



Beloved in our dearest Lord;
CHrist, the Scripture, your owne hearts, and Satans Devices, are the foure prime things that should be first and most studied & search∣ed; if any cast off the study of these,
 they cannot be safe here, nor hap∣pieIf a Minister had as many eyes as Argus, to watch; as many heads as Typheus to dispose, and as many hands as Briareus to labour, he might finde imployment enough for them all. hereafter. 'Tis my worke as a Christian, but much more as I am a watchman, to doe my best, to dis∣cover the fulnesse of Christ, the emptinesse of the creature, and the snares of the great Deceiver; which I have endeavoured to doe (in the following discourse) ac∣cording to that measure of grace, which I have received from the Lord. God once accepted a hand∣full of meale for a sacrifice; and a gripe of Goats haire for an oblati∣on; and I know that you have not so learned the Father, as to despise the day of small things. Beloved, Satan being fallen from light to darknesse, from felicity to mise∣ry, from Heaven to hell, from an Angell to a Devill, is so full of malice and envy, that he will leave no meanes unattempted, whereby he may make all others eternaly miserable with himselfe; he being shut out of Heaven, and shut up under chaines of darknesse till the judgement of the great day, makes use
 of all his power and skill, to bring all the sons of men into the same condition, and condemnation with himselfe. Satan hath cast such sin∣full seed into our soules, that now he can no sooner tempt, but we are ready to assent; he can no sooner have a plot upon us, but he makes a conquest of us; if he doth but shew men a little of the beauty, and bravery of the world, how ready are they to fall down, and worship him.
What ever sin the heart of man is most prone to, that the Devill will help forward. If David be proud of2 Sam. 24. his people, Satan wil provoke him to number them, that he may be yet prouder. If Peter be slavishlyMatth. 16. ver. 22. 26. ch. 69. ult. fearfull, Satan will put him upon rebuking and denying of Christ, to save his owne skin. If Ahabs1 Kings 22. Prophets be given to flatter, the Devill will strait way become a lying spirit in the mouthes of foure hun∣dred of them, and they shall flatter Ahab to his ruine. If Judas willJohn 13. 2. be a Traitor, Satan will quickly
 enter into his heart, and make him sell his Master for money, which some Heathens would ne∣ver have done. If Ananias will lyeActs 5. 3. for advantage, Satan wil fill his heart that he may lye (with a witness) to the Holy Ghost. Satan loves to saile with the winde, and to suite mens temptations to their conditions, and inclinations; if they be in pro∣sperity, he will tempt them to de∣ny God; if they be in adversity, he will tempt them to distrustProv. 30. v. 9. God; if their knowledge be weak, he will tempt them to have low thoughts of God; if their consci∣ence be tender, he will tempt to scrupulosity; if large, to carnall security; if we be bold-spirited, he will tempt to presumption; if timerous, to desperation; if flex∣ible, to inconstancie, if stiffe, to im∣penitency, &c.
From the power, malice, and skill of Satan, doth proceed all the soule killing plots, devices, stra∣tagems, and machinations, that be in the world; Severall devices
 he hath to draw soules to sin, and severall plots he hath to keepe soules from all holy, and heaven∣ly services; and severall strata∣gems he hath, to keep soules in a mourning, staggering, doubting, and questioning condition. He hath severall devices, to destroy the great, and honourable, the wise, and learned; the blinde, and ignorant; the rich, and the poore; the reall, and the nominall Saints, &c. One while he will refraine from tempting, that we may think our selves secure, and neglect our watch; another while he will seeme to flie, that he may make us proud of the victory; one while hee will fix mens eyes more on others sins, then their own, that he may puffe them; another while he will fix their eyes more on others graces then their own, that he may overwhelme them &c. A man may as well tell the stars, and number the sands of the sea, as reckon up all the devices of Satan; yet those which are most conside∣rable,
 and by which he doth most mischiefe to the precious soules of men, are in the following Treatise discovered, and the Remedies against them prescribed, &c.
Beloved, I think it necessary to give you, and the world a faithfull account of the Reasons, moving me to appear in Print, in these dayes, wherein we may say there was never more writing, and yet neverlesse practising, and they are these that follow, &c.
First, because Satan hath a1. Reason. greater influence upon men, and higher advantages over men (ha∣ving the winde and the hill as it were) then they thinke he hath, and the knowledge of his high advantages is the high way to disappoint him, and to ren∣der the soul strong in resisting, and happy in conquering, &c.
Your importunity, and the im∣portunity2. Reason. of many other precious sons of Zion hath after much stri∣ving with God, my own heart, and others, made a conquest of
 me and forced me to doe that at last, which at first was not a little contrary to my inclination, and resolution, &c.
The strange opposition that I3. Reason. Pirates make the strongest and the hot∣test oppositi∣ons against those ves∣sells that are most rich∣ly laden; so doth Satan that arch Pirate against those truths, that have most of God, Christ, and Heaven in them. met with from Satan, in the study of this following discourse, hath put an edge upon my spirit, knowing that Satan strives migh∣tily, to keep those things from see∣ing the light, that tend eminently to shake and break his Kingdome of darknesse, and to lift up the Kingdome and glory of the Lord Jesus Christ, in the soules and lives of the children of men, &c.
Its exceeding usefulnesse to all sorts, ranks, and conditions of men4. Reason. in the world; here you have salve for every sore, and a plaister for every wound, and a Remedy against every disease; especially against those, that tend most to the undoing of soules, and to the ruine of the State, &c.
I know not of any one, or5. Reason. other that have writ of this Sub∣ject; all that I have ever seen,
 have only toucht upon this string, which hath been no small provo∣cation to me, to attempt to doe something this way, that others, that have better heads and hearts, may be the more stirred to im∣prove their Talents, in a further discovery of Satans Devices, and in the making knowne of such choice Remedies, as may inable the soules of men to triumph over all his plots and stratagems, &c.
I have many precious friends in6 Reason. severall Countries, who are not a little desirous, that my pen may reach them, now my voice can∣not. I have formerly been, by the help of the mightie God of Jacob, a weake instrument of good to them, and cannot but hope, and beleeve, that the Lord will also blesse these labours to them, they being (in part) the fruit of their desires, and prayers, &c.
Lastly, not knowing how soon7. Reason. my Glasse may be out, and how soone I may be cut off by a hand of death, from all opportunities of
 doing further service for Christ, or your soules in this world, I was willing to sow a little handfull of spirituall seed among you; that so, when I put off this earthly Ta∣bernacle, my love to you, and that deare remembrance of you, which I have in my soule, may strongly engage your minds and spirits, to make this Book your Compani∣on; and under all externall, or internall changes, to make use of this heavenly Salve, which I hope, will by the blessing of the Lord, be as effectuall for the healing of all your Wounds, as their look∣ing up to the brazen Serpent, was effectuall to heale theirs that were bit, and stung with fiery Serpents. I shall leave this Book with you, as a Legacie of my dearest Love, desiring the Lord to make it a far greater, and sweeter Legacie, then all those carnall Legacies are, that are left by the high and mighty ones of the earth, to their nearest and dearest relations, &c.

Beloved, I would not have affe∣ction carrie my pen too much be∣yond my intention; therefore onely give me leave to signifie my desires for you, and my desires to you; and I shall draw to a close.
My desires for you are, That he would grant you according to the ri∣chesEphes. 3. of his glory, to be strengthned with might by his Spirit in the innerVers. 17. man. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, that ye being rooted and grounded in love; May be able toVers. 18. comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth,Vers. 19. and height: And to know the love of Christ that passeth knowledge; That ye might be filled with all the fullnesse of God. And that yee might walkeColos. 1. 10. worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitfull in every good worke, and increased in the knowledge of God, Strengthned with all might, ac∣cordingVers. 11. to his glorious power, unto all patience, and long-suffering with joy∣fullnesse. That ye doe no evill. That2 Cor. 13. 7. your love may abound yet more and more in Knowledge, and in all Judge∣ment.Phil. 1. 9.
 That yee may approve things that are excellent, that ye may be sin∣cere,Vers. 10. and without offence till the day of Christ. And that our God would2 Thess. 1. 11. count you worthy of this calling, and fulfill all the good pleasure of his good∣nesse, and the worke of Faith withVers. 12. power. That the name of our Lord Je∣sus Christ may be glorified in you, and ye in him, according to the grace of our God, and the Lord Jesus Christ. And that you may be eminent inPsal. 93. 5. Sanctitie; Sanctitie being Zions glory, that your hearts may be kept upright, your judgements sound, and your lives unblamable. That as you are now my joy, so in the day of Christ you may be my Crown; That I may see my labours in your lives, that your conversa∣tion may not be earthly, when the things you heare are heavenly; but that it may be as becomes the Gospel. That as the Fishes which live in the salt Sea, yet are fresh; so you, though you live in an un∣charitable world, may yet be cha∣ritable and loving. That ye may
 like the Bee, suck Honey out of every Flower; That ye may shine in a sea of troubles, as the Pearle shines in the skie, though it grows in the Sea; That in all your trials you may be like the stone in Thra∣cia, that neither burneth in the fire, nor sinketh in the water. That ye may be like the Heavens, ex∣cellent in substance, and beauti∣full in appearance; that so you may meet me with joy, in that day, wherein Christ shall say to his Father, Loe, here am I, and the children that thou hast given me.
My desires to you are, That you would make it your businesse to study Christ, his Word, your own Hearts, Satans Plots, and Eternity, more then ever; that ye would endeavour more to be inwardly sincere, then outwardly glorious; to live, then to have a name to live. That yee would labour with all your might, to be thankfull under Mercies, and faithfull in your Places, and humble under Divine Appearances, and fruitfull under
 precious Ordinances; that as your meanes and mercies are greater then others, so your account be∣fore God may not prove worse then others. That ye would pray for me, who am not worthy to be na∣med among the Saints, that I may be a precious instrument in the hand of Christ, to bring in many soules unto him, and to build up those that are brought in, in their most holy Faith; And that Utterance may be given to me, that I may make knowne all the will of God. That2 Cor. 11. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. I may be sincere, faithfull, frequent, fervent, and constant in the worke of the Lord, and that my labour be not in vaine in the Lord; That my Labours may be accepted of the Lord, and his Saints, and I may daily see the travell of my soule, &c.
But above all, pray for me, that I may more and more finde the power, and sweet of those things upon my owne heart, that I give out to you and others; and that my soule be so visited with strength
 from on high, that I may live up ful∣ly, and constantly to those truths that I hold forth to the world; and that I may be both in Life and Do∣ctrine, a burning and a shining light; That so, when the Lord Jesus shall appear, I may receive a crown of glo∣ry, which he shall give to me in that day, and not onely to me, but to all that love his appearing, &c.
For a close, remember this, that your life is short, your duties many, your assistance great, and your re∣ward sure; therefore faint not, hold on, and hold up in wayes of well do∣ing, and Heaven shall make amends for all.
I shall now take leave of you, when my heart hath by my hand subscri∣bed that I am,

