




Right VVorshipfull:
DEtraction, that ugly deformed Hell-borne Monster, hath of late cast her poisoning envi∣ous breath upon my best actions, even upon these harmlesse papers, and would faine beget in you an evill opinion of me, and of my honest endeavours,
 thereby to worke my utter ruine. But I hope the Lord, who knoweth the in∣tegrity of my heart, and the cleannesse of my hands, from doing wrong to any, especially to my late Iudicious loving-Master; will worke in you such an heroicall and magnanimous spirit, that you will not be infected with such pe∣stiferous venome, your Worships knowing very well, that such De∣tractors like ravenous Vultures, eate and gnaw upon the very life and live∣lihood of others; onely for their owne ends, viz. that they may grow fat and rich thereby, for they care not how they impaire the good name, fame, or reputation of others, so they themselves may get honour and esteeme, though there be little worth in them, deser∣ving the same. Therefore for vindi∣cation
 of my credit in this particular (which now lyes a bleeding) I am in∣forced to publish that, I intended to keepe private; to shew to your Wor∣ships and all other my friends, that I have beene so far from intending the least disgrace, that as I am in duty bound, so I have ever sought the ho∣nour of my judicious loving Master: And I am confident if in these workes of mine he had found any thing to his disparagement, hee would in his life time have showne me my errors, (up∣on my request) which he never did, as your Ladiship very well knowes. And as it is very well knowne throughout this Citie, that my Master in his life did much good to others, especially in Iusticiarie affaires; so, I doe humbly acknowledge, that he did alwayes de∣light
 to doe me good, even to the day of his death. And therefore I thinke it part of my dutie, now hee is departed this transitorie life, to expresse my thankfull heart for the same; which I can no better way perform being I have alreade been so presumptuous as to cast my unlearned workes into the Presse) then to publish without flat∣terie his many worthie and imparal∣leled workes to his never-dying me∣morie: That they may bee a meanes to excite and stir up others of his qua∣litie to doe workes of charitie to the poore, and judicious benevolence to the rich. Yet I doe ingenuously confesse, that they deserve to bee ingraven in Pillars of durable Marble by some learned and eloquent Cicero, rather then by my rustick quill on these time∣perishing
 papers. For my workes, I commit them to your gracious accep∣tance, and judicious censure, hoping that what I have done amisse herein, you will be pleased favourably to passe by, because you know the attractive cause from whence these cloudie and muddie vapours did arise; therefore I doubt not but the sun-shine of your favourable aspects will expell such mistie exhalations, and ever remain upon the poore and weake, yet honest and willing endeavours of

19. Maii. 1642.
