



MADAM,
YOu have been plea∣sed to make me an object of your ex∣ceeding many and great fa∣vours, which you could not have done, had it not been
your principle to be good, gratis; that I might not miss an occasion (which I may never be able to offer my self again) of putting this into a publique ac∣knowledgement, is much of what I have to plead for sending you these Papers. I had never any thing to re∣turn you but my thanks, and how much I am hither∣to in arrear for due expressi∣ons of it, the less you do ac∣count, the more I yet owe you.
The further errand of this
discourse is not to tell you where your happinesse is: you know GOD too well to be able to mistake in a con∣cernment of that conse∣quence, nor to tax you for seeking it where you know 'tis not; You love God too well, to suffer any thing in your heart to sit above him. Have not I observ'd the de∣licacie of your spirit, how tenderly you meddle with the Earth, from a holy jea∣lousie lest your conversati∣on should not be enough in Heaven? But it is (Madam)
to offer it self as a poor in∣strument in the hand of a great GOD, of some addition to the heaven you are alrea∣dy in, the comforts of this here (though not the joyes of that hereafter) are capable of an augmentation. Who can tell, but that even by this means, your Communion with your God may be further'd? And if but one glimpse the more of divine beauty shine in upon your soul, and raise but a rapture the more upon your spirit, I shall not be
totally disappointed in what J aim at: And if you saw my heart, you would finde it very full of wishes, that J were able to doe you, not better service, but more of this.
Many do already very well know, and J do hereby publiquely declare, That there is not that man alive, to whom J am so much in debt as to your Honourable Husband; and very much am I below any possible e∣vidence of gratitude to him, unlesse it be of this kinde.

 If you shall ask, Why then doe I not direct this (if this be all) unto himself? Why! Madam, what do I else in directing it to you? But if this satisfie not, I must discover my design in doing it by you. It is (to confesse all ingenuously) that this naked acknowledgement, unable otherwise to signifie half enough, might be ren∣dered (by a medium of conveighance so extreamly well-pleasing) sufficiently acceptable. If I misse not here, though I may beg of
you some other favours, you shall never be solicited to doe me a greater; and J shall constantly pray, That the Lord (your exceeding great reward) would wrap up your soul in the bosome of his love, give you so much of Himself, as may be had by any means, at any time, and in it a comfortable fore-taste of what cannot be all had, till you come to enjoy him immediately for ever. Doubtlesse I may be guilty of many failings as to other things, but this re∣tribution
for your many favours shall be daily pay'd, by,
Madam, 
