



Right Honourable,
THis Exposition of famous Mr. Perkins's Catechism, was the work of Master Charles Broxolm; a good man, who was well known to your noble Lord; whose great favours con∣ferred upon him, hath engag'd me up∣on the account of his wisdom (my dear Aunt) to dedicate it unto your Lady∣ship.

The Authors Ministery was ho∣noured, by the Conversion of many souls, both at Gunthwait in York∣shire, (where he was Patronized by Mr. Godfery Bossevile, Brother in law to your worthy Lord) and also at Buxton and Belper, and other pla∣ces in Darby-shire, who are his E∣pistle Commendatory, and will be his glory at the day of Christ.
Madam, This Book had sooner been brought into publick view, if the Con∣troversies of our broken times had not discomposed peoples spirits, to give due entertainment unto such useful Trea∣tises. Many in these latter dayes, have wofully disputed away the life of Re∣ligion, and power of Godliness; whence it is, that their Spiritual Appetite to salubrious Truths, is extremely de∣cayed;
and their Sun-shine, is like the Winters light, altogether without holy heat. It was an high commendation of the Christian Romans, by Saint Paul, that they were full of good∣ness, and filled with all know∣ledge, Rom. 15.14. and it is pi∣ty that this good couple should ever be divided. As practical Profession most glorifieth God, so it winneth most estimation amongst good Christians. The end of this Treatise, is to edifie Gods people in both; therefore if I should dare to keep this piece secret, (which the Reverend Authour in∣tended for Publick use) I should not onely frustrate the intentions of the dead, and deceive his godly friends li∣ving, but also rob the Church of that which is her right.

Madam, I shall not any longer detain your Lady-ship from reading this Book, which craveth your ac∣ceptance, and promiseth your soul bene∣fit by a serious perusal. That your Lady ship may long continue an en∣courager of godliness, and a comfort to the Members of Christ, till the time of your everlasting refreshing shall come, when triumph shall be your recompence, glory your reward, An∣gels your company, and God your glo∣ry; shall be the humble prayer 
(Madam) 
