



Beloved,
THe respect I bear to your Souls, the Truths, and Church of Jesus Christ (much endangered by the secret and unwearied actings of the Emissaries of Rome, insinuating themselves, and instilling the cor∣rupt Doctrines of that Church into many in this Nation, having the advantage of our lamentable differences, and the toleration of all Sects not professing themselves openly to be Pa∣pists, wherein they are so wise, as to conceal their names, that they may be the more taking in their Doctrines; witness the Anabaptist Jesuite at Newcastle, and the Quaker Jesuite at Bristol, mentioned by Mr Prynne) occasioned a late serious publique disswasive of you from the Church and Doctrines of Rome, under what name soever, and by whomsoever they were propounded to you, and especially as they are propounded by the Quakers; who, as they are more active among you then other Sects, so do their doctrines and practises more har∣monize with Rome then others. The charge of falshood against me by them, hath produced this demonstration of the truth of what I had publiquely asserted: which as I hope it will tend to settle you against their way, so may it through God's blessing, be a means to fetch back some who are ignorantly drawn from us into their snares.
In order to my attempt, it will be necessary to premise what is Po∣pery, and what doctrines are Popish doctrines. It cannot be denyed but that the Church of Rome doth still assert and maintain some truths, concerning the Trinity, Church, Scriptures, &c. which are Catholick, not Popish Doctrines; owned not only by them, but all the Reform∣ed Churches, together with the Eastern Churches. It is not of these that we are speaking, but such as are peculiar to that Church, as aposta∣tized from its primitive purity, wherein she hath been still opposed
in the Churches Confessions of Faith, in learned Protestants disputes, and in the sufferings of the Martyrs in Q. Maries days, and which have had the Sanction of the Councils of the Pope, and the pains and labours of Cardinals, Jesuites, and Priests, for their defence a∣gainst the Champions of Truth in our Churches. In these doctrines which are peculiarly Romes, do the doctrines of the Quakers conspire, and may therefore be called Popery without falshood:
Again, its requisite to shew what practises I mean. I shall not rake into the common sins of Papists, knowing that there may be found too much profaness in any Church or Society, and that therefore these common vices cannot denominate a Papist: but I shall only speak of such practises as are by the Reformed Churches charged upon them as theirs, and are peculiar to those Orders amongst them, which the Reformed Churches are strangers to, I mean, of Monks, Hermites, Nuns, and the like. These things being thus premised, I come to my Parallel; and first I shall parallel their Doctrines, and then their Practises.
