

they doe concerne. This Covenant hath been a port of refuge, to which the Saints have alwayes fled in their distresses, they claiming the blessing therein contained and grounding their hope upon the faithfulnes of him that hath promised. This Covenant hath been the rock for the anchor of their hope to fasten upon, when the winds & waves of temptation have beaten upon them. The troubles of the Church & people of God are not yet finished, by reason whereof we, no lesse then our fa∣thers before us, do stand in need of help and consolati∣on from this Covenant in these dayes of affliction in which we live. Neither is it only a consolation to know the great things which God hath by Covenant promi∣sed unto us, but it is a foundation to all godlinesse and holy walking before God, perswading us to walk wor∣thy of the Lord, as beseems those whom he hath taken into Covenant with him, to be a peculiar people to himself. God hath so linked together the blessing of the Covenant (which is his to give) with the dutie and way of it, (which is ours to walk in) that we cannot with comfort expect the one, but it will worke in us a care∣full endeavour of the other. To speake more hereof, I shall forbeare. When I had finished this Treatise, and bethought my self to whom I should dedicate it, I could not thinke of any, to whom it was so suitable as your self. You are (to omit other relations) one of the chil∣dren of the Covenant, which was first made with Abra∣ham your Father, and with Sarah your Mother, both which, as they lived by faith, so they dyed in faith, ha∣ving now received the end of their faith, which they waited for. Your honoured Father, the thoughts of whom are ever precious unto me, was a right Abraham indeed; If I should speake lesse of him, I should speak too little of that singular piety, and exemplary grace
 and godlines which shined in him. I abhorre giving ti∣tles unto man, but give me leave to beare witnes unto the truth. I knew his faith, his feare, his uprightnesse and holy walking before his God, whereby he became as a Prince of God among the people of the world,Gen. 23. with whom he lived. Wherein he went before you also, as a patterne to be for ever in your eye, to be imitated by you. Sir, let it (I beseech you) be your chiefest care, and count it your highest honour, to walke in the steps of your pious & blessed Father. His faith follow, con∣sidering what was the end of his conversation. That sweet peace, those heavenly consolations, which he ta∣sted of, those inward feelings which carried him out of himself, even whiles he was yet in the flesh, are strong engagements and encouragements unto you, to walke after his foote, as the Prophets expression is, treading in the same steps of faith and holines in which he went before you. I am sure you cannot forget those dying words of his a little before his end, (You that are in the flesh thinke, &c. I spare the rest) in mention whereof I speak a mystery to others (being but a broken sound) but not to you; you can interpret my meaning and 'tis enough to me that you know the meaning of them, for whose sake I mention them, that you may often re∣member them for your own good. They will never out of my heart, and I trust they will never be forgotten by you. Goe on (deare Sir,) in the wayes of grace which you are entred into, the Lord having made good his Covenant towards you, be you also mindfull to walke in Covenant with your God. Set Gods kindnesse be∣fore your eyes, to stir up your self the more to walke before him in his truth. The more you honour him, the more you honour your self. Study therefore to do great things for God; seeke the peace of Jerusalem, the
 prosperitie of Sion. Your goodnes extendeth not un∣to him, but to his Church and Saints that are here on earth; yet what you doe unto them, he will say, Yee have done it unto mee. Remember Davids troubles, Josephs affliction, Pauls bonds, the distressed estate of Gods Church and people, and thinke of Mordecai his Item to Esther. This way was Davids spirit working when he was sitting in peace in his own house; He was conside∣ring what the LORD had done for him, and what he should render to the Lord for all his benefits. Won∣derfull was his zeale for the House of God; The cost he prepared for it was almost incredible, an hundred thousand talents of gold, besides silver & other things without number; but he lost nothing by all, (no man loseth by lending to the Lord, no more then the rivers doe by powring their water into the Sea, which they re∣ceive back againe by secret passages in the earth, and so are still ever full.) The more he honoured God, the more God honoured him. He spared not his riches in things pertaining to God, and God cast in more upon him still, so that he dyed in riches and honour, 1 Chro. 29.28. Let your life be like his, and then in death you shall not be divided. The God of all grace, who hath done so great things for you, go on in blessing to blesse you, that you may with Nephthali be satisfied with fa∣vour, and filled with the blessing of the Lord, even with all blessings of heaven and earth, of this life, and of that to come.
Decemb. 3. 1644.

