



RIGHT HONOURABLE,
THis Sermon formerly preached bfore you and entertain∣ed with your good approbation, is now in Obedience to your Order made
 more publick; whereunto I was more willingly induced, because of the special usefulness of the Subject. The Doctrine of the Day of Judgement, with the practical improvement thereof, being much insisted upon boh by our Saviour and the Apostles, yea the Duties in reference to this Day, are so importunately urged, as that, Whether we eat or drink, whether we walk or sit still, our thoughts and meditations should be fervent and affectionate about it; and which is the more to be observed, this Truth is a foun∣tain from which cometh bitter and sweet; In it is both a sting and honey; from the same root springs the Rose and the prickles;
 Would we raise up our dejected and disconsolate hearts? the thoughts of this Day, like Da∣vids Harp, would expell all such evil apprehensions; Would we awaken our dead and dull spi∣rits? Would we curb and bri∣dle our immoderate affections? the meditations upon this Day would be like a fiery Sword to keep frm them. Hence it is that the Scripture maketh this two-fola Use thereof, for Com∣fort (to the Godly, I mean) Therefore (Luk. 21.28.) they are commanded upon the ap∣proach of that Day, To lift up their heads, for their Re∣demption draweth near. It is a Day of Redemption to the
 who art kept a prisoner in this Aegypt of the world; A mighty Deliverance will then be wrought for thee from sinne and misery; How blessed then and comfortable must the thoughts of this time be to thee? Luthers expression was (Ser∣mon. de Signis prae. extr. Jud.) That he had rather never have been born, than not to be in hope of this Day. Hence it is that God exerciseth his children in this Wilderness, that Canaan their rest in Heaven may be more desired. Luther (ibidem) saith of himself, That once he was very an∣gry, and could not endure the matter of the Lords Pray∣er,
 wherein Christs King∣dom is prayed for, but after that God had tossed him up and down with the waves and tempests that he met with in this world, then no Peti∣tion could be more welcome to him. He that doth not look for, and hasten Christs com∣ing, is not yet weaned enough from the world, his corrupt heart is not burden enough to him. The things of this world have too much interest in his soul, and therefore with the children of Reuben they had rather take up their habitation on this side Canaan, because the Land was fruitfull and ad∣vantagious: But where the
 heart is raised up to a spiritu∣al frame, there their hopes, desires, and ardent affections are breaking and longing for his coming, even as Sisera his mother, Judg. 5.28. looked out at the window, expecting his triumphing return, and crying, Why is his Chariot so long in coming? Why tarry the wheels of his Chariot?
The second Use, which is of Terrour, and thereby to keep back from sinne, to preserve in a constant watching and pray∣ing, which the Scripture like∣wise frequently commendeth, is diligently to be heeded by eve∣ry one, especially (Right Ho∣nourable and Right Wor∣shipfull)
 by you who are cal∣led to the Publick Government of that famous City, the medi∣tation on that Day should be as powerfull to awaken your souls for Zeal to the glory of God, and righteousness in all your administrations; As the sound of the Trumpet, and the voice of the Archangel will be effe∣ctual to raise your bodies. And the rather attend hereunto, be∣cause that Day among other ends is especially Judicare non judicata, & malè judicata, The sinnes not judged and not punished, and the things falsly and unrighteously judged; God will at that Day have a re∣view of them, so that the
 crooked things which are in this world will then be made straight. At that Day, rich∣es, honours, and the pomp of the world will be in no request, but an interest in Christ, to have him our Mediatour and Friend, who is the Judge, will be the only happiness, of which the Lord grant you to be parta∣kers, so as to finde mercy in that Day, is the prayer of

