



Humbly sheweth:
THat whereas your Majesty in the booke of Prayers set forth upon the Treaty at Uxbridge, to be read on the Fast day, then enjoyned by Proclamation, * there is this clause, (or if the guilt of Vide the book of Prayers printed for the Fast be∣fore the Treaty at Vxbridge. our great sinnes, cause this Treaty to breake off in vaine,) Lord, let the truth cleerely appeare, who those men are, who under pretence of the publique good, pursue their own
 private ends: and remembring that of the Prophet, Ier. 9. 12. Who is a wise man that he may understand this, and who is Acqui (dibane Iudaei) habemus le∣gem & Prophetas non est peritura lex ex ore nostro, habe∣tis quidem ait Pro∣pheta, sed neque Propheta est, ullus qui eloquatur, neque; ullus in populo qui scultit legi. Trem. & Iun. not. in locum. he to whom the mouth of the Lord hath spoken, that hee may declare it, for what the land perisheth, &c. and per∣ceiving your case to be like his, who had many Priests and Prophets, attending at his Court, but there was none that spake out, nor shewed him, and his people their transgres∣sions, but were as they are described, Ier. 8. 8. deceitfull flattering persons; for the pen of the Scribe wrought for fal∣shood, the wise men were ashamed, dismaid, and taken, they had rejected the word of the Lord, and what wisdome was in them then? Surely none at all, though they boasted, Loe they were wise, and the law of the Lord was with them: so your Majesty, hath had many great Bishops, and learned Doctors, and grave Divines, but none (as yet I have heard of) have declared to your Majesty the true cause of our miseries; for, in that booke of Prayers, they confesse to God, (and with him they should deale uprightly) that they know not why this strange and unnaturall warre should be, but onely in a generall notion (thy Justice and our sins ex∣cepted) therein cleering your Majesty with words of deceit, as if you had not partaked with them in their sins, and causes of our miseries: for so it followes, Looke on thy Moses, who stands in the gappe, beseeching thee to turne Exod. 32. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. thine anger from thy people, as Moses was an Advocate be∣tweene God and the people in their sin of the molten Calfe, and no way partaker; and so in the next Prayer, more plain∣ly they say, Regard the sincerity of thine Annointed, and to flatter your Majesty in your sin, and obdurate your heart, and deceive your soule, they apply that of the Psalmist, Be thou my Judge, O Lord, for I have walked innocently, my trust hath also beene in the Lord, therefore shall I not fall: Examine me, O Lord, prove me, try out my reines and my heart; Let my sentence come forth from thy presence, and
 let thine eyes looke on the thing that is equall: Remember Vide the book of Prayers, ut supra. what he hath suffered, and the heavy things thou hast shew∣ed him, and in the day when thou makest inquisition for bloud, forget not his desires of peace, and the endeavours which he hath used, and the prayers he hath made to thee, for it; these men have boasted of their Learning, Wisdome, and that the truth was on their side, and that it was Gods cause they did maintaine. But their pens have wrought fal∣shood, Vide, the vindic. of Episcopacy, and Dr. Ham∣monds preface in the survey of the Directory. like Ahabs Prophets, 1 Kings 22. 6. 11. 22, 23, 24. 27. A lying spirit hath deceived them, whilst they cryed out to your Majesty, as they to Ahab, Go up and prosper; and have rayled against, smitten, and imprisoned the poore Michaiahs of the land; But God hath made them ashamed, they have beene dismaid, and taken, for they have rejected the word of the Lord, and what wisdome is in them then? their worldly wisdome they vaunt of, is foolishnesse with God, he takes them in their craftinesse, 1 Cor. 3. 19, 20. he hath declared their thoughts to be but vaine, Iob 5. 13. Also, con∣sidering the heavy doome, denounced on that watchman, who seeing the sword comming, doth not blow his Trum∣pet, to give warning to the people, the bloud of the unwar∣ned, God will require at the watchmans hands, Ezek. 3. 18. & 33. 6. and knowing S. Pauls woe, if I preach not the Go∣spel, 1 Cor. 9. 16. which, though properly it appertaine to that flock over which the holy Ghost hath made me over∣seer, Acts 20. 28. over whom a more speciall care is required, yet, seeing those who have been about your Majesty, fayle of their duty, and knowing your Majesty to be under no particular cure, but to be a publique person, in whom all have interest, 2 Sam. 19. 42, 43. and on whom, every Mini∣ster should cast an eye, (as the supreame Governour of the Church) on whom the well-being, and ordring thereof doth depend, and therefore to whom, all ought to give Intelli∣gence, Cannon 1. of the Constitution made at London, An. 1603. being obliged thereunto by the Law of God,
 2 Chron. 20. 2. 16. & 1 Sam. 22. 8. & Levit. 19. 17. and man, by their office, Esay 58. 1. & 1 Tim. 5. 20. and Oath of Allegiance, besides the Oathes and Protestations they have lately taken, together with their particular engage∣ments in the safety of your Majesties person, and kingdome, wherein their owne lives, families, and fortunes are embar∣ked. Therefore, I having Gods warrant for what I speake, & the approbation of Gods Spirit in mine own conscience, first moving me unto the worke, and afterward confirming, Novemb. 11. 1642. Aug. 26. 1643. and approving of it, when I first began it, making this pray∣er. O Lord, let thy good Spirit guide me into all truth, and give me a right understanding in thy word, and grace to be ruled alone thereby, that I may doe nothing, but what is of faith, nor for feare, or favour, may run into heresie, or er∣ror, into superstition, or Rebellion, but that (being guided by thy word, and led by thy Spirit) whatsoever I shall doe in word, or deed, it may tend to the praise and glory of thy Name, to the good of thy Church, and to the salvation of mine owne soule, especially in this worke; which, O Lord, prosper in mine hand, and enable me well to performe it, to tell this people of their sins boldly, without respect of per∣sons, that so I may be a meanes to bring them to repentance, that so thou maiest turne away thy wrath from them; which O Lord, grant for Christ Jesus sake. Amen. And after this, God sundry wayes, assisting and strengthening me in it, by helping me strangely to divers books, out of wch I gathered divers weighty matters, and God graciously keeping me in health, and safety, notwithstanding the fury, and malice of mine enemies round about me, (who thrice imprisoned me) and the weake constitution of my body, together with the many cares, and feares wherewith I was troubled, whilst I was penning it, from without, besides the inward feares, troubles, and perplexities of my soule, arising from the tem∣ptations of the world, flesh, and Devill, who all allured me,
 to spare my selfe, and not to hazard my person, nor estate, in this dangerous enterprise, nor to expose my wife, and children to the mercilesse world, discomforting me, in my unlikelinesse to speed in the worke, or to come off with life, & that it would be accounted a ridiculous and desperate at∣tempt; yet Gods Spirit mightily wrought in me, & prevailed against all these, and with an holy violence moved me to go on, and perfect the worke, and to oblige my selfe thereunto In Lent 1644. by a Vow, on condition, God would dispossesse mine ene∣mies that compassed me, by a set time, to confirme me in the same; which accordingly came to passe: Therefore ha∣ving Gods glory, your Majesties, and subjects repentance, and conversion, together with mine owne salvation, for the ends I aimed at, (though too long, through weakenesse and corruptions prevalent in me, I have delayed, the declaring this worke, and have beene much hindered, through the malice and mistake of other men) yet now, that I might no longer conferre with flesh and bloud, Gal. 1. 16. the hand of God being strong on me, and his Spirit lifting me up, Ezek. 3. 14. though I goe in the bitternesse of my spirit, I have re∣solved to publish the same. Having, by the helpe of my God, obtained some small gifts (though the fewest of a thousand) and observing the seasonablenesse of the action, being as a preparative to digest the Propositions that are brought to your Majesty, from your Parl. of both king∣domes, which, will be the wholesome physick, to recover Furnishing with gifts, seasonable∣nesse of the acti∣on, evidence of good to issue from it, and some notes sufficient of Gods separati∣on of that man to the action, are proofes of his calling. Bifields vindication of the Sabbath. our sick and much distracted kingdome, and being assured evidently, of the great good that may issue from the sincere perusall and practise of this worke; and having convincing and undeniable notes of Gods separating me hereunto, ha∣ving a lawfull ordinary calling to the Ministery (nay almost extraordinary) being consecrated thereunto by my mother, (a godly Matron) before I was, as 1 Sam. 1. 11. Samuel was by his, and Gods Spirit when I was about 15. yeares
 of age, strangely moving me thereunto, (whereunto I con∣sented:) and relying onely on Gods assistance, who out of the mouthes of babes and sucklings, perfects his praise, Psal. 8. 2. and who useth to manifest his power, in mans weake∣nesse, his wisdome, in mans infirmity, that the excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us, 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28. & 2 Cor. 4. 7. and seeking onely herein his glory, your Maj. and these kingdomes honour, and Reformation, (which is more precious to me then life, and all I have, I call God to record, I lye not.) And calling to minde what devoute Chrysostome, and that zealous Martyr of Christ John Chrysost. Homil. 55. ad pop Ant. Vide his defence of the 15. Arti∣cle of Io. Wic∣liffe in Mr. Fox his Acts and Mo∣numents. Vol. 1. pagin. 418. printed 1610. Huz saith, That he that openly declareth the truth, and doth justice, (though he worke no miracles) he is a man of God; for who is sent of God? not he that doth worke miracles, but he that speaketh the truth; not he that preacheth humane Traditions, and customes, but he that speaketh Gods word, and doth justly. Encouraged with all these reasons, I am willing to obey Gods command, and to hearken to the mo∣tions Recte facit animo, quando obsequitur suo, quod omnes fa∣cere opertet, dum id modo fiat bono. Plaut. in Amph. of his Spirit herein, to divulge this worke, being back∣ed somewhat by the yeare of my nativity, being the same, wherein Bishops, the chiefe cause of our misery, were new∣ly erected in Scotland, by the advice of Dolman the Jesuit, and other Jesuited Doctors here in England. And remem∣bring the history out of Eusebius, of the subtile Philoso∣pher, Vide, Altar. Damas. in prefatio lectoribus, & epist. Philadel∣phi, pag. 200. who could by no kinde of learning be converted to the faith, but put by, and withstood all the arguments of the learned Bishops, and Doctors brought against him, yet was at last by a poore man, of small wit, and lesse learning, (who started up from amongst them, and beginning to encounter Euseb. Eccles. hist. lib. 11. cap 3. him in the Name of the Lord Jesus) nonplust, contrary to all mens expectation, so that he could not chuse, but ac∣knowledge the power of God in his words, and give place to the truth. And I trust, the same may this effect with your Maj. and people, by the same power of the holy Ghost,
 though performed by mee (the unlearnedst of Christs Ministers) for Gods hand is not shortened, nor power abated, in the turning of mens hearts now adayes, as well as he did then; so true is that of our Homily, where the Homily on Whit-Sunday, part. 1. holy Ghost doth instruct, and teach, there is no delay at all in learning; for this is the difference, (saith a learned Au∣thor) Inter Dei, & ho∣minu judcia, ho. inter si &c. Ca∣mer. in 1. epist. Thossal. cap. 4. vers. 4. Bezae te∣stam. Anno. betweene Gods judgements, and mans, that men in chusing have regard unto the qualities of the things pro∣posed, but God finds in himselfe, the reason of his coun∣sell; so that whereas we are unfit, so much as to thinke of Gods matters, those whom he first chooseth to these vo∣cations, he doth not finde them, but makes them fitting: even as Christ himselfe saith, Mat. 11. 25, 26. his Father had hid these things from the wise and prudent, and had revealed them to babes, for so it seemed good in his sight. Also having examples, both divine, and humane, to con∣firme me herein, as how Plato reproved Dionysius King Flutarchs lives. of Sicily, and Diogenes boldly taxed Philip (King of Macedonia) for rapacity, telling him, It was for dogs to Lychosten. Apoth de libere dictis. bite their enemies to hurt them; hee with his free speech did bite his friends, to doe them good. And so indeed in Davids account, the friendly smiting of the righteous, Psal. 141. 5. hee accounted a precious balme to his head, Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a kindnesse, let him re∣prove me, it shall bee an excellent oyle, which shall not breake my head. And so the wise King: Reprove a wise man, and he will love thee, give instruction to a wise man, and he will be wiser, Prov. 9. 8, 9. and he that rebuketh a man afterward, shall finde more favour, Prov. 28. 23. then he that flattereth with his tongue: As Fulco found by ex∣perience, when with courage, and boldnesse, he told Ri∣chard the second your predecessour, of his three vicious daughters, which hee admonisht the King to take good heed of, and marry away, viz. mischievous pride, greedy
 covetousnesse, and filthy luxury, which three, unlesse they were speedily provided for, would utterly undoe, both him∣selfe, Fox Acts and Mon. Vol. 1. pag. 225. printed 1610. Fox ut supra, pag. 212. Fox ut supra, pag 213. and his kingdome. I finde Henry the second King of England, was oft reproved, as by an old man at the Castle of Cardiffe in Wales, for prophaning the Sabbath. Second∣ly, by an Irishman, who gave him secret signes. Thirdly, by a knight, called Philip de Easterbie, and that with threatning. Tis a commendation of Ethelwolfe (sometime King in this land) that he followed for his soules health, the good ad∣monitions, and counsels of Swithinus his Schoolemaster: Fox Acts and Mon Vol. 1. pag. 123. but tis a perpetuall blot lieth on Sigibert king of the west Saxons, who murthered one, who faithfully and lovingly counselled him; who afterward, for his misgovernment, was deposed, by his owne people, who wandring in the Fox ut supra. pag. 99. woods, was slaine by the Swineheard of the aforesaid Councellour. I need not relate how Henry the third your predecessor was reproved by a Dominican Friar, for his evill Councellours he loved, and maintained about him. Fox Acts & Mon. Vol. 1. pag. 253. printed 1610 Nor how Gregory wrote to the French king, moving him to command a Synod to be congregated, to cause all the carnall vices which raigned amongst his Priests, and all the wickednesse and symony of his Bishops (which is most hard to be condemned and reproved) utterly to be banisht out of his kingdome, and that he would not suffer them to possesse any more substance under his dominion, then Gods  u spra,  42 ▪ sse aliti∣am, & ad  pec¦cat nec tantum orrctionem rep¦d, sed de equo qus ho¦se vindctam si zae no. ▪ 19. 20. commands did allow. There are two unparaleld examples in holy writ, the one of David (a king after Gods owne heart) whose conversion, and salvation, was wrought instru∣mentally, by a bold Reprover; And Nathan said unto Da∣vid, Thou art the man, 2 Sam. 12. 7. 13, 14. and David said, I have sinned; and Nathan said, the Lord also hath put away thy sin, thou shalt not dye. The other is of king He∣rod, the heighth of whose sin, (which brought temporall and eternall misery along with it) consisted in despising the
 counsell of S. John the Baptist, and shutting up the Repro∣ver in prison; for Herod being reproved by John, for his brother Philips wife, added this above all, that he shut up John in prison; S. Luke hereby noting, his desperate estate, and that he was come up, to the heighth of wickednesse, when he was angry with the physick, that should cure his disease, and takes bloudy revenge on the Physitian that prescribes it. Lastly, considering Gods precept, given to all Christians, Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thy heart, when thou seest him sin, thou shalt in any wise rebuke him, and not suffer sin for him, Levit. 19. 17. by thy silence, or flattery, in not saving a soule from death: by converting a sinner from the errour of his way, as S. James, Iames 5. 19, 20. exhorts, and encourageth unto, by promising thereby, he shall hide a multitude of sins; for, hereby love is nouri∣shed amongst the wise, Prov. 9. 8. and knowledge encreased amongst the prudent, Prov. 19. 25. and a good blessing from God, is procured upon both, Prov. 24. 25. when as he that neglects this duty, becomes guilty of his brothers bloud, by being partaker of his sin, as Gregory confesseth, He that Gregor. in Regist. in lib. 7. cap. 9. may correct a fault, and doth neglect the same, without doubt, hee makes himselfe partaker of the offence; and S. Paul commands us, not to be partakers with wicked men, nor to have fellowship with the unfruitfull works of darke∣nesse, but rather to reprove them, and not to connive at them, nor dissemble with them: Yea, Christ commands, If Multi modis, pe∣test quis dici com∣municare cum ope∣ribus tanelrarum, vel cooperando, vel eadem faciendo, vel consulendo, ap∣probando, permit∣tendo, covendo, & non prohibndo, cum possis, & de∣beas, vel tacendo, dissimulando. Zanch. expos. in Ephes. 5. 7. 11. thy brother sin against thee, rebuke him, and if hee repent, forgive him, if he heare thee, thou hast gained thy brother, Luke 17. 3. & Mat. 18. 15. Now if I should say, that the sins herein mentioned, have not beene an offence unto me, I should lye, and have no truth in me; therefore, that I may deliver mine owne soule (that I dye not in mine iniquity, by silence, or consent) and your Majesty, and peoples, by shewing the errours, and failings wherein you have beene
 deceived, that so you may repent thereof; and that I may cry aloud, and spare none, for feare, or favour, profit or pleasure, (there being a necessity laid on me, by the Spirit of God that gave me no rest, day nor night, till I had accom∣plisht it) but may be a weake meanes (which God can make mighty) to help reduce the troubles, and distractions of these times, and may reunite the heart of your Majesty to your godly and faithfull subjects, and their hearts to yours, and may procure Gods mercy, and favour on both. I have with feare, and faith, gone on in this worke.
Therefore, though I have no Court holy-water to sprinkle on you, nor sleeked phrases of Rhetorick, (the garbe of our times) to enchant your eare, and steale on your af∣fection, (for I know such fine linnen and soft clothing are in Kings houses) Yet, let the reverence you owe to your dread Soveraigne, (who is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, Revel. 17. 14. & 19. 16. & 1 Tim. 6. 15. a great God, a mighty, and a terrible, who regardeth not Deut. 10. 17. Rom. 2. 11. persons, nor taketh reward, who measureth the waters in the hollow of his hand, and meeteth out the heavens with a span, and comprehends the dust of the earth in a measure, Esay 40 12. 17. and weigheth the mountaines in scales, and the hils in a ballance, before whom all Nations are nothing, and they are counted to him, lesse then nothing, and vanity, in whose hand is thy breath, and whose are all thy wayes, Dan. 5. 23. as Daniel told Belshzzar) and the reverence, and obedience he requires to his sacred word, and to the mea∣nest of his Ministers that brings it, Luke 10. 16. & Mat. 10. 40. prevaile with you, and command both, (although I rub your tender eares with reproofe, and with Eliah, and John Baptist, my message be harsh and unpleasant;) for Christ hath said, He that despiseth you, despiseth me, and he that despiseth me, despiseth him that sent me. But I doubt not, but your Majesty will confesse, that every word of God is
 good, and that all his judgements are righteou, and that you will lay apart all filthinesse, and superfluity of naughti∣nesse, and with meeknesse will receive the ingrafted word, Psal. 119. 62. 57. 160. & Iames 1. 21. which is here deli∣vered, and is able to save you: and that you will no longer hearken (as Joash did) to your prophane Courtiers, and Blanditiis ita Io∣aschū demulent prinipes Jehuda, ut animum illius divini cultus alio∣qum studiosum frangerent, & re∣giae autoritatis spe∣ci (omnia) prol∣bidne administra∣rent, etiam in cau∣si Religions. Trem. & In. in 2 Chron. 24. arthly minded teachers, (which are enemies to the Crosse of Christ) Phil. 3. 19. for these like Joash his Princes, and Priests, under pretence of maintaining, as Junius speakes, his regall power, administred all things, according to their owne lusts, (Religion it selfe not excepted) and so changed his religious minde, (otherwise studious of piety and peace) by their flatteries and lies; and surely the same have they dealt with you. Therefore let me entreat your Majesty (as the Prophet Jeremy did his Soveraigne) Ier. 38. 20. to obey the voice of the Lord, which I declare unto you, and it shall be well with you, and your soule shall live; Search with the noble Bereans the Scriptures, whether the things I speake be true, or no, Acts 17. 11. and then, receive the word with all readinesse of minde, (as they did) but not as the word of me, a vild sinfull creature, who am full of er∣rour, and sin, (even in this worke, which in charity I be∣seech you for Christs sake to forgive and passe over) but as it is in truth the word of God, which effectually worketh in all those that beleeve, 1 Thes 2. 13. bury therefore my failings in silence, (which are committed out of pure igno∣rance) and what shall be taught out of the word, either to in∣forme your judgement, or reforme your wayes, let it with the kingly Prophet be hid in your heart, that you may not againe sin against God, Psal. 119. 11. and with that good King Josiah, let your heart be tender, and humble your selfe before the Lord, when you heare, what is here spoken a∣gainst this place, and against the Inhabitants thereof, for great is the wrath of the Lord that is kindled against us,
 2 Kings 2▪ 11, 12, 13, 14. because we and our fathers have not hearkened to the word of God, to doe according to al that is written concerning us. O let your Majesty, with al your people (as Josiah commanded) enter into Covenant, to walke after the Lord, and to keepe his commands, an statutes, and testimonies, with all your heart, and all you soule, 2 Chron. 34. 30, 31. and let all that take it, or have ta∣ken it, be caused to stand to it, and performe it, and with Josiah, let your most sacred Majesty take away all the abo∣minations, both of Church, and State, out of City an Countrey, that shall be knowne or found out, and let all tha professe themselves Christians, bee enforced to serve th Lord their God in unity, and uniformity, according to th rule of Gods word, and examples of the best reforme Churches; in thus doing, God will certainely powre down a blessing on your head, your childrens heads, and on thei posterities, and from thence it shall descend on your Nobles▪ and Clergy, on your Judges, Gentry and Comminalty, an generally on the whole kingdome; for when, both you, and your people, shall humble your selves, and pray, and seek Gods face, and turne from your wicked wayes, then wil God heare from heaven, will forgive your sinnes, and heal this land; then shall your kingdomes flourish, your glory fa exceed your predecessors, your subjects shall abound with happinesse, Mercy and truth shall meet together, righteous∣nesse and peace shall kisse each other. In thus doing, God will honour your Crowne here with his grace, and will grace your honour, with a Crown of glory hereafter, which is the dayly prayer of your most humble and faithfull sub∣ject and petitioner,

