



Right Honourable,
IT is a serious and grave resolution of CALVIN,
Calvin. in 1. Epist. in Tim. cap. 2. Te∣nendum est illud principium, &c. That principle and maxime is firmely to be kept, viz. That Magi∣strates are appointed by God, to safeguard, and pre∣serve Religion and publike honesty, even as the earth is ordained to bring forth fruit for nourishment, and therefore as when we pray for our daily bread, we also intreat God to make the earth fertile and fruitfull; so when we pray, that Christs Kingdome may come; we also beseech God to raise up Magistrates, that may preserve and propagate his truth; But as the earth is many times cursed, because of the sins of the inhabitants thereof, so God for the iniquities of a Nation, raiseth up Governours in his wrath, to be a scourge to them; All which sheweth the great necessitie of that injunction, to pray for Kings, and those in Authoritie, that we may live a quiet and godly life under them; and this is the in∣tent of the future discourse, which by your Command is now pub∣lished,
that otherwise had been buried in silence: I have not launcht into that great question, De jure Magistratus circa sa∣cra, though I have spoken a little obiter of it, The Magistracie and Ministry have their distinct bounds, and yet are mutually to help each other, Quamdiu Respublicae manent hospitia Ec∣clesiae, tamdiu sint mansurae; As long as Common-wealths are Innes, like that in Bethlehem, to lodge Christ in, so long they will abide and flourish. I have adventured to joyne you both in the Dedication of this Sermon; partly, because you both did in∣courage to the publishing of it: and partly, because the Lord hath raised you both up in the place of Authority; The one be∣ing almost at his races end, and the other beginning his journey. The one having found the experience of Gods Protection in the managing of that Office, which is surrounded with so many dis∣couragements; and the other needing all provocations not to faint in such a publike worke: The Lord so blesse your Honours in this publike Service, that the whole Citie, yea, whole King∣dome may praise God for your Fidelitie, Prudence, and Piety therein.

