


IT is far from our thoughts to oppose, or disparage Ortho∣dox Doctrine, a well-composed Liturgy, Rites for de∣cency and order, Ordination of Ministers, Apostoli∣cal Episcopacie, or due Rules of Discipline. We are for all these, with Truth; and, against rigid Imposi∣tions which may debar a Christian of any liberty allowed him by Christ.
Nor do we offer any Polemical Discourse, or Theological Debates proper for a Divinity-School, or Synod: but onely, what we humbly conceive more suita∣ble to a Parliament. Our work, chiefly, is, out of those Laws, which we, as Ministers, are bound to take special notice of; and, out of those Books said to be by those Laws settled; to make out these two things. First, that (so far as we can apprehend) neither the Articles of Religion, the Books of Com. Prayer, or Ordination, the Jurisdiction of Bishops, claimed be∣fore 17 Car. 1. nor so much as their Being, as Bishops, sithence; nor those Canons so much contended for, are indeed established by Law. Secondly, that none of these, as they now stand, ought to be confirmed and setled. But, all, with submission. And this we trust shall not be censured as Eccentrick. For, al∣beit we acknowledge the learned in the Law to be far more able in matter of Law, touching these things; yet, seeing every Subject is to inform himself of all such Laws as more especially concern his own calling, we hope it will not be
judged an extravagancie, or presumption in us, to produce those Laws which more nearly concern all of our Function.
Of this, we apprehend some necessity. 1. Because it is already too ob∣vious, that too many (notwithstanding all pretences of Moderation) do alrea∣dy fly higher than ever; some, in asserting Arminianisme to be the Do∣ctrine of the Church of England, thinking thereby to force all to imbrace it; some, in stickling for the Liturgy commonly used; some, still holding up sole Ordination by, and sole Jurisdiction of Bishops; and, all Canons, not onely made in England, but in Rome it self, (if not repugnant to our Laws;) labouring to possess the people that all these are settled by Law, and therefore to be continued, and imposed, without alteration; and that all who seek a Reformation of them, do oppose and violate the established Laws. 2. Because if men go on in such ways, and prevail therein, it is to be feared, that, in short time, every Minister of different judgement, (how able, godly, and useful soever) will be put, not onely out of his present place, but out of the Ministry also, as it hath already too often happened. And indeed, it can hardly be found in any age since the Conquest, that where Kings have not curbed the violence of Bishops, they have ever sharply persecuted all that threw off Popery; which Persecutions usually produced Confusions in the Common∣wealth. For prevention whereof, we humbly beseech all Noble Spirits, and faithful prudent Patriots, to look back upon the Mutinies, Insurrections & Re∣bellions, in Edw. 6. his time, occasioned by fomenting, and not moderating the furious Zeal even of those that were most countenanced by that pious King; which notwithstanding the Act of 1. Edw. 6.1. made many to flee so high, as exasperated the other side so far, as that it put several parts of the Kingdom into Combustion. Nor will those rivers of blood shed in Q. Maries days, by recalling the Bishops and others formerly deprived, and giving way to their wonted tyranny, in the height thereof, be forgotten, while ought of Protestant Religion remaineth. Nor will it be unseasonable to reflect upon the throwing out of many worthy Ministers in Q. Elizabeths reign; and, of many moe, under K. James. For, that Noble King, immediately after his coming to the Crown, was so plyed by Bishops, that, notwithstanding the Conference at Hampton Court, the Prelatical Party prevailed so far, that the Liturgy (then much complained of) remained in greatest part, and in the most mate∣rial points, unreformed: to which, they all were compelled to subscribe: which had never been required before; and many Illegal Canons were made, and inforced so far, that within the space of two years (as was credibly reported) 70 Ministers were deprived, 113 not suffered to preach; and, about 94 more,
were under Canonical Admonition, the next door to Deprivation. The carrying on of all which, together with the countenancing of Arminianism, formerly declared against, by that Learned King James (witness his promo∣ting of the Synod of Dort) did so much, and so generally offend, and ex∣asperate, that, after many thousands were compelled to leave their native Coun∣tries, to dwell in Mesech, and to take up their habitations in the tents of Kedar; others were drawn on to engage so deeply in the publick differen∣ces, (which, as to matters of Religion, were occasioned by the continuing of the former corruptions, and by those Canons, of 1639.) as produced all those horrid and bloody effects, which we abhor to mention, and tremble to remember.
May it therefore please your Wisdoms, Piety, and Goodness, to procure a re∣view of all these things, after the example of the Parliament in 3.4. Edw. 6. and, to call some of the most moderate and able persons of every different par∣ty to assist therein; and thereupon to settle all the things of God in a solid and moderate way, that all Ordinances of Christ may be restored to their pristine Purity, all Christians reduced to the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace: and, in the mean time, nothing to be imposed which may grieve or of∣fend those who shall be careful not to disturb the Publick Peace. In order to which ends, we humbly recommend to your Noble and Pious thoughts, that of the Apostle; Let your moderation be known to all men; the LORD is at hand. For this, and for your Honours,

