



WHen first it pleased You to re∣quire our service in Preaching at Your late Publike Fast, we resolved to close our eyes against all Clouds of discouragement a∣rising from our owne unworthinesse and insuffi∣ciency, and to set our selves wholly to seek what the Lord would command us to deliver in his Name, at such a time, to such an Honourable and awfull Assembly, with a totall deniall of our Psalm. 82. selves.
And albeit we should have beene glad to have beene spared this exposing of our selves to the

publike view; yet, You appointing other wise, we hold it equall that the joynt entreaty of the Representative Body of the whole Commu∣nalty of the kingdome should be regarded, and have chosen rather that others should censure us of weakenesse, than You should charge us with Disobedience: Your Request being no lesse than a command; and Your acceptance sufficient to give value to things of themselves both meane and worthlesse.
Wherefore, according to our Duty, so wil∣lingly as the consciousnesse of our slender perfor∣mances would permit, we obey Your Order, and doe now, although somewhat late, humbly offer these two plaine Sermons (for, who expects other in a Fast?) at the footstoole of Your Tribu∣nall, as a lasting Monument of Our Gratitude for Your encouraging Approbation of, and solemne Thankes for our weake endeavours in the preaching of them.
If in some places we have taken that just li∣berty which all others have done before us, we trust it shall not be imputed; so long as in the

most materiall passages we have kept to the very words which at first wee used, so farre as was necessary; and have not wittingly swerved an haires bredth from the sense and substance in the residue.
Wee have indeed pared off some Repetitions, which in speaking had their use, the more to in∣culcate, and the better to set on the matter, but would not have been so gratefull in Writing, be∣cause Readers account every thing too long that hath any thing too much. We have likewise con∣tracted some expressions, which in discourses of so much length, could hardly be so concise as wee desired, Memory being not alwayes at hand to give birth to every Conception of our minds in such formes as wee intended. And some few things we have added, where straites of time, or defect of memory made some balkes in the first delivery.
What ever our performances be, we humb∣ly leave them in Your hands, and under Your Honourable Protection, which we are bold to ex∣pect, because they are by Your owne Act drawne

from us, and that in a time so queasie and di∣stempered as can hardly beare that food, or Physik which is needfull for it. Seldome doth a wise Reproofe, a necessary Exhortation, or whol∣some Doctrine meet with an obedient Eare.
The God of Heaven steere all Your weighty consultations by his own Counsell, to his owne Glory; cover You still under his own Wing, and make You the most accomplisht, best united, & most successefull & glorious house of Com∣mons that ever sate in that High Court; but chiefly in the effectuall endeavouring of a fur∣ther Sanction of, and stronger Guard about our true Palladium, the true Religion, already established among us; in the perfecting of the Reformation of it; in the erecting, maintai∣ning, protecting, and incouraging of anable, godly, faithfull, zealous, profitable, Preaching This was our joynt & earnest suit to You, in Preaching; and we now again beseech You to set your hearts and hands to this work, as Benhail, Obadiah and other Prin∣ces in Iudah did. Ministery, in every Parish Church and Chap∣pell throughout England and Wales; and in the interceding to the Kings sacred Majesty for the setting up of a Faithfull, Iudicious, and Zealous Magistracy, where yet the same is 2 Chr. 17. 7, 8, 9.

wanting, to bee ever at hand to back such a Mi∣nistery: without either of which, not only the power of Godlinesse will soone degenerate in∣to formality, and zeale into Lukewarmenesse; but, Popery, Arminianisme, Socinianisme, Prophanenesse, Apostacy, and Atheisme it selfe will more and more croud in upon us, and prevaile against us, doe You all You can by all other meanes.
And now, commending You to God and to the Word of his grace, which is able to Acts 20. 32. build You up further, and to give You an inheritance among all them which bee sanctified; and these our Labours to his fur∣ther blessing, whereby all may speedily be brought under the line of his Covenant, which is our safety; that hee may continue with us, The Summe of both Ser∣mons. which is our Glory; and wee with him, which is our happinesse: we rest,

