



Most Noble LORDS:
THE main designe of this plain Sermon, is, to awaken men not yet agreed with GOD, out of their golden dreams of nothing but Halcyon dayes, and mountains of perpetuall prosperity, which the almost innumerable glorious Victories heaped on your Armies, seem to promise. To effect this, I have endeavoured to put all upon the Triall of their Agreement with GOD, which being the soul of my Text, ought to be the chief subject of my Dis∣course. I have therein insisted most upon the examining our performance of the Nationall Covenant, which (not∣withstanding your pious command, to whet the people upon it, every Fast day) is so much neglected, yea despised, that he is, by some, ranged among the dissolute, that now will take it; and, it is made one character of the godly party (which they who say, stand apart, appropriate,) to refuse it.
Uniformity which we have Covenanted to promote, is be∣come a scorne. And they who (being sensible of the mischiefs of no Government in the Church) presse the setling of a Discipline according to our Covenant, do every where hear, Rigid Presbyterians, Persecutours, worse than Bishops; and what not, but what they are? None know now how to Time things, but they who while out the times to prevent the setling of any thing at all.
My Lords, it is our happinesse, and your honour, that you have continued with Christ in his temptations, and remain∣ed
 faithfull in the midst of a perfidious generation, when the enemy had his hour. For, what Tiberius once spake to Nero and Drusus in the Senate,Tacit. Annal. lib. 4. Ita nati estis, ut bona malá{que} ve∣stra ad Rempublicam pertineant, may be much more said of you, who are so borne for the Publike, that you are engaged in ho∣nour to promote that, what ever become of your selves. There is no Publike act of yours, if good, but the whole Kingdom fares the better for it; no evil that you commit, but all the Nation suffers by it. Be faithfull unto Christ (who had never more need of your Zeal) and let him alone with your safety and honour, untill he give you a crown of life.
It is not enough that you act, when acted, unles you also quick∣en others to more expedition in that great busines of the Govern∣ment of the Church. It is not sufficient that your selves come up to an Agreement with God, unlesse, as Josiah, you do your ut∣most with all vigour, to draw others into the same also. Nor will it suffice that you do good your selves, if you wittingly suffer others to do evil against God and Christ, without exercising that autho∣rity which God hath put into your hands against them.
You remember Galba, who though innocent of much harm, which passed under his name, yet because he permitted them to commit it, whom he ought to have bridled, or was ignorant of that which he ought to have known, lost reputation, and open∣ed a way to his own destruction.
The Lord of Lords guide, quicken and prosper you in all the great affairs which are under your hands, make you more and more zealous for Jesus Christ, that he may yet further honour you above all your Noble Progenitours, and give you hearts so to im∣prove this homely piece, that it may further your Account, and not rise up in judgement against you in the great day of the Lord Je∣sus: in whom I am, and ever shall be

