


Right Honourable,
GOd calls you to dayes of Fasting and Prayer, you call his Ministers to joyn with you, to be helpfull to you in them. When should you ever think to be dealt faithfully with, if not now? How can we recompence better any faithfulnesse of yours to God and the State, but by being faithfull to your soules? These Prayers and Sermons passe away moneth af∣ter moneth, but know, that God will call them all over againe, he will require an account of them one day. It is a happinesse you have beyond the greatest part of the Nobility of the Christian world, that you have the Word in the plainnesse and power of it administred to you. You cannot honour the Word so much as it honours you; the Preachers of the Word have not so much need of you, as you have of that Word they preach to you. Your Honours have the largest op∣portunities to honour God, and to doe good to his Saints, that ever Noblemen had since the world began. God hath laid out work for you fit for truly noble spirits; you have as many Saints to take care of in these Kingdomes, as ever any on earth had, use them kindly, that they may blesse you, and blesse God for you; be not exasperated against any of them by those who know not, or consider not of what spirits they are. Although we should account it a heaven upon earth that there were nothing but wheat growing in that part of the field where we live; yet seeing there are many tares sprung up, ma∣ny errors and sinfull practices; if your Lordships should now be put
 upon such severity, as out of zeale to pluck up all the errors which are not venemous weeds destroying, but tares onely, some way distur∣bing the growth of the wheat, you shall as much as in you lies pluck up much of the wheat, denying such as are godly and peaceable the enjoyment of the Ordinances of Christ, (for so it is, if they cannot partake of them, without that which is sinne to them) and as some would have it, cast them out of the Kingdome: This, I feare, will not be acceptable to the meek, gentle, forbearing spirit of Jesus Christ, in the day of your account.
For connivence at Blasphemies or damnable Heresies, God forbid any should open his mouth; those who are guilty herein against the light of nature, should be taken off from the face of the earth; and such as are guilty against supernaturall light, are to be restrai∣ned and kept from the society of men, that they infect not others. But if on the other side, your Lordships be put upon this principle, that those who appeare to be men holy and gracious, yet must not be suffe∣red in opinion or practice wherein they differ from what such a com∣pany of learned and godly men shall determine. The Lord prepare me for himselfe, and quickly call me out of this world, that my eyes may not behold such a sad spectacle, as the hard usage (to say no worse) of so many thousands of Saints, and that by such who are also I beleeve the true Saints of God.
When I look upward to God, to your Honours, and the Honoura∣ble House of Commons, I see lesse cause of feare: God is full of mercy, love, patience, and tendernesse towards those who are godly, and desire to walk peaceably with his Saints; if they can appeale to him; Oh Lord, the searcher of the secrets of hearts, thou knowest not onely our desires, but our painfull sincere endeavours, are to find out thy mind, and to submit our understandings, wills, affecti∣ons, practises, to whatsoever in the use of any means, we can see to be thy will: but after all our diligent endeavours, we yet cannot appre∣hend such opinions and practises, which our brethren hold forth to us to be what thou requirest of us; and thou chargest us not to ac∣knowledge or practise any thing, where we feel not a bottome of thy Word to rest upon; therefore if it be through our weaknesse that we doe not joyne with our brethren in what they would have, yet out of a sincere desire that we may doe nothing displeasing to thee, Lord pardon this to us: Surely God in this case will pitty his people, he will not charge such errour, in judgement or practice upon them.
And as for your Honours, together with the Honourable House
 of Commons, we have that which cannot but be a comfort to thou∣sands of truly godly people in the land, for which they praise God. Namely, an Order from you that the Committe of Lords and Com∣mons appointed to treat with the Commissioners of Scotland, and the Committee of the Assembly doe endeavour the finding out some way how farre tender consciences who cannot in all things submit to the common rule, may be tolerated according to the word of God; Wee see in your Lordships and the Honourable House of Commons, a Noblenesse, joyned with much tendernesse to the godly party, whom God hath made so instrumentall for you; for which, the blessing of God be upon you, and your posterities. But it cannot but much sad∣den our hearts, that any party in the Kingdom should seek to quench that sparke of favour and hope, that so good a hand of God hath be∣gun to kindle, for his people who feare him. Yea, that so many of our brethren who lately were under bondage, with whom we joyned in fasting and prayer, crying to heaven for deliverance from our yokes; and that those who awhile since were left destitute, and fled to this City for refuge from the rage of the enemy: yet as soon as they have found succour here, that they should rise up to oppose a forbea∣rance of their brethren, who together with them love Iesus Christ, and agree with them in the substance of worship, and the doctrinall part of Religion; yea, and in matter of Discipline differ not from them but in that which is controversall; not so cleare to themselves, but that they will acknowledge, godly and peacable men may mistake in; what no forbearance in these things? How comes this hardnesse, this severity, into those hearts, where the spirit of Iesus Christ rules? where are those bowels? those bowels they say are so stirred in them, surely there is want of bowels, or if they be there, Oh that they would worke some other way then yet they have done. Nay further, this can∣not but goe to our hearts, to see these brethren to stirre up the Assem∣bly and City against them who love them in the Lord;Si tantū habet pondus aliquod verum, ut vi∣res discentis excedat, suspen∣dendum est, ut extendat crescentem, non imponendum, ut obterat par∣vulum. August. Quest. in Mat. 11. and to be so ve∣hement to promote that, which very lately many, if not most of them understood not, of which they have given out no Modell to the King∣dome, with proofes and reasons. If I know mine own heart, I can say, Peace is dearer to me then my life, I could joyfully lay down my life to procure peace between brethren, but surely this is not the way.
It is a good rule of Augustine, If any truth hath that weight, that it exceeds the strength of the learner; it is to be suspended, that that which is little and tender, may have liberty by degrees to put forth it selfe; it must not be imposed, left it bruise and oppresse it, and so hinder the growth.

Whatsoever liberty shall be granted according to the Word, I hope there is a generation that will not abuse it, but will in the middest of their liberties be servants to Peace and Concord, according to that I find in an Epistle of Master Calvins to Farell, Nos liberi, Servi sumus Pacis & Concordiae.
And my Lords, seeing there is such an out-cry against Toleration and Schisme, I beseech your Honours that there may be a full debate, how far Christ would have Brethren tolerate one another, both in matters of judgement and practice; and what that Schisme is, which the Scripture condemnes as a thing not to be suffered, and that the re∣sult of this debate may be published to the Kingdome for their satis∣faction. We know what abuse there hath been of words, by them a spi∣rit of opposition hath been stirred up in people against they know not what. And I the rather humbly beseech this, because many presume to interpret the Covenant against all kind of Toleration, and what∣soever they are pleased to call Schisme, and so they make the Cove∣nant which we have made with the high God, to become a snare to many thousand consciences of godly and peaceable men.
The Lord God guide your Honours, and give unto every one of you the wisdome of an Angel of God, in these miserable distracting times, that you may doe worthily in your generation, that in all your wayes Christ may owne you, and all the godly of the Land may with one spirit joyne together and blesse you, which is and shall be the prayer of him who is

