



MOst Noble & grave Senate, having by me a certain Idea of some Meditations upon the sounding of the sixth Trumpet, which Idea I first conceived in my close Pri∣son and Exile, the wombe of its breeding, forming, and growing to that small stature it is of: and finding (by comparing with this trumpets sound, the sight of those remarka∣ble things within the circuit of our times) such an harmony between them, as the things themselves seemed to returne a full eccho to the sound; which as it afforded mee matter to exercise and recreate my thoughts, and so to deceive the naturall taedium of so horrid a soli∣tarinesse, and to support humane infirmities with some hope, that it was not impossible
 (all circumstances weighed) that such a dy∣ing life (meerly upheld by a divine power) might yet survive to bee an eye-witnesse of the accomplishment of the things then re∣mayning to be fulfilled: so now (though so long since my returne) I have conceived it might bee not altogether unseasonable for your godly wisdomes to take notice of it, as who have no small interest in it, seeing it hath pleased the Divine Providence in so full and important a season to call you together to be the grand Agents and Instruments of ac∣complishing his great worke falling with∣in the sound of this Trumpet, and hast∣ning on the terrible summons and consum∣mation of the seventh and last: to whom then should I now dedicate these my Medi∣tations but to your worthy selves, and that not only for the interest you have of right in them, but in me also, whose deliverance from Prison and Exile, your unanimous votes made the handsell and first-fruits, and so the happy Auspicia of this ever famous and unpa∣ralleld Parliament? so as I have received, and doe enjoy a second life, which under God I owe to the immaculate justice of this Hono∣rable
 House; nor a life only, but (which is better then this life) a glorious libertie, and that not only from a perpetuall prison and exile, but (with many thousands more) from the bonds and chaines of a Babylo∣nish and Antichristian captivity, from the remainder whereof (still surviving) we hope and pray for a full deliverance by you. And for me, if my late testimony against theRevel. 11.7. Beast may come in for a share with thoseIbid. v. 3. two witnesses mentioned in this sixt Trumpet (which I am farre from arrogating to my selfe) then this I dare be bold to say, that your unanimous vote which called mee from Exile, is that Great voice from Heaven, saying to the Witnesses, Come up hither. And was not that a Great voice, which was made up of the whole House, none contradicting, when the widows petiti∣on for her exiled Husbands liberty was read and granted? And the Order for his liberty came it not to his Prison just in the beginning of that moneth, which made up three yeeres and half, answering to three days & a half, as here yee shall find it calculated? But I sub∣mit all to the charitable & judicious interpre∣tation of your excellent wisdomes. But little
 thoughts had I of such a Parliament as this, when these Meditations were a working. And this I humbly pray you to take notice of, that I have, without any alteration, or addition, of second thoughts, presented these my Medita∣tions unto your Honours, as they were first conceived, that wherein (at such a distance, as I then was) they have come home to the Pro∣phecie, God may have the Glory, and where∣in short, or wide, humane frailty may obtaine pitie and pardon. Now the Lord Iesus Christ be pleased to continue his March before you, and fill your hearts more and more with all holy Zeale and invincible courage, to fight his spirituall Battell against the Beast and his Crew, that you being his Called, and Chosen, and Faithfull, may with the Lamb overcome, and reigne with him for evermore, which is and ever shall be the fervent prayer of

