



Sir,
HOw justly I shall incur the censure of indiscretion in giving consent to have these raw and indigested Meditations (espe∣cially in these knowing times) to passe the Presse, I cannot but easily conjecture. This by way
 of excuse I can truely say, my conscience bearing mee witnesse, I intended nothing lesse; neither desired any thing more, then that they might have been so bu∣ried in the hearts of the Con∣gregation to whom they were preached, that the sound of them might never have been farther heard. But importunity of friends for the printing of this poor, plaine, unworthy Sermon hath not onely besieged mee, but also gained so farre upon mee, that I can keep possession of it no longer: And being enforced to yeeld it up, I knew not into whose hands to resigne it rather then into yours, of whose favou∣rable acceptance of my poore, weak labours in the Ministery I
 have had so much experience. Your clemency hath embolden∣ed me not onely to present it to you, but also to send it abroad in that plain posture and homely Dresse wherein it was delivered, without alteration or addition. Sufficient to procure from you for it the best welcome, and most cordiall entertainment that can be desired, is the very mentioning of the occasion, and sending it with this bare Inscription, A Sermon preached at the Funerall of your Dear, Loving, and Welbelo∣ved Wife. I have read a Spanish Proverb, He that wipeth the childs nose kisseth the mothers cheeke: Sure I am, he that doth but men∣tion the name of your dear Wife, though hee renew your griefe,
 yet in your apprehension hee re∣viveth your heart. For upon my knowledge, you account your tears shed for her sweet refresh∣ment; and those solitary places and times seem to you most de∣lightsome, where and when, be∣ing alone, you may (as David once at Ziklag) weep till you can weep no more, 1 Sam. 30.4. I desire that you may imitate Da∣vid also in the ensuing clause: But David encouraged himself in the Lord his God, ver. 6.
Sir, You know right well, that whatever comforts wee lose in the creature, they are eminently and transcendently to be found in the blessed Creatour: But the difficultie is in applying these things home to our selves when
 the Lord calleth us forth to tri∣all. I remember what the Co∣moedian saith, Facilè cum va∣lemus consilium damus aegroto: I know it is farre easier in these ca∣ses to tell others what they ought to doe, then to practise it our selves. Sir, I desire to sympathize with you in your griefe, as the Lord hath made mee (in some measure) a suffer∣er with you in your losse. You have lost (shall I use that impro∣per word?) a pious loving Wife; and I and mine a cor∣diall faithfull friend. Let mee ingenuously professe, that these∣rious thoughts how the Lord hath now deprived mee of any other way or means to testifie my thankfull respects towards her
 was not the least motive that o∣verpowred my spirit to displease my selfe for the pleasuring of o∣thers in the printing of this en∣suing Sermon. Truely, Sir, so many have been the favours that I and mine have received from you, and so reall are the engage∣ments wherein I stood bound unto you and your dear Con∣sort, that I shall far rather chuse to be accounted guilty of folly by others in coming into print, then of the least suspicion of in∣gratitude from you: you know that censure that is deservedly past upon unthankfulnesse, Si ingratum dixeris, omnia dine∣ris.
It was your selfe, together with your deare Yoake-fellow,
 your second selfe, who were the chiefe (if not the onely) instru∣ments of bringing mee into this place. When through feare of cruell enemies I was constrained to forsake an house, that in some regards I might then call mine, and to fly for refuge to the great and famous City of our Land, you were pleased from thence to bring mee to your own house, and to make your house mine (for my use) and your home, a home both to my self and my fa∣mily; which you did for severall weeks, not suffering us to depart thence, untill you had provided a convenient house for us, and fur∣nished us with those necessary accommodations, which by rea∣son of our flight, we were at that
 time most destitue of. In which place (through the good hand of God) I have continued al∣most three yeers compleat, en∣joying much sweet and heaven∣ly society with your selfe and your dearest deceased friend, whom the Lord (to our great griefe, though her eternall gain) hath now pleased to take from us: whose zeale to God inflamed her heart with an ar∣dent love to those that feared God: The Saints were (of all upon earth) the onely excellent ones in her eye, and in their communion shee placed much delight.
How conversant shee was in reading the works of godly learned men; (to omit divers
 others) I shall instance onely in those choice passages which in reading some of the Labours of that worthily, renowned, and truly reverend Author, Doctor Freston, shee had selected for her owne private use. With what an earnest desire of trea∣suring up spirituall knowledge shee read the blessed word of God, who-ever shall peruse her Bible will easily perceive. Great was her care, and no lesse her industry concerning the educa∣tion of those sweet children the Lord was pleased to bestow upon you: 'twas her desire to train them up in religion, learn∣ing and manners. To this end her daily practice was (upon all occasions) to sharpen instructi∣ons
 to them, according as their young and tender yeeres were capable; even as Bathshebah u∣sed to instruct her son Solomon, and Eunice taught her son Ti∣mothie the holy Scriptures from a childe.
Sir, The remembrance of these and many other sweet gra∣cious properties wherewith shee was endowed, although it might deservedly yeeld you much comford in this your disconso∣late estate and condition; (and I know, in many regards it doth) yet I have often heard you speak of these and such like, as aggravations of your griefe, to consider how many com∣forts you have lost in one.
It cannot be denyed but
 your losse is exceeding great in the death of such a Wife, and your childrens in such a Mother. But let mee yet tell you seriously, The losse in her is not onely (though most prin∣cipally and especially) yours: but the people of God in ge∣nerall may justly claime a part in it. So affectionately desi∣rous was shee of the welfare of the Israel of God, that I am confident I may speak of her in the Psalmists words, Shee did desire to preferre it be∣fore her chiefest joy. Shee had learned how to sacrifice her deerest delights to the good of the publick: Witnesse her willing not onely yeelding you up unto, but also her ear∣nest
 perswading you to accept of that call from God to serve your Countrey and Kingdome in that publick military im∣ployment which the unanimous consent of the well-affected had cast upon you: often pro∣fessing, that in this cause, shee could as freely trust God with you in a showre of bullets, as of raine; being fully perswa∣ded that the Lord could as ea∣sily protect you in the one, as in the other.
Shee was a woman of a pub∣lick spirit, truely sympathizing with the miseries of these sad times; never thinking it was or could be well with her selfe or hers, whilest it was so ill with the deer Saints and
 people of God, both in the greatest part of our owne King∣dome, and in many places else∣where.
And as shee was exemplary in her life, so was shee conso∣latory in her sicknesse and death. With what a contented and thankfull frame of spirit shee did bear this her last visitation, as her constant demeanour in generall did evidently declare; so in particular, I may instance in those last expressions which (according to my best intelli∣gence) shee breathed out not long before her last breath, when one of them that watch∣ed with her (laying her eare to hearken what shee spake) heard these words once and a∣gaine
 uttered, What shall I ren∣der to the Lord for all his mercies? What shall I render to the Lord for all his mercies?
Sir, I could easily herein enlarge my selfe, without ex∣ceeding the bounds of truth, or intrenching upon the borders of flatterie, both which I ab∣horre: But I conceive it very unseemly to prefix a long E∣pistle before a short Sermon; Therefore I shall humbly crave liberty to cease writing to you, engaging my selfe (upon all occasions) not to omit praying for you, That the Lord would please to sanctifie this your great losse to your abundant spirituall advantage. This is and shall be the earnest request
 (at the Throne of Grace) of him, who cordiallly subscri∣beth himselfe
Sir,

