


HUmane Creations in ci∣vil Societies God doth own. And unto eve∣ry humane Creation, for our Lord Christs sake we owe submissi∣on: this is our well-doing according
 to the Will of God. Here supreme, and sent of the supreme is order and beauty; bands and beauty. Lawes against evil-doers, and for encou∣ragement of wel-doers, with execu∣tion of those Lawes, for which pur∣pose they beare the sword, are of ne∣cessity, that Magistracy in its various Creations may attain its end. But in the Church all things are of God; and whatever is of man, is alien to that Society. The grand enemies of the Church under the New Testa∣ment, are the Dragon, the Beast, the false Prophet: this last is the most dangerous; the Beasts and Dra∣gons, spiritual wickednesse and power, the animating vivacity of that lustful Whore, Babylon the Great, the Woman that rides the beast. And the Beast is a Beast, whether arising out of the sea, or out of the earth, or ascending out of the bottomlesse pit. And the Dragons poison and paw is in all, and all to
 mischief the Church of Christ. This Paradise he affects to be in, because not his place: but chiefly out of his love, his love to work ruines there. How slily, how insensibly slides in this old Serpent? humane here, hu∣mane of what note soever, and Satan presently Acts it. Christ knew it well, who said to Peter, Get thee be∣hind me Satan, thou art an offence unto me; for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of men. The love-feasts shrowd divisions pre∣sently, destroy the Lords Supper, and harbour slie and spotty Here∣tiques, and deceivers. Prelacy in the ministery, though brought in ad tollenda schismata to take away schismes, brings forth the man of sinne, and with him the mystery of iniquity. An Easter day fill'd the Christian world, East and West with misera∣ble contentions, and turn'd the Pro∣fessors of Christs name after forma∣lities and meer Nifles. The reti∣red
 solitarinesse of some eminently devout, filled it with Monkery, Nun∣nery, and the swarmes of the orders of such. Commandments of men received to teach the feare of God, do Null the Commandments of God. Mens opinions chosen for the rationality, or the depth of them, have proved the depths of Satan. Mens Inventions entertained for their suitablenesse to humane Poli∣cies, have, while served the lusts of men in Magistracy, trampled on Ma∣gistracy, enthroned Tyranny, and suborned for sacred, Maximes that are the hornes to push at and gone all the godly and the power of god∣linesse: Such as these; No Bishop, no King. Christs Kingdome is an e∣nemy to Caesar. Christs simple Ordi∣nances for worship, without the pompe of humane Ceremonies, are not for the State and Majesty of Princes. That is, the world knows his own, and will know nothing but his own. It
 hath been long and lamentably expe∣rimented, that the evils of the Church have ever disturbed the state. That which corrupts men, and sets up lust, must needs be against God, and a∣gainst Magistracy which is from God. The Gospel in its purity will help all this evil, will bring with it all good; this Gospel is one: the name of them that hold that one faith is sacred, the name Christian. The love it teacheth and worketh, is the bond that knits them together in one brother-hood; love is for Communi∣on, not for single standing, separa∣ting, nor dividing. Its power is as sweet, as strong; as beautiful, as powerful; as good, as commanding. Administrations there are in diversi∣ty, but one Lord there is, from whom, as there is but one Church, one body, for whose edification all those are given; One body in Com∣munion distinguished into several, but no severed fellowships or Chur∣ches
 for order and edification-sake. Absolutenesse in severed Companies is of Primacy affected. The 24. El∣ders are one community about the Throne and the Lamb: and are more able to advise than one that arro∣gates, because he loves to have Prae∣eminence; The Instituted order in Administrations of the New Testa∣ment, is, Apostles, Prophets, (these the Scriptures now supply: lay the Bible in the midst, and consult there∣with, and there you have them;) then Teachers, Deacons, Govern∣ments: these Christ Jesus by his Spirit gifts, and by his Church owns. One way, and one heart go together. Diversities of wayes, nurses up di∣visions of heart. O Princes, let Christ the King of glory, in his Go∣spel, and Gospel-Administrations come in. These things belong un∣to the wise; these concern the su∣preme primarily: and Grace, Wis∣dome, and Prudence discerns, clo∣seth
 with, and establisheth them.
The strange crossenesse and con∣trariety of things that stands out in these Gospel-dayes, and rises so stoutly for one against another, ama∣zes the best heads, and staggers, yea, confounds the stoutest hearts that are by place and office to manage them; here are with us in one womb the old revived strugglings of the ho∣liest and profanest; the purest and the subtlest; the most for power, and the most denying of the power of godlinesse; the most zealous, and the most formal and richly goodly luke-warme; the weightiest grain, and the lightest chaffe; the deepliest poor in spirit, and the loftiest proud in the flesh; the heaven-born Sons of marvelous light, and the hell-born brats of thickest darknesse: these cause difficulty to rule, so as to foster the gracious, and discountenance the wicked, severing the precious and the vile. Faith, an active faith, the
 faith of the Lords Heroes is the one only helpe; this keeps with God in his Word for principles of Policy, for upright wayes, for support and courage in both, against carnal coun∣sels, courses, confidences and fears, the worst of Counsellors.
These Considerations possesse, whil'st with joy in God through Jesus Christ, glorying in his works, all honourable and glorious, and in his wayes, all righteous and holy; with fears, sorrows, and prayers, because of judgements impendent for the wickednesses of errors, divisions, profanenesse a∣bounding; and for the Magistrates sake and their concernments, and for Common-weals and King∣domes, the Innes of the Church; for, as for the Ministers, sack∣cloth cannot hinder the efficacy of their Prophesying and Witnesse∣bearing salutiferous and destru∣ctive: nor their slaughter do any
 more than issue forth their resur∣rection, to the fall of the tenth part of the City to be visited, and the ruine of seven thousand of men of name; let the earth-dwellers, the merry world of them beware.
For the Publishing of this Trea∣tise, besides the Importunity of many of the Commissioners of Sur∣rey, for the ejection of ignorant and scandalous Ministers, who heard part of it delivered in Sermons, which wrested from me a conces∣sion to their desires; two things swayed with me. First, that in this sleight age, tossed to and fro with puffes of windy vaporings which blow high and big, and take with many the wholsome, old, everlasting, and absolutely ne∣cessary truths of saving doctrine, might be laid again before all mens sight, to cure, if the Lord will, this giddinesse of head; and se∣condly,
 that in this notional, high-flown, conceited age wherein no∣thing is esteemed, but that which goes under the name of Mysterious, of a more spiritual dispensation, and a∣bove Scriptural, and the plain truthes of the Scripture are over∣look't: called low, carnal, and fit for none but Saints under the low∣est dispensation; It might be mani∣fest that these truths only are tru∣ly heavenly, spiritual, Gospel-myste∣ries of the highest dispensation that ever shall be in this world: and that upon the review and Christian-experience, all might see that the other Novel speakings, are low, carnal, beggarly things, belly-breaths, the issues of fleshly tu∣mors, indigested waterish tympa∣nies, and crackes of clouds without rain: That I prefix your High∣nesses name, is an act of boldnesse, for which pardon is humbly cra∣ved. I adventured on it, that I
 might acknowledge the encourage∣ment given to my Ministery two years since, at a needful time by your Renowned father, now with Christ, who openly and really owned it al∣most opprest, by willing, my labours at Kingston; of which poor labours, as they are mine, these are some of the fruits presented to your most serene aspect, and offered to the service of your faith. What remains, but prayers promised, that your life may be bound up in the bundle of life with the Lord your God; your person may abide in the secrets of the most High, hid there, even in his bosome-love in Christ; your heart may remain, large, wise, holy, humble, and believing; your eyes may see the great Council in Parliament assembled, full of grace and peace, the Lords and yours to his glory, and your abundant joy for the good of these Nations, and of the people of Christ in all the world; In you also through the advice of that
 your great Council, it may be mani∣fest, that God doth and will still bless these Nations, and make them instru∣mental to the ruine of Romish Babylon, with all that belongs thereto, and that out of illuminated zeal for the Go∣spels, the Saints injuries, and blood, till the vengeance and recompence be rendred to her, double: which work shall be fulfilled in its time, by the Lamb, and his called, and faithful, and chosen. On which work your heart set, you have the Hosanna of him that waits for the mighty thunderings of the Hallelujahs, and is

