


IT is the mighty worke of God, beset with wonders of fatherly Providence, that you enjoy againe a Thurs∣daies Lecture, Preached by some of the Ministers, now standing on their feet by the spirit of life from God entring into them who upheld it heretofore, untill Prelaticall usurpation with furious tyranny suspended them, and spoiled their Nest, as their proud threats phra∣sed their malicious Pharisaicall Act a little before they had fully acted it. The fourth Commandement must be turned up by the rootes, the power of godlinesse, and of faithfull Preaching, with Prayer in the Holy Ghost, as bad, with them, as Preaching; the undeniable enemies of the Prelati∣call Kingdome, Crown, and Dignity must all be outed, Lectures by godly Ministers that desired to be found faithfull may not b endured: and now for this work, that was their day. Their power through their interest in the Royall favour was superlatively great, their Hierarchy fast∣ly rooted in the ancient Lawes, and grown up with the body of the King∣dome, Parliaments exploded, the Vniversities theirs; All preferment in their hands, thousands of their Enemies gone in Colonies to the Indies the utmost ends of the earth, many great and choice wits with them, some of them profound Schollers, some with them preferred by them to the choisest Sees for ancient fame and present maintenance, as good men, and of as good report, even among the godly, as ever any Age had, all the rest of them painted Tombs, goodly Pharisees to see to: And their old friend Rome had got no little ground among us, by matching one of his Daughters here, and for all the Reformed Churches beyond sea, they were brought very low. What wisdom of man would not have thought, but that in such a day they should undoubtedly have ad the day. For my part, I sate down under their unjust illegall Sentence, with this saying to some of my acquaintance yet alive through Gods mercy: There is no coming in for me again, but with the breaking of the whole State, An alteration that must change the Kingdom and the Laws thereof. I sate down willing to see the way of God in his work; the desires of my soul were towards him in that hour and power of darknesse, I drew a small draught of it for my own direction. Little did I think the return of our captivity had been so neer, and who could conceive the glory and terrour of it? Neverthelesse, in the time of that four yeers and four weeks suspension and sequestration that I suffered, my thoughts, among other things, were on that Text in Zach. 2. 13. Be silent, O all flesh, before the Lord, for he is raised out of his holy ha∣bitation. In which, collecting the signes of the Lords arising, I saw the
 ruine of these Luciferian Vsurpers, yet not conceiving it to be so neer, in such unparalleld wayes of high providence, with such well founded pro∣ceedings of legality that hath slain all them, and cast out their carcses, and their worm dyeth not, and their fire is not quenched, and they are an ab∣horring unto all flesh, With such streams of blood, with such executions pon a sensuall Nobility, Gentry, seat of Iudges, shop of Lawyers, nke of Civilians, and sinfull body of a Malignant Commo∣alty; Of which we may say not without astonishment and high raises, What hath God wrought? Must this be the way of Vindica∣tion of the Ministeriall Liberty, of such a miserable sinfull worme as I am? From the Lords right hand went a flame of that fiery Law for us: A fiery Law is the Decalogue of the ten Command∣ments called; the fourth Commandment is then a flame of the fire,Deut. 3. 2. and it hath fiered the State and habitations of these transgressors; that sentence warmed and refreshed my heart, and touched my tongue in that winter season, and now should fire us with Gods praises, for the time draweth on pace of the Churches Hallelujahs.Rev. 19.
I write this, that you may not forget how we come to preach again un∣to you at all.
But now when I came to preach to you at this time; not only neighbour∣hood of habitation, and former ancient relation to you, and my unfeigh∣ned desire to do you good by imparting some spirituall gift, but your de∣sires, your divisions, and the care of the Churches, which towards you came upon me, because of your divisions; did much move me. I had no thought at all of making these Sermons publique; your importity brings them forth; that word, Paul, Apolles, Cophas, all the Ministers ar your, that word bound me. Being bound, two things more facilita∣ted my yeildance, when I durst not withstand the suitablenesse of the subject to the times, and the diseasednesse of the Congregaion of King∣ston, to which I was once, though most unworthy, a Teacher; this year disease is, The Lord help and heal, the disease of the Church of England; through grievous poverty grown upon her, under the impositions and op∣positions of her Diotrephesses, the Spring of the year of glorious Gos∣pel-iberty coming on, there appears a , Phhiriasis, she beginsPhhiriasis. to swarme with Vermine; this ariseth from want of concocting the wholesome food of sound Doctrine, even the truth, which is after God∣linesse: if we feed favourly on the solid substantiall truths that concerne faith and love, which is in Christ Iesus, and not turn aside after watery trash, that food will quickly set us sound, and so nourish us, that we should ru off, and rid us of these , Phtires, these Lice, and Wormes.Phthires.
Wash you with the waters from under the Sanctuary, and that is Sove∣raigne to kill them, and clear the body, and cleanse the skin of the Church. Ile reach you some that flowes out of one vein of Scripture it rls the wayes and spirit of sducers.
Their wayes are such as these:
1. To draw the heart from, and to destroy the fundamentall truths; the2 Tin. 2 18. . first truths, pretending they are low, dry and saplesse in comparison of their depths, and their high speculations, giving metaphoricall, and farre
 fetcht meanings and interpretation; as  and Philus did upon the Article of the Resurrection; saying, it was past already, or annexing to those foundation truths, opinions which overthrow them by conse∣quence, laying one foundation in appearance, and another in deed, as the Apostle implieth in 1 Cor. 3. 11. So the Papists do about the Article of Christs Ascension into Heaven, when they teach his corporall reall pre∣snc in the Masse; of thse kindes of Seducers the Apostle saith, that their word will a as doth a Canker.2 Tim. 2. 17.
2. To beguile by Paralogismes or dceitfull reasonings, and sophisti∣callCol. 2. 4. . Iam. 1. 22. Nitor ser po, non Argumento, Ambr. de spi∣ritu Sancto. Col. 2. 4. . Rom. 16. 18. 2 Tim. 3. 13. . Eustachius di∣cit  esse . 2 Thes. 2. 10. . Gal 3. 1. . arguings; when upon misconceived principles of , said as pre∣mises, wrong conclusions are drawn; like Satan their Father, who be∣gles mens hearts by a self deit, when they set up a profession of the wod, , heart often, and thereupon conclude they re blessed, though they neglect the practise and obedience ▪ against this abd of the usefull Art of Logickeit is safe to rest upon the plain Scriptures and a∣void the subilty of Argument, brought to lead from plain truths.
3. To use perswasive and enticing words, that they might induce to their errours; and the Morall Philosophy of Heathen Authors about ue, naturall abilities, and the chief good, which poste us of Christ, and true consolation through Faiin him, these ening words are also ether the swelling words of Vanity, d of wdy ostentation, or good words and fir speeches.
4. To inchant the people through a mournfull behaviour, the old ge of most of the, orders of Fryars and Monkes and the new gusse of many with us, in 2 Tim. 23. . He useth a word for Seducers▪ that signifieth an Inchaer by  and lamentation.
5. To lead us out of the common baten high way; when affectation of a Notion, and of a curious each makes men innovate word and phrases formerly received in the Church, as best expressing the sense of Scripture.
6. To bewitch with fascinations; that is, to delude simple mindes with glesings of some speciall care of tm, abou some point of truth pre¦nded, as witches do doe eyes of the body, that they thinke verily, they see that which they do not see, and do not see that which is absolutely ne∣cessary they should see and know; these be witchings are most dangerous, when the mist is cast over the soul with jugling pretexts of shewing you Christ and Fee grace in a more excellent manner, till you know neither Christ no Free-grace.
7. To wrest and wy things that are streight and plain.Act. 20. 0. . Act. 8. 9. . 2 Cor. 11. 3.
8. To lead people to the admiration of their persons: (another way of bewitching) bringing them into astonishment, and a trance upon the conceit of the great power of God in them, and some inspirations of the Holy Ghost.
9. To corrupt mens mindes from the simplicity that is in Christ, by adding or diminishing somewhat of the purity of the Gospel, whereby we all from the obedience of faith, as the Serpent dealt with ve.
10. To alleviate the threats of Gods word with vain words and to pro∣miseEphes. 5. 6. 2 Pet 2. 19 liberty; and turn Gods grace into wantonnesse.

 These are the chief path of Seducers, and for the spirit that rriethI om that of Miracles and lying Wonders of Stan, in 2 Thes. 2. them, it is an unruly spirit, a self-willed spirit, a proud spirit, a giddy inconstant unquiet spirit, a self-seeking spirit, a spirit of timorousnesse, and base fear, not of love, power, and a sound minde, a spirit of earthly mindednesse, a spirit captived to mens persons, a spirit that creeps into houses, and leads silly womn captive, laden with divers lusts, and a do∣ting spirit.
Of their dotages and deceits, I shall give you two instances, the one is this, that they conceive they have a great light, and a new light; when their new great light, is either some old errour raised from Hell again and new painted, or some matter of opinion which is very doubtfull, and controversall, or somewhat of lesser moment, rged and pursued with such zeale that the great things of the Law and Gospel are neglected, the very disposition of the Pharisees of old: But if any say, should we not seek an increase and growth in our light; and do not we look for it? yes, in some sense we do, and we ought to grow in knowledge; but this is not to be understood of any light of new truths, there are no new truth toNo new truths. be revealed; yet the light may increase exceedingly in the more full di∣stinct, and shining knowledge of received truths, in the clearing and ful∣fillingWe expect a new and great light, increas∣ing in 8. things. of some prophesies; in the power of practise when Christians in name shine in holinesse, power of faith and godlinesse, expressed in their lives, as so many great lights in the frmament of the Church; in taking a∣way the various contentions and quarrels, that now darken and offuscate the mindes of men; Satan chained up more from deceiving: in the fur∣ther manifestation of Gods judgements upon enemies of all sorts, which thing doth exemplifie and illustrate the things we do already know: In the increase of the number of able and faithfull Teachers, and knowing holy professors: and in clearer resolution of some obscure places of Scrip∣ture, together with a more perfect union of the Church of Christ on earth, which will be full of Grace, Majesty, and Terror; now not one of these is found in or by the means of our men that boast of their new light, for why do not they shew it to us?
Another Instance of their doing deceivable spirit is this, that they can∣not be brought to measure themselves and their tenets by the standard of the Scripture without shuffling: It were a plain and easie way to see the truth in any matter in question about Religion, if men did not love to doat: thus, propose the tenet nakedly; see whether there be any plain Scripture for it; if there be not, we need go no further: if there be, but yet some other Texts seeme to say against it, or a question may be moved a∣bout the sense; hold the Analogy of Faith and rule of righteousnesse, see the tenour of the Scriptures, and accordingly produce Arguments, and answer Objections; as for Example, There are arisen among us some that utterly deny the Baptizing of Infants of Professors of the Faith of Iesus Christ; now how easily might this matter be resolved, among men of quiet and Christian spirits? They say, Infants ought not to be bap∣tized: What one Text in all the Scripture saith so? Not one. What Ar∣guments can they alledge? Not one that reacheth the matter in hand; for they all go no further then this, that persons of age ought first to pro∣fesse
 their Faith, and then receive Baptisme: but not this, that they only ought to receive Baptisme; how dare men say, they must be excluded, when God saith no such word? on the other side▪ doth not the Scripture plainly take-in such Infants into the Covenant, and acknowledge them members of the Church of God: The Infant Israelites were not born Heathens, without, were circumcised, were meant as part of Abrahams seed; the Nations to whom the Gospel comes, and who do receive it, are now of the same body with the Iewes, partakers of the same promise, the grace of God is larger under the New-Testament, which it were not, if such a part, as the millions of infant-Christians that die before they come to years, were cut off from it? The Children of believers are ho∣ly, whole housholds were baptized: Christ blessed Infants upon this ground, Because of such was the Kingdom of God; that is, not onely Heaven, but the Church of the new Testament, which is called the King∣dom of God; there is this ground why those that are of age that repent should receive Baptisme, because the promise is to them, and the promise is to their children, therefore their children have the like ground, on which they ought to receive Baptisme: these with the like Arguments are strong and unanswerable, were it not that these persons doted, and in their Pride will resolve to be contentious? Let not any think that a small er∣rour which shuts out from Christ and his Church millions of his Mem∣bers, which runs against the constant tenour of both Testaments, which confines and imprisons the Grace of God in the New-Testament, which makes the grace of Christ the second Adam not to reach one sort and con∣dition of men, over whom sin and death passeth by and from the first A∣dam, which evertes and destroyes at one blow all the Churches of Christ in the whole world: All this doth this unchristian error of the Anabap∣tists do: The like might be said concerning Church Government, whether the Hierarchy or Independency, or Presbytery be of Christ in the Scripture? It might soon be determined were it not for a spirit of Dotage, Pride, and Contention, but I leave that to the Assembly, where it depends and is in Agitation: I hold you from the perusall of the Sermons, which you heard with much attention; I have written some particulars in the enume∣tation of Temple-Polluters under the second Doctrine, which time cut off from delivering, as I then told you, the rest you have as near as I could set down, save that one thing throughout the Sermons the Printer could not nde any Characters or Letters to expresse; that is, the spirit with which they were delivered with lively voice. You have the Instrument and Stick; I cannot help you to the Rozin: The Spirit of God make supply thereof, while you read them, & in that superabundant measure. Take me into your prayers, and let me be in your esteem, what I desire for ever to be whiles remaining in the flesh; Even
From my house in Long-Ditton April 7. 1645.

