



O. CROMWELL,
I Am moved by Gods Spirit this present 24. of May, 1655 to write this to You, and those that assist You in Council, for your leisurely perusal, with the other lines that belong there∣unto, and also to present them, by the spirit of God, who is the King of all the Earth, and reigneth over the Heathen, and of a truth will be found no respector of Persons, though many that are in places to Judge the People, give false Judgement, and respect Per∣sons, both in the High Court of Chancery, And that Illegall, Arbi∣trary, Irregular, Unlimmited Court, now called a Court of Pro∣bates, &c. in which is executed more the will of man then the judge∣ment of the Lord, they respecting the Persons, and Profitts one of another, as they do yet in Chancery, although in the Ordinance for Regulating and limmitting the High Court of Chancery, it is Ordai∣ned, fol. 523. That for the future there be no more cause of just Complaints from the People.
SIR, it is hoped good things will be found in You; Jehu told Jehoshaphat 2 Chro, 19.2, 3 For such a thing he had provoked the Lord to be wrath with him; Neverthelesse good things are found in thee, and that You will set Judges over the People of the Common-Wealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, You having accepted the Stile of Lord Protector thereof, and sworn to Govern these Nations accor∣ding to the Lawes, Statutes and Customes, seeking their Peace, and causing Justice and Law to be equall Administred; The Lord God of our Fathers enable Your Highness to put in such men to Judge between the People, that may be men of Truth, fearing God, and hating Covetousness, as Jethro advised Moses, Exod. 18.21. the People have been long abused and oppressed by lying unsatiable extorting, unfaithfull, unconscionable Lawyers, and men in pla∣ces of Judicature, to the dishonor of God, and the destruction of
 the Nations, and their great reproach, for sin is a reproach to a peo∣ple or Nation But Justice or Righteousness exalteth a Nation. Prov. 14.34. and lying lipps are an abomination to the Lord, but they that deal truly are his delight. Prov. 2.22. then all lying men in place of Judicature, and ying Lawyers that deal not truly, are an Abomination to the Lord; The Apostle, who knew all Gods Coun∣cell, Acts 20.27. For he must first know it before he could declare it, Rom. 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, saith, God ordaines Powers, for the Peoples Weale, or good, and such are called Gods Ministers, and are to attend continually for that very end, or thing, for the Peoples good, and well-being, if the People do well; but they are to take Vengeance, if the People do evil, and to such ministring Persons ought People to be obedient, or subject un∣to, not because of their wrath, but for Conscience sake, Your Highness, assisted with your Council, hath begun to limit and regulate that unconscionable Court of Chancery, and lying delaying Practisers, and to pull down their extortions by your Ordinance, made August 22. 1654, though they are loath to obey it; Oh judge for the Lord, and limmit and regulate that unchristian corrupt Court, stiled a Court of Probates, &c, for the Civillians must confesse, their Law is a Sea full of Waves, and as uncertain as the present Judges mindes thereof, but the grounds of our Common Law have from the begin∣ning been lay'd with such deep Wisdom, Policy and Providence, as they do provide for and meet with almost all Cases that can fall out in our Common Wealth; Th'Imperiall Power, th'immeiate Po∣wer under God and Christ, is setled in Your Person, with Your Council, and all Writts, Processes, Commissions, Patents, Grants and other things in Your Name, they are to run as the 2 & 3, & 33 Ar∣ticles of Government, declared Decem 16. 1653. and from You to be distributed in all Courts, they acting and doing in the Name of O∣liver Lord Protector, should act justly and truely; and the Pen-man hereof shall exhort all People with the words of Paul. 1 Tim. 2.1, 2. to make supplycations for Your Highness, &c. and all you shall preferr to Judge between the People, and deal truly therein, that so we may lead quiet and peaceable lives in all godliness & honesty; for false Judges, and false & lying Practisers about the Law, under them, must be a more intollerable and ahhominable thing then Warr; beleeves Yours, while GOD is with you, and you with him.

