


SIR,
THat a man should Dedicate his case to one he is for∣ced to sue in the Law, one would think should seem a Juggle, or a Paradox; but it will not be so found in this, and I shall cleer it to you, or any else; for in the Mirrour of Justices, pages. 156, 157, 158. Our Ancestors, if the partie would not confesse that had done any falsitie to a man in deed or word, where there was no wit∣ness to testifie the truth, they were suffered to enter Battell, if E∣qualls, for Declaration thereof, or proof thereof, and sometimes they proved by Witnesses, saith the Author; for if a man hath done any falsity to me in deed or in word, whereof he is appealed or impeached in Judgement, if he deny it, it is lawfull for me to prove the Action, either by Jury, or by my Body, or by the body of one Witness: Now that Battell is laid aside, yet by Jury and Witness a man may prove his Action, or Appeale; and I having spoken to you, and finding you so reall and just, and honest, in your Discovery of the matter related in these following lines, and confession thereunto, and since this our Appeal to Equity and Law is a Combating, and that the Victory is holden for
 truth, and you a Witness therein, I have placed you upon the front of the Battell, and have dedicated it to you, that in this fraudulent mat∣ter, whereof doubtless you have been ignorant, as a faithfull and Coura∣gious Champion or Combitant, you may maintain the truth hereof to this evill lying World, and in your answer in Chancery, quit your self like a Christian man, and thereby keep a good Conscience, void of Offence. Thomas Walton hath confessed the cancelling of the old Writings to our Father in his House, though not by his own hand, A∣prill the Eleventh, 1655. But would not confesse Francis Riche Habitation. Sir, on Saturday, Aprill the Seventh, toward Evening, I was with Mr. Thomas Ellis, to have delivered this Letter to my Brother John Burt, where he lodgeth in More-fields, and his Land∣lord told me and Mr. Ellis, that he and his Wife and Children were gone out of Towne, and that he had no servant left there in being to answer for them, or belonging to them, so that not knowing when he may return, I having been at the paines of penning of it, and added since something of Court Abuses, and wishing his repentance, and a∣mendmennt, and theirs also, that this iniquity be not his perpetuall loss and undoing, but that he may be saved in the day of Christs appear∣ing; though thereby he hath sought my temporall ruine, and I not be∣ing certaine of his return, that I might have seen how he would have received my Councell, or rebuke herein, and answered there∣unto next unto Gods glory, and Englands Laws, I claime sa∣tisfaction to, and any Dammages or losses I have received by him and his Complices therein beside my trouble and grief thereby (and the expences and losse which you have already seen and felt by him, and through him and his procurement) who as it is beleeved, never deser∣ved or ought to have had any such usage from him; or any of his com∣plices, abbetors or Confederates, and that now it is discovered, and come to my knowledge, so much as concerneth you, you are by Law an∣swerable to me; who am the Eldest son of my Father, and sole Admini∣nistrator by Law of my Fathers Estate, and by the Seal of the Pre∣rogative Court, unto whom John Burt became bound in a bond of 500. l. to fulfill certain Articles which were sealed between us twelve dayes after our Fathers Funerall, and Sixteen dayes after his discease
 wherein he tyes or bindes me the eldest Son to sue Letters of Admini∣stration out of the Prerogative Court in 500. l. also, and himself with me to Discover to the utmost of our knowledge the said Estate, viz. All and singular the Goods, Chattells, Plate, ready Money, Leases, and all other things whatsoever, which any way did, or doth concern the E∣state of the said disceased, which Bnd, Witnesses, and administration I have shewed you, and he having had in his hand and Possession seve∣rall Writings and Leases of your Fathers, which have continued with our Father ever since Anno 1639. and the use made by our Father, Recited in his Book of Accounts written with his own hand, untill the Christmas before he dyed, which rests with me, and he dyed June the 12th, 1654. Now you being the Principall Witnesse herein, and next unto my self, the neerest concerned both in the abuse, Charge and loss past, and of suffering for future. I having used your Name in re∣lating the matter of mine and your abuse, and since he is abscent, that I cannot have his present Answer. I am constrained to publish it in Print, that my wrongs, losses and false judgement given against me, may appear to you, and through you to the World, you being the grand Witness, and others also, and that can here discover concerning the fraude and Concealement of the said Writings belonging to you and your Father disceased; and I hope by this to finde much more of my Fathers concealed Estate. And it being commanded, That the hand of the Witnesse be first upon him that is to suffer. Deut. 17.7. And that the Father and Mother of the Rebellious or stubborn Son, which would not heare the voice of his Father or Mother, should lay hands on him, and bring him before the Elders of the City, That he might suffer for that he would not hear and obey them, it being an evill Example in Israel, and not to be suffe∣red; This Premised to you, with my Love and Well-wishings to you.
Aprill the 18. 1655.

