



Friends;
BEfore we give a particular Answer to the several parts of the fore-mentioned Pamphlet, we think it needful to give some Account both why we have for-born to Answer in hitherto, and why we have undertaken to answer it now, and the rather L. Key, (whose Name is to the greater part thereof) doth in his second and third Pages say, That the Observations and Queries made publick, were long since delivered to some of the formal Preachers in Reading, but no Answer given to them. Now as for the Observations he mentions, we saw them not till they were Printed. The Queries we acknowledge were sent to us in Manuscript, inclosed in a Letter from him, bearing date the 7th of the 12th Moneth, 83. On the 5th of the 1st Moneth following, Benjamin Coales (his Confederate in this Work) had finisht his Hue-and-Cry, ready to be made publick, and on the 2d of the 2d Moneth L. K. had concluded his whole Work for the Press, as by the several Dates thereof appears: So that the time his Impatience complains of, as long, was less then two Moneths, and it appears by the date of the Hue-and-Cry, that there was preparation made for Printing soon after the Que∣ries were sent to us. And therefore if he urges our not answering his written Queries, as the Ground or Reason of his Printing them, he dissembles, and is not plain. Now the plain Reason
why we did not answer those Queries of his at that time, was the Injustice and unfair dealing we had met with from L. K. and some others that took part with him; for besides his reading a Paper of his own againt some of us, he refusing, with his Company, to suffer an Answer to be read thereto, he had before this sent a Letter to one of us, namely William Lamboll, to which W. L. gave him an Answer in Writing, sealed, which Answer soon after L. K. had received, he tore into pieces sealed as it was, without so much as looking into it, to see or take notice what was written therein: Which rude, unreasonable and unmanly Act of his (the Fruit of a froward peevish Mind, and of a Head-strong ungo∣verned Will) made us think it not worth our while to write An∣swers to be tore in pieces without being read. This was the Rea∣son why we then for-bore to answer his written Queries, which we willingly submit to the Judgment of Truth in every honest Friend, whether he had not thereby given just cause so to do? And we leave it to the Witness of God in every upright Heart, whether L. K's publishing what he hath done to the World, doth not proceed from the Spirit of the World, and savour more of Strife and Envy, than of Peace and true Christian Charity? And whether he hath not hereby added a further proof of Friends Charge against them of the same Spirit with himself, namely, that they are the first Publishers of Differences in Print.—And if any should question, Why we have not answered the Pamphlet sooner after it was printed? Our answer is, (his Impatiency consider∣ed) we therein followed them wise man's Counsel, Prov. 26.4. we were not willing to be hasty upon him with an Answer, but to give him time to consider at leisure of that which he had hastily and for∣wardly done, desiring (if it would have been) that he and all others concerned with him in Speaking, Writing and Printing against the Truth and People of the Lord, might have received in them∣selves that sentence of Condemnation that's due to their evil un∣dertaking, that from a sence thereof they might have repented of
what they had done, and of their own accord have called in their envious and naughty Pamphlet; but instead thereof, after we had waited some Moneths, finding the said L. K. to be very busie and forward in spreading his mischievous Pamphlet abroad in City and Country, and observing him to grow more confident, lofty, exalted and conceited than before, and having of late received from him another Paper in Writing (and of like tendency with what he hath Printed, in which he presses earnestly for an Answer) but it being not made publick, shall take no more notice of it here) but say as we said before, observing him still to grow more confident, lofty, &c. We remembred what the Wise Man said, Prov. 26.5. For which cause partl, but principally for the sakes of such, who through weakness, and want of due consideration, may upon the first view of his Queries and Observations, according as they are represented by him, be in danger of being misled to think otherwise of things then in truth they really are, or that by our altogether be∣ing silent, any should conclude what L. K. hath written is justly charged upon us, the following Answer is now made publick by us,
Reading, the 25th of the 2d Moneth,

