



Right Honourable:
THis Title salutes you as Lord Major, in relation to your Place & Office; which being Honourable, then much more, when true worth and vertue makes the Person Right Honourable, as in title, so in reality: Otherwise such usual Titles are but empty founds, being but Civil complements, and not of any Moral notion. As it was the custome of the Heathen to style those their Benefactors, who were their Oppressors. Christians should not use such flat∣tery. For my part, I have taken this boldnesse to sa∣lute your New Lordship, without giving flattering titles, lest (as Elih said) my Maker should soon take me away. And in truth, such Places and Titles of Honour Job 32. 22 as these, being well weighed, do somewhat resemble Honos onus. the Crown, which Henry the 7. of this Realm, finding

at Bosworth field to be flung in a Thorn-bush, said, He that knew the weight and cares of a Crown, would not stoop to take it up. And though your Cap of Maintenance come short of a Crown; yet into such times are we fal∣len, as may make your Cap, to your self at least, being truly sensible of it, as heavy as a Crown. And if I may speak plainly my apprehensions, the well-being and safety, not only of this City, but even of our fair England, claimeth and loudly cals for of you, an ho∣nourable, wise, and faithfull execution of your Major∣alty this very year: all mens expectations being erect, some with hope, and some with fear, according to their severall interests. But with what minds soever, and for what ends, Men made choice of you at this time; this we are sure of, That Jesus Christ the Lord of heaven and earth, who hath all power in his hands, as King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who raiseth up, and throweth down again, hath in his wisdome called you to this place at this time, to do his will, and not your own. And therefore, in this high and important office, and this juncture of time, what need have you of another heart, and another spirit then your own, (it being dangerous, especially in steep and slippery places, to be led by Mens spirits) and of new princi∣ples from heaven to be put into you (as we read of Saul, who had another heart given unto him, so as he was turned into another man, so soon as he was an∣nointed 1 Sam. 6. 9. King) and all to furnish you with such quali∣fications of wisdome, understanding, and the fear of God, as may in the due execution and faithfull dis∣charge of your office, declare to all the world, that your main aimes and ends are more for Gods glory then your own, and more for the publike good, then

for your own private; and more to gratifie good men, then others, though never so high or great, and whose designs drive at nothing more then ruine & confusion. For we are not ignorant what diabolical plots are on foot, and how ripe for execution, and what kind of Counsellers and active Spirits, your Chair, and Table, yea and Bedchamber too will be haunted withall, if experience deceive us not. And you shall find their ordinary counsels to drive at two main things (yet both reduced under one head, to wit, Tyranny) the one, Tyranny over our Bodies, Estates, Freeholds, Liberties, Lawes and Birth-rights of all English free∣born Subjects; the other, Tyranny over our Soules and Consciences, which are CHRIST's peculiar freeholds and purchase, and subject to no other Law, Lordship or Kingdome, but Christs alone.
And in truth (my Lord) in this respect, you are in a hard condition, in case you should by any importunity be perswaded to interpose as a Judge in the matter of Religion, and especially in the point of Church-Government, the main controversie of these times, as wherein you have been little versed, considering how few there be that come to preach before you, who set themselves to open unto you this great mysterie of Christs Kingly office, and government, over Consci∣ences and Churches: But on the contrary, such as Ignorants most admire and adore as gods upon earth, do withhold this truth of God concerning his Sons Kingly government from you; nay (though under other terms) do publikely in your solemn assemblies exclaim against it, shut it out of their churches, will not suffer others to preach, or print it, with their good wils, but do exasperate and incense you against all

those that hold forth this truth in the glory and ex∣cellency of it: this being that very Kingdom, of which Christ said, Woe be to you Soribes and Pharisees, hypo∣crites, Mat. 23. for ye shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men, for ye neither go in your selves, nor suffer ye them that are entring, to go in.
But, my Lord, you are a lover of Peace; as that part of your Speech upon your Election, in the Hall, declared, and we all believe it: when you said, That you would endeavour to have Vnity; for which you propounded two wayes, either by Intreaty, or by Force. Indeed, in such a case, and for your place, In∣treaty is very commendable: but if you think by Force to compose the differences, that will prove none of Gods wayes, nor to lie within your sphere; as I dare say, you abhorre to be a persecutor of those that are the promoters of Christs honour. And being a thing not pertaining to the office, especially of a Christian Magistrate; I need not tell you what be∣fell Vzzah, for stretching out his hand to stay the trembling Ark. 2 Sam. 6.
And now that I have been thus far bold with your Lordship, (which hath proceeded meerly from a hearty desire, that you may not be carried with the strong tide of the times by any malignant spirit filling your sailes, through many under-water Rocks and Shelves, endangering not only the splitting of your own Vessel, but the total ship wrack of this floating State:) Give me leave further to beseech you, that (as you love your own self, and soul, and family, and posterity, your native Country, the Honour of this City and Nation you would improve the whole power of your Office (among other evils) for the not

only suppressing, but utter obliterating out of all re∣cords of memory, or mention, that late Remonstrance of London, which like the Trojan horse is stuffed with such matter, as, if the importunity of some might have its desire, would unavoidably hale in ruine both to City and Country.
Nor doth any thing more clearly demonstrate that spiritual Judgement of blindnesse, and hardnesse of heart to be upon all those who have their heads and hands in that Remonstrance, and wilfully still persist in the prosecution of it now in cold blood: Than the unnaturall hating, and hunting after the destruction of those very men, as our mortal enemies, who have with the extreme hazard of their lives, been honoured of God to be the Preservers both of Them, our City and Country, and on the other side, the high esteem and honouring of those, as our faithfullest friends, who are part-takers with Murtherers, with Rebels, with Traitors, Incendiaries, Underminers of our Parliaments, and consequently of the State of the Kingdom, Dividers between the Parliament and City, that themselves may reigne, whose violent and frau∣dulent practises proclaim them to be not friends, but such, as in whom to put the least confidence, is to trust in the Reed of Egypt, whereon if a man lean, it will pierce him through. And therefore, for these many and weighty considerations, both in a due re∣spect to your Lordship, and hearty zeal for the honour and safety both of Parliament, City, Kingdome; fuller of dangers and enemies at this day, then (by reason of that spirit of blindnesse, and deep sleep, wherein our City hath of late been sweetly lulled by the strong charms of fair false friends flatteries) we are

aware of: I have in the name of Jesus Christ humbly commended this small Book to your Lordship, that therein I might discharge the duty of a poor Watch∣man, to awaken you in the first place, and consequent∣ly all of that Court and Counsel with you, to look out, and inward too, for the speedy preventing of all those imminent dangers, which otherwise will sudden∣ly surprise us, and take us napping in the deep of our too credulous security. For the Spirit of that Ten∣horned Beast is now making war with the Lamb, Rev. 17. (which is likely to be his last war, Babylons fall fol∣lowing in the next chap.) & this Spirit warreth under Rev. 18. new colours, not red, but white, whose Word is, RE∣FORMATION, and this under a fair colour of a Cove∣nant, by vertue whereof pretending a just title to the War, he hopes, by the help of the Remonstrance, and the prime authors thereof, and their adherents, to erect a new Bestial tyrannie over souls, bodies & estates, un∣der new names and notions. But the issue is, The Lamb shall overcome them (for he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings) and they that are with him are called Chosen and Faithfull. And, my Lord, you shall find in this Book, Conformity to be the Mystery of iniquity, the mo∣ther of all mischief, the cause of all our present cala∣mities, and the forerunner and hastener of our ruine, if we repent not, & if our Lord Iesus Christ prevent not, which certainly he will, because himself is the Great and Almighty General, whose Cause and Name is mainly engaged in this warre. Now the Lord Iesus Christ give you the Spirit of wisdom, well to consider and lay to heart these things: which that you may do, is, and shall be the hearty prayer of

