



TO speake to a Kingdome at once, is both a weightie work, and an happy opportunity; Whiles I considered the former, the vast disproportion of mine owne abilities did discourage me: but the latter brought me upon the adventure; in which though I should come off with losse, yet if you and the great worke in your hand receive but any gaine, I shall de∣sire to rejoyce. I know that God usually is maximus in mini∣mis, and doth his highest workes by lowest meanes, and instru∣ments; Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings he hath perfected praise, Mat. 21. 16. Therefore I hope my poore endeavours may not be without fruit; which your desires doe command, and your gracious acceptance doth incourage me to make thus publique, and present them againe to you.
In them I have set before you a true Christian as standing firmly upon the true foundation, as ascending daily in the true spheare, to perfection and rest; Both which is the Lord Jesus. Every standing that is not upon this foundation is deceitfull
 and false, every ascent that is not in this spheare is enormous and crooked.
Every man is growing up according to that root in which he is planted, and that principle in which he lives; By living in Christ we grow up into Christ, and he that lives most in him, growes up most into him; What ever God the father would have to abide, and grow up into a state of perfection and glory, that he hath laid upon Christ as the foundation; and what ever rests upon any other, will either vanish into aire, or be consumed with fire.
And this is the commission that Christ hath received of his Father, and the great work that he is upon at this day, to throw down all false foundations that men have set up and built up∣on, that the true foundation of all things may appeare. All Religion, peace and principles within, all power peace and glory without that rests not upon it, he is now comming to shake and dissolve.
The foure great Monarchies of the world, though their firmnesse and strength be like that of Gold, Silver, Brasse, Jron, as they were represented to Nebuchadnezzar in his dreame Dan. 2. Yet because they were not erected upon a true foundation, the Stone cut out of the Mountaine breakes them to peices, and brings them to nothing;
And so Great Babylon the throne of the beast being erected without Christ, yea against him, is falling down every▪day be∣fore him.
Therefore (Worthy Senatours) take heed how you build, see that your foundation be solid; Let me be bold to tel you, that all your profession, religion, and your hopes grounded upon them will fall into the dust if they stand not upon this Rocke, the Lord Jesus; I mean not an imaginary but a true Jesus, as rightly discovered and apprehended: For millions of soules miscarry in these Gospel-times, amidst Gospel-light by
 resting upon such a Jesus that hath no existence either in the word, or in heaven, or any where but in their owne fancy alone.
And when you find your standing good, let nothing shake you; rest here, reigne here, and from hence be you daily advan∣cing into the bosome of the father, which is the centre, the home, the haven, the heaven of your soules.
As to the Kingdome, and your own trust in relation to it, I shall only say thus much, looke upon its ruines, and its dan∣gers; and both these call upon you for a double worke, to be stre∣nuous in building, and vigilant in watching.
First, strenuous in building, you are called to raise up the former desolations, even the desolations of many generations, Here are the liberties of the people to be built up, the peace of Church and State to be built up; the walls of Jerusalem to be built up, and the ruines of poore Irelad; according to your power and capacity addresse manfully to all these that you may winne to your selves the honorable name of bing the repairers of our breaches. I remember a great Athenian Commander being asked why he did not riot and swagger it with the rest of the Company; answered, I know not how to drinke and swagger; sed novi Rempublicam ex parvâ magnam facere; I know how to make a smal Common-wealth great: Oh Sirs, you will then approve your selves to be men of skill and wisdome indeed if you know how aright to build up a poore decayed Sate, and to unite divided Christians. That you may be successfull in this worke;
First, build with unity, there can be no greater obstruction to the building than divisions among the builders; Did you all act from the same principles, to the same common ends the work would goe on in your hands more prosperously and speedily.
Secondly, with diligence; If builders grow slacke, will not attend the worke, but are by every slight occasion called off, the building is likely to sticke.

 Thirdly, with wisdome, Prov. 9. 1. Wisedome hath built her house. The spirituall building goes on successeful∣ly, because it is carryed on by an infinite wisdome: And Prov. 24. 3. By wisdome is an house built, and by understan∣ding it is established.
You have many enemies that seeke to disparage and under∣mine your building, and therefore build wisely: and wise builders will build upon a good foundation, and by a good rule.
Fourthly, with resolution; builders ought not to be affrigh∣ted from their worke with ashowre of raine, a puffe of winde, or the barking of a dog; For want of this men have left their worke, and either by feares or flatteries have been brought to a very unworthy and base complyance.
Next in order to the imminent dangers of the Kingdome, your worke is to be vigilant in watching. Vita hominum vigilia, said Pliny to Vespasian; I am sure it is now one great worke of your life to be watchfull for this poor Kingdome, and would you approve your selves true watchmen, then watch;
First, accurately; Watch-men must not be blinds as Isra∣els was, Isa. 56. 10. They must have a piercing sight, that they may be able to see into the bottome and depth of things; that they may see snares that are laid in private, and may not be deluded with fair pretexts and overtures to the betray∣ing of their trust, and the good of those for whom they watch. As also, that they may be able to see afarre off. Watch-men stand upon walls and high places to discover dangers ap∣proaching at a distance: so are you this Kingdomes watcbmen to discover evils that may come upon it, not only for the pre∣sent, but many yeares hence. You are to provide not only that we may for a few yeares, or in this generation enjoy the Gospel, our peace and liberties, but to settle them upon such a bottome, as that posterity may rejoyce in them as well as our selves.

 Lastly, Watch men must have accurate sight to spie out the fittest season for every action; that may be done at one time with ease, which at another will not with much difficulty. And surely Sirs, had there been this wisdom on all sides to improve seasons, the work of this Kingdome might have been nearer fi∣nishing then now it is. But this is our comfort, though men may misse their seasons, God alwayes doth lay hold of his.
Secondly, watch faithfully; the unfaithfulness of a watch∣man brings all in danger. If he be corrupted and comply with the Enemie, he may doe more hurt then the whole Army.
Thirdly, watch with selfe-denyall; A watch-man must en∣danger himselfe for the publique safety, hee must deny him∣selfe in his ease, in his estate, in his private occasions and interests, that he may be serviceable to the publique. Let A∣drian's motto be writ upon all your hearts; non mihi sed po∣pulo, for the people, not my selfe.
That the dangers of the Kingdome are not yet over, we have too evident reason to believe: and therefore let your eye be still open, and keepe strict watch, lest we should be surprized by them.
Thus I have done, onely if any where you finde my lan∣guage more particular and importunate then ordinary, I de∣sire that the present exigence of the time and your affaires may plead my excuse.
I did desire to be faithfull in the worke, and in the free discharge o mine owne conscience I shall endeavour to sit downe and rejoyce amidst all the censures and reproaches of men. Who are the true friends and enemies of peace God will in a short time discover.
Some things which I had prepared to speake, I was con∣strained to omit by reason of the time, and I am here bold to present them to your eyes, together with those which I have
 already presented to your eare. Which that they may bee as A SACRED ANCHOR to establish you, as HEA∣VENLY FIRE to enflame your hearts into an higher pitch of true zeal and resolution for God and this Kingdome, shall be the continuall prayer

