



GENTLEMEN,
MY thoughts have beene long perplexed to find out some way or other whereby I might re∣turne some acknowledgement of the many expressions of love, and underserved favours, which I have received from you; I dare not deny, but I am deeper indebted
to you; then to any people under Heaven, and the debt I owe to you is above my ability, not wil∣lingness, to pay; I here tender you earnest, let your goodness please to accept of this in part, (if it may bee in good part) till the whole comes.
I offer herein some of my first fruits unto you, and doe earnestly desire you would accept them, and wish them safe protection, for I dedicate not onely them, but my selfe unto you, necessitated there∣unto by an obliged duty of thank∣fulnes; and receive them as from one that unfeignedly desires the salvation of your soules.
In the preaching of this Sermon you might perceive, I did not seek so much to please, as to profit, not to informe the judgement, as to worke on the affections; but till
God blessed it in both, I never purposed it should have been broa∣ched abroad, because it might seeme as a candle lighted at noone day; it found such approbation, that it was thought fit that it should not bee confined within the narrow limits of a Parish; but that it should bee communicated to o∣thers, by these silent speaking cha∣racters.
It is a true saying, that Prin∣ting is a kind of Preaching, though not soSolet ac∣ceptior esse sermo vi∣vus quam scriptus. Bern. plausible and prevalent to perswade, yet it is of larger ex∣tent (seeing a man may Preach to more by his pen then his tongue, and bee farther heard out of the Presse, then the Pulpit) for a dead man may live in his bookes, and by them preach to the living, though unborne, when he dieth. I would accompt it a double happi∣ness
if I could doe good both wayes.
I am sensible of the curiosity of the times, and of my owne insuf∣ficiency, those small abilities God hath given me to profit others, are rather in the Pulpit, then the Presse: yet for the benefit of slee∣py and secure Malignants in the North (whereof some received some light from this poore talent of mine) therefore it is come to light, and for a light; that they may see how farre in the day it is, that it is time for blind beleevers to awake, and behold God every day by his lift-up hand, putting mat∣ter of thanksgiving both in our hands and hearts. It is a part of my prayer that God would winde up our hearts to the right tune of Hallelujahs, and that the rest may have as much cause of praysing the
the Lord of Hoast as the North hath had, that so God might per∣fect his owne worke of reformati∣on, and put a period to our warres and depopulations.
You know too well, how sad and deplorable was the Condi∣tion of this ancient Corpora∣tion, when the common and cru∣ell enemie had plundred your houses, and loaden themselves with your Wealth, which (with much Labour and Sweat) all your life time you had beene ga∣thering for you, and your poste∣rity, and wanting light to steale away what they had possest themselves of, therefore their ma∣lice set on fire your habitations, & brought many of them to ashes.
When your Castle was left carelessely by Commanders, that had it not been for Gods lift-up
Hand, that which was left un∣burnt, had beene at their com∣mand, and your selves Slaves to those bloudy Towne-Burning Adversaries. Then you became the subject of many prayers, and object of many teares, so that you might have said with Saint Paul,2 Cor. 1.8, 9, 10, 11. Wee were pres∣sed out of measure, above strength, insomuch that wee despaired, even of Life: but wee had the sentence of Death in our selves, that wee should not trust in our selves, but in GOD which raiseth the dead, who delivered us from so great a death, and doth deliver: in whom wee trust that hee will yet deliver us. Yea, also hel∣ping together by Prayer for us, that for the gift bestowed upon us, by the means of ma∣ny
persons, thanks may bee given by many on our be∣halfe.
Hath God raised you out of this wofull condition, and doe your dead bones live? Let then the language of your praises bee that of DAVIDS, Psalme 18.46, 47, 48, 49. The Lord liveth, and blessed be my rock; and let the God of my salvati∣on bee exalted: It is GOD that avengeth mee, and sub∣dueth the people under mee; hee delivereth mee from my e∣nemies, yea thou liftest mee up, above those that rise up against mee: thou hast deli∣vered mee from the violent man. Therefore will I give thanks unto thee, O Lord, a∣mong the Heathen; and sing praises unto thy Name,Psal. 62.18, 19. and
blessed be the Lord God of Is∣rael, who onely doth wonderous things.
What misery did formerly befall the Towne, by the lift-up Hand of GODS Justice, was for sinne; And now GOD seemes to smile upon you, and is willing to be reconcil'd with you; never returne againe to your former folly; for new-provoking Transgressions, or old, unrepented of, will pro∣cure new depopulations. There∣fore sinne no more, lest a worse thing come unto you. Sinne is the ruine of a Town, nay of a Kingdome; and if that our Enemies did at a∣ny time ruinate our estates, we may thank our selves.
Sinne is like a Traitor in our bosomes, that will open the
gates of the strongest Castle to the enemy.
Sinne weakens the hands, and makes them unapt to fight; it was not the strength of AI that overcame the Israelites, but ACHANS sinne: The sins of LANCASTER, were the enemies of LANCASTER; these cursed CANAANITES are alwayes rising up against us: but it must bee our Re∣pentance that must repaire our Ruines, and bee our future Fortress, in the dayes of dan∣gers: The LORD in mercy destroy our sinnes, and not our Townes, least our unre∣pented sinnes force him to fire the remainder of our houses, to fire us out of our Formalities, and manifold iniquities. Let us not provoke GOD any
more, lest the next blow bee the last blow, and the everla∣sting destruction of us. I con∣fesse the course you have lately taken in Reforming the Sab∣bath, hath wrought much good, and the executing Justice on prophane sinners, hath been a good work, and may prove the onely meanes to turne away the wrath of God from us (which was increased by drunkenness, and prophaneness.)
I beseech you goe on in the worke and way you have begun with courage and constancy, and be assured the LORD is with you, while you are with him: Your joyning the sword of your power to the word of your Mi∣nister, is the high-way to a bles∣sing; your prudent perseverance in the worke so well begun,
will procure many praises to GOD, many prayers for you, and much joy in the hearts of all them who sincerely affect you: Of which number you may reckon him who is

