



Brethren,
WHEN I could any waies impetrate Section 1. from my selfe, some leisure from other studies, not having any great affinity with these which I now offer to you, and to which of late years I have been much addicted, since some heterodox disowned, and at last owned papers of Mr T. P's, have in a clandestine, and in an open way, fluttered about our Country; I think it not fit to tel you, with what expedition & chear∣fulnesse, I did draw up an answer to them, satisfactory to my selfe, and to some others
 much better able to judge betwixt things that differ: Yet now that I am forced to entertaine sad and serious thoughts of publi∣shing my conceptions, my witnesse is on high, that I am not able to expresse to you, how va∣rious and great the anxieties of my tumultua∣ting spirits are; and that not only for those more personall reasons long since, and of late given in to my Antagonist, for which I am sure he owes me thanks, not scornes, the only returnes which yet I have had from him; (In∣gratum si quando dixeris, omnia dix∣eris) but much more for those of a higher altitude and contemplation. Alas for my deare mother, the Church of God amongst us, after so many worse then Scyllan or Ma∣rian, civill, uncivill contests, which lately, yea still do abound in her sacred and spiritu∣all republicke; is it not high time for her to take her Supersedeas from contention, and to use the Historians phrase, quasi aegrae sauciaeque requiescere quomodocūque, B. Florm, lib. 3. cap. 23. ne vulnera curatione ipsa rescinderentur? Knowes not all the Reformed Christian world by this time, to the griefe and sorrow of it, that we are long since grown sick of our
 remedies, as of our diseases? Lord Christ, is Nec morbe nec remedia fr∣re possunt, Tacit. this a time, when pens, hands, tongues, to speak of no sharper things now, are up and busie, not only against Ministers, but contra Pres∣byterium ipsum, the very ordained mini∣stery of Christ it selfe, lately blessed be God, vindicated by your selves, for Ministers one against another, as it were in a hostile way, to be breaking their speares and launces, and to stand,
Tela pares acies, & pila minantia pilis, See the preface to the rea∣der, p. 55. of Jus divinum Ministerii Evangelici, with Mr T. Bal's Pasterum pro∣pugnaculu. as if the Devill in this last of ages had not conjured up enemies enough to destroy them all, and that by their own divisions? Hither∣to I thank my God for it, both in forreine parts, and in my sweeter home, as to all my Protestant Brethren in the Ministry, in whom there hath but appeared the least glimpse of true piety, what is observed to have been the happinesse of Myconius, hath T. Fuller Abel Redivivus in the life of Myconius, p. 139. been mine, we together, cucurrimus, certa∣vimus, laboravimus, pugnavimus, vici∣mus, & viximus semper convinctissime, &c. with all such, even when in all things, conscience would not suffer me to colere u∣nitatem opinionis, I did colere unitatem
 ordinis, and so did mainteine the union of the spirit in the bond of peace. This faeli∣city my (as he cals himselfe Protestant, p. 4.) * Antagonist should not have envied me, by Bullinger upon occasion of Bolsec his disquieting the Church of Geneva, by his opposing the doctrine of Calvin touching election, returned this answer; that he which did teach that Gods eternall election did depend on foreseen faith, did maliciously a∣buse the doctrine of the Church of Tigurum. interrupting my peace. Can there be at this time a day, after that so many invincible He∣roes have subdued all Pelagian and Armi∣nian monsters, who heretofore have corrup∣ted Gods truth, and disquieted his Church, any great use or honor (if that were any way to be heeded by modest Divines) in open field to appear against slain and conquered ene∣mies? Who so great a stranger in the Israel of our God amongst us, but knowes that more famous Writers have anticipated all that can be said according to Scripture, Right reason, antiquity upon these arguments, then ever wrote the History of the Marathonian fight? and yet G. I. Vossius, tels me in his observations upon I. Sleidan, p. 17. de qua∣tuor summis Imperiis; pugnam Mara∣thoniam ferè à trecentis historicis esse descriptam. And truly to say nothing of others, I must confesse I know little use of, and lesse honour in writing more upon these arguments, till the adversaries bring new
 ones, for the supporting of their gracelesse cause, which have not long since been confu∣ted (if I may so speake) by those Herculesses or Sampsons in Divinity, Austin, Brad∣wardin, and out of them, Dr Twisse. For my part upon these and other grounds, I could most willingly have given my adver∣sary leave to have reviewed his arguments, and have compared them with the answers of most renowned authors, and so to have allow∣ed See T. Fullers Abel Re∣divivus, p. 336. him yet longer space to have come to his Retractations, the second or the third time, (for he hath been at them severall times al∣ready, p. 24.) and to keep touch with us, in what he puts us in hopes of, p. 72. that how dogmatically soever he may seem to have spo∣ken in many places of his discourse, that hee will submit to those of deeper and pro∣founder reach, and my selfe could have re∣joiced to have betaken my selfe to the wonted crypts of my silence, though I were to be jee∣red for it by him, p. 4. There he jeers me with my very great leisure. then thus to appear upon an open Theater.
But when pious, prudent, and by me stu∣died Section 2. delaies shall, and that by no beggers, be interpreted to bee a scrinking in the maine
 cause, that noble and brave cause of grace, defended by me the meanest of its votaries; when not onely my compt, smooth, polite ad∣versary shall disdaine (as I know he doth) to to thinke how low and meane qualified an enemy hee hath in mee met withall to deal a∣gainst him.
Rusticus (saith he) es corydon, nec quicquam curat Alexis. But when by some, even of Christs friends, it shall bee thought that he hath the better of the cause, because he of a long time hath had the last words, it is high time for me to arowse my selfe, and to cease from that which the most call sloathfulnesse, whatever I may call it In causa haereses neminem oprtet esse patientem, Hier. myselfe. And now I trow if you will not be angry with me, (as I hope you will not) for bringing my labours in this Dedicatory to your doors, I am sure no body else will be able to give any reason why they should be so, for calling upon you upon this occasion. Have I, or am I solicitous to have any more know∣ing, able, more proper or competent patrons, yea, Ecclesiasticall, Ministeriall Iudges of my worke and cause then your selves? who have ever with L. Capella, judged it un∣reasonable, L. Capellae Epist. Dedic. ad Spicilegium.
 illis (be they Lords or Ladies, or whoever they will be) mea inscribere, qui vix libri titulum adspicere dignan∣tur, quique inscriptam sibi Epistolam, saepe vix legere, multo minus intelligere possunt, ne dum ut de operis pretio & merito, vel ejusdem demerito rectè judi∣care valeant I cannot doubt but you have been grieved at the very heart, for the pleasing poison in a golden cup of Oratory in the papers answered, propined against your judgements and liking unto many of your incautelous auditors, and may a little be re∣freshed by a sound, though homely antidote, now at last come forth against them. None of you, as you know, are the Fathers of your poor Sympresbyters papers, (as Mr T. P. is not ashamed somewhere in his Epistles to me, to suggest that you were to be). Would to God you could have stooped so low, as to have been so, or at least to have appointed those three most Reverend Praefacers, (whom I have, as was most fitting, set in the fore∣front, seeing they have been pleased like themselves, doctorally to speak to the maine Questions controverted) Dr Reynolds, Mr
 Thomas Whitfield, Mr D. Cawdrey, to have been so, my adversary would have felt any one of their little fingers to have fallen heavier upon his cause, then all my loynes: but you know I have been long deeply ingaged to you for your pious and learned society, and for your constant good affections not so much to my cause, as to our Lord Christs, our common Lord and Master. To such friends as I owe much, so I would gladly out of my poor treasury, pay out by publick acknowledgement, some mites of gratitude; the rather because I feare be∣fore this now begun contention in our parts be ended, you with your more robustious armes, must come in Ecclesiastically to de∣cide it; I fear me, pray God in this I prove a false Prophet, the late Correct Copy, though for the present taken up, and exami∣ned by a fratrum minimus of your order, yet in the issue, as most probably in the inten∣tion of our Duellist, must bee taken up by some Majorite of your company, before hee will cease from displaying his banners of de∣fiance against the truth and grace of God.
I believe every body will think I should Section 3.
 rather make some Apology for the length, lightnesse, or pleasantnesse, and for the tartnesse of my stile in the work, then for beseeching you to patronize it. For the two latter, let me crave leave to beginne à poste∣riori, I list to say little, because most, even of you may judge me faulty, and I will think so, and say so too, yea, and most willingly come to an open penance for it, also with a peccavi fate or from my heart and mouth, veniam peto, si unquam posthac. De∣fendam ego non passiones meas, sed veritatem Christi, if any of your so∣ciety shall, convince mee of scurrility in the former, or Calumny in the latter; else I must humbly crave leave to think, that if the conditions of my adversary were but as to all matters as well knowne to others, as I am made continually to know them, feel them, and understand them, I should have enough to plead an excuse for that which o∣therwise might sound ill in my way of some∣times play fulnesse, and anon sharpnesse with him: Every one can tell how to tame a shrew, but he that hath her. As for the length, I can safely say, It was not projected
 by me at the first; and now I perceive how much it is beyond my first designes, I am much displeased with it; yet I must crave leave to say in my owne behalfe, that whilst, 1. I labour to draw out my Adversary out of his ambiguous lurking holes. 2. whilst I study to avoid obscurity in deep matters. 3. whilst I state questions all allong left unsta∣ted, after a carelesse fashion by Mr T. P. 4. Whilst I pull away ancient Authors from him. 5. Vindicate the modernes. 6. My selfe being a meer pigmee, Zacchaeus-like, get upon the shoulders of many ancient and modern tall writers. 7. Whilst I am somewhat loath to leave any thing which hath but the very physiognomy of an Argu∣ment wholy unanswered 8. Whilst I study to prevent the adversaries pelting of mee with oratoriall Triobulary Pamphlets, which but for the logs which I throw in his way, he hath a geniús to doe from moneth to moneth. I say, whilst I do all this, lo, before I am aware of it, I swell into a kind of a vo∣lume, which to some I doubt not, will neither be unprofitable, nor unpleasant towards their Anti-Pelagian, and Anti-Arminian
 studies: and as for others of lesse leisure, if they will but bee pleased seriously to per-use my answer to the two Portals of Mr T. P's book; in which, for the gratifying of some, I was purposely the longer, and but let the margin alone to professed Students and Divines, they will not finde the worke over∣bulky, and yet I trust have enough, by Gods grace, to settle them in the truth, and to take off the edge of objections.
To conclude; the work, such as it is, is now Section 4. exposed to open view, for every one to passe what censure upon it, he shall judge most fit∣ting. I shall but beg of all, that neither I, and lesse Gods truth by me mainteined, may be condemned before it be heard to speak for it selfe. If Mr T. P. who as yet stands ad op∣positum, will take upon him that which he cals, p. 20. the drudgery of a Reply, let him do it candidly, not so much against the more lighter parts of my book, wherein af∣ter some worke, I took a little leave to play; as against that, wherein every judicious per∣son will say the strength of it lies: If he doe otherwise, he shall henceforth sibi & Musis canere, take all the sport to himselfe; as for
 me, I will be as a deafe man, who will never dance at any such musick. As for you my deare and Reverend Brethren, as I have had, so I humbly begge the continuance of your prayers upon my Ministry, labours, person, for the afflicted Church and peo∣ple of God amongst us, that it may at length enjoy truth, peace, righteousnesse, in a set∣led way, according to Christs mind, that we may all speak and mind those things, where∣by both we, and those who heare us, may be saved.
 Brockhole Febr. 6. 1655/6
