



FRIENDS,
DIVINE Providence (who is the wise disposer of things) hath so ordered that our Lot is faln out in the last dayes; and eke upon the Borders of the Promised land, the tedious, de∣sertous wildernesse journey (wherein so many thousands of the Israelites Carkeises have faln) being almost past; and the Day-star ready to arise, and the glorious morn of the son of man, and evangelicall peace and rest, ready to dawn and break forth, as a pure, and the greater light in Zions Horison. Yet when we look abroad into the World, our thoughts are other∣wayes exercised, and that to them twill be a day of darknesse, of clouds, and of thick darknesse, &c. That the Rulers of the World will be degraded and Exauthorized; that the light of this morning (or indeed rather even-tide: For then shall it be light,) will make the works of darkness manifest, and that all occult and secret hypocrisies, and the execrable, sacrilegious and si∣monicall sins and wickednesses of the sons of men will be dis∣covered by the searching fire, which will render the Sinners in Sion sufficiently obnoxious to the punishment of these everlast∣ing burnings.
The great Jehovah, and our Law-giver, and those in Cove∣nant with him, are now making inquisition for blood, and the blood shedders, and truly it evidently appeareth, that Rome and the Nations of Europe (commonly called the Protestant, but are the Anti-christian Countries,) which are the streets of that great City, and Rome-Babylon are the Akeldema, or field of blood.
Now for that the deep sense of those hainous murders com∣mitted upon the bodies of the precious Saints, which hath cau∣sed streams of blood to run down, is imprinted in our hearts; and more especially being greatly affected, and melted with a godly sorrow for that stop, and remora put upon the work of
God, that noble Interest and Cause, which once in a glimps appeared, and was carrying on in great-Brittaine and its Domi∣nions, which the great men of these times have now by their preposterous prevarications, and flagitious vitiated practises banished their Courts, and Palaces; and it is become not on∣ly an exile, but captivated in bonds, and the Iron-chains of these mens lusts, which are now become laws: And Jehovah hath, and doth permit this Cause at present to lye dead; yet (would men, nay would Saints but rightly consider it) it is for great advantages, which a suddain and good event, and not our pen shall Declare, and demonstrate to the World; and even alrea∣dy it is not without some ratling noise, and shaking, nay, not with∣out some sinews, flesh, and skin, which doth premonstrate a lively standing up upon its feet, as an exceeding great Army. (Come from the foure windes, ô breath, and breath upon these stain, that they may live:) Now seeing the Lords arisen to the prey like a roaring Lyon, stirring up jealousie like a man of war, cloathing himself with zeale and vengeance, preparing his heavenly Army, his Bow; the Quiver of the Lord of Hosts, and the sharp Arrows of the Almighty furbishing his sharp glittering sword, opening his Armoury, and bringing forth the weapons of his indignation, blowing with a blasting East-wind, and shak∣ing his hand upon this Power and these men, & preparing his Charriot that's swift, as the While-winde all now co-incident: We cannot but conclude, That the Lord cometh out of his place to punish the Inhabitants of the Earth, for their iniquity: And that the earth also shall disclose her blood, and shall no more cover her slain, Isai, 26.21. O gastly fin, ô thou accuser, ô burthened and crying Consciened O impenetrable and obdurate heart, O dreadfull and wrathfull Judge? O heaven and earth that witnesse against us? O yee re∣deemed ones, yee Princes, yet an nointed ones, whom we made Bond-slaves and Vassals! Where's the rocks and mountains now? fast on us? fall on us! hide us! hide us! alas! alas! in one houre is so great Riches come to nought, a short work will the Lord make upon the earth, Rom. 9.28. In this day of Controversies will the foundations of the earth be out of course: Mens foundations shall all the broken down; all earthly Governments dissolved; all Oppression and violence arraigned judged, and condemned and great will the fall of that House: We also further conclude (as being apt to believe) that God has laid aside this generation of
Apostates and Oppressors for doing any work for him, they are barren, fruitlesse and dry, fit for nothing save the fire. And therefore God will raise up other instruments (and they Saints) fitted for his service and glory, We may say as one well said, more work is left for growing springs, for whom some Crowns are left, to which their Fathers heads wee not so fit∣ted. Yet are we not left without great anxiety of spirit (as being bound with those that are bound, and in pangs and sore travell) for this noble Cause, and the birth of the Man-childe that must rule the Nations, and whip the mony-changers, and Merchants, the buyers and sellers, that are so busie now in their merchandize of slaves and souls of men; bring him forth O most mighty, woe unto thee O Tyre, howle O Babylon! Come downe and sit in the dust: sit on the ground: There is no throne O daughter of the Caldeans. Isa. 47.1.
But if any yet surther desirous of satisfaction touching us, and the truth by us Asserted, Let such inquirers be pleased to take notice of our grounds and Reasons. That which we move upon is, the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, and Christ Jesus himself the chief Corner-stone. But more particularly to satisfie those whose desires proceed from a good end.
I. Ground, The Visible Kingdome of our Lord Jesus Christ, in, and over the whole world in the twofold dispensation thereof; Toge∣ther with its righteousnes, just, and holy laws prescribed by the Lord Jehovah, and declared in the written word of Truth: Tis possible that some (notwithstanding what we say) may suggest to chemselves and others, that we are those that would bing all into a Confusion and Anarchy; destroy the foun∣dations of Government, Magistracy and Ministry. We confesse this may be a great stumbling block to many, for want of due consideration; But a little to answer this, Consider, ever since the Generall Apostacy, and falling away from the pristine spirit and practice, and the rise of the Beast with ten borns, and ten Crowns; There hath been extant in the world, two sorts of Powers, different in quality; and (according to the opinion of some learned and godly men) are the Magistracy and Ministry of Jesus Christ, opposed to the Magistracy and Ministry of that Beast: Of one (and those the Witnesses) tis said by Jehoyah, I will give power unto them, Rev. 11.3. so that they are spirited and
qualified by God, to testifie to the world. That in the darkest day he hath not left himself without a witnesse; of the other (and he a ravenous Beast, a devouring and blaspheming Mon∣ster) and the Daggon gave him his Power, and his Seat, and great Authority: So that he is Authorized and quallified by him, and for him, Revelation 13 v. 2. But in the end, when there is but three years and a half left unto the Beast to tyrannize in, he prevails against those Witnesses, (at such a time when they are come so high, as to finish their Testimony, against his Prero∣gative royall:) overcomes and kils them. Now that which is to be noted is the End and issue of all these transactions; of the enemies mirth and jollity, and the Witnesses death, and the womans 2d. flight into the Wildernes, to her old place and station a∣gain (all thing continue as they were: the face of affairs do not look now as if we had been hazarding our lives twelve years together in the high places of the field for liberty and Refor∣mation,) and that is not ably declared, and set forth to the full in the 11, 12, 13, 14, and 15 verses of the 11. chapter, The Spirit of life from God renters the witnesses, sets them on their feet, standing, and foundation again, they ascend to heaven in a cloud, in∣vested with the same, and a greater power and authority than they had before (though that was great) and then comes the great Earth-quake, and that rends and tears the very foundati∣ons of the Beasts Civill power up by the Roots: the effects are a great fall, the tenth part of Romes Dominions; and a great slaugh∣ter among the great men, and implagueable enemies of Christ; And the finall result is THE KINGDOMES OF THE WORLD BECOME CHRISTS POSSESSION. Now for that we apprehend that the present generation in which we live, is that time in which this great work of Reformation will begin, and that time in which the first dispensation of our Lords kingdomne shall take place, and that it shall not passe be∣fore these things be fulfilled; Therefore are we against these Governments as now Constituted, and growing upon the old root of wickedn sse and bitternesse, that (time out of minde) have brought forth and produced nothing but Blood-monsters; and to rule by those laws that Bastards, and Tyrants, and Con∣querours have made for their lusts sake, in opposition to the Law, and the Testimony, Isa. 8.20. Therefore tis that the axe
is laid to the root of this Sodomitish-plant, that so the BRANCH of righteousnesse may grow up to the Lord, to his people, to all good men, to the whole creation. And therefore it is also, in the second place, that now we cannot hazard our lives, nor contend for any o∣ther Government whatsoever, that is of mans erecting, buil∣ding and planting (though it be a Democracy, or an Olligarchi∣call Form) where a few evill Branches may be lopped or topped, and the rest left, or where any thing of this old foundation (we speak not against the forme) may remaine and be left; and which good men, morrall men, civill men may exercise upon a meerly Civil-accompt (for all men as they are men have lost their Rights and priveledges in respect, of Government, in the first Adam; But Saints have regained them in the second Adam, or Lord from heaven) and by force and vertue of mens Lawes (though but the best of those Lawes, and those called fundamentall. So they are where noe more Righteous is found) For the Lord will pluck up, and destroy Root and Branch, and the Lord, will not have a stone of Babells confused Building for a Corner, nor a stone for a foundation: Why? for she and her Powers shall be Desolate for ever, Jer. 51.26. But in the third place must freely goe on up∣on this ground, and accompt: and wee hope we are not here∣in preproperous in our Judgement. And therefore now be pleased to take notice that our Lord Jesus The King of Kings, According to the Decree and Covenant of God, hath now layd Claime before the Judge of heaven and earth, to the whole world, and to all the Nations, Governments, Crowns, and Septers thereof. We cannot therefore But (as in duty by our Allegi∣ance to this King bound.) PROCLAIME That Jesus Christ is the onely Lawfull and true beggotten heire, and lawfull King, and Potentate of these three Nations, and of all the Nations of the Earth, and (as he is the seed of Abraham) shall possesse the earth: yea and the very gate of his enemies; and that the sole, LEGISLATIVE Power of the Nations is, and doth of right appertaine, and belong to him and shall be exercised by him Dan. 7.27. Jer. 10.7. Isa. 9.6, 7. Galla. 3.16. &c. hence then it necessarily follows that those Beast like powers now in Being in the world, and those (if any) which shall succeed upon that bottome that Rebell-like will nor assigne their said Power, Crownes and septers to this great 
