


MADAM,
MY written Papers (a few moneths a∣gon commended to your reading by your Renowned Husband) you pleased to take the pains, and to have the patience to read through: and according to your excellent understanding, and sound judgment, to give your sence, and with much ingenuity to pass your approbation of them: the same are now again (after some delay in the Presse) presented to your Ladiship in Print; In a fairer Character to return most humble thanks for that noble favour.
It is an addition to the worth of my poor labors, that they find the Patronage ana Countenance of such Honorable and Judicious persons, and of so known and eminent Goodnesse.

And truly Madam, I cannot but let you know, what satisfaction it is to me, that my Meditations were directed to a subject so suitable to the quiet temper of your Religious mind: so agreeable to the constant practice of your vertuous life, meek and peaceable.
It is your Meeknesse, Madam, that gives a lu∣stre to all your other vertues and Graces, which beautifie your person, and Christian conversation, and render you an Ornament to your Sex: no plai∣ting of the Hair, wearing of Gold, putting on of Apparel, do set forth a Lady, in that high estima∣tion with God and good men, as her exemplary ver∣tues do; those outward Adornings you do not use them; for you do not need them; God having abun∣dantly stored you, out of his own Treasury of nature and Grace.
Good Madam, I know it is unpleasing to you, to read your own Commendation (though never so well deserv'd) yet I beseech you give me leave to acknow∣ledge to the Glory of God, what I have observ'd to the joy of my heart: and when you shall be taken into heaven; and I shall be turned into dust, let this be written for a memorial to the world; of your Merit, and my duty.

In Treating of Meeknesse, I am not ignorant that (Lupum auribus teneo) Anger the one ex∣treme is a hot, heady, fierce and fiery passion (like a wild beast) Meeknesse is the Mean that tames it. And so! here, through Meeknesse I have (with some industry) beaten a plain path for the sober mo∣derate Christian to walk in.
And now were it not to trespasse too farre upon a noble patience, I could give in a Breviat of my Book: but I presume of a candid interpretation from your Ladiship, (if in a very few words) I humbly offer an Assay of what I have treated on.
May it please your Ladiship then! I have en∣deavoured! to settle the weak and wavering mind: to quiet the wilful and unruly spirit: to set the heart in a right frame and temper both towards God, and also towards man: to suppresse impatience, murmu∣ring, fretting and repining: to shew how sufferings are to be entertain'd, and afflictions of what kind soever undergone, with a patient and quiet mind.
I have set forth Meeknesse as a most rare ver∣tue: and such that brings beauty, safety, dignity to them that have it: and not only fils the soul and con∣science with tranquillity and serenity: but doth fa∣shion the countenance, carriage, language and out∣ward
 comportment to amiablenesse and sweetnesse.
It doth pass by indignities, puts up injuries, bears Reproaches, and forbears Revenge, qualifies the heat of passions, rectifies the disorder of Affecti∣ons, appeases Distractions, heals Distempers, re∣conciles differences both in judgment and practice. Here is propounded also a means for the stopping of private quar-rels: a way opened to publick peace: di∣rections given for the ordering of our Civil and Christian conversation: and certain Instructions about order and Decency in the publick duties of Re∣ligion; setting down the nature and use of things indifferent, and how Christian liberty is to be re∣gulated to peaceablenesse.
And this I shall ever reckon amongst the chief∣est blessings of my holy Calling, to be in any mea∣sure Instrumental in promoting the publick peace: and by the Grace of God (so long as I live) next to the Truth of Christ, the peace of the Church, shall be the Center both of my studies and practice.
And seeing by the Providence of God, and by the great Wisdom, and unwearied pains of our Ru∣lers, we have attain'd to that happinesse, which of late years we could rather wish, than hope for: and seeing above hope, and beyond expectation,
 God hath appear'd for our salvation and settlement both in Church and Common-wealth; it were to be la∣mented that any should be found so great an enemy to their own felicity, as to call for new troubles, when the wouds of the old (though healed with a tender and skilful hand) are yet blew: or so far in love with their own mi∣sery, as to put away from them this precious mercy, and not rather with heart and both hands to entertain it, to be contented and thankful.
Most honoured Lady, God hath given you your hearts desire, to live in peace under a rightful Govern∣ment. And the Affections of your most worthy husband and your self so happily meeting in the love of Truth and Peace: in the dislike of Error and Schism: your continual practice of Piety, and in the worship and ser∣vice of God your chearful conformity (to the Order of the Church of England by Law established) doth let the world know the most truly Religious, and most judi∣cious, are most conformable. Long may you both live, (to move like stars, in your own Sphere) a light and di∣rection in every good way, to all that are below you. He adde no more; after I have beg'd of your Ladiship to ac∣cept of this my most humble service; and of my most hearty wishes, for a happy New-year.
And I pray God, every Revolution of the year, may bring with it a Renovation of your health, honour, and outward prosperity, with an encrease of all spiritual Graces, and heavenly blessings, until you come to the ex∣change of time for Eternity, for the which I shall not cease to be importunate at the Throne of Grace whilst

Jan. 3. 1660.
