

RIGHT HONORABLE,
TAking into consideration the Quaeries so long since pro∣pounded by your Honours, to the Assembly called Divines at Westminster, desiring their Answers therein, as once Ne∣bucadnizer did of his dream, from his Magicians, Astrolo∣grs, Sorcerers, and Caldeans, whom he had chosen, and to whom was appointed a dayly provision of the Kings meate, and of the wine which he drank. Dan. 2. That so being nourished at his Table, at three years end, they might stand before the King, But they being called forth to satissie the Kings desire, in tel∣ling

&c. as Ier. 51 6.7. compared with Isaia 21.9. and Micha 2.10.11. Arise ye and depart, for this is not your rest, because it is polluted it shall destroy you, even with a sore destruction, if a man walking in the spirit of falshood do lye, saying, I will prophesie unto thee of wine and strong drink, he shall even be the prophet of this people, compared with 2. Cor. 6.14. to 18. and Revel. 18.4. come out of her my people that ye be not partakers of her sinnes, and that ye receive not of her plagues.
Now as the people of God were thus called forth of temporall and spirituall Babylon, so the instruments by which the Lord will do this great work, shall be by dispised persons, that so the great wise men of the world may stay themselves, and wonder who are blind & make you blind, instead of this they render it, cry ye out and cry, Isai. 29.9. to 15. & also, that the whole glory may be given to God only, & not to men, and as for such as have received their Call and Ordinati∣on from the beast, or no calling at all as some now pretends, if ever they should be converted and to submit unto the Order and Govern∣ment of King Iesus in the Gospell way, yet will these be the unsittest for the carrying forth of that rich treasure of the Gospel, they having formerly sworn themselves Servants unto Antichrist, and therefore will be but as the Gibiouites, who although by their craft had saved their lives, yet were by Josuah that glorious Tipe of Christ, appoin∣ted to be hewers of wood, and drawers of water, Josuah 9. or Lovies Sonnes, Sam. 1.2.36. who at that time when the Lord shall raise up his faithfull Priest, shall come and crouch for a peece of silver, or a morsell of bread, saying, put me I pray thee into one of the Priests Offices, that I may eat a pecee of bread, or with those Merchants of the earth, who when the Kings and Magistrates of the earth, who have committed fornication with the whore, and lived deliciously; at her overthrow, shall bewail her, and lament for her, Revel. 18.9. then also shall those Merchants of the earth weepe and mourn; for no man buyeth their Merchandize any more, vers. 10. This will cause them as the Jewes, Acts 22.22. to discover their madnesse who east dust upon their heads, so these crying, weeping, & wayling, saing, alas, alas, that great City wherein were made rich, all that had Ships in the Sea, by reason of her costlinesse, for in one howre is she made desolate, vers. 19. and vers. 20. the Church holy Messengers and Prophets are called forth to rejoyce over her for God hath avenged them on her when all profit and delight is taken away from her, verse 22.23.
the Reason is layd down vers. the last, because in her was found the blood of Prophets and of Saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth; oh that therefore your honours would give liberty for publike disputes, that thereby the truth might be tryed, and that there might be some time allowed after the publike Exercises is done; wherein the hearers those whose mouthes the Lord by his spirit shall open, might have liberty to adde to what is delivered, or contradict if irronious, and that there might be some places that are vacant, as Paules, or the like appointed, for such exercises and tryalls of the truth, according to Iohn 1.4.1. where he saith, believe not every spirit, but trie the spirits whether they are of God, because many false Prophets are gone out into the world, and Thes. 1.5.21. The Apostle exhorts the Saints to prove all things, and to hold fast that which is good, which cannot be done in that way that is practised by them, they tying up the mouthes of all but themselves, by their Antichristian power and practice, that therefore the Kings of the earth, and you the Majestrates would be wise, and consider your wayes, & know as it was once said to Saul, as he was going to Damascus, having received Authority from the High Priests to persecute and hale to prison all that called upon the name of the Lord Jesus, Saul Saul, why persecutest thou me, it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks, so it will one day be said to all those that persecute Christ in his Members, which through the subtelty of Antichrist is usually done under the name of Heri∣ticks and Sectaries, as in Queen Maries dayes, &c. for know as the Prophet David saith, Psal. 2.2. to 6. although the Kings of the earth set themselves, and the Rulers take Councel together against the Lord, and against his Christ, saying, let us break his bonds asunder, and cast away his cords from us; but he that sits in Heaven shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in derision, then shall he speak to them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure, yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Zion, all which their doing was but a vane thing in Davids Accompt, vers. the first, and vers. 10.11.12. he exhorts them saying, be wise now therefore on ye Kings, be instructed, ye Judges of the earth serve the Lord with feare, and rejoyce with trem∣bling, kisse the Son least he be angry, & ye perish from the way, if his wrath be kindled, yea but a little, blessed are they that put their trust in him, compared with Prov. 16.20. Isa. 30.18. Jer. 17.7. & 27 7. Rom. 9.33. and 10.11. 1 Pet. 2.6. For saith the Lord, Isa. 60.12. The Nati∣on and Kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish, yea those Na∣tions
shall be utterly wasted, on that England would consider this in time! least one day it be said to it, as was once said by Christ to Jerusalem, Luke 13.34 and 19 41. where coming nigh to the City, he beheld it, and wept over it, saying, if thou hadst known even thou at least in this thy day, the things that belong to thy peace, but now they are hid from thy eyes.
So the Lord for many years having called upon this Kingdom of England for repentance, and turning unto him by amendment, sol∣lowing us with mercies and deliverances, fatherly chastizing us by pestilence, sword and famine; but what amendment is there of any since, but that in justice, pride, cruelty, neglect of the poore, Idolatry, covetousnes abounds, & as the proph. saith, Is. 56.11. every one for ku gaine from his quarter, that love of mony the roote of all evill remain∣ing as much as ever. 1 Tim. 6.10.
That therefore we would turn unto him according to promise, in keeping the Protestation and Covenant, in standing for a reformati∣on according to the word of God and institutions of Christ, and not covetous mens desires and inventions, who in all ages have been ob∣structers of the true worship of God, & persecuters of his servants, as King. 1 22.22. to 28. Ier. 18.18. Come let us smite him with the tongue, Ames 7.10.11 Mic. 1.1. &c. 3. Ier. 26.11. to 19. Mat. 23.13. who shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men, they neither go in themselvs, neither suffer them that are entring to go in; but as Thee∣doro Beza observes from Act. 6.9. to 15. that fals teachers because they will not be overcome, flee from disputations to Magistrates & open slandering, and false accusations, & that the first bloudy perse∣cution of the Church of Christ began, and sprung from a Councell of Priests by the suggestion of the University Doctors, that therefore we might beware of men, and according to the command of God heat ken only to the voice of Christ, Mat. 17.5. that so we obey∣ing him the great Prophet and Anointed, the Lord may be gracious unto us in causing the sword to be sheathed, and that he may delight to dwell among us, in turning the hearts of the Fathers unto the chil∣dren, and the hearts of the children to the Fathers; which shall be the desire and prayer of him, that desires the happines here and glory hereafter of you, and all that love the Lord Jesus Christ in fincerity.
