


Honored Sir,
KNowing that you are one that wait for the appearing of the Lord Christ in his Kingly glory, and are willing to hear news of the good Land, though it be by a weak & poor instrument; for out of the mouths of babes and sucklings, God will declare his praise. I have made bold to com∣municat a few lines to your godly and grave consi∣deration, what I do believe God is doing in this last Age of the World; Surely, God is answering all the prayers, that have been powred out by the Saints at the Throne of Grace against Antichrist, for this many hundred years; and he is now going in an eminent manner, to require the bloud of the Saints that hath been spilt by that man of sin, and his adhe∣rents; now the Lord is revenging the bloud of the Saints that cry under the Altar, now those that have made war with the Lamb, the Lamb shall overcome them: for he, and he onely is Lord of Lords and King of Kings; and they that are with him are called chosen & faithful. Antichrist hath bin drunken with the bloud of the Saints, now he must have bloud to drink, for he is worthy; now have we great cause to bless God, who hath taken to himself great pow∣er and doth reign, and hath destroyed them that hath
 destroyed the earth; now is the Lord humbling great men, the loftiness of man shall be bowed down and the haughtiness of man shall be made low, and the Lord alone exalted in that day; now hath the Lord Christ appeared in the Majesty of his strength; in his Armies he hath scattered the proud in the imagi∣nations of their hearts, he hath pulled down the mighty from their seats, and exalted them of low degree; For behold, the day cometh that shall burn as an Oven, and all the proud, yea all that do wickedly shall be as stubble, and the day cometh that shall burn them up saith the Lord of Hosts, and it shall leave neither root nor branch; and he shall tread them down, and they shall be as ashes under the soles of your feet; Now many Nations are gathered against thee, that say, let her be defiled, and let our eyes look upon Sion; but they know not the thoughts of the Lord, neither understand they his Counsel; he shall ga∣ther them as Sheaves into the floores; Arise and thrash O daughter of Sion for I will make thy horn iron, and thy hoofs brass, and thou shalt beat in pieces many people; God doth and will do great things by weak instru∣ments, thy feet shall tread them down, even the feet of the poor and the steps of the needy, Zech. 12. 8. and God hath made good his word of late, in that day shall the Lord defend the Inhabitants of Ierusalem, he that is fee∣ble amongst them, shall be as David and the house of Da∣vid shall be as God, as the Angel of the Lord before them; God is now stayning the glory of all flesh, now is the little Stone that was cut out of the Mountain without hands smiting the Image on the feet, that was of iron and clay and breaks them in pieces; then was the iron, and the clay and the brass, and the silver, and the gold, and all the Empires of the earth broken in pie∣ces
 together, and became like the chaff of the Sum∣mer flower, and the wind carried them away, and the place was no more found: And the Stone that smot the Image became a great Mountain, and filled the whole earth; the Lord Christ will break them with a Rod of Iron, and dash them in pieces like Potters vessels; yea, the Kings of the earth that will not submit to him, He will strike through Kings in the day of his wrath, he will shake all Nations: yea, not only earth, but also Heaven; and these promises & Prophecies & many more, is the Lord Christ now making good by his Prerogative Power; and hath not God begun this work in this Common-wealth? hath not God delivered us out of Egypt by a mighty hand? and God hath broken the rod of oppressors, as in the day of Midean; and I do beleeve, the work that God hath begun in England shall go on till he hath made all his enemies his footstool: and that great block that lyeth in the way, and hinders the peace of many good men, that the Witnesses are not slain: I do believe for my part, that the Witnesses are slain in this Iland. I take the Witnesses to be those that have suffered under Antichrist for fourty and two months, Rev 11. 2. as Antichrist came in gradually, so shall his ty∣rannical power be taken away gradually.
First, because when Christ begins he will make an end, Babylons ruine is like a mighty milstone thrown in the Sea, it shall never be found again, he will goe Rev. 18. 21. on till Rome bee destroyed.
Secondly, because in the time of Antichrists reign the Witnesses must be clothed in sackcloth, but now Rev. 11. 3. God hath taken a way the sackcloth, and many of the Saints doe see cause to put on the garment of reioy∣cing,
 and are wayting for the Bridegrooms coming.
Thirdly, the Witnesses having lain three dayes and a halfe dead, which is in conformity to Christs death, they must stand on their feet againe; as blessed bee God they now do in this Iland.
Fourthly, when the Witnesses stand on their feet great feare shall fall on them that see them; and are not the enemies of Christ and his people in great feare in these daies who can but see it?
Fiftly, and are not many of the Saints of Christ rai∣sed up by the Spirit of God into a glorious admira∣tion of God, and into a safe condition out of the reach of the malice and power of their enemies, and their enemies be hold them, but they cannot hurt Rev. 13 6. Chap 12. 19. them; Gods raising up his people is called heaven.
Sixtly, the great Earthquake God hath made of late both in England Ireland, and now of late in Scot∣land, which I doe beleeve hath made the territories of Babylon to shake, this is called a great Earth∣quake. Rev. 11. 13.
Seventhly, I do beleeve this Commonwealth was the tenth part of mystical Babylon which now is falen and the powers both in Church and Commonwelth that did oppress the saints is taking away blessed be the Lord; and is not the seventh Angel now going to sound? and are there not great voices in heaven, in the Churches of Christ which is called heaven, saying the Kingdomes of the world are become the King∣domes of the Lord and his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever, therefore let us fall down on our fa∣ces saying, we give thee thanks O Lord God almighty Rev. 11. 16. 17. because thou hast taken to thee thy great power and hast reigned.

But now give me leave to give you a few Reasons to shew you why I doe beleeve God is about such a glorious work in this Iland.
First, because I do not know nor have read of any Iland in the Christian world, that hath opposed the Lord Christ, but this, that hath a people that the Lord will save, at this time that the Lord is destroy∣ing Antichrist, you may see in that forenamed Isa. 12. 14. place.
Secondly, in this Iland there hath bin many famous Martyrs that have suffered for Christ.
Thirdly, God hath had as many Iacobs that have wrest∣led with God by prayer against Antichrist as any Na∣tion in the world ever had; and I can speak it for a∣bove this twenty years they have sowen in tears, and were like unto Israel groning under our burdens and bondage, therefore I doe beleeve he is now bringing us out of bondage.
Fourthly, I doe beleeve God is going on with this his glorious work here in this Iland, because God hath raysed up choice Instruments in pulling down Anti∣christ powers that have opposed Christ.
Fifthly, God hath given many of his choice servants a great measure of faith, to beleeve that the work is begun in this Iland, and that it shall not end till An∣tichrist be destroyed.
Sixtly, I am sure of it God hath as many pretious and choyce servants, such as doe love the Lord Je∣sus in sincerity after the inward man, as any Nation in the world.
Seventhly and lastly, because I doe find by the pro∣mises of Christ, that his work in destroying Anti∣christ shall begin in the Ilands, as the Scripture saith
 The Iles shall wayt for his Glory: So if you read the 97. Psalm, the whol Psalm is a glorious Prophecy of these Times: it begins, The Lord reigneth, let the Earth rejoyce, let the multitude of the Iles bee glad thereof. I do beleeve God has made good this whol Prophecy by his acts of Providence in this Iland, & also that glorious prophecy in the 42 of Isa. from verse 12. to the 21. which I do believe is now fulfiling in these Ilands, and therefore we have no reason to murmur against the Instruments of our good, nor to complain, but to say with the Prophet in the 12. ver. let them give glory to the Lord and declare his pray∣ses in the Ilands: hath not the Lord Christ gone out like a mighty man? hath not hee cryed and roared against his enemies? hath not he made wast moun∣tains and hills? hath not he brought the blind by away that they knew not, and led them in paths that they have not known? and made dark things light before them, and crooked things straight: these things hath he done unto them, and not forsaken them; and may it not be said at such a time as this, who is blind but my servant? or deafe but my messinger as I have sent, who is blind as he that is perfect & blind as the Lords servant? seeing many things but observing it not: this prophecy I beleeve is fulfilled in our days.
Sir this little Treatise was written some two years since, then being dark times, and therefore what you find of weaknesse in it, let it be attributed to the author, but what you find to be ac∣cording to the mind of God, let him only have the glory: this Treatise was put forth by the desire of many godly frinds, and beleeving you are one that is precious in the sight of the Lord, therefore you will have a favorable construction of what is written, I leave you in the Lord,

