








MADAM,
AS it would be a difficult matter for me not to comply with all your de∣sires, I did not at all pause upon the Re∣quests I received from your Ladyship, for the reducing as soon as possible into wri∣ting, the secret Entertainments wherein your Society had so great a share. I engaged my self too solemnly in this Gallant Enterprize, for to decline now the going through with it, or to excuse my prosecuting this Work, upon the difficulty there is to give to the Ʋoice and Action that Ʋivacity they were animated with. I know not if I shall have fully performed my Duty, and satis∣fied
your expectations, the exercise of two or three mornings will discover to you the Resemblance or Imperfection of this Draught; and will let you know, that if I have not a great deal of Eloquence, I have at least memory enough, faithfully to relate the greatest part of things past. I have so proposed to my self your satisfaction in this Ʋndertaking, that I have indifferent∣ly passed over all the reasons which seem to disswade me from it; the fear only of it's falling into any other hands than yours, has made me somewhat delay sending it to you, and I my self would have been the bearer, if my present affairs would have allowed me that satisfaction, rather than trust to the hazard of a Post or of a Messenger a Packet of this consequence. For in good earnest, if the secret conferen∣ces should happen to be made publick, it would Occasion no small scandal both to me and your Lady-ship; and if Actions which are not blamed, but because they are not known, should happen to become a new subject of Criticisme, and furnish arms to all those who are willing to attack us; what a posture would our poor Nun be in, and with what Countenance can she ap∣pear, if she had the misfortune of being exposed in her Smock to the sight of all
the curious? How much Scandal, Shame, and Disorder would this Occasion! All these considerations are strong, but you will be O∣beyed, & you have termed sure & solid reasons by the name of light and timerous Reflections.
Let what will happen, I wash my hands of all consequences; & to lay aside this serious hu∣mour, I may tell your Ladyship, that Sis∣ter Agnes has nothing to fear, though her ill Destiny should concern it self in the ma∣nagement of this business; for the Draught I have made of her in my Wri∣tings, has represented her in a very exact observation of all her Vows; for indeed, to begin with Poverty; can one be in a great∣ter disengagement from the blessing of this World, than to strip and deprive our selves of them, even to ones very Shift? Can we in our words or our actions shew the Beauty of Nature with more Lustre, than by proposing to ones self for Rule, Nature altogether pure? in short, if one had a mind to make trial of her Obedience without exception, she would be found to have as much Docility as any one of your Novices.
Thus you see Madam, you have a long Letter to a small Work, and a great door to a little House, but no matter: I chose rather to sin against the Rules, than to curb and constrain my self in my writing
to your Ladyship. Impart to your and my most intimate Friend, what you think fitting they should know of this matter, and believe me to be without reserve.
MADAM, 
