



Dearely beloved in the Lord,
TIll better provision come, In all humility I here pre∣sent you as from Jesus Christ, (the Head and. Rev. 15.3. King of Saints) with this plain Treatise, for whose sakes it is composed, and sent abroad into the world. The subject matter of it, (looking directly to the glory of Christ, and the welfare of your soules) is so excellent, that I ingenuously professe, it cals for the richest annointings from n high, to de∣clare and hold forth the beauty and lustre thereof: And had I not proved by experience, that the glorious God ordaineth strength out of the mouthes of Babes, Psal. 8.2. and as the Apostle saith, 1 Cor. 1.27, 28. chooseth the foolish, the meale, the base things of the world, and things that are despised, yea things that are not, to be instrumentall for his praise; I should have been altogether discouraged from setting about it. But in regard theJosh. 6.20 Jericho's wall fall downe at the blowing o Rams hornes. 1 Sam. 17. Da∣vid conquere Goliah with  Sling and a stone. Esay 41 14, 15, 16. the Church a poore worme, thretneth the mountaines to dust. The Disciples of Christ take out of Fisher-boates, by no other meanes then preachin subdue King∣domes, & na∣tions to Christ weaknes of the instrument, exceedingly advanceth the glory, both of the wisdome and power of God; I was the more encouraged to undertake it. ow because of my intending the generall good of believers, and profiting the meanest, in pub∣lishing this Treatise: I have propounded to my selfe 3. things in the carrying of it on.
1 The manner and way of ordering and disposing it.
2. The grounds and arguments that divinely moved me to




 it, and were as a fire in my bosome, not suffering me to rest.
3. The end and scope that I had before me, and at which I aimed: of all which I shall briefly give you an account.
As for the first of these, I have endeavoured three things.
1. That the method be plain and easie, by way of Proposition, and Deductions or inferences from them; according to the most usual and ordinary way of preaching observed in the Kingdome, to which people have been accustomed, whereby the truth is not only cleared and defended, but that which is contrary there∣unto, and unsound, is discovered, and weakened.
2. That the style be not lofty, with an affected straine, soa∣ring above the capacity and reach of the ignorant, (a distemper that sticks too close the tongues and Pennes of many men, for∣getting that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.19. That in the Church he had rather speake five words with under∣standing, that he might teach others, then ten thousand words in an unknown tongue) but low and familiar, a∣voiding to the uttermost (according to the same Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.4.) the entising words of mans wisdome, in hand∣ling the sacred mysteries of the Gospell: neither can this be any prejudice I suppose to such as are learned, considering that they (especially if they have learned Christ) do judge of Books rather by the matter then the style. That great Oratour (De∣mostenes) himselfe could say, that the riches of Greece did not consist in words.
3. That the matter it selfe propounded and discussed in this Treatise, be not so much an argumentative as positive way held forth from the authority of the Scripture chiefly; and sound rea∣son consonant thereunto, which are those spirituall weapons, that are mighty through God, to the casting down those strong holds in the hearts of men, that exalt themselves against the knowledge of God, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. As for the judgements of the most eminent, learned, and godly men
 which I have here and there, throughout the Treatise produced, I have not done it in the least, to disparage the authority of the Scriptures; for without controversie, the word of God is grea∣terTo build up∣on any Doctor saying, withou Scripture, or reason agreeing to Scripture, were to follow Pythagoras, ra∣ther then Christ. vid. Cranmers con∣futation of un∣written Veri∣ties.
Be a man ne∣ver so learned after the Apo∣stles, yet his words without Gods word ar of none autho∣rity: id. ibid. And this he a∣bundantly pro∣veth from anci∣ent Fathers and Schoolmen, as Chrysostome Je∣rome, Ambrose, Augustine, Cyril▪ Fulgent. Greg▪ Theophil. Da∣masc. Bruno, Beda, Ansel. Tho. Aquin. and others, in the Treatise. then all the testimonies of men, but only to satisfy such as are weake, and conceive that those of the Congregationall way, are singular and contrary to all men, both in their judg∣ment and practise.
2. Touching the grounds and reasons that prevailed with me to the setting upon this worke, they were such as these following.
1. The ardent and burning desire of my soule, after the lif∣ting up of Jesus Christs honour, and furthering Sions wel∣fare, both which at this present time, do not a little suffer, from the tongues and Pennes of multitudes in this Kingdome, and o∣ther parts of the world.
2. The stopping in some measure (if it be possible) the mouthes of opposers, and giving satisfaction to other more moderate, that enquire after the truth of the Congregationall way, accor∣ding to the Scriptures, and vindicating of it also, from those foule aspersions that have been, and are stil cast upon it, & those that walke in it: many men not fearing in these dayes of ini∣quities abounding, to speake all manner of evill, of the wayes & servants of Christ, that will not, dare not comply with them, in their sinfull wayes: as was the practise of many in the pri∣mitive times, 1 Pet. 4.4. Wherein they thinke it strange that you runne not with them to the same excesse of ryot,Blasphemy in a Greek word, and with the learned in that tongue, a blasphemer is one that taketh away the same, credit, or good name of another; from . Demost. , blaspheming, or speaking evill of you.
3. The bleeding condition of the true Churches of Christ, through the violent out-rage of divers men, that of late are prejudiced against them, and that right order of the Gospel they walk in: So that the feet of many weak soules begin to slide, and the feeble Lambes of Christ, that of late have been folded
 and brought in to the beauties of holinesse, are thereby in dan∣ger to be turned out of the way.
4. The great danger of Reformations miscarrying, that of late yeeres was so happily begun, there being not onely an ob∣structing thereof at present, but a great and marvellous appea∣rance also of recidivation, and returning to the old and former wayes of formality, superstition, and tyrannie, in many places of the Kingdome.
3. As for the ends I have proposed to my selfe in the pub∣lishing this Treatise, they have been such as these.
1. Not to increase and widen, (the Lord knowes) but to heale and abate the present differences that are now on foot in the Kingdome, about the Sacred and Divine Ordinances and Institutions of Christ, touching the right way and order of the Saints in the visible worship of God. The truth is, I have not a little suffered from the tongues of men, as a rent-maker, and peace-breaker, for my endeavours to bring the Saints (in the place where Providence cast me) into the order of the Go∣spel; but whether justly, I doubt not but my Lord and Master will in due time make evident. In the interim, this is my com∣fort, that my sufferings in this or any other kind, being for righteousnesse sake, shall infinitely advantage my internall and eternall peace and wel-fare, however it shall goe with my externall condition in this world.
2. Nor yet to condemne, or contemne in the least, the per∣sonall gifts and graces of the servants of Christ, that yet re∣maine in their present questionable Church-state, but onely (as duty inds me towards Christ and them) to discover, how vain a thing it is for them to expect a right Gospel-Reformation in matters of visible worship throughout the Kingdome, so long as theyIts greatly  be desired at this que∣ion were roughly de∣ted. Qu. Weether he Church of ngland as it is National, con∣sting of so any thousand arishes, that e as branches nd members of he same, and ave no power f government n themselves, ut stand un∣er an absolute uthoritative cclesiastiall ower without hem to rule & overn them n the mt∣er of Gods Worship, be a rue Church for matter and orme, accor∣ing to the Scripture, and divine appoint∣ment. remaine under a false, visible, Nationall Church-state, and order of worship: because, as long as the right order of the Gospell, instituted by Jesus Christ, for the Saints to
 walke, and worship God in, is slighted and rejected, the blessing of Christ on our endeavours, after a sound and through Refor∣mation in the Kingdome cannot be expected: the old leaven of a false and Antichristian constitution must first be cast out, as the Apostle reasons with the Corinthians in the point of their Church pollution, 1 Cor. 5.6, 7. before there can be a new lump, that is, a sound Church state according to di∣vine institution.
We cannot be ignorant, how the whole  or frame of Eng∣lands visible Church state, and order of worship and govern∣ment hath been unsound, from the very first day that the Lord was pleased to beginne the freedome of this Kingdome from Antichristian bondage and thraldome: And though the Re∣formation in doctrine and matters of faith (as being the prin∣cipall) was carefully looked after, (for which we and our poste∣rity after us have great cause to blesse God)Though mat∣ters of faith are the principall parts of Christs will, & so ought to be done, yet matters of ex∣ternall worship and Church-order are also commanded, & so not to be neg∣lected, as Christ said to the Scribes & Pha∣risees in a like-case, Mat. 23.23. and so Cal. Pet. Mart. M. Cartwright, & others judge. yet in respect of the visible frame and constitution of the Church, and order of worship and government, so there was little or no Reformation, nor separation from Rome: All the separation in England from Antichrist formerly, was more in respect of purity of do∣ctrine, then worship; and the reformation that is now on foote is more in respect of government in the Church of England, then of the Church state of England it selfe: which I desire may be marked, for the same Nationall forme and frame of Church state continues stil, and is allowed of, as it was former∣ly, before ever there was a renouncing of the power and autho¦rity of the Pope, in H 8. and Ed. 6. dayes. The change hitherto is only in point of government, the constitution stil the same.
And therefore I say one chiefe end I have had in publishing this plaine Treatise, is not to despise the godly that yet remaine in their old Nationall Church▪ state, or in the least to give a check to the Parliaments proceedings hitherto, who doubtlesse
 (as charity binds me to believe) have proceeded according to that light they have received, but only to hold forth in a briefe man∣ner, according as it hath been desired, what the true visible Church-state is, of Christs appointment under the New Testament, and how proper it is to him only to institute it, & what necessity lyes upon all those that professe the doctrine of the Gospell to embrace it, and submit unto it, and to come off from all other Church states that are of humane constitution, (as I understand a Nationall politicall Church-state to be) if we will expect Jesus Christ to dwell amongst us, and take pleasure in us for the future.
3. Another end proposed to my selfe in composing this Trea∣tise, was not to discover or lay open before the world, the na∣kednes of any of my brethren, that either walke contrary to the rule of the word, and besides it, in the matters of worship, or that through the wiles of Sathan, & cunning craftines of men, as the Apostle speakes, Ephes. 4.13. have been carried away from their former stedfastnes in the use of those pure Gospell ordinances and institutions, and now live and walke up and downe the world, as if Jesus Christ were Church-lesse, & the Saints Christ-lesse; yea, as if the barrel of Christs Meale, and Cruse of his Oyle, (lockt up in his spirituall ordinances and administrations,) were altogether drawn dry and exhau∣sted: but that I might be a poore instrument in the hands of Christ to deliver such from their false wayes, that are yet in Egyptian darknes, & reduce those to the Tents of the Shep∣herds, that are gone from them; where they may again (as for∣merly) enjoy their beloved,Cant. 1.7.8. and be built up to a further enjoy∣ment of his glory.
And thus (beloved in the Lord) you have a briefe dis∣covery of what I have propounded to my selfe, touching the method, grounds and ends of this Treatise. I have only a few
 things to request at your hands, and then I shall dismisse you to the Treatise it selfe, and commend both it and you to the blessing of Christ. Now that which I have to request of you is this.
1. That you would not receive with the left hand, what is offered to you with the right, but endeavour to put a candid and faire construction (as in charity you are bound) on the weak endeavours of him, that had nothing in his eye, but Christs ho∣nour and your and the whole Kingdomes welfare.
2. In the reading of the following Treatise, to take with you the helpe of the Spirit of truth, who alone searcheth the deepe things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10. and can enable us to judge of spirituall things spiritually: If we plough with Christs heifer, we shall understand his Riddles; whereas, if wee consult with flesh and blood, in the things of God, and measure divine mysteries, by the wisdome of this world, we shall be so farre from having our expectation answered, as that we shall stumble, and be offended at them, 1 Cor. 1.18, to 26. and 2.14.
3. When you meet with an any Scriptures and Arguments that are brought to cleare and confirme any point, that you would vouchsafe to take in the whole, and consider them together, and not apart, be cause what may be wanting in some, may be made up in the rest. For if there be but one or two, a∣amongst six or ten Texts of Scriptures, or Arguments that are produced to prove the truth of any one point, that are substan∣tiall and to the purpose, its sufficient, though the rest are not so strong: as if ten men were to lift a burthen together, though the one halfe of them were but weake in comparison of the other, yet if the worke be done, tis sufficient, we looke after no more.
4. Where Scriptures alleadged, do not expresly, and in so ma∣ny
 words speake out the truth of that they are produced for, yet to remember, if they do it by a sound and good consequence, then that is sufficient, as we may see in the practise of our Saviour, when he would prove the truth of the resurrection to the Saddu∣ces, he doth it not by a Scripture that speakes expresly, but only by sound consequence; as Mat. 22, 31, 32. Mark. 12.26, 27.
5. Not to take offence, at the short & brief passing through par∣ticulars, because I undertooke at first to give a draught or plat∣forme only, (according to the Title of the Booke) of the visible Church state which Jesus Christ hath instituted for the SAINTS to observe in the dayes of the New Testament. Now in a busines of this nature, understanding men will confesse, that are pointing at truths is sufficient, and therefore I purposely avoided the transcribing of most of the Scripture proofes that are cited in this Treatise.
6. That wheresover I have been necessitaed to speake (in a∣ny of the inferences drawn from the Propositions) against those wayes and practises which do vary from what is laid down as the truth, whether it be the way of absolute and hgh clas∣sicall Presbyterie, over the particular Churches and Congregations of believers; or the way of re-baptizing; or the way which is (only for distinction sake) styled The rigid Separation; or way of living altogether without visible Ordinances and worship, because of the defective∣nes is in the administrators, or above them in the Spirit, as those that look upon the divine institutions of Christ, but as shadowes, or things indifferent; or the way of fashioning the sacred orders and ordinances of Christs Church, to the government of civill States and Com∣mon-wealths, or any other mentioned in the following Trea∣tise▪ it hath not been in the least, out of a spirit of contention a∣gainst those that walk in those different wayes; nor to disparage
 or undervalue their gifts & graces with which they are endow∣ed; or to infringe their christian liberty, by bringing their per∣sons into trouble; but in the discharge of my duty towards Christ, and the giving occasion for a more cleare discovery of the truth professing my selfe (as in the sight of God) alwayes ready to performe any christian duty or office of love, towards any of them, whensoever I shall by providence be called there∣unto.
7. Lastly, if any shall attempt the answering of it, I shall in the Spirit of love request him that he would first of all sit downe and consider with himself seriously, that whiles he thinks to strike at an errour, he may do what in him lyes, to wound the truth, and so make worke for repentance: Tis not for me to boast in the least of what is published by so weake an instrument as my selfe; but so much I have seen and observed from the first day of the Lords putting me upon it, to the time of its publishing, (besides what I have found in the practise of it) that I cannot but expect the truth therein held forth, for the substance of it shal stand, and take place, notwithstanding all the Batteryes and blasts of opposers that shall come against it. I know the age I am cast up∣on to beare witnes to those truths of Christ I have published, cannot easily digest what is set before them; and so I shall be ex∣posed to the deepest censures that men of evil and perverse spi∣rits, (who have only a forme of Godlines, but deny the power of it in their walking) can lay upon me: but (through infinite riches of mercy) I have learnt in some measure to looke above them all, and to cast my selfe and the worke I have published, on him, who is that Alsufficient God, and faithfull Creator, that is every way able to keepe that is committed to his charge in weldoing, and to bring about his glorious ends,1 Pet. 4.19. by weake and contemptible meanes.
Thus having premised these few things, I forbeare troubling
 you any further in this place, having reserved a word of exhor∣tation to you, in the end of the Treatise; only desiring the Fa∣ther of mercies, and God of all consolation, to make the following Treatise effectuall, for the bringing over of your hearts to the beautifull wayes of Sion, and accomplishing all those other gra∣cious ends, for which it is intended, which is the constant pray∣er of him whose greatest ambition is to be instrumentall for Je∣hovahs glory, and his Saints happinesse.

March 1. 1646.
