



MADAM,
WHen I Preached this slender Piece, there was not the least thought in my mind of bringing it to the Press; but since, being beseiged with a strong force of Importuni∣ties,
Friends conquered me, though they can never confute me of my Opinion, touching the little worth so imperfect an embryon as this hath to go abroad in publick: I was confident it would meet with Censures, and therefore care∣full it might finde some Sanctu∣ary: And no better then under your Honours protection, where the unworthy Author, and those that are dear to him have found so good shelter. Be pleased there∣fore, I beseech your Honour, to let it come forth under your Pa∣tronage, both as a pledge of my Duty, and thankfulnesse, for your many and great Favours conferred on me, unworthy of the least. And also that others
seeing your Honours Name pre∣fixed, may be induced to read it over. Some right you have to it, also for the Argument sake: It is a discourse of a Christians Liberty, purchased by Jesus Christ, from under Sin, and Satans thraldome. And to whom muy fitly can it be dedicated then to your selfe, whom the Lord hath so conspi∣cuously called to partake of that Liberty? witnesse the lustre of your personal Sanctity, your con∣stancy in Private and Publick Devotions, and your zealous en∣devour to plant Religion in the meanest of your Family, that you and your House, may unanimously serve the Lord.
There is something likewise in
this Sermon, by way of Con∣gratulation and Thankfulnesse, to the great God of Heaven, by whom Kings reign on Earth, for that much longed for liberty, re∣stored unto us as Subjects, by the most happy and miraculous Ad∣vent of our Dread Soveraign, King CHARLES the Second, to the Royal throne of his Ancestors. And in this Liberty, likewise as your Honour receiveth a large share, so of Joy and Thankful∣nesse, you render unto God a liberal tribute. And not your selfe onely, but your Family and noble relations (who have ever gi∣ven abundant testimony of their Loyalty to his Sacred Majesty, and to his Royal Father of Glori∣ous
memory) do now proportiona∣bly rejoyce and blesse God for his happy and wonderful Restau∣ration: And all their Sufferings for their Fidelity to their Prince, are remembred no more, for joy that our Soveraigne Lord the KING is come in peace to his House.
Thus doth your Honours Pi∣ety and Loyalty, both challenge an interest in this little mite, heightned much in worth by your Honours acceptance of it. The Blessing of God go along with it, and make it effectuall to the building up of every one that reads it in Faith and Love: And the good Lord continue and mul∣tiply the comfort of his Spirit in
your Heart, and your blessed hope to be partaker of the In∣heritance of the Saints in Light.
Campden in Gloucester-shire.

