


Right Honourable and renowned Ladies,
THE favourable acceptation which this small present found with your Virtuous and Honourable Mother, incouraged me to commu∣nicate it to other Virt uous Ladies and Gentlewomen, who were very desirous of a Coppy of it; which desires growing ample and importunate, made me

weary of writing, and willing (though not ambitious) to impart it to the Press: Partly to Commemorate the Honourable ac∣ceptation and partly to congratulate and gratifie the respects it found.
Moreover, by much perusal, I perceived that I had left out many memorable Persons of high account in Holy Scriptures, where∣fore to make all compleat, and to leave a Living Monument of those Resplendent Virtues that are Recorded of the Female Sex, which will undoubtedly excite good Women to Godly imitation, I have pre∣sumed to make this Paper publick for the Honour of that Sex which God hath so highly Honoured, as the most Acute Aretius observes upon the Pious Womens coming first to the Sepulchre of our Saviour, Luk. 24. 1. Totum hoc ad gloriam Muliebris Sexus pertinere, That it did all belong to the glory of the Female Sex; and Learned Polanus saith on the same occasion, Syntag. Theol Christ. Page 149 at the letter C Column 1. Re∣surrectio Christi primum ab Angelo annun∣ciata est mulieribus quia oit Deus sic ornare pietatem illarum quarum Zelus pro Gloria Christi fervidior erat quam Viro∣rum. The resurrection of Christ (saith

he) was first told by the Angel to the Wo∣men because their zeal for the Glory of Christ was hotter then the mens.
Confiding therefore, that it cannot be condemned for flattery; (for none can in∣herit such Glory but they that imitate them) nor can it provoke envy o disdain (which is so cleer a record of the Holy Scriptures,) Neither doth it derogate from the man, but dignifie him. (For as he is her head, so she is his glory, 1. Cor. 11. 3, 7. And a Virtuous woman is a Crown to her Husband, Prov. 12. 4.) I humbly crave your Honours allowance and acceptation of the Publication, in your Noble and Religi∣ous Mothers stead, to whom the Dedication was designed: And so with supplications for your Honours long Health and Happi∣ness, I rest

