



Honourable, and ever-Honoured Patriots:
THis poor and plain Sermon, as it was first preached in obe∣dience to your Command, and heard with a great deale of Religious Attention; so it is now most humbly presented to your hands and eyes. Wherein the Preachers aime and intention was not,Qi monet ut fs, qod j m sci, &c. either to informe your Judgements in what you knew not, or to perswade your Obedience to what you did not, but to encourage and comfort you, in what you already did, even spend your selves in the Publicke Good. The which he conceived the rather to be most necessary for him to doe: First, because of the great difficulty of the worke you are ingaged in, by reason of those Scornfull men, who have brought the City into a snare, or rather set the Kingdome on fire. Secondly, because of those great discouragements which you have long wrastled with, through the frowardnesse and unthankful∣nesse of the people of this land, who have withdrawne (many of them) their assistance, and stopped up those wels that should afford you wa∣ter to quench that fire. And had not the Lord himself stood by you, and endued you with Wisdome, Goodnesse, Meeknesse, the wickednesse of the one sort, and the perversenesse of the other sort, might have cau∣sed your hands to faint, and your hearts to faile in the prosecution of the Worke. But blessed be God▪ who both raised you up unto us, and raised and kept up your spirits, to be constant and active, for such a time as this: But it is usuall with God so to doe. As it is observable in Nature (Physitians say) that as there are Nationall diseases, so there are peculiar Nationall remedies: So commonly in the greatest distresses of his Church, and greatest opposition of Malignants, God
 is pleased to raise up defendants proportionable to these necessities. This is evident in many passages of the sacred Story; especially in the booke of Judges, in Nehemiahs and Esthers time. The two parties in the Text, are not so much opposed one against another, viz. Scornfull men, and Wise men, as they are in the present experi∣ence of these times. Never did any Kingdome know and finde so great a generation of Scornfull men, not onely the lower ranke of meane Malignants, who have scorned and scoffed at Religion and Good∣nesse so long till they have scoffed themselves out of all, even shewes of Religion, and into unbeleefe of all relations of successes, as false and fabulous: but even those of the second and third magnitudes, who like Tobiah and Sanballat, have jeered and derided all your un∣dertakings, as weake and worthlesse: saying as they, What do these feeble men? will they fortifie themselves? will they make an end in a day? Will they pull downe the Old, and set up a new Church in a day? Nay, have they not flouted your fastings and prayings, upon the least successes of their party? and some of them said where is now your God? But againe I say, Blessed be God (who resists the proud, and gives grace to the Humble) that hath as it were, created a generation of Wise men, in a way of opposition to those Scornfull men, to breake those snares, and quench those fires which they have kindled. Wherein God hath not only magnified his owne Wisdome and Goodnesse, in providing and fitting the Remedy to the Disease; but also manifested to all the world, your Wisdome in discovering their snares, and your Goodnesse in quenching their fires. Truly (worthy Patriots) next under God, we cannot but ac∣knowledge, that the Kingdome, the whole Island, is beholding to you for its present preservation. And though you have met with an unthankefull generation for the present, yet we doubt not, but the children yet unborne, shall have cause to call you Blessed; as the re∣pairers of our breaches, as the restorers of paths to dwell in, and above all, as the blessed Reformers of Church and State. Which that you may be, shall be the dayly prayer, of

