


MADAM,
I Protest in the first place, that
though I offer you this work, I
seek not either the effects of your
benevolence, or the protection of
your power, because I feel my heart
as clear from interest, as I know my
soul exempt from fear. I have had
sufficient good fortune, not to finde
hitherto in the address of my works,
but the sole thing which I sought
therein, which was the honour to

render my testimony publick upon
the esteem of some particular persons.
Though it seems that my present con∣dition
should excuse a more mixt in∣tention,
and the change of life that
I have made might give me thoughts
lesse noble, I protest yet once again,
that I look not upon either your de∣fence,
or your benefits. I give li∣berty
to all the world to examine my
writings, without pretending any
safeguard against the Academy; but
I request you that without consider∣ing
my offering, you would deign to
suffer the affection that consecrates it
you. You should not deny me this
honour, since it is no longer free for
me to obey you, though you your self
should have a will contrary to the in∣clinations
which your excellent merit
gives me. Your generosity hath pre∣vented
me with so many favours, that
it is impossible for me to retain that
testimony of my resentment. Not∣withstanding
without declaring my
self more openly upon the motives

of so just a gratitude, permit me Ma∣dam,
to say that one of your bounties
alone is capable to ravish from me all
the heart that I have, and to ravish it
from me everlastingly. You have de∣sired
to know me in a conjuncture,
wherein many persons, whom I belie∣ved
to have gained either by my servi∣ces,
or by their promises, have feign∣ed
not to know me. You apprehen∣ded
not that my misfortune was con∣tagious,
nor that my misery might be
troublesome to you: Your courage
extended it self unto me even in an
estate, which rejecteth very often the
most generous courtesies. In which
to speak the truth, you have done that
which belongs not but to the greatest
souls, who never withdraw themselves
from an unfortunate party, provided
that he be innocent. Though I should
not love that little vertue which you
suppose in me, your judgement would
sollicit me to be amorous of it; inso∣much,
Madam, that I have you the ob∣ligation
not only to believe me, but

also to render me vertuous. Certainly
if beauty be the glory of bounty, (as
Plato will have it) I judge by that lau∣dable
profusion, which you have u∣sed
in my behalf, that yours how per∣fect
soever it be, is unfaithful, since it
sheweth not upon your visage all the
treasure of your soul; and that you
are much better, then you appear
fair. I hope from the mercy of God
(notwithstanding any crosse that may
come unto me from fortune) that he
will continue me the good motions,
which his Grace inspires me; and
that for the favourable thoughts,
which you have of them, he will give
me the means to publish to all the
world the just cause that I have to
be all my life,
MADAM,

