



Much honoured and beloved in Christ,
IT cannot be deni∣ed,
but that
GOD hath
blessed this
City above
most Cities in the world with
blessings of all kinds, and

more especially, with the bles∣sing
of the Gospel. And
although our sins are many,
and great, and such sins may
be found amongst us, for
which God hath destroyed
other great Cities; yet not∣withstanding
he hath hither∣to
preserved us, and dealt
with us, not according to
Rule, but according to Pre∣rogative.
He hath made
London an exception from
his generall way of procee∣ding
with other Cities, and
hath spared us upon the ac∣count
alone of free-grace; E∣ven
so Father,Mat. 11: 26 for so it see∣meth
good in thy sight.

O that this extraordina∣ryand distinguishing love
of God, might at last lead us
to Repentance!Luc. 19. 42. And thatin this our day we might
know those things which
belong unto our peace, be∣fore
they be hid from our
eyes; That our Preservati∣onsfrom former judge∣ments,may not prove Re∣servationsunto greater, And
that we may not (by reason of
our unthankfulness, and un∣fruitfulness)drink the dregs
of Gods wrath, and at last be
be made a spectacle of divine
indignation, and an exam∣pleto others, because we

would not learn righte∣ousnessby their Examples.
The chief design of this en∣suing
Sermon (now made
publick by your intreaty) is,
to persuade the Citizensborn in this famous City, by
their Prayers, Unity, Piety,
Verity, and Charity, to seek
the welfare and happinessof it; And to be so holy and
heavenly in their lives, that
they may be accounted able,and worthy to stand in the
gap, to hinder the Judge∣ments
of God from falling
upon it.
It is not only not contrary,but very suitable to Christi∣an

Religion to seek the good
(in an especiall manner) of thePlace where we were born,or bred up.Luc. 4. 16. Because Jesus
Christ was bred in Naza∣reththerefore he preached
first in that place.Elton upon Rom. 9. This he
did (saith one) as a recom∣pence
for his education.Because Paul was bred,Act 22. 3. . andbrought up in Jerusalem,and of the stock of Israel,therefore he was in great
heaviness, and continual
sorrow of heart; and could
have wished himself accur∣sed
from Christ for his bre∣thren,Rom. 9. 2, 3.
his kinsmen accor∣ding
to the flesh.

Religion doth not take a∣way
natural affection, butperfects it, it doth not extin∣guish,but order and regu∣lateit. It is your great Du∣tyto study to be blessings andMercies, as to the placeswhere you were brought up,so also to the places where youwere born.Aristotelem had minus quam Pa∣trem suum initio di∣lexit, quod a Patre, ut viveret, a Praecep∣tore, ut be∣ne viveret, accepisset Pezelius. It is reported ofAlexander the great, that
he loved his Master Aristo∣stle,as much as he did hisFather Philip; because (as
he said) from his Father hee
received his being, and from
his Master his wel-being.I will not dispute, whether we
owe more to the place where

we were born, or to the place
where we were bred, Sure I
am. We owe much to both; and
it is our duty to endeavour to beblessings both to the one,
and to the other.
It is a Providence not to be
slighted, that you are Citizens
of no mean City, but this
will little avail, if you be not
a credit and an ornament to
it. The excellency of a Cityconsisteth in the excellencyof the Citizens; without
which an excellent City is
rather a Bethaven, than aBethel, rather an Hell, than
a Heaven. Human storiesrelate what great blessings

some Persons have been to the
places,Ejus gratiâ Lacedaemo∣nii in reli∣quam Baeo∣tiam saevi∣entes The∣banis pe∣percerunt. Ita & A∣lexander quum The∣bas everte∣ret, & in omnes sae∣viret sine discrimine, Pindari Vatis pe∣natibus fa∣miliaeque parci jussit. Cicero con∣tra Ver∣rem. where they received
their first Breath. The Lace∣daemonianswhen they laied
waste all Baeotia, sparedThebes, because Pindar (that
famous Poet) was born there;
And when Alexander de∣stroyed
it, he commanded his
Souldiers to spare Pindars
Family, &c.
The Persians when they
waged War withall Grecia,
would not hurt the Isle of De∣los,
because it was the place
where Apollo was born, &c.
O let it be your care, that you
may be Noah's, Abraham's,
Lots, and Daniels to the

place where you were born;
That God by your prayers
and tears may be moved to
spare this great city▪ & mul∣tiply
his blessing upon it.
For this end and purpose,
your great study must be towalk worthy of the Gos∣pel,which you enjoy with
much purity, power, plen∣ty,and liberty; You must
not onely have it with you,but in you; not onely be Pro∣fessors,but practisers of it;
not onely be fellow-Citizens
of London, but of the
Saints, and of the houshold
of God.Eph. 2. 19. You must labour to
be Citizens and Freemen of

that City which hath foun∣dations,
whose builder and
maker is God.Heb. 11. 10 For you can∣notsin at so cheap a rate in
London, as some may do
in other places. When you
sin, you sin against greater
light, and love, against grea∣ter
means, and mercies than
others do. And therefore your
sins will more provoke theAlmighty, and bring downgreater, and more sudden de∣solations
upon you; You areCapernaum-like, lifted up
to heaven,Mat. 11. 23 and if you slight
the Gospel as she did, you
shall be brought down to
hell, and it shall be easier for

Capernaum at the great day
than for you. The great
God expects, that you should
be like Hananiah who fear∣ed
God above many.Neh. 7. 2. That
you should be in the highest
for me of Christs School,
taller by the head in gracethan men in other places. He
looks that you should do ,something singular and
extraordinary;Mat 5. 47. He hath gi∣ven
you more than he hathgiven to others, and he re∣quires
more from you, the Lord
grant you may return more!
There were many eyes up∣on
you, beholding what you
would do (after this follow∣ing

Sermon was preached,
in which you were earnestly
excited unto good works) at
your Publique Dinner. Give
me leave to tell you freely and
plainly; You have not as yet
sufficiently answered the ex∣pectation,either of others, or
of many of your own Com∣pany;There were some lit∣tle
spots (this year also) in
your Feast of Charity; (I
mean) some defects, and ble∣mishes,not (I hope) for want
of affection, but of observ∣ing
a due Method; howso∣ever;
Thus much I must pu∣blish
to the World both for theHonor of God, and for
your honor;I received a Note of these par∣ticulars from the worthy Stewards of the late Feast. you havedoubled your Charity this
year, above what it was the
last year; You have bound
out 30. Boyes to be Appren∣tices;You have given con∣siderable
summes to Mini∣sters
born in London, and
Ministers Widows, in distresse,
and to poor Scholars in the
Ʋniversities; And my hope
is, That the next year you will
double the summe above what
you have given this year.
I am verily perswaded,
that, what God said of Co∣rinth,is very true of Lon∣don,
He hath much people
in this City;Act. 18. 10. Though there
are many wicked amongst us,

yet there are many, yea, very
many, both born, andbrought up in London,who truly fear God; and
for their sakes▪ God hath hi∣therto
spared us. My pray∣ers
is, that God would in∣creasetheir number; That
this City may be a City
of Refuge,Zeph. 3. 1. for distressed
Christians;Nah. 3. 1. not an oppres∣sing,or a bloudy City; but
a faithful and holy Citywherein▪ God may delight to
dwell, and that Salvation
may be appointed to her
for Walls and Bulwarks.Isa. 26. 1.
So prayeth▪

