



THe differences and Divisions of England at this day are so many, so great, and so destructive to Church and State, as that it can∣not but be accounted a transcen∣dent act of Piety and Charitie for any man to endevour according to his place to compose the one, and remove the other. But though this worke be very excellent, yet it is also very dangerous to him that shall undertake it. For it is often found, that he that will step into reconcile two parties that are a fighting, doth prove the party a∣gainst which both of them will fight. Or if not both, yet alwaies the party that doth the wrong will be a bit∣ter enemie to him that would make up the breach. And therefore it is expressely said, Act. 7. 26, 27. That when Moses saw two of his brethren striving one a∣against

the other, and stept in to set them at one, say∣ing, Sirs, ye are brethren, why wrong ye one another? He that did his neighbour the wrong thrust him away, saying, Who made thee a Ruler and a Judge over us? But yet notwithstanding, happy is that man whom God shall make any wayes instrumentall to the bringing in of a holy and blessed Peace into this di∣stressed Iland, though with the losse of his owne life. Famous is the example of Gregory Nazianzen, who was Bishop of Constantinople, eminent for Learn∣ing and Piety: And yet when he saw a prevailing Faction endevouring to choose another into his place, and that it would much disturbe the peace of the Citie Ruffini histor. Ecclesiast. lib. 2. cap. 9.if he did not yeeld it up; he brake out into this speech: Absit, inquit, ut mei causâ aliqua simultas oriatur in Dei Sacerdotibus. Si propter me est ista tem∣pestas, tollite, & mittite me in mare, & desinet à vobis quassatio. God forbid that for my cause any difference should arise amongst the Ministers of God: If this tempest be raised for my cause, take me, & throw me into the Sea that so the tempest may cease. A sentence worthy to be written in let∣ters of Gold, and to be put in practise by every true hearted Englishman. The like we read of Codrus a Heathen King, who for the love of his people ex∣posed himselfe to death. And of Curtius, and of three Decii that devoted themselves to ruine for the safe∣tie of their Countrey. The Booke of God tels us of Mo∣ses that was willing to have his name blotted out of the Booke of life: and of Paul that was willing to be an Anathema, that so God might be reconciled to the people of Israel with whom he was displeased. But the greatest example of all is of our Lord and blessed

Saviour, who emptied himselfe of his Divinitie, and became a servant, and a curse, that he might become our Peace-maker.
Much to this purpose is said in the insuing Ser∣mon, which is now made publique by your Commands. Something also is said to keep up your spirits from be∣ing over-dismaied at the consideration of these Land∣destroying Divisions. Great are the searchings and tremblings of heart, because of these Divisions. But be not over-discouraged: It is Gods Prerogative to bring light out of darknesse, good out of evill, unitie out of division. He worketh by contrarie meanes as well as by unlikely meanes. He delivered Jonah by a Whale, and kept him (as Basil saith) vivus in sepulchro. He raised Joseph by casting him into prison; he cured the blind man by clay and spit∣tle. And I doubt not but he will bring a great deale of good at last out of our Divisions. It is observable that Simeon and Levi, that at first were brethren in iniquitie, joyning together to destroy the Sheche∣mites, and for this cruel act, as a sutable punishment, were divided in Jacob, and scattered in Israel, Gen. 49. 7. Yet notwithstanding because afterwards Levi was zealous for God against the worshippers of the golden Calfe, and did appeare valiantly on Gods side, Exod. 32. 26. God did turne this curse into a blessing, Deut. 33. 10. For Levi was consecrated to teach Jacob Gods judgement, and Israel his law, &c. And the Simeonites, as Ainsworth observes, Ainsw. xi Gen. 4. 7.were also Teachers of the Law in the Synagogues of Jacob; and the Levites in the Schooles of the sonnes of Israel. This story is written for our con∣solation. The time was when we dwelt in peace and

unity, but then we combined against God and his chil∣dren; and for this cause as a just curse, God hath di∣vided us one from another, to the utter ruine one of another. But yet notwithstanding, if you (Right Ho∣norable) will goe on to shew your selves zealous for God and his Cause, and to appeare vigorously and faith∣fully on his side; God will turne our great curse into a great blessing. And as the dividing of the Red Sea was made by God a way and meanes to lead the people of Israel over into Canaan, and to destroy the Egyptians: So God will make our Divisions in this Red Sea of bloud, into which we are plunged, a way and meanes to a happy Canaan of unitie and peace; and to the utter ruine of our implacable Adversaries. Thus he did with the divisions of Paul and Barnabas, as this Sermon relates unto you. Onely be couragious for God, and in nothing be terrified at our differences, but make your peace with him, and he at lastwill make us at peace one with another: which is the ear∣nest prayer of

