



I Read in the Book of Nehemiah, that when
the wall of Jerusalem was in building, the
builders met with so much opposition, that
they were forced to build with their wea∣pons
in one hand, and with their working
tools in the other. They had enemies from without, and
they had secret enemies amongst themselves. They met
with many discouragements; but God carried them
through all, and at last they finished the wall to the
confusion of their enemies, and the rejoycing of their
friends. Nehemiah's condition is our condition. The
Discipline and Government of the Church, is to the Church
as a wall is to a City. A City without wals is exposed to
every enemy: so is the Church without a Government.
This wall is now in building: the Parliament (blessed
be God) hath contributed very much to this building;
but yet we meet with mountains of opposition, and with
many discouragements. Our enemies say, What doe
these feeble Presbyterians meane? will they fortifie them∣selves?
will they make an end in a day? will they revive

the stones out of the heaps of the rubbish which are burnt?
Even that which they build, if a Fox goe up, he shall even
break down their stone-wall. Our enemies also raise false
reports to weaken the hands of the builders, and to
make us afraid, as they did, Neh. 6. 6. 10. They say, that
the Presbyterian Government (which is the Government
that comes neerest the Word, and the Government of the
best Reformed Churches) will prove Tyrannicall, and
Episcopall. And that it is better to be under one Bishop
then under a hundred. But we answer, as Nehemiah did,
Neh. 4. 4. Hear ô our God, for we are despised; and turn
their reproach upon their own head. And as Neh. 6. 9. Now
therefore, ô our God, strengthen our hands. But that which
is worser then this, is; that our seeming friends seek
to undermine us, and to terrifie us, and say, as Neh. 4.
11. They shall not know, neither see, till we come in the
midst among them, and slay them, and cause the work to
cease. And others are ready to discourage us, and say as
it is, Neh. 4. 10. And Judah said, The strength of the bea∣rers
of burdens is decayed, and there is much rubbish, so
that wee are not able to build the wall. It is impossible
(say some) to purge our Churches according to the rule,
they are so full of rubbish, and therefore it is better and
safer to study Separation from, rather then Reformation
of our Churches. But yet notwithstanding all these op∣positions,
and discouragements, I doubt not but God
Almighty will in his due time finish this wall of his,
and so perfect his own work, that all the enemies there∣of
shall cast down their eies, and perceive that this work
was wrought of our God, Neh. 6. 16.
For the effecting of this blessed work, God hath
raised us up a happy Parliament. And also God hath raised
you up (Right Honourable, Right Worshipfull, and the rest

of the Common Councell) and hath raised up your spirits
to strengthen our hands to this work, and to build the
wall together with us, (each of us in our places) that
so the Church may no longer lye waste, and open
to all Errors and Heresies, and that we may be no lon∣ger
a reproach to all other reformed Churches. This
work by your help will quickly bee finished, as it is
written, Neh. 4. 6. So we built the wall, and all the wall
was joyned together unto the half thereof, for the people had
a minde to the work.
The times wherein you live are indeed very trouble∣some:
but be not discouraged; for it is foretold, Dan.
9. 25. That the wall of Jerusalem shall be re-built, even in
troublous times. And let me say to you as Mordecai to
Esther, Esther 4. 14. Who knoweth whether God hath not
raised you up to be Mayor, to be Sheriffs, Aldermen, and
Common Councell men for such a time as this is? Go on
courageously, and God will trouble those that trouble
you, and bring good to you, and to the Church out of
these troubles. We reade of the Pool of Bethesda, that
when the water was troubled, then it became a healing
water. The untroubled water, was an unhealing water.
So will God doe with you; he will make the troubled
waters of the Sanctuary to become healing waters: Inso∣much
as we all shall say, Periissemus nisi periissemus; We
should have been undone had we not been undone. One∣ly
be strong and of a good courage: I say it again, be
strong and of a good courage. I say it the third time (for
so did God to Joshua in 4 verses, Joshuah 1. 6, 7, 8, 9.
Be strong of a good courage. The Lord hath made you
instruments to doe much good for Church and State; the
same God make you every day more and more instru∣mentall.

And be not terrified and dismayed because of the many
Heresies and Errors that are in the City. For as when the
wall of Jerusalem was once built, all their enemies did
immediately vanish into nothing, Neh. 6. 16. So when
the wall of the Church shall be once erected, I doubt not
but these prodigious errours will all vanish.
And as when the Sun ariseth, all wilde beasts goe to
their dens; so when the bright Sun of Christs kingly go∣vernment
shall appear in our Horizon, I trust all these
beastly errours will betake themselves to their dens of ob∣scurity
and oblivion. It was said of Augustus, that when
he was first Emperour he found Rome in a poor condition,
but he left it in a glorious condition; Invenit lateritiam,
sed reliquit marmoream. My prayer shall be (and oh that
God would hear me!) that you may be able to say, When
I was first Mayor, or first Sheriffe, or first Common-councell
man, I found the City a City full of division, full of pro∣fanenesse,
full of errors and heresies; but now I shall leave
it full of truth, full of holinesse, and a City at unity within
it selfe. Inveni lateritiam, reliqui marmoream.
For the better bringing of this to passe, you did lately
renue your solemne League and Covenant; at which time
this ensuing Sermon was preached. Since which time,
not only the Sermon, but the Preacher of it, hath under∣gone
many harsh and bitter censures. It is the wickednesse
of these dayes to build their own designes upon the ruine
of other mens good name. But surely God will never pro∣sper
such bloody practises. It is said of Antiochus, a vilde
person, Dan. 11. 28. That his heart shall be against the holy
Covenant. We have many amongst us, that in this are
like unto Antiochus, whose hearts, tongues, and hands, are
not only against our solemne League and Covenant; but
against all that preach for it, or write in the defence of it.

There is indeed a Covenant that some do much contend
for, and make the very form of a particular Church, with∣out
which a Church cannot be a true Church, which is
called a Church-covenant. For my part, I conceive that
whosoever shall say, that a Church-covenant (I meane an
oath expressed by formal words) is an Ordinance of Christ,
and necessary to the very being of a visible Church; doth
not only un-church most of the Churches of Jesus Christ,
but doth also set up his own invention for an Ordinance
of Christ. In the New Testament we reade of no such
Church-oath at the admission of Members. And there is
no place in the Old Testament (for ought I could ever
reade) that speaks of a Church-oath to be taken at our ad∣mission
into Church-fellowship. Indeed we have mention
made of a Nationall Covenant, and of the Covenant of
grace, and of subscribing with our hands unto the Lord. But
what are these to a Church-oath; without which, no
man is to be accounted a Church-member, or to have right
to the seales of the covenant of grace? To urge this as an
Ordinance of Christ, is to set our posts by Gods posts, and our
threshold by Gods threshold, Ezek. 43. 8. But if I should
expatiate any further in this point, I should exceed the
limits of an Epistle, and therefore I forbear.
My hearty desire is, That this Covenant which you
have now taken the second time, may be carried about
you in continuall remembrance. And that it may serve
in stead of a thousand Arguments to make you zealously
serviceable, to God, to Church, and State. It is reported
of Theseus, that he was so taken with the wonderfull
works of Hercules, that he could not sleep for thinking
of the wonders of Hercules; and when he slept, he dreamt
of Hercules wonders; and was never satisfied till he had
imitated him in working wonderfull things also. And

it is also related of Themistocles, that he had alwayes in
his thoughts by night and by day, the victories of Mil∣tiades,
and this made him insatiable till he had imitated
him. Oh that you would thus deale with the Covenant!
That you would think of it in your bed, in your closets,
in your walks; and think of what particulars you have
sworn unto, and never leave thinking untill you have
fully performed your Oath and Covenant. And if you
keep Covenant with God, the great God will keep Covenant
with you, and all the blessings of the Covenant which
are mentioned in the book of God, which is the book of the
Covenant, shall be your portion for ever and ever. Which
is the prayer of

