



Beloved in the Lord;
I Need not spend much time in giving you an account how these ensuing Ser∣mons come to be made pub∣lick. It is not because they are more worthy than those which you hear weekly; Nay, I may truly say (without boasting) they are lesse worthy (though I think none of them much worth) than many others. It is not because. I desire to bee in print; But it is

1 To present you with the Pattern of a Woman whom God did pick out to make an example of great affliction, and great patience, that when you come into great troubles, you may bee comfort∣ed with those comforts, with which shee was comforted.
2 To acquaint you with the pains shee took, and with her diligence in time of health to make her salvation sure; That so you may bee provoked to lay up sutable, seasonable, and sufficient provision against an evil day, and not have your Evidences for Heaven to get in the hour of adversity.
It is the grand sin of most people to delay and prorogue their solemn pre∣paration for affliction and sickness, till they come to bee sick, and in affliction. There are many in Hell, who purposed to repent, but were prevented by death; therefore Bernard saith, good purposes Bona pro∣posita ge∣henam intrant, bona ope∣ra coelum. go to Hell, and only good performan∣ces lead into Heaven.
To prevent your delaying and defer∣ring,

to provide for affliction, these Ser∣mons are printed, and to perswade you, that whatsoever you do for Heaven, you would do it speedily, and with all your strength.
The Subjects handled are so plain and easy, and the stile so rude and unpo∣lished, that I was resolved to ave bu∣ried them in perpetual oblivion, had I not been conquered by this following (together with the forementioned) consi∣deration, that they are calculated only for people under great troubles, at which times learned debates about Discipline, and controverted points of Divinity, painted Eloquence, and curious Language, are of very little e∣steem, and account. Afflicted conscien∣ces are oftentimes puzzled, but never comforted with doubtful disputations. Neat and elegant expressions may skin over, but cannot cure spiritual diseases. Nothing can heal a wounded con∣science, and keep a man from sinking into dispondency in the day of great tribu∣lation,

but a real, right, and particular Application of the Promises, to help a doubting Christian to perform this great work, there are thirteen plain Rules and Directions laid down in the following Treatise. My prayer is, that they may prove useful and successeful.
Seneca indeed comforts his friend Polybius, and perswades him to bear his afflictions patiently, because hee was the Emperours Favourite, and tells him, That it was not lawful for him to complain, while Caesar was his Fas tibi non est de fortuna conqueri salvo Cae∣sare. friend: But this was but a poor Cordi∣al: For Caesar himself a little while af∣ter, was so miserable, that hee had not a friend to help him, much lesse was hee able to help his friend. The Word of God affords a better Cordial. It bids a true Child of God not to bee over much dejected under the greatest affli∣ction, Fas tibi non est de fortuna conqueri salvo Deo, & salvis promissio∣nibus Dei. because hee is Gods Favourite; It tells him, that it is not lawful for him to complain, while God is his friend, and the Promises of God his

rich portion, and inheritance. Though Job lost all hee had, yet hee lost nothing, because hee lost not his God, who is All in All, and they who have him, have All.
My purpose at first was only to have printed the Sermon preached at Mris. Moores Funeral, together with her E∣vidences for Heaven, collected by her in the time of her health. But the impor∣tunity of friends hath overswayed mee, and caused mee to adde four more, preached immediately afterwards on the same Text.
And now (Dearly Beloved) having this fair opportunity to speak to you in writing, give mee leave to propound and lay before you some cautions and admo∣nitions; some Rules and Directions for the right ordering of your lives and conversations in these dangerous and divided times, that so you may bee able after my decease, to have them in per∣petual remembrance.
1 Take heed of mistaking in the great

work of Beleeving, and Repenting. Faith and Repentance are the two great Gospel-graces: And the reason why so many miscarry to all eternity, is not for want of them (such as they are) but upon a pure mistake, in thinking they have them, when they have but a shadow of them. Where one goeth to Hell by despera∣tion, hundreds go thither by presump∣tion. O! quam multi cum hâc vanâ fide, & vana spe ad aeternos labores de∣scendunt; How many thousands go to hell with a vain faith, and hope of Hea∣ven! And therefore bee much in exami∣nation, whether your Faith bee right or no. Examine your selves, whether yee bee 2 Cor. 13. 5 in the Faith, prove your own selves. To bee mistaken in the great work of Be∣leeving, is to bee necessitated to dam∣nation. Mark. 16 16 For hee that beleeves not, shall bee damned. Ask your souls often, whe∣ther your Repentance bee of a right stamp, or no; whether it bee a Repen∣tance unto life, a Repentance never to bee repented on. To bee mistaken

in purchasing of Lands, can but hurt your outward estates; but to bee mis∣taen in the graces of Faith and Repen∣tance, will undo your souls to all ae∣tenity. What the Characters of a true Faith, and true Repentance are, you have frequently heard, I will not now re∣peat them. Only remember that self-flattery, is self-mockery; that soul-delusion, is soul-damnation. Pray unto God to deliver you from that great murderer of souls, the sin of Presump∣tion.
2 Take heed (as I have said) of de∣laying, and putting off the great work of providing for Heaven, till sickness or oldage. The Lord Christ commands you to seek first the Kingdome of God, and his Righteousness, &c. First, be∣fore other things, first, more than o∣ther things. You must seek after Hea∣ven in the first and chiefe place, and if you seek it in the least and last place, you will never obtain it. In matters of weight delay is dangerous, Abigail

made haste to prevent Davids fury. Ra∣hab made haste to hang out her Scalet threed. The salvation of your souls s a matter of the greatest concernment, and to delay providing for it, is not only a sin against the command of Christ, but a sleighting of the Hea∣ven of Christ. How justly may God deny to you (who refuse when hee calls) either space, or grace, to turn to him, and say to you, as it is reported, hee said to a man, who desired to repent in his old age, ubi consumpsisti farinam, ibi con∣sume furfurem; Where you have spent your flower, there go spend your branne; Therefore let my Counsel bee acceptable to you. Make Christ your unum neces∣sarium, your one thing necessary, and Heaven your primum quaerite; Seek yee first the Kingdome of God, and his Righteousness. Say with David, I made haste, and delayed not to keep Psal. 119. 60 thy Commandements.
3 Take heed of resting in the Mini∣stry of man, You must not despise the

teachings of Orthodox Ministers lawful∣ly called (for hee that despiseth them, despiseth Christ; hee that is above their teachings, is above the teachings of Christ, for Christ teacheth by them. Eph. 2. 17 2 Cor. 5. 20 They are his Embassadors, and they preach not only in his name, but in his stead) yet you must not rest satisfied with the teachings of men, but pray, That while the Minister speaks to your ears, God would speak to your hearts. That God would fulfil that blessed Promise, Isa. 54. 13. And all thy Children shall bee taught of God. That hee would give you an unction from the 1 Joh. 2. 20 Holy One to teach you all things. Psal. 68▪ 24. That you may see the goings of God in his Sanctuary, you may behold the beau∣ty of the Lord, and see his power and Psal. 27.4 glory in his holy Temple. In a word. Psal. 63.2 That God would give you, not only the presence of Ordinances, but his pre∣sence in them. That you may experi∣mentally know, what it is to injoy com∣munion with God in Gospel-Administra∣tions,

4 Take heed of formality, custo∣mariness, and carelesness in the per∣formance of holy duties. Hee that serves God carelesly, brings a curse upon himself, instead of a blessing. For cursed is hee that doth the work of the Lord negligently. Hee that serves God formally and customarily doth not serve him, but mock him. If the Israelites had brought the skin of a beast for sacrifice, instead of a beast, it would have been counted a mocking of God, rather than a worshipping of him. So do they who serve God negligently and formally.
5 Bee not contented to have a name to bee godly and religious, but la∣bour to bee really such as you are supposed by others to bee. Remem∣ber what Christ saith of the Church of Rev. 3.2. Sardis. That shee had a name to live, but was dead. What will it profit you to bee thought by men to bee godly, if God knows that you are ungodly? What will it advantage you to seem to go to

heaven, and yet at last to miss of it? O labour to bee Christians not onely in word, but in deed, and in truth, not onely by outward profession, but by a holy conversation: Rest not satisfied with a less degree of grace, than that which will bring you to heaven. It will be a double hell, to go within an inch of heaven, and yet at last to miscarry.
6 Remember what Christ saith of Capernaum. The Capernaites were not so bad as the Gadarens, who desired Christ to depart from them: much less as the Nazarites who thrust Christ out of their Coasts. For they heard him Luke 4.29 Luke 4.32 preach every Sabbath-day, and were astonished at his Doctrine. And yet be∣cause they did not sincerely practise what was taught them, Christ pronoun∣ceth a heavy doom against them, Matth. 11.23, 24. And thou Capernaum which art exalted unto heaven, shalt bee brought down to hell; for if the mighty works which have beene done in thee, had beene done

in Sodome, it would have remained unto this day. But I say unto you, that it shall bee more tolerable for the land of Sodome in the day of judge∣ment, than for thee. It is not enough to praise the Sermons you hear, to admire, and stand astonished at the Doctrine delivered. If you do not pra∣ctise what is preached. If you do not live Sermons, as well as hear them, it shall bee easier for Sodome and Go∣morrha at the day of judgement than for you.
7 Take heed that the love of the world, doth not eat out the heart of Re∣ligion, and at last, Religion it self out of your hearts. Remember what 1 Tim. 6. 10 the Apostle Paul saith, That the love of money is the root of all evill, which while some have coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced thēselves through with many sorrows. 1 Joh. 2.15 And what the Apostle John saith, Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any man love

the world, the love of the Father is not in him. There is no sin so contrary to true Saintship as worldly-mindedness: A Saint is one who hath much of hea∣ven in him, and is much in heaven. A Saint is one whose original is from heaven, he is born from above, his name Joh: 3.3 . is written in heaven, his meditations, affections, and conversation is in hea∣ven. Hee is one who is elected to things above, and called to partake of heaven, and eternal happiness. And for such a man to minde things earthly, is a sin of the first magnitude. There∣fore Eph. 5.3 the Apostle would not have cove∣tousness so much as named amongst Christians. There is no sin more defiles the soul. It will besmear you, and make you spiritual Blackamores, and Chimny∣sweepers in Gods sight. There is no sin doth more dead and dull the heart in the doing of good duties. It hinders Mar: 22: 5 a man both from, and in Ordinances. The Farmer, and Merchant made light of the call of Christ, and one

went to his Farm, the other to his Merchandize. There is no sin will more eclipse the light of Gods counte∣nance from shining upon you. The Moon is never in the Eclipse, but when the earth comes between us and the Sun. A childe of God is feldome without the light of Gods countenance, unless it bee through the overmuch love of the world. No sin will more hinder your flight up to heaven. The Ostrich can∣not flye high, because of the greatness of her wings. Jacob was forced in his travelling towards Canaan to go slow∣ly and softly, because of his multitude of children, of flocks, and herds. And Gen. 33. 13, 14 therefore let mee again beseech you to take heed of worldly-mindednes; This will quickly betray you into Apostacy from Christ, and from the truths of Christ. A man who loves the world, will (Judas-like) betray Christ for thirty peeces. Hee will part with his Religion, rather than with his estate. This sin is the root of all evill, it

exposeth a man to all temptations, to hurtful lusts, to all errors, and all 1 Tim. 6. 9 kinde of sorrows. It will drown your souls in perdition. Hee that seeks things . below, shall have his Heaven below. The Apostle saith expresly, that they who minde earthly things, their Phil. 3.19 end is damnation. Therefore let mee once again repeat it; Take heed lest you bee like the Thorny ground. Let not the cares, riches, and pleasures of the World choak the good seed that is weekly sown in your hearts.
8 Let it bee your morning and even∣ing thought what shall become of you Momen∣tum unde pendet ae∣ternitas. to all eternity, and labour so to use things temporal, as not to lose the things that are eternal. Remember that this life is a moment upon which eternity de∣pends, and according as you spend this Momen∣tancum▪ quod de∣lectat, ae∣ternum quod cru∣ciat. moment, so you shall bee for ever happy, or for ever miserable. Remember that the pleasures of sin are but for a mo∣ment, but the punishments of sin are everlasting.

9 Look upon Sin as the greatest of e∣vils, greater than poverty, imprison∣ment, banishment, or death it self; chuse the greatest affliction, rather than commit the least sin. If Hell Anselme. were on the one side, and Sin on the o∣ther, chuse rather to go into Hell, than to sin against God. For Sin is a grea∣ter evil, than Hell, because it is the cause of Hell, and more opposite to God (who is the chiefest good) than Hell is. For God is the Author of Hell (which hee hath provided for all unbelee∣vers, and impenitent persons) But it is blasphemy in the highest degree, to say, That hee is the Author of Sin, Look upon Christ as the greatest good, greater than health, wealth, liberty, or life. Love Christ, more than you love your estates, or lives: Hee that loves Christ, more than the world, will not for sake Christ to imbrace the world. Hee that fears sin more than affliction, will not sin to avoid affliction.
10 Rest not contented with that mea∣sure

of grace you have attained unto, but labour to grow in grace, and in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ. Remember that the Scripture doth not only perswade you to get into Christ, but to grow up into Christ; not only to bee Righteous, but to bee filled with the fruits of Righteousness, &c. Remem∣ber Eph. 4.1 Phil. 1.11 that saying of Christ; to whom much is given, of them much is re∣quired. Luk. 12. 48 God hath given you much, you have plentiful means of salvation, and you have had them for many years; hee expects from you, not only good fruit, but much good fruit; not only thirty-fold, and sixty-fold, but an hundred-fold. Where the Husbandman bestows most cost, hee expects most fruit. The more a Merchant adventures by Sea, the greater return hee looks for. God hath done more for you, than for many o∣thers, and therefore hee expects that you should do some singular thing for him. Hee looks you should bee more humble, more heavenly, more knowing than

others. If the Sun should give no more light than a little Candle, to what pur∣pose hath God given it so much light? If you that have Sun-like abilities do no more good, than those who have but half your abilities, to what purpose have you them? It is a true saying, As our Crescen∣tibus do∣ni cres∣cunt rati∣ones do∣norum. gifts increase, so must our account increase. You shall answer at the great day, not only for your gifts, but for the measure of them. Remember that God doth not only require service from you, but service proportionable to the means, and mercies you injoy.
Hee that hath but one Talent, shal answer but for one; but you that have five, or ten Talents, must bee answerable, ac∣cording to the quantity, as well as the qua∣lity of them.
11 Labour to diffuse those grace which God hath given you, and to communicate them to those with whom you converse. True grace i of a spreading nature, and therefore compared to leaven, which diffuseth i

self into the whole lump, and to Salt, that seasoneth all those things with which it is mingled. Assoon as the woman of John 4. 29. 30 Samaria had found out the Messias, shee leaves her water-pot, and goeth into the City, to tell others what God had done for her. Assoon as Cornelius had re∣ceived the Message from the Angel, to send for Peter; hee calls together his kinsmen and neer friends, that they, together with him, might bee made partakers of Gospel-grace. A true Act. 10▪ 24 Christian is like a Needle touched with the Loadstone. A Needle (truly touched) draweth another, and that will draw another, and that, another: Whoso∣ever hath his heart truly touched by effectual grace, will labour to convert others, and they, others. Philip will draw Nathaniel, Andrew will draw Peter. And Peter being converted, will labour to strengthen his Brethren: There is a natural instinct in all crea∣tures to make others like themselves (as fire will turn all things that come

neer it, into fire) and there is a spiritual instinct in all converted Christians, to convert others. It is as natural to a true Christian to make others true Christians, as it is for a man to beget a man. True grace is not only of a com∣municative, but of an assimilating na∣ture.
See then that you labour by seasonable and religious admonitions, and exhor∣tations; by communicating of experi∣ences, and especially by the shining pat∣tern of a holy life and conversation, to bring all those with whom you con∣verse unto Jesus Christ. That man hath not grace in truth, who put sit in a dark Lanthorne.
12 Labour to bee good in your Rela∣tions, good Husbands, and good Wives, good Parents, and good Children, good Masters, and good Servants. Remem∣ber that that man cannot bee a good man, who is not good in his Relation. Hee cannot bee a good Christian, who is not a good Husband, or a good Child,

or a good Father, &c. Shee cannot bee a good Christian, who is not a good Wife; and so of the rest; and the rea∣son is: Because the same God who commands the Husband to love God, commands him to love his Wife; the same God who commands the Wo∣man to obey God, commands her to obey her Husband. There is the same stamp of authority upon our duties to∣wards our Relations, as upon our duties towards God; therefore bee sure to make conscience of relative duties.
13 Joyn works of mercy and cha∣rity together with your profession of piety and holiness. For God hates a penurious, niggardly, and covetous professor of Religion. Let that saying of David abide upon your hearts, God forbid I should serve the Lord with 2 Sam, 24.24 that which cost mee nothing. God hates your obedience to the first Table, Isa, 1. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 if it bee not joyned with obedience to the second. Works of mercy and charity are made in Scripture the touchstones of

the truth of our piety and holiness. This is pure Religion (saith the Apostle) and James 1. 27 undefiled before God, and the Father, to visit the Fatherlesse, and Wid∣dows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world. If any man say (saith Saint John) I love God, and hateth his Brother, hee is 1 John 4. 20 a lyar, for hee that loveth not his Brother whom hee hath seen, how can hee love God whom hee hath not seen? An unmerciful and an unchari∣table man, is a wicked and an ungodly man. Let it bee the care of all those amongst you, who are rich in estate, to bee rich in good works. Let every man lay up for the poor, according as God hath prospered him; remembring 1 Cor. . 2 that saying of Christ, Come yee bles∣sed of my Father, inherit the King∣dome prepared for you, from the foundation of the world; For I was an hungred, and yee gave mee meat, I was thirsty, and yee gave mee drink, I was a stranger, and yee took mee in,

naked, and yee cloathed mee, I was sick, and yee visited mee, I was in prison, and yee came unto mee.
14 Take heed of separating from the publick Assemblies of the Saints. I have found by experience, that all our Church-calamities have sprung from this root. Hee that separates from the publick worship, is like a man tumb∣ling down a hill, and never leaving till hee comes to the bottome of it. I could relate many sad stories of persons professing godliness, who out of dislike to our Church-meetings, began at first to se∣parate from them, and after many chan∣ges and alterations, are turned some of them Anabaptists, some Quakers, some Ranters, some direct Atheists. But I forbear; you must hold communion with all those Churches, with which Christ holds communion; you must separate from the sins of Christians, but not from the Ordinances of Christ. Take heed of Unchurching the Churches of Christ, lest you prove Schismaticks in∣stead

of being true Christians.
15 Though you never live to see the times setled, yet labour to get your con∣sciences setled: Pray for the Spirit of Truth, to guide you into all Truth in these erring dayes. Remember that say∣ing of Christ, If thine eye bee evil, thy Mat. 6. 23 whole body shall bee full of dark∣nesse; if therefore the light that is in you bee darkness, how great is that darkness. God hath given you your un∣derstandings, to bee the guide of the whole man. As the Eye is the guide of the body, and the Sun of the world, so is the understanding of the man; therefore you must in praying, pray that God would give you a right understanding in all things. Pray not only for the grace of Sanctification, but of Illumination. Avoid as soul-poison all Doctrines

1 Which tend to liberty, open a door to prophaneness, and are contrary to god∣liness.
2 Which hold forth a superstitious strictness above what is required in the Word.

3 Which are Antimagistratical, and Antiministerial.
4 Which lift up corrupt nature, and exalt unsanctified reason.
5 Which preach free-grace, to the ut∣ter ruine of good works.
6 Which lessen the priviledges of Infants, and makes their condition worse under the New Testament, than under the Old.
7 Which are contrary to the Analogy of Faith, the ten Commandements, and the Lords Prayer.

16 Take heed lest being led away with the errour of the wicked, you 2 Pet. 3. 17 fall from your own stedfastness. Take heed of a threefold Apostacy, of which this Nation is deeply guilty.
Of Apostacy
1 In your Judgements, from the Truths of Christ, and from the Faith once delivered to the Saints.
2 In your Affections, from that ancient love, desire, and delight, which the Saints of God have had heretofore,

and you your selves once had, in, and to∣wards the Ordinances of Christ, and the godly and learned Ministers of Christ.
3 In your conversations, from that humble and exact walking with God in all good duties, both towards God, and man, which was the credit, and honour of the good old Puritan in former daies. Let mee speak to you in the words of the Apostles Paul and Peter. Wherefore my beloved Brethren, bee yee sted∣fast 1 Cor. 15.  and unmoveable, &c. The God of grace, who hath called you into his eternal glory by Jesus Christ, make you perfect, stablish, strength∣en, and settle you.
17 Remember that it is the will of Jesus Christ, that you who partake of the same word of life, and of the same Sa∣cramental Bread and Wine, should admonish one another, exhort one another, watch over one another, bear the burdens of one another, provoke one another to love and good works; seek the good of one another, and not

your own good only. That you should warn the unruly, comfort the feeble∣minded, and support the weak That this is your duty appears, from Col. 3▪ 16. Phil. 2.4. Heb. 1. 24. Gal. 6. 1▪ Rom. 15. 2. Rom. 14. 7. 2 Cor. 5.15▪ 1 Thes. 5. 11, 13, 14. The 12th. vers. speaks of Ministerial and authoritative admonition, but the 13, and 14. verses of fraternal and charitative. These Texts will rise up in Judgement against thou∣sands of Christians at the last day. I do not say that you are to admonish none but those of your own Society. Admoni∣tion is an act of mercy; It is spiritualis Eleemosyna, spiritual Almes, and you are bound by the royal law of charity, by the communion of Saints, the com∣munion of Churches, and communion of natures, to distribute these spiritual almes to all that need them, as God shall give occasion. But this I say, you ought especially to admonish them, and watch o∣ver them. This is novum, though not solum vinculum. Some Divines think

that one chief reason why the Israelites were punished for Achans sin, was be∣cause they did not admonish him, and watch over him: For the Israelites were commanded in the plural number, Josh. 6.18. Keep your selves from the accursed thing, &c. Hee was one of the body, and because they did not watch over him, they communicated in his sin, and in his punishment. There is an excellent Law in this Nation, That every Parish shall provide for its own poor. And by parity of reason, it is as just and equal, That every Congre∣gation should chiefly and especially look to the souls of their own members, to warn them, admonish them, exhort them, and watch over them.
That you may the better discharge this duty, you must labour to bee ac∣quainted one with another, as far as your callings and relations will give you leave. It is a great and common sin, and much to bee lamented, That there is so little knowledge and acquain∣tance,

between those that are of the same congregation. They sit in the same Pew together, partake of the same Sacra∣ment, and yet converse no more to∣gether, than if one lived at York, and the other at London. And when they do converse together; it is a meer civill and outward converse, as amongst sober heathens; But there is very little re∣ligious society between them, for the spiritual edification one of another. Now this must needs bee a great sin; For how can you watch over one another, edifie, and admonish one another? How can you support the weak, comfort the feeble-minded, if not spiritually ac∣quainted one with another.
And yet 'tis not my opinion that every member of a Congregation is bound to know every fellow-member. I beleeve it was not so in the Church of Jerusalem, or of Samaria. It is in∣credible, to think that they all knew one another. I should bee loath to lay such a clog upon your consciences, as to say,

That every maid-servant, and man∣servant is bound to know, and to bee acquainted with all those with whom they communicate in the Lords Sup∣per. Indeed the Church-officers are the eyes of the people, and are to know all, and to bee acquainted with all: But yet notwithstanding this, I say, It is the duty of every member, to endeavour ac∣cording to his place and calling, to grow up in spiritual acquaintance one with another, as God shall offer occasion, and not to be so strange and unacquainted, but to walk in love one towards another, to bear one anothers burden, and so fulfill the Law of Christ, Gal. 6.2.
And this you ought the rather to do, that so you may contribute to the keep∣ing of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper pure in the Congregation to which you belong. There is much com∣plaint amongst many (and not without just cause) of mixt communions, and of an universal liberty which some take in giving the Sacrament promiscuously

to all that come, though grosly ignorant, and notoriously scandalous, and in mak∣ing (If I may so speak) the Chancel-door, as wide as the Church-door. This in my judgement is a great ini∣quity.
1 It is to give holy things to Dogs, and to cast Pearls to Swine. It is a prophanation of the Ordinance, in giv∣ing it to those who are visibly unworthy to receive it, and to whom wee know Christ would not have us to give it.
2 It is an act of great uncharitable∣ness, to those who are grosly ignorant, and scandalous. For it is to give them that which wee know will further their damnation.
3 It makes the Church-Officers (who have power to hinder them, and do not use it) partakers of other mens sins.
4 It is an Act of cruelty to the Na∣tion: For because wee have been Pro∣digal of Christs blood, therefore hee hath been Prodigal of ours.

5 It is a great scandal to the truly godly, and a stumbling-block to weak Christians, causing them (though unad∣visedly) to separate from our Congre∣gations.
6 It is to walk contrary to the pra∣ctise of most (if not all) of the Churches of Christ in the Christian world.
To prevent this Sacrament-propha∣nation; there are some Ministers, who wholly surcease from administring it. This I allow not, unlesse in case of absolute ne∣cessity. For this is (as it were) to suspend the whole Congregation, and to deny Children their bread, for fear of giv∣ing it to Dogs. The best way is to follow the advice which our Lord Jesus Christ gives, Mat. 18, 15, 16, 17. where hee propounds Rules and Directions fort he removing of scandals out of the Church. If thy Brother shall trespass against thee (saith Christ) go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone. Hee doth not say, go, and separate pre∣sently (For this is to rend the Church,

not to heal it; This is to hinder thy Brother from Christ, rather than to gain him to Christ. Hee doth not say, God and tell others (for this is to back∣bite thy Brother. This is to reproach him, rather than to reprove him) But hee saith, Go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone; if hee shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy Brother: But if hee will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, &c. And if hee shall neglect to hear them, tell it to the Church (that is, to such who are impowred by Christ to redress offences) but if hee neglect to hear the Church, let him, &c. Hence learn,
That all Church-reformation, and Sacrament-purity must begin from Church-members, and proceed from them in Christs way, unto Church-of∣ficers: That if any man who is called a Brother, bee a fornicator, or a railer, or a drunkard, or guilty of any other scandalous sin: It is your duty, who are

members of the same body with him, and know his guiltinesse, to labour by private admonition to gain him to God, not to shame him by telling others, but to gain him, by telling him alone. But if hee will not hear you, then you are in an orderly way, to bring it to the Church, which if you neglect to do, the sin of Church-pollution is your sin, and not the sin of your Church-officers. If there bee three doors to get into an house, hee that keeps mee out of the first, keeps mee out of the other two. All Sacrament∣reformation begins with you, you are the first door at which it enters; if you fail of your duty, the sin lyeth at your door, not at ours. It is the custome of all people (though otherwise godly) if a scan∣dalous sinner bee admitted to the Lords Supper, to charge the sin of it upon the Minister, and in the mean time to forget that the sin is theirs, not his, because they have not done what Christ would have them, for the gaining of him, and for the inabling of the Church, to pro∣ceed

against him by censures, if hee prove obstinate. The Lord give you hearts to think of this, and give you grace (instead of murmuring against, and complaining of mixt communions, and of separating from us because of them) to contribute your utmost towards the purging of our Congregations, and to practise all those duties which Christ re∣quires of you in order thereunto.
I have much more to say of this parti∣cular, but I perceive that the Epistle swells to too great a bigness, and therefore I shall deferre what I have further to say, till God shall offer mee another such opportunity.
18 Labour to maintain peace, and u∣nity amongst your selves. It is a good and pleasant thing for brethren to dwell to∣gether Psal. 133 in unity. Have Salt in your Mark. 9. 50. selves, and peace one with another. Labour to get your fouls seasoned with the grace of humility, self-denyal, and mortification; and this will keep you in peace. Remember the saying of Christ,

Blessed are the Peace-makers. Now, I beseech you Brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that yee all speak the same thing, and that there bee no divisions among you; but that yee bee perfectly joyned together in 1 Cor. 1. 10 the same minde, and in the same Judgement.
19 Study often and often the quatuor novissima, The four last things, Death, Judgement, Hell, and Heaven. The meditation of Death, will prepare you for Death; The meditation of Heaven, will make you heavenly∣minded; The meditation of Hell, will keep you from Hell: Therefore Ber∣nard Descen∣damus vi∣ventes, ut non de∣scenda∣mus mo∣rientes. perswades us to go often down to Hell by meditation while wee live, and wee shall not go down to it when wee dye. The meditation of the day of Judgement, will bee both fraenum, & calcar, a bridle to curb you from sin, and a spurre to incite you to all godliness, that so you may give up your account with joy at that terrible day.

20 Study the exceeding great and precious promises of the Gospel, make a Catalogue of them, meditate on them, and labour to apply them to your own souls, for your everlasting comfort. And for this purpose, read over these Sermons, and study them in time of health, that you may injoy the benefit of them in the time of sickness.
Lastly, Let mee intreat you to praise God in my behalf; that hee hath been pleased out of his free love to uphold mee amongst you in my Ministerial imploy∣ment for these eighteen years; And to continue your earnest prayers unto him, that hee would make my labours more use∣ful, and successful, that hee would guide mee, that I may guide you, that hee would not only make, but keep mee faith∣ful in these backsliding times, and teach mee so to preach, and so to live, that I may save my self, and those that hear mee.

