



Right Honourable,
THe noble favours which I recei∣ved from your deceased father, are so many, that I can never sufficiently expresse them, and (I hope) shall never be so ungrate∣ful as to forget them. The chief∣est requital I can now make for them, is to pray for your Lordship, That as you are his heire, and inherit his estate, so you may also inherit his vir∣tues; And that whatsoever was good in him, may live in you.
For as it is a happinesse, when a sonne is de∣scended from religious Ancestors (he being here∣by made partaker of their good counsels, prayers,

and pious examples) so also it is an invaluable blessing, when a father hath religious and virtuous Utinm caelebs vixissem, aut orbus periissm. Prorsus faelicem suturum fuisse (inquit Auso∣nius) si hunc fi∣lium nn gene∣rasst.children. It was a sad complaint of Augustus, O that I had lived a Bachelor, or dyed childlesse! And concerning Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, that he had been perfectly happy, had he not begotten such a wicked sonne as Commodus was. And that he did injure his country in nothing, but in be∣ing the father of such an ungodly child,
Hoc solo patriae, quod genuit, nocuit.
Some children are blots and blemishes to their Parents, as Manasseh was to Hezekiah. My prayer for your Lordship is, that you may be an honour, glory, and crown of rejoycing to your Family, and by your godly and virtuous life make your Father (though dead) to enjoy a kind of happiness upon earth while you live. And that you may embalme his memory to posterity by the spices, and sweet odours of your godly life, and conversation.
It ought not to be forgotten, but for ever to be remembred, That your Lordship may not unfitly be called the Lords Passeover. For when he took away by death your only sonne and heire, he passed over you, and instead of the Father

took to himselfe the Grand-father. This re∣markable Providence is alone sufficient to teach you to pass the time of your sojourning here in 1 Pet. 1. 17.feare; and to purge out the old leaven of sinne and iniquitie, that you may be a new lump of sincerity and truth; and thereby have an undoubted interest 1 Cor. 5. 7, 8.in Christ your Passeover, who was sacrificed for you.
This ensuing Sermon was preached at your Fathers funeral, and it is now dedicated to your Lordship as yours by birth-right, and by many other obligations. It will much conduce (if put in practice) for the encouraging of you in wayes of holiness, and righteousness. For it teacheth wherein true Nobility doth consist, and that nothing makes a man truely noble, but pie∣tie, and godlinesse. Sinne defiles a person and makes him vile and loathsome, though otherwise never so honourable. David calls a sinner a Psalm 15. 4.vile person, and his sonne Solomon calls him a loathsome person. Antiochus the great because Prov▪ 13. 5.of his wickednesse, is stiled by Daniel a vile per∣son. Sinne makes us not only like unto dogs, Dan. 11, 21.vipers, and swine, but unto devils: Nay, Sin makes us devils. Christ himselfe calls Judas a devil: and saith, Revelations . 10. The devil John 6. 70.

shall cast some of you into prison, &c. mea∣ning thereby wicked and devilish men. He that is a slave to his lusts is base, and ignoble though a King or Emperour. Nobilitie with∣out virtue is but as a scarlet roabe upon a leaprous body. A true Christian is of a noble extraction. He is the adopted Sonne of God, brother to Jesus Christ, heire of God, and co-heire with Christ. He is partaker of the divine nature, and without all controversie the Noblest man in the world. The Lord give you grace to believe this, that as you are nobly borne in reference to your earthly extraction, so you may be borne from above, and borne of God in reference to your heavenly ori∣ginal.
This Sermon will likewise instruct your Lord∣ship how to dye nobly and honourably. And that is, to dye in the faith. He that dyes in his sinnes, must of necessity be condemned for his sinnes: but he that dyes with a true faith in Jesus Christ, shall cer∣tainly live for ever in heaven with Christ. It will teach you to build your Sepulchre in your earth∣ly Paradises, and in the midst of your pleasures to remember your latter end. This will be a golden bridle to keep you from unlawful, and to mode∣rate the use of lawful pleasures. It sets before you

a double patterne for your imitation. The lives of the ancient and religious Patriarcks, and many commendable, and praise-worthy things in your Fathers life. And if your Lordship will endeavour to write after these excellent copies and live as they lived, you will be happy both in life and death, which that you may be, is, and shall be the prayer of
My Lord, 
