



Madam,
I Have borrowed some con∣fidence to set your name in the front of this Treatise, and concionary discourses, which my thoughts are you will freely vouchsafe me without grudge. In this I put you not to be the lug or
 handle to a common Pot, but to a choice and Golden Vessel: and whom you know of old seasoned with Christs liquor for his service. At first edi∣tion I did nominally affix no dedication, there being some reasons preponderating in those wretched times, full of the worst parts of Arithma∣tick, Divisions & Fractions of Church and State, Now first press being all exhaust, and some urging to have it in a 2d birth. I have yielded it the liberty of coming into the World again. Nor I hope you will be ashamed of pub∣lishing the holy life of your sanctified Neighbour. Mat∣ters there are all over in print of several natures: some A∣doxa, Zzer in Chili∣ad. 11. as pamplets in praise of Fornication & Drunkenness,
 of being in Debt, in praise of Baldness, of banishment, &c. Some are Amphilaxa, praising things of a middle nature, and indifferent, in themselves nei∣ther good, nor evil. Some Paradoxa, strange things cryed up and commended beyond all mens sound opinions. O∣ther writings are Eudoxa, of good and stanch report with∣all are good and wise, truly praise worthy, as Grace,St. Hieron in Psalm 147. Vir∣tue, Piety, Sobriety, &c. What I here give out is of this last sort, that will sute every good and holy palat, as Jews fable, that Manna answered e∣very gust. If they thought of Hony, of Partrigdes, of any desired dainty, what they had in their minds, Manna was the representative of it to their Mouths. your Ladyship I choose for facing this Script,
  you are much  she was, much  pon the deli∣cate  one word and prayer, ply, privately, secretly And truly I must needs approve of your diet: for your body, caring to live Epicratically, rather than Hypocritically, Studying a course dayly of slender, so∣ber, and plain feeding (though compast with much infirmity, and indispositions) rather then to live medically and Physi∣cally, translating the Apo∣thecaries Shop into your flesh.Barrad. in Itiner. Israel in Dis. The first mischief that let in all misery upon us, was Eves and Adams ill diet, neg∣lecting the Tree of life to seek and taste the forbidden fruit. Indeed all our sin, misery, sick∣ness, death, wrath of God,
 and Hell came in at this Gate of an ill diet: for our first pa∣rents made it not their meat to obey and do the will of God, which should have been their corporal & spiritual diet. But it is your spiritual order of diet I most aim at and com∣mend, the humble and quoti∣dian feeding your Soul with waiting on God in the way he has commanded you, and pro∣mised to bless you, you well digesting that word of our best Lord, Labour not for the meat that perisheth, but for that meat which endureth to everlasting life,Aquin. pust. 63. which the Son of man shall give unto you. Other meat perishes, and nourishes them that eat it to a perishing life; but Christs spiritual food endures for ever, abides with us, and
 nourishes us to the growing up to eternal life. Neither this meat, nor the man pe∣rishes. A modern Roman Doctor of Physick disputes the case,Paul Zac∣hias in Quest. Medico∣legal. lib. 7. Tit. 2. Quest. 2. whether a Popish clergy man be excused and without blame, if sore trou∣bled with the Asthma he ab∣stain from his office of reci∣ting divine things, as Preach∣ing, Reading, Praying, Singing. He indeed deter∣mines, that unless a sore Pa∣roxysm, and a strong fit of the same be afresh come upon him, his speaking, singing and loud voycing will do him no harm; for he saith, all practical Physitians say, it is profitable and helpful for them that are Asthmatick, to read or speak with an high voyce (that is, if they be a∣ble, and at the the instant not
 opprest with a violent assault) for it helps to purge the lungs of the matter impacted in them. But you look not to be ruled by him, but in and out of the strong invasions of the di∣sease, you know how to breath high and loud in your Soul to God, when you breath strait∣ly and strainingly to those a∣bout you. Madam go on in this wholesome diet for Body and Soul: and if, while you are here below, you cannot in Body and Soul get into Hea∣ven, yet continue and abide on the threshold of this beau∣tiful Gate of the Heavenly Temple of Gods mercy: the Patient abiding of the meek shall not perish, nay such shall be fatherly and sweetly sup∣ported to the end. Physitians cannot speak so much of the
 advantage of good and order∣ly diet for Body, but from the word of God, we may reason as strong for the benefit of spiritual diet for the Soul: Let them tell us from their puni-godling,Hippo∣crat. lib. de vet. Med. that if the sick would use the same diet they do, that are sound and whole, the Art of medicines would fall to nothing. Hereby he inti∣mates, that great is the digni∣ty of exquisite looking to di∣et,Aurel. Severin. in Trin. Chit. as if it were all medicine. Wherefore they tell us, that the right hand in diseases and wounds is Physick and Chy∣rurgery, but the left hand is diet, which doth very much. Now if we would study the most necessary Physick by di∣rection of divine Medicks, then is nothing so necessary, as to learn to know God and ourAluinus.
 Souls. Philo the Jew tells us, the Essens three Principles were these, they studied wholly to be , to sea∣son all their life and labours with love of God,Philo. Jud love of men, love of virtue. But we have a full voice of direct∣ion,Mic. 6.8. and better particulared to us from Micah in his Ter∣nary, He hath shewn thee, O Man, what is good, and what doth the Lord require of thee; but to do justly, to love mer∣cy, and to walk humby with thy God. Or take we St. Pauls three, To live soberly, Righteously, and Godly,Tit. 2. in this present world. Or if we hearken to him he will tell us of taking good heed to these two things, which are the complex of the whole counsel of God.Acts 20. & 27. Repentance
 towards God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. Or last∣ly, take his unum magnum, his one great point of exercise, To have always a Conscience void of offence towards God and towards Men.Act. 24.16. Gen. 5.12. All comes to this one, to imitate Enochs holy Peripateticks, to walk with God continually. Many things of beauty and novelty are lookt after in this World, outwardly glorious and rich things are applauded: men and great persons dote upon rarity, and splendors of this World, and think those men are in a kind of Heaven, though they be very fairly for∣ward in a way to Hell.Plato in Tae. Thus the glorious Tent and Taber∣nacle of the great Persian Kings were called Ouranoi, the Heavens: you have learnt
 better to know Christ in the Soul, and the Soul in Christ to be Heaven upon Earth. He that believeth hath ever∣lasting life. What a glorious vanity was that of Kings of Cusco and Mexico, one of them having a glorious Garden, where all the Trees, Fruits,Lord St. Aug. Herbs, Plants, Flowers ac∣cording to order, and great∣ness they have in a Gar∣den, were curiously framed in Gold: and in his Cabinet all the living Creatures were known in Earth or Sea curi∣ously fashioned and cast in Gold. A princely Heathenish vanity, would make his life no better then a, St. Augustine calls this life, A shadow in Moonshine, which is little more then shadow of a sha∣dow. I know you more stu∣dy
 to have all the fair flowers of Heaven, Faith, Patience, Humility, Meekness, Love of Christ, Thankfulness &c. cast in a sanctified model, by Gods Spirit kept in your heart and life, exceeding massy gold. Carlo Boccomeo, Bp. of Millain, Canonised for a Saint, said well, A Bishop should have no Garden, but the holy Scrip∣tures. Go you on still to make Prayer your Garden and Flowers, and by holy glorifying of God, as St. Chry∣sostome directs, Give up your five spiritual senses to wait on God continually. For the Soul has spiritual seeing, smel∣ling, tasting, touching, hear∣ing; which in their way ap∣plyed to God, and his mani∣festations, you shall not only please God, but give him Musick, and be his Decachor∣da
 Cithara,St. Chry. in op. Im∣perfecto in cap. 22. S. Matth. Hom. 24. his ten stringed Harp to praise him. No far∣ther will I detain you, but pray for you, that you may have support of Gods Spirit in your great infirmities, try∣als, and gravid years, to an∣swer them from Heaven with grace sufficient for you, and very efficient in you, that when your strength of flesh and heart fails you, God may come in with fresh store and assure you of Holy Asaphs viaticum, that he will be the strength of your heart, & your portion for ever. He the Guide & Faher of his Israel lead you, till per  a right Chri∣stian comfortable death, he bring you ad , to an immortal life, which all good Mortals wait for by Jesus
 Christ the blessed Purchaser, and unfailing Preparer of it.

