



I Dare not dispute your Power, for even Dr. Dr. Fern his Con∣science satisfyed lately printed at Oxford. sect. 2. pag 6. Ferne himself is Satisfied in his Conscience (or else he would never have granted it in his Tract, entituled Conscience Satisfied) that the two Houses of Parliament are, in a sort, Coordinate with His Majesty ad aliquid, to some Act, or Exercising of Supreme Power, that is, to the making of Laws, by yeelding their consent: and this (saith he) they have by a Fundamentall Constitution: Nay, the Order of the House of Commons cannot in reason but ob∣lige all the Commons of England; it doth not indeed oblige the King, he is exempt by his Soveraignty; the Lords plead Peerage, I have not yet heard of any other Plea, and therefore I will not di∣spute your Power, but obey your Order. You shall have the glory to command, mihi autem obsequii gloria relicta est, pardon the expression: we Merton College men have been used to Tacitus, 'tis his expression.
The times are sad, my Text was seasonable: Though Baby∣lon be at Rome, yet there are some sonnes and daughters of Babylon too here in England: Sion is now surrounded by them, and your Honourable House is most eminently opposed by them: Many there are that plot against you, all the Antichristian Po∣liticians in the Christian world are beating their brains how to destroy you, but their Plots are discovered, their Designes defeated by the watchfull providence of an Omniscient God, Many

there are that fight against you, against you, I say, for it is evi∣dent that those many thousands who are up in Arms, do not fight for the King, but against the Parliament: This man fights for a place at Court, and the other, perchance, for a place in the Church, or rather over the Church: O bloody Simony! some fight for Pluralities, and some for Bishopriks, some for Patents, some for Monopolies; some have lost their places in the Star-Chamber, and High Commission, and have scarce any thing to rast to but the sword. The Papists fight to subvert Religion: Delinquents, to subvert the Laws, and the Parliament too, be∣cause it hath power to make, declare, enforce the Law: The Roysters fight to destroy your persons, and gaine your estates to pay their Tavern-tickets: and yet there is a Divine, one Dr. erne, who seems to excuse all this, and by his excuse, doth cer∣tainly encourage them, to do what is inexcusable. And the good Doctor would fain perswade you and all the Commons of England, to sit still the whilest, and lose your Religion for Conscience ake; your Laws, Liberties, Estates, Lives, for Peace sake: And what will Peace advantage your Posterity, if the Army in the North will give them Peace upon no other terms then these; that either they must turn Papists, or else be content to be Beggers, and which is worse, Slaves? Some that gloried in the Title of Royalists, do now perceive, That it is not enough, to stand for the King, unlesse they will declare themselves for the Queen: and they are not a little startled at that: Is this the Bishops holy War for the Catholique Church? Be it the Bishops War, saith Dr. Ferne in his first Book▪ Well, be it so: Why, then sure the Bi∣shops have much blood to answer for. For it is well known to this whole Kingdom, and to some Churches abroad, that the Parlia∣ment desired to have all Church-matters fairly debated, , as Nazianzen speaks, not by an Army, but by an Assembly; the Bishops then have clearly declined this Rati∣onall way of triall, and taken up Arms against the Parliament in the old quarrell, and sure the Parliament hath good reason to de∣fend themselves. It seems the Bishops arguments are spent, and therefore they call for Powder and Bullets, to prove that Pre∣lacie is Jure divino. I say Prelacy, for there is a great deal of difference between Prelates, and Bishops.

Pontifices nunc Bella juvant, sunt caetera nugae. Palingenius.
What they cannot prove by the Word, they would fain make good by the sword. What? because men of tender consciences can be no longer pursued in their Courts, must they be pursued even unto death, by force of Arms? but stay: What's their fault? Why, they are enemies: They are enemies to such pomp and state as (some Bishops cannot but confesse) may well be spared. This Plot came from Rome, for I remember Hostiensis saith, That from the dayes of Pope Adrian, till his time, the Cardinals and Bishops of Rome had scarce ever laid down their Arms. Nunc belligeran∣tur Episcopi, nec alid fere quam belligerantur. Eras. Annot in cap. 3. Luc. Erasmus complained, that in his time the Bishops were men of warre. When the Duke D'Alva tyrannized over the Netherlands, there were new Bishops Mr. Fullers Pro▪ fane State. . 19. Sees erected in every City, and then presently the In∣quisition was brought in upon them: as if there could never have been any absolute tyranny without the help of the Bishops. But you will tell me, that the Men may be faulty, and yet the Order blamelesse. I answer, that the dignity of their Order should be tried by the Word, and the men being faulty, should not be prote∣cted by the Sword▪ Blush ye heavens, and be ashamed, O earth, that ever proud ambitious spirits should enflame differences be∣tween King and Parliament, onely that they may feed themselves with vain hopes of being Bishops at last, and enjoying Pluralities the whilest. Let the Searcher of hearts judge between us, and let them beware that they do not hear aconfounding voice, like that in the Historian, Quintili Vare redde Legiones, Tu Episcope redde Legiones, redde Animas. I was bold in my Sermon to lay Prelacy as low as Prelaticall men have laid Monarchy. I was too bold, they say, in calling the Pope whore so often. But it is as certain that Pope John the eighth, (or Joan the first) was a Whore, as the credit of impartiall Historians (I except the Sacred See Mr. Alexan∣der Cok his Dia∣logue about Pope oane. Cognomine Angli∣cus, natione Mo∣guntinus▪ vide F∣sci temporum ata∣ 6. ad An. 854. onely) can make a matter of fact certaine, which was done so long ago. The ancient Popish Historians acknowledge this truth. The Successour of Leo the fourth is generally described, by name John the eighth, by firname English, by place a Pope, by sx a woman, aod by her lust a Whore: She tyrannized somewhat above two years, some reckon the moneths and dayes; she played the beast with one of her own servants, and died in travail, in time of solemn Pro∣cession

in the high street. No man ever went about to prove this Story a Fable, but he proved himself a Foole. For this story is con∣firmed by the testimony of  &  Theodoricus de Nem, one of the Popes Secretaries, by  Charanza Archbishop of Toledo, by  ulgosus, sometimes Duke of Gena, by D mmora Platina, keeper of the Library in the Vatican at Rome, a man commanded to write the truth by De  Pope Sixtus the fourth; a man that had been racked and deprived of his dignities by Paul the second: it seemes he bad spoken truth too freely, and therefore Sixtus restored him to his  dignities, and did not onely enjoyn, but encourage him to write the truth. To these I might adde John of Paris, Divinity Reader in the Ʋniversity of Paris, g Polas an Archbishop, and the Poes Petiary, h Trithemius Abbot of S. Martins Mo∣nastery, i Philippus Bergomensis, I will not omit Krantius, he is an excellent Chronographer, and k Bellarmine saith, not to be suspected, because he wrote before Luther, nor is Achiles Gras∣erus to be dsrespected, because he collected his Epitome out of ve∣ry chce Historians. Here is weight in these testimonies, if any man look for number, he may see Sigebert, Boccace, Mantuan, Petrarch, Gotefridus, Viterbiens, Palmerius, Nauclerus, abellicus, Volateran, Schedel, and divers others cited at arge in that learned rat of Mr. Alexander Cook, set out on purpose to confirm this truth: or he may read Mr. Bell his Mo∣ives, or his Survey of Popery; Books that I never yet saw an∣swered. But what if one Pope were a Whore, and delivered of a Bastard before all the People, peradventure the rest of the Popes  D . were more holy. No, John the eleventh was promoted to the Pope∣dome by Theodora a famous Whore: John the twelfth, was a Bastard begotten of Marozia (another mans wife) by Pope Ser∣gius the third: John the thirteenth abused his fathers Concu∣e. Some Popes have been notorious for Incest and Sodomy, Ju∣lius the second, Martin the second, and divers others; Boniface the eighth had issue by both his Nieces, Lucretia was daughter and whore to Pope Alexander the sixth; her Epitaph will be more lasting then Brasse or Marble,
Hoc jacet in tumulo Lucretia nomine, sed re
Thais, Alexandri filia, sponsa, nurus.

You may see more instances in Platina, Ophrius, Sleidan. We are so much given to Romane Courtship now adayes, and our ears have been so little used till now of late to the old expressions of zealous Protestants, that such like passages will be counted little lesse then rayling by some Gentle Readers; but let such hear what Reverend Dr. Abbor, sometimes Bishop of Sarum, a man of a meek spirit, observed when he treated of this Argument. The Ib. ubi supra pag. 199. Pontificall Chair, saith he, was so infected with that She-Pope and famous Whore John the eighth, that scarce any man ever since climbed up to that Seat of Pestilence, but he hath stunck of that, or some other Whore. I will not give you occasion to stop your noses, by ripping up the beastlinesse of the fat Monks, and wanton Priests, whom the people might well call Fathers, because they be∣got Hosiens de Orig. Mnach lib. 6 c. 3. so many Bastards;
Non male sunt Monachis graa indita nomina Patrum,
Cum numerent natos hic & ubique suos.
There hath been enough said, to give (and I know all impartiall men will take) satisfaction. The great Designe I had in my Ser∣mon, was to overthrow Babylon, and build up Sion. I touched upon the Heresie, Idolatry, Tyranny, of the Antichristian Facti∣on, that Protestants might be moe watchfull, and Popery more odious, It is my daily prayer, that God would unite the King and Parliament; and my great Request to your Honourable House was, that you would put forth your strength for the recovery of that Power, which the Antichristian Faction by force, or fraud hath wrested out of the Kings hand, that when it is regained, it may be setled upon the Kings Royall Person, and Posterity. For this end and purpose, I made an humble Motion to you, that you would seriously consider what Points we must stand upon, and what Errours we must Protest against, that so there might be a more speciall and punctuall Covenant of Peace drawn up, subscri∣bed, nay sealed, and King and Parliament might Victoriously joyn in an happy Union against the Antichristian Faction, this in England, which is intimately Confederate with that in Ire∣land, and equally Rebellious against the Kings Authority in His highest Court of Justice. In my discourse about the Covenant, I mentioned a Book, which directs us how to make a Christian Pa∣cification

by a thorow Reformation: The Authour of that Book did not set himself to dispute with Turks, or Jews, or grosse Papists, but with some treacherous Reconcilers, who under colour of Pacification, and some pretence of a moderate Reformation, would take away half Christ at least, and three quarters of our old Creed, as if they could make us amends, by giving us a New one, and we might Covenant to tear Christ and his Gospel to pieces for Peace sake. The Protestants talked much of the Cause of Christ (saith the same Authour) as long as they had . their swords by their sides, but when they had laid down their Arms, and were in danger of their lives, then they forgat the Cause of Christ, and began to think that zeal was rashnesse, and constancy stubbornnesse. But if we love Christ and our souls better then our lives, let us resolve never to embrace any conditions of Peace which mingle the Inventions of men with the truth of God: Let us maintain the Doctrine of free Justification, our Salvation depends upon it, and let us preserve the Worship of God entire and pure; for saith he, if we look onely to matters of Faith, and contend not for purity of Worship, we seem to have lesse care of Gods honour, then of our Salvation. Moreover, in matters of such moment, we must weigh and consider every phrase, word, title, lest by obscure, or slipper terms, our Adversaries evade, and leave us in the lurch. This is the substance of the first Cha∣pter. His second Chapter concerns Justification, and he would have us consider, that it is not enough to say, we are justified by Faith, but we must say, we are justified by Faith, because Christs righteousnesse is imputed, and our sins are not im∣puted to us that beleeve. We must not deny our Regeneration, and yet we must not confound it with our justification. We must obey God with all our heart, and all our strength, and yet we must not plead any other obedience for our Justification at the Tribu∣nall of God, save the obedience of Iesus Christ. Our good works shall be rewarded, that's encouragement enough; but the reward is grounded upon a free Pardon, and a gracious acceptation: if we were not first justified, our works would not be accepted, nor re∣warded; Because our persons are accepted in Christ, therefore our works are rewarded for Christ; that imperfect righteousnesse of works which we have, doth wholly depend upon the righteousnesse

of faith; now the imperfection of our righteousnesse is pardoned, the sincerity of our obedience is accepted, and yet we are not justified by our own sincere obedience, no not in part, but are onely (and whol∣ly, because perfectly) justified by the compleat and perfect obedience of Iesus Christ. We must then trust with our whole soul to the obedience of Iesus Christ, and not trust at all to any good quality infused into us, or good works wrought by us, for our Iustification: This is the pure Protestant Religion, commended to us in the se∣cond Chapter. In his third Chapter, he doth largely explain the of∣fice, and use of Faith, because Faith is the instrument of our ju∣stification, and we can never keep the unity of Faith in the bond of Peace, if we do not agree about the Nature, or the Offices, and use of Faith. I am sorry I must lay aside this Book, but if you will be pleased to take it up, I may conclude my Epistle; onely give me leave to renew my suit to you, concerning a Nationall Co∣venant, a Nationall Thanksgiving, a speedy and free Assem∣bly: If the Prelaticall men are displeased, that so many Bishops are passed by, let them remember what the Archbishop of Canter∣bury Schol G▪ Naz. d d vit Cer. Archb. Cant. Re∣lat. p. 27. saith, That there have been some corrupt crafty Bishops, who by plots and tricks have disturbed all Synods, and most Councels. Astutos & veteratoriae improbitatis Episcopos, qui aribus suis ac dolis omnia Concilia perturbabant. I shall conclude all with that Prayer which I used at the Fast. Lord, never was there any Kingdom that made an higher Appeal to thy Majesty then our poor Kingdom hath made: Both sides appeal to thee, not onely by a Warre, but a Protestation Lord, be pleased to decide the Con∣troversie, let that side prevail which doth most sincerely desire thy glory, the Kings good, the Kingdoms welfare by an happy Refor∣mation, and a Christian Peace: I am sure you will say Amen to the prayer of

