



Much and Worthy Honored,
TO prefix much before so little, would be like the making of a wide Gate to a narrow house; To say nothing, may seem (at least in us to whom the care of those is commit∣ted whom your Christian love hath received) to savour of some ingratitude; and we are sure is unsuitable to our purpose in publishing these short, and suddenly con∣ceived Notes, which by the desires of others are drawn from us; wherein our intent is not onely to remember, and present as exemplary, the piety of those that are dead, but to tender therewith a just acknowlegement of the charitie of those that are living, and your selves in particular who have therein the principal part; yet may we not forget divers others (though we name them not) by whose ready supplies and concurrence, this work of love is more comfortably and fully carried on. We bless God both for you and them, well knowing how sad a thing that is, which (with due respect to others of a different judgment) we conceive to be the case and curse [a] of Edom (Jer. 49. 10, 11. Vide Vatabli an∣not. in loc. Item Oeco∣lampad. in loc. Ex cla∣de Superstes non erit qui te sau∣cium et ad∣huc spiran∣tem soletur ac dicat, Animo secu∣ro mihi li∣beros tuos relinque, E∣quidem me illis altorem & paren∣tem consti∣tuo. Sic Tremel. & Jun. in locum: Et calvin. in eundem sen∣sum licet sub diversa notione.) unto whom the Lord denounceth so great, so grievous, so general a
 destruction and desolation, that there shall not be any left to say to the dying Fathers, and Husbands, Leave thy fatherless Children to my care; I will preserve them alive and nourish them, as Genes. 45. 5, 7, 11. and let thy Widowes trust in me, or, let them rest on me for taking care of them (as Prov. 31. 11.) This lies heavy on the tender hearts of expiring parents. Suitable hereunto are our Saviours words, who when he ment to say, He would not leave his Disciples comfortless, but send them a com∣forter, expresseth it thus, I will not leave you orphans (John. 14. 18.) importing, that to be left Orphans, and to be left comfortless, is all one. But God leaves not those that are his Orphans. The righteous are not for∣saken in themselves or their seed Psal. 37. 25. with God (by such Instruments as he thinks fit to raise) the fatherless find mercy Hos. 24. 3. & the Motherles, pity Psal. 27. 10. Isa. 49. 15.. What's a Father but his bowels? (Isa. 63. 16.) What's a Mother but her yernings? 1 King. 3. 16.) If God stir up those affecti∣ons to Orphans in surviving friends, that's all one as to Psal. 109. 12. Lament. 5. 3. form and create new Fathers and Mothers. These com∣passions, Divine providence might seeme to intend to draw forth in the present case, by taking away both the Parents at once; which, though a sad and unusual stroke in it self, yet is in this comfortable, that it hath made the grace of God in your selves and others the more conspicuous; for we are not willing to look upon your favourable support meerly as a Gift (that we may speak in the Apostles language, Phil. 4. 17.) but especially as a fruit, while the tree that gives shade and succour to others, springs and spreads forth it self from a root of grace in you: whence it is, that we shall the rather take unto our selves this boldnes, to beseech you to add unto a liberal and beneficial, the care of a religious and pious
 education. We would not in any thing we have spoken, or shall hereafter speak, intimate any such reflexions on the deceased Parents, as to cause any to conceive they left their children altogether unprovided; They were not such strangers unto Scripture as not to know that children ought not to lay up for their Parents, but Parents for their children 2 Cor. 12. 14.. God bestowed a competent por∣tion upon them, which they so improv'd, as that they have provided that which is considerable for the subsi∣stence and disposal of those that they have left behind them; Howsoever therefore we thankfully acknowledge any assistance in this kind also, yet the chief benefit will be to supply the parents absence in their education. The feeding of children is one thing, and a lesse thing; The breeding is another, and a greater; and the chief thing in breeding (which the godly Parents most desired, and which we most humbly beg at your hands who are left and stand obliged to pursue their good affections and intendment) is, to bring them up in the nurture and admo∣nition of the Lord Ephes. 6. 4., which endeavours shall be fol∣lowed (God assisting) with our most earnest prayers for their good success.
The righteous God, Heb. 6. 10. remember, in much mercie, Neh. 13. 22. all your labours of love which you have shewed to his Name in ministring to his Saints, and abundantly recompence them in all spiritual and outward blessings on you and yours, which shall still be the prayer of

