



Right Honourable,
GOd hath given us four Books to study: The Book of Scriptures; The Book of Conscience: In which, there are so many Errata's, that all Books were Writ∣ten to mend that one Book of Conscience. The Book of Creation, and therein the Treatise of Beasts, de∣serves our sad consideration: We may read such excel∣lent things in Beasts, and see such abhominable things in men: That I may safely say, All they who quarrell at the Lan∣guage of the Holy Ghost, in my Text, think too highly of themselves, and too cheaply of the Beasts. Wise men may go to School to Ants, Bees, Elephants, Serpents, &c. And most men to the Ox, and Asse, Isai. 1. 3, 4. What strange things have Beasts done by phantasie, and me∣mory helped with experience? Beleeve it, The providence, wit, doilitie, sagacitie, meeknesse, temperance, chastitie, diligence of Beasts, set forth to the life by Basil, Ambrose, Chrysostome, Augustine, Aristo∣tle, Pliny, Atheneus, Elian, Gesner, and the rest, may put too many Nobles to the blush. The last Book, is the Book of Providence, and we are compelled to study this Book so often in these sad times, that some  feared our Divines will turn Statesmen: But you know, my Lords, That he ho is to Preach a solemn Sermon, doth not Preach conscionably, unlesse he Preach seasonably: We must study how to apply spirituall Remedies to our sick State; and it is our duty to stir up you, to apply some civill Remedies: But for my part, I had rather be Preaching of Faith and Love, Christ and Heaven, for I am not cut out for Court-work; yet sre I should have more Courtship then Conscience, if I should crave your pardon, or make any sneaking Apologie, for pressing Scripture-notions, and phra or any necessary trueths, home upon your conscience. You did command me to Preach before you, and I was bold for to Preach to you: Some pas∣sages of my Sermon were sharp, and others bitter; but if Pills be well acu∣ted, they will purge the better: My roughnesse is like that of a file, to smooth and polish my Auditours; and if by that means, you be∣come more bright, and pure, I shall not repent that I was no smoother. Ministers, especially in times of war, are instead of Drums and Trumpets, we must not let you sleep in quiet; but some expressions of

mine, may seem too blunt, why, a Whotstone's blunt, yet serves to sharpen what was dull before, though made of excellent mettall. We are enjoyned by the Directory, to give every one his own portion, without neglecting the meanest, or sparing the greatest in their sins.  moved your Honour's almost in down right terms, to passe that Self-denying Ordinance, which bindes not onely Lords, but Commons also, to deny all pri∣vate interests, that you and they, may unanimously promote the Publike Ser∣vice: Your Honour doth not depend on Wax and Parchment; and it is clear, that rebus sic stantibus. You will gain more Honour by laying down your Commissions, then by keeping them. Your Lordships are pleased to approve, what was delivered, by a double Order; the first of Thanks, the second for Printing.
My Lords, I understand and obey, onely give me leave, to present some humble requests to you, which being granted, will encrease your Honour.
Be pleased to consult how to relieve distressed Ireland, and besieged Taunton: How to purge the Committtee's (in the Counties neer London) in Essex, Sussex, Surrey, Hampshire: It is proper to give them Physick now at Spring; you will thereby do your selves, those Counties, and the Citie right. Consider, how you may unstop the mouth of the other Fountain: We fight for Learning, as well as Pietie; How to prefer able Divines that have spent their spirits, and lost their voice, and are by that means disabled for any Preaching Service, but admirably qualified for Writing, if they had leasure and encouragement to put Pen to Paper: How to rebuke presumptuous Incendiaries, who occasion the bloodshed of many hundreds, plunder thousands, and yet hope when they have done all the mischief they can, to make their peace for 500 l. and get a Warrant from some Justice of Peace, to receive the Sacrament: Finally, How to relieve the Orphans and Widows, of them who have lost their lives; and maintain such as have lost their limbs, in this present Service.
Keep a precise watch, my Lords, over your own souls; They who have the greatest temptations, must allow themselves the least libertie. Prepare, and wait for the coming of our Saviour, Christ will wait upon▪ them, that wait for him: These are Honourable Services, and you can∣not desire a more Honourable reward, then to be Honoured, nay, served, by the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Luk. 12. 37. That you may never be weary of doing him service, who will never be weary of doing you good; is the Prayer of your Honours, most humble Servant

