



SIR,
WHen the mindes of men are blinded with Interest and Errour, or vitiated with Prejudice and Partiality, the wonted manner of opposing Truth is fortiter calumniari, being not able any longer to defend themselves (by subtile Sophistry, and cunning Evasions) from the convincing evidence and demonstra∣tion thereof. Hence it must be either stigmatized with terms of Opprobry and Contempt, or its right names ex∣posed, by a proverbial and malicious abuse, to the scorn and derision of the Ignorant and unstable Vulgar, most easily (by artificial pious Fraud) inspired with a fond Opinion; and through the enchantment of that Opinion, transported into a furious Zeal for or against such things as they never weighed in any balances of right Reason, or duely examined the goodness or evil of; and hence are carried this way, or that way, as designing men shall lead them, or as the wind of Popularity raises the swelling Surges of boundless Passions and Affections, verifying the Saying of the old Poet,

. Menand.
Opinion, more than Truth, impression makes
On th' Vulgar, and as more perswasive takes.

And truely, Sir, among good words, perverted from the right meaning, and abused to Reproach, none have been more than those two which the Author of this small Treatise hath dignified his Title-page with. A Catholick in our days is become as contemptible as a Puritan for∣merly, or a Phanatick now; whenas every good Chri∣stian is really a Catholick, and doth approve himself so in his Principles and Practice, is a Member of the Catholick Church, hopes to be saved by the common, i. e. the Ca∣tholick Faith; exerciseth Catholick Holiness in his life and conversation, holding a Catholick Communion with all visible Catholicks. And this is the Christian that is likeliest to contribute most to the healing the manifold heart and Church-divisions among us.
And as for Hierarchy, it's well known how our Age hath delivered it up to the infamous usage of scurrilous Tongues and Pens, notwithstanding its venerable and ne∣ver-enough to be admired significancy, that the very na∣ming it calls for Reverence and Devotion; yea, its very letters and syllables will be a Monument of Renown, mau∣gre all the designes of ill-minded men, to abandon the Churches glory, and to convert all Ecelesiastical Decency and Order into a confused Chaos of phantastical Imagina∣tions, or a miscelany of private Humours and Interests. And do men know what Hierarchy is, that speak so ir∣reverently of it? is it not a Sacred Jurisdiction? and where is it seated and exercised? is it not in the Church and Conscience, seats of its dominion so sacred, that no Secular Power can aspire unto, without the highest usur∣pation? And there is no true Church and sound Consci∣ence, in which the Hierarchy doth not exert its power, and is not as freely submitted unto with all due homage and obedience. And whatever some licentious Protestants may pretend to, and raise so much dust of contention a∣bout,
or of whatever Churches, of unquoth names and worse natures, they profess themselves Members; if ever they intend to be saved, they must (notwithstanding all their religious Huffs) at last be found Members of the Catholick Church, and be subjected to the Catholick Hierarchy thereof: And till this professed subjection be∣come more universal among Christians, Religion will still be splitting on the Rocks of Faction, Schism, and Phana∣ticism.
Sir, you will finde the principal designe of those few sheets submitted to your judgment, is to recommend this Panacaea, or Catholick Remedy, for the sound healing of of our morbid Church, which seems to labour under some Disease not unlike the Microcosmick Scorbet, being (ac∣cording to the account of late Physicians) a complication of all Distempers, or transforming it self Symptomatically into the shapes of all diseases of the Body natural. With∣out doubt, our Remedy being prepared, and applied S. Artem Spiritualem, may contribute towards the recovery of our thrice-honoured, but languishing Mother, more than all the essential or golden purging Spirit of Cochlear in London can do to the restoring of one Scorbutick body: neither is it prepared in every Elaboratory. He saith there is one at Westminster can do more towards it than any in England besides. He tells me also of one admirable Vertue, that it doth wonderfully pacifie the disquieted Archeus of a Body Politick; and if it be so, I will assure you it's to be preferred beyond all compare: for the plain truth of it is, the old Remedies of purging and bleeding do but scurvily agree with it, and it's very apt to Relapses after those rugged Medicines, as we finde by sore experience.
Sir, my Friend hath taken some pains, out of love to his Country, to clear up the nature, and demonstrate the necessity of a Catholick Hierarchy; though you must
not expect to finde that word often mentioned, the Vulgar being so apt to start at it as a hard & dangerous word, pre∣gnant with a Pope. Sir, I had not obtained leave of my Friend to present these Papers to your view, but upon con∣dition that I would apologize on his behalf, for the plain∣ness of his Stile, saying, that he is naturally a stranger to the smooth dresses or high strains of Rhetorick; & indeed it's my judgment that the plain truth, especially when it acts polemically, requires it not, but is usually delighted in a garb most like it self; and thereby is rendered most acceptable to every good man and solid judgment. He likewise hum∣bly desires, that you will deliberately read, and not sud∣denly censure any thing as dissonant to truth, till you have duely weighed it in it self, as in its dependencies and suppositions on which it is built.
Sir, to conclude, I humbly crave pardon for the trouble I have given you, though I am fully satisfied the subject will not be unpleasant to you, whom I know to be an Ec∣clesiastical Adeptus, In respect of your Catholick spirit, superlative love to the Church, and singular devotion to∣wards the Hierarchy. That you may long live, and continue in the same minde and practice, and many follow your worthy Example, is the devout Prayer of,
SIR,

