



My Lord,
NOT only the Per∣sons of Princes, but the greatest Monuments of their Glory, have pe∣rished, excepting their good Works, and wise
Sayings, which Fame hath handed to Posterity from one Age to ano∣ther.
Thus are come to light the Papers of Charles the V. late Duke of Lorrain, General of the Emperor's Forces Writ by him. I, thought it Injustice to confine them amongst my Papers, therefore have ad∣ventured to give his Thoughts an English Dress, they were never Printed till now. This Country, where he was a Stranger, is the first Place in which they see light; where having need of a
Noble Protector, I took the Liberty to presnt your Lordship with the Translation in Manuscript, and thereby had recourse to your Lordship's Fa∣vour, that this Illustri∣ous Stranger's Spare-hours might find that shelter and Countenance, which his great Character calls for.
This Prince was so ac∣tive, that he could never find leisure to be idle, even in his Retirements from Affairs he would have some Subject to imploy himself. It is observable that the noblest Works of
the Creation are most Ac∣tive: Activity was so in∣nate to him, that the Sun might as well stand still, or the Sea cease from its Motion, as this Prince desist from giving himself Imployment.
You will find, my Lord, that Variety that may di∣vert; they being Miscella∣nies that give more de∣light, than a continued Se∣ries of Matter. These will be acceptable to ma∣ny, especially to such who to this day, make his Ac∣tions the Subject of their Conversations.

His Notions and Max∣ims carry Worth in them, so may deserve your Lord∣ship's Protection, they need no Encomiums. And though some may not have the like Apprehen∣sions of this Prince's Works, yet it may suf∣fice, that he was a Soul∣dier, and that they dropt from the Pen of a Prince.
The Scotch History tells us, That one of their Kings, while confined, did scratch with his Nails the History of our Savi∣our's Passion on the Wall; which rough Draught be∣ing done by Princely
Hands, was more preferra∣ble, than what might have been done of that kind by the most celebrated Ma∣sters.
He was not only valued for his Illustrious Birth, as being of the best Bloud of Christendom, but reve∣renced for his great Qua∣lities, for which his Person was had in so great Esteem, and intitled to double Ho∣nour; for he was not only born a Prince, but was also an experienced Cap∣tain. Such was his Con∣duct and Perfections, that each were so many Im∣mortalizers of his Fame;
and, with the old Hero's, he hath scattered his Tro∣phies in the Fields of Vic∣tory, of whom Fame hath mustered Catalogues, and with them he hath filled the World with Applause; so that the Chronicles are so many standing Records to his and their Glory: For the Exploits of War have something of more splen∣dour in them, than those of Peace.
These retired Thoughts, which his Memory hath regist'red from Observati∣on and Practice, are given to the Publick, as I found them, to change their
Form, would have been presumptuous. The Cou∣rage, Civility and Hu∣manity, that appeared in the course of his Life, dis∣cover themselves here in this Treatise. In his own Country, they need no Protection; his Fame be∣ing so celebrated, though his Conceptions are Stran∣gers there. As his Person fled for refuge to Germany, so his Works do now to your Lordship for Sanctu∣ary from the ill Usage of a Censorious and inhospi∣table World; though his Actions are so many Mo∣numents of his Fame, yet
they need your noble Protection; which I am the more incouraged to supplicate, in that you will find many Things not unknown to your early Experience. And though Things have daily impro∣ved since his Time, yet here are never dying Ob∣servations, that will be e∣ver of Use in all Ages.

My Lord.
You are one of those from whom this Age ex∣pects great Things; for you did early promise so much, which makes that, the Eyes of all are upon you, who with me wish,
that Fortune may always smile upon you: That as you have advanced in the Temple of Honour, so you may in Favour with God and our great King, to the Good of the Nation, the Honour of your An∣cient and Illustrious Fa∣mily, and the great Joy of,
My Lord, 

