



SIRS,
THis discourse which will seem Pa∣radoxicall both to the learned and unlearned, doth not promise it self to be so perswasive to the rea∣ders, as to draw them all to side with the Author in his opinion. Himself had no such pretence; which caused him, after he had once put it to the press, to call it in again. I had al∣so
suppressed it, had not some persons of worth desired to see it, which hath caused mee to publish it. Yet the Reader may find herein, what were the thoughts and intentions; of one of the greatest Politicians of our age. Those who wonder, why Socrates, Platoe's, and Aristotles Schooles, yeeld no more Epa∣minonda's, Xenophons, nor Alexanders, shall here find satisfaction. These great men made Sci∣ences, as it were, naturall to them, and caused them to grow up with them, giving them the Principles thereof in their infancy, Whereas now, the flower of mans youth is imployed in learning of the Precepts of obsolet Lan∣guages; and after he hath gotten this vocall knowledge, when he comes to any reall, he meets with some unskillfull and shufling teachers, who either through ignorance, or out of meer malice, obscure Arts and Scien∣ces, under rude and improper termes, cloa∣thing them, as I may say, with raggs and tat∣ters. Blame me not then, gentlemen, if I pre∣sent you this treatise: there being none, or but very few extant upon such a Subject. Your affections to learning, and knowledge of it hath perswaded me, that such births as these ought to have approbation, or disacceptance from such as you are. I know there are many things in it, at which weak understandings may stumble. They will say, that the Au∣thor seeks with unexampled boldness, to un∣dervalue ancient Languages, to gain more tye and auctority to his own native tongue. But those who shall consider, that all Nati∣ons
may apply that which is here particular∣ly spoken of the French, aswell to their own mother tongue, will soone acquit him of that imputation. You must moreover observe that he doth not absolutely disswade any from the study of those he calls Obsolet Langua∣ges, but onely restraines it within the bounds of a publick utility: He approves of learning of those Languages, so we do it as the Greeks did the Aegiptiack, & the Arabians the Greek, namely to appropriate to their own Lan∣guage such Sciences as were first conceived and written in the other. It were absurd to say, that we cannot in our Languages doe the like; For reason speaks all Languages, and through the necessity of expressing ones self, all Nations (were they never so barbarous) did, & do dayly find out termes & words suf∣ficient to express their thoughts. Is mans un∣derstanding become so confined, and barren, that it cannot more dress and trimm up Sci∣ences after its own fashion? No indeed, it is as vigorous now as it was in former ages, but more servile. It is become like those de∣generous and slowthfull painters, who dare not adventure to see forth any thing of their own invention; But will rather bee stiled poor coppiers of others draughts, then by some Masterpecce of their owne, shew that they understand the secret and order of de∣signing. And are content to bestow the ut∣termost of their art, and spend their times in refreshing some old images, and renewing with some quaint colours, the pourtraiture
of a Judith and Holofernes. It is no wonder therefore, if our modern Languages be so poor, seeing we bestow all the care we should have of them, upon the beautifying and refining of the antient ones, whose very Antiquity o∣therwise is a manifest proof of their defect and barrennesse. For as those who spake them, had seen fewer things then we, so they needed fewer words to express them: and living in the first ages of the world, they could not frame names for such things as have been dis∣covered but of late dayes. So that we may there find the mistake of those Criticks, who through a curious stupidity, will forsake Pis∣tolets of weight for light Medalls. As for those who imagine, that treating of Sciences in vulgar tongues, will derogate from their Majesty, I beleive they have as little ground for it, as those who should conceive that the value of Gold is diminished by those who digg it out of the entralls of the earth, to refine it, and make it serve for commerce. Finally Gentlemen, those who shall know how to distinguish the Authors reasons, from the praises which he attributes to the person to whom he speaks; that is to say, can discern the matter from the accidents, the substance from the colours, and the words of truth from those of insinuation, shal find that it would be very advantagious for every country, to have such Sciences, as concerne Policy, taught in their mother tongue. And let such as are of a contrary opinion, look upon this Treatise, as a triall of wit, and read it onely to pass the
time. My onely desire is, to shew you that my duty and affection caused me to dedicate it to you all joyntly; desiring not to be known by any other name, then of

