



Beloved,
AS Jehovah hath chosen you to be his holy, spe∣cial and peculiar Peo∣ple above all the people that are upon the face of the Earth,Deut. 7.6. & 14.2. Exod. 19.5. Isa. 56. Rom. 10.12. so he hath given unto you signs & Sacraments, amongst which the Sabbath is a sign be∣tween him and you, to testifie, That he is Jehovah which sanctifieth you;Exod. 31.13, 17. Therefore ye are commanded to Remember




 the Sabbath-day to keep it ho∣ly.Ex. 20.8.
From the Creation of the world, God did appoint one day of seven to be a Sabbath, not onely because he had rested on the seventh day from all his Workes which he had crea∣ted and made;Deut. 31.17. Gen. 2.2. But that both man & beast might have rest and resreshment also,Deut. 5.14. which thing remaineth sub∣stantially unto this day, as sure as God is merciful who hath not left it to the wills of men; but hath established this Liberty, upon the grounds of certainty.
In old time God did institute the seventh day for aEx. 20.0. See r. Ans∣orth's ransla∣ion. Sab∣bath, but there was not that
 desirable perfection in it for acception as was upon the first day of the wick the morrow af∣ter the Jews Sabbath; which was higher, and more honour∣able because of the Wave∣sheaf,Lev. 23.10.11.—1 and first fruitsver 15 —21 then presented before the LORD, those lively Types of Jesus Christ, who is the first fruits of them that sleep,1 Co 15.20.23. who rose from the dead on the morrow after the Sabbath; As there∣fore the Jews were to observe it as a Sabboth, and a holy con∣vocation by solemn Proclama∣ion it was to be unto them, And they were to do no servile work thereinLev. 23.21.: So must the Christians now in the dayes of Christ our LordPsa. 110.31, who ho∣noured
 this day by his pre∣sence, in the midst of his Dis∣ciples after his Resurection, up∣on the first day of the Week,Joh. 20 19. and eight days after thater. 26. e∣ven upon the second first dayLev. 23.15.16. he came again & gave them more fuller manifestations, and confirmations of his Re∣surrection, breathing on them that they might receive the Ho∣ly-Ghost, and after his Ascensi∣on into Heaven, sent down the Holy-Ghost upon his Disciples on the fiftieth day, which was the morrow after the Jews Sab∣bathActs 2.1., And on the Lords day also, he ravished with his spi∣rit, that Disciple John, whom he so dearly loved before his death; And then and there
 in the Isle of Pathmos, he im, parted that great Revelation which is called The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which he had received from the bosome of the FatherRev. 1.1, 10.. This first day of the week, is the day of Christs powerPsalm 110.2., on which day the di∣sciples met together to break bread, and to practise the o∣ther Ordinances of God, for the setting forth of Jesus Christ, who holdeth his Mini∣sters in his right hand, and walketh in the midst of his ChurchesActs 20.7. 1 Cor. 16.2. Rev. 1.12, 13, — 20. & 2.1. & 7.16.. This is the day of our holy solemnity to be kept in Sion, the City of the Saints solemnities, upon which day our Lord Christ was made per∣fect,Luke 13.32. Heb. 5.9. an High Priest for ever,




 not after the Law of a carna commandement, but after the power of an endless life& 7.16.; then the stone which the Builders refused became the head of the Corner; Ps. 118. Then the right hand of Jehovah was exalted and did valiantly; Then Christ said, I shall not dye but live and declare the works of Jeho∣vahPs. 118.18.19.; For although for a little while as precious seed he lay in the heart of the earth, yet through the quick∣ning Spirit of God, which came upon him as the dew of Heaven he arose, and sang, and Jehovah was then his strength and song, and also be∣came his Salvationv. 14..
This day is a joyful & good
 day; This Sabbath is a delight, holy of Jehovah, honourableIsa. 58.13. Ps. 118.22. it is the day of his marvelous do∣ings; This is the day which Jehovah hath madever. 24., our God hath entred into Cove∣nant with us this day,Isa. 54 9, 10. to give us the sure mercies of DavidActs 13.34.;
This is the wedding-day of Jesus Christ with his beloved spouseIsa. 54.5., it is his Coronation-day the day of his espousals, and the day of the gladnes of his heartCant. 2.11. O come then and let us be glad and rejoyce in it with him, and let the voyce of joy and rejoycing be heard in the Tabernacles of the righteous.
Is not this the great Mar∣ket day of our souls, wherein there is Proclamation made,




 Ho every one that thirsteth, come unto the waters of life? And he saith moreover, Hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight it self in fatness, incline your ear, come unto me, hear and your souls shall live; And I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure Mer∣cies of DavidIsa. 55.1, — 3.. And the spi∣rit and the Bride say come, and he that heareth saith come, and let him that is a thirst come; And whosoever will, let him take of the Well of the water of life freelyRev. 22.17.. O how sweet are the Christal streams of the Christian Brooks, which pro∣ceed from the Throne of God
 and of the Lamb! And how pleasant and pretious is the Tree of Life on either side the River of Righteousness, the meat where of is good for food, and the leaves thereof for Medicine!
Blessed are those that keep his Commandments, that they may have right to the Tree of life, and enter in through the Gates into the Holy City.
Remember therefore the Sabbath day to keep it holy, as the Lord hath Commanded, particularly to consider the time of celebration thereof, which is from even to even.
Now that you may not forget duly to prepare your selves against the night of our
 holy solemnity, I have publish∣ed this following Epistle, to prove that the Evening and the Morning is the first day from the Creation, and that the Sabbath or Lords day, is to be kept (not from Morning to Morning, nor from Mid∣night to Midnight but) from Even to Even.
Thus saith Jehovah, If you can break my Covenant of the day, & my Covnant of the night, & that there should not be day and night in their season; then may also my Covenant be bro∣ken with David my servant, that he should not have a Son to Reign upon his Throne, and with the Levitos the Priests my Ministers.Jer. 33.20.21.
