



WHen I received Your Order, I was not in
case to obey it, being scarse able to write
or read; We should learn by every fit of sick∣nesse
the greatnesse of Gods Majesty and our
frailtie. We live in sickly times, and You are
collecting many wholsome and Medicinable in∣gredients,
onely take heed that you do not mi∣stake
one Herbe for another, it is easily done, and
whilest You are but making Essayes it may be easily
rectified: Be pleased to consider that the Antidote
must be made according to the Dispensatory the pre∣scription
of the great Physician of Souls in his saving
Gospel, that the blessing of Christ may be upon it,
and it may prove a soveraign Antidote for the pre∣venting
as well as removing of Church-offences. Je∣sus
Christ hath not entrusted any State to make new Insti∣tutions,
or create new offices in his Church. There are
several forms of Civill government in severall Chri∣stian
States, but there should be the same Church-offices,
and for substance the same Church-govern∣ment
in every Christian State, though that govern∣ment
cannot be so peaceably exercised in some places
as in other; There is so much equity and prudence

in Evangelical rules and Institutions, that they ought
to be observed in all Christian States and Common-weals
thoroughout the world: Those orders which
Christ hath sent us by his Apostles must be obeyed, there
can be no exception against them, there must be no
Prohibition of them;Rom. 16. v. 17, 18. This is a Rule of Christ, that
they who walk inordinately, and cause divisions contrary
to the doctrine of the Gospel,2 Thes. 3. 14, 15. must not be admitted into so∣ciety
with the Saints.1 Cor. 5. 11. I need not insist upon other
rules.1 Tim. 3. 4, 5. Our Saviour did injoyn his Apostles to teach
Christians to observe all things he commanded, Matth.
28. 20. Now St. Paul did not onely teach Timoty
to ordain Elders in every City, Tit. 1. 5. but Paul and
Barnabas ordained Elders in every Church. Act. 14.
23. And when St. Paul spoke of his departing out of
the world, and seeing their faces no more to whom he
had preached, he recommended the oversight or go∣vernment
of the Church to Elders, assuring them
that the holy Ghost had made them overseers over the
Church. Act. 20. 1, 25, 28, 29. and therefore it is
easie to conclude, that the Elders were, Jure Divino,
by the will and appointment of Jesus Christ, to suc∣ceed
the Apostles in the ordinary government of the
Church, and Christ promised to be with the Apostles,
and their successours, not for two or three hundred yeers
onely, till some Magistrates did turn Christians, but
even to the end of the world: and the holy Ghost seals
up the promise with Amen, Matth. 28. 20. If then
there be ten thousand Churches in England, there should
be ten thousand Elderships; but the government by
these Elders is not Arbitrary, all the Censures which
they passe must be in some sort Evangelicall, because
agreeable to the Word of Christ; for the Elders are

not to govern in their own name, or in the name of the
Magistrate, no nor in the name of the people, but in the
name of Jesus Christ, from whom they do immediately
receive their power and authority, and therefore are to
receive their orders and directions from the Gospel of
Christ. The Christian Magistrate ought to protect the
Elders, that they may peaceably exercise that Church-power
which is committed to them by Jesus Christ, for
the Christian Magistrate doth owe a spirituall subjection to
all the ordinances of Jesus Christ. Erastus himself confes∣ses,
that the Magistrate in ordering of sacred things must not
depart one hairs breadth from the Word of God. p. 161. &
162. li. 3. Confirm. Thes. It will be very dangerous for a
Magistrate to do any thing of his own head about Church
affairs, and it will be as dangerous for Ministers to com∣plement
in this weighty point; all the power that a Magi∣strate
hath setled upon him in Rom. 13. is setled on him
as he is a Minister of God, and therefore they who teach
Magistrates to despise the Authority of Ministers, be∣cause
they are but Ministers of God, teach the Magistrates
to despise their own authority. Officers of Christs insti∣tuting,
and powers of Gods ordaining, must agree toge∣ther,
and uphold one another, or else both will be vilified:
Ministers must not usurp a civil power, nor Magistrates
lay claim to any Spiritual power properly so called: if a
man go about to thrust two swords into one scabberd, let
him take heed he doth not split the scabberd, and cut his
fingers. Mr. Robinson and those of his mind say, that if the
Magistrate be a Church-officer, he must be called to his
office, and may be deposed from it by the Church, and
and if the Magistrate be a ruling Elder, he is inferior to
teaching Elders, and deserves lesse honour, according to
that order, 1 Tim. 5. 17. In his Iustificat. of Separat. p. 216.

if the Magistrate (say others) chalenge a Church-power,
and deny himself to be a Church-officer, then we have a
good Argument for Popular government, because there is
a Churchpower in some that are not Church officers;
and none can be entitled to Church-power, but by a
Church office, or by Church-membership; and if by the
latter, then say they, Every member hath as much power as
the Magistrate; who knows not what the Anabaptists say
upon this point; The Church of Scotland hath declared
their judgement; and they who plead for a Congregati∣onall
government have expressed themselves after this
manner: The Governors of the Church have not their
power from the members of the Church, but from
Christ, they are invested with the power of Iesus Christ, they
exercise his power, and do act in his name, and not in the
name of the Church, saith Mr. Burroughs in his ren. p.
50. And for my part, I shall readily grant that these Offi∣cers
ought to transact all things which concern the con∣sciences
of the people in such a convincing way as may
best tend to Common edification and satisfaction. Church
ordinances are to be dispensed by the Church, that is, by the
Elders with consent of the people, saith Mr. Rutherford, in
his late book p. 398. We should quickly think of some
expedients for an happy agreement, if You would be
pleased to free us from the much feared Commissioners.
Church power must needs be acknowledged to
have the proper notion and character of Authority in
the Elders, to which the multitude ought by a com∣mand
from Christ to be subject and obedient, as to an ordi∣nance
to guide them in their consent, and therfore in the
sentence of the Elders the ultimate for mall ministeriall
act of binding or loosing should consist. Christ hath
placed a Rule and Authority in these officers over the est

of the congregation, not directing only, but binding. (See
the Epistle to Mr. ottons book of the Keyes) When
these officers gathered in Christs name do passe a right
judgement upon hereticall congregations, or persons
declaring them to be such as have no communion with
any of the Churches of Christ, those hereticall persons or
Churches are put out of the kingdom of Christ, and consequent∣ly
put under the power of Satan: Heart divisions, p. 44.
The Rule urged by many is this, Nemini fit injuria cui
praeponitur Christus, we prefer the Authority of Christ
above all authoritie of men, or societies of men: King,
Parliament, & people must subject themselves to Iesus Christ.
None must plead priviledge to live scandalously, though
Peers of the Realm. The Tigurine Divines are account∣ed
most favourable or rather remisse in this point; but
Guather in his Epistle to Ionvill, saith, Excommunicatio
legibus nostris praecipitur quâ a tribuum Societate, & publi∣corum
pascuorum usu fructu excluduntur qui contemptis ad∣monitionibus
tam publicis quam privatis aliter vivunt quam
homines deceat Christianos: and Bullinger in his Epistle to
Mr. Dathen speaks for them all, and saith, That if Noble
men amongst them were taken in the act of uncleannesse, they
were publickly degraded. Solemus maechos, , depre∣hensos
honore & trabeâ exutos publicè dedcorare; And
Erastus saith, that they who do pertinaciously violate
Gods commands, may be put to death. Confirmat Thes.
p. 337. You see that Erastus did not encourage pertina∣cious
offenders. They that desire such a monstrous kind of li∣berty,
as to live as they list, and be accountable to none what∣soever
they hold or do, are not onely unworthy of Christian, but
Humane society, saith Mr. Burroughes, Heart-divisions, p.
166. & 177. You see what a generall severity is expres∣sed
by all, that desire any true Reformation, though they

be men of different perswasions. In the judgement of the
Assembly, None are fit to be admitted to the Sacrament, who
do usually neglect to pray in and with their families, or to in∣struct
them in those principles of Religion, the ignorance of
which, is sufficient cause to debar any one from the Sacrament.
Be pleased then to take these things into your most re∣tired
thoughts, and doubt not but the godly Ministers
and people of this Kingdom will stick close to you for
promoting of a thorough-reformation; onely let me in∣treat
you, that when bloody Delinquents come to com∣pound
3. things may be excepted. 1. That their com∣position
may not authorise them to communicate at the
Lords Table with those friends of yours, whose fathers,
brothers, &c they have slain with wicked hands, & have
not as yet given any publick testimony of their repen∣tance.
2. That they may not deprive any Parish of a
powerfull Ministry, by denying sufficient maintenance to
the Minister, that they may raise their Fine, or a good
part of it out of the Impropriations, which come into
their hand upon their composition. 3. That they may
not make themselves whole, by oppressing and racking
those poore Tenants of theirs, or their widows, or or∣phans
who have been faithfull to You, and spent their
estates, or lost their lives in your Service, Help the honest
Tenants to an easie composition with their Malignant
Landlords. If I did not Honour You, I would not be thus
plain with You, I leave it to your wisdom to draw con∣clusions
from all, for the putting of your own Order in
execution, for suspending all that are scandalous sinners from
the Sacrament, though the sins which they be guilty of be not
yet enumerated; let all be fairly interpreted, as it is hum∣bly
presented, by him who desires Your perfection.

