



THe intent of this Dedication, is not to tell the World how hopefull and towardly a Child you are, but partly for mine own sake, to testifie my sense of those many kindnesses I have received from your Parents; which I cannot see any possibility I should ever require, and the least I can do is to acknowledg. Low Parents do accept from a poor hand a small kindness that is shewed to
 their Children: Even God himself our Heavenly Father, because our good∣ness extends not to him, accepts of what we do to his Children; and be∣cause my thankfulness cannot ascend, I was willing that it should descend, ever judging it a true principle, If I cannot do the good I would, to do what good I can.
But for your sakes also do I Dedicate this small Book to you:
1. To lay an obligation upon you to answer the means you enjoy in a good education, that the prayers, pains and cost your Parents are at with you may not be lost.
2. That you might have a Daily Mo∣nitor of your Duty to God and Man. You are not sure to have Father or Mo∣ther alwayes with you, or Ministers, but these things if they sink into your heart, will abide with you to comfort and counsel you. I do therefore exhort you to a frequent and serious rding of them, with prayer unto God, that
 they may be blessed to you; and if no other should gain by them, yet if you do, I shall not altogether repent my pains: But if others should gain by them, and you not, you and I both shall have cause of grief and shame. Par∣don my plainness with you; I speak not this as distrusting the Grace of God in you, (which I pray may grow up with you more and more, and abound in you:) but as one I love in the Lord, to warn you, and admonish you, that you may not begin in the spirit, and end in the flesh. Some of these things you have heard discoursed to you, and some of them in publick, and there are some that I have collected from others, which owe nothing to me but the meer order and form of them, of which I have given an account by prefixing the two first letters of their names. I know you have many other usefull, and spiritual Books by you; let not this take you off from them, nor them, or this, make you neglect the reading of
 the Scriptures, and the orderly reading of them, according to an example you have daily before your eyes: For all o∣ther Books are written to give light to the Scripture, and to stir us up to the practise of those duties there laid down. I shall trouble you no further now, but commend you and this Treatise to the blessing of the Almighty; And Rest

