



SIRS,
I Have a few words to speake to you, and they are to tell you, that I here present to your view this Treatise fol∣lowing, viz. concerning Preaching without Ordination, and my desire is,Esa. 8.20. 1 Thes. 4▪ 21. that you would reade and seriously consi∣der it, trying all things therein, by the word of God, and if in the tryall it shall be found to corrispond to truth, then quench not the spirit, nor dispise the preaching therein con∣tended for.
But let me intreate you to take the Councel of Gamaliel, which he spake to another Assembly,Acts 5.34.35.38. ye men of Israel take heede to your selves what you intend to do, as touching these men, so I say to you, take heede to your selves what ye intend as touching the suppressing of preaching the Gos∣pel by the breathing of the Spirit of God in the hearts of his people (though not ordained by your humane Ordination.) Refrayne least you be found fighters against God; for if this Councel and worke be of God (as by the Scriptures to mee it appeares to be of his right hands planting) then it shall stand and prosper.
It is very strange that you who would be counted the onely advancers and inlargers of the Kingdome of Christ should rise up in Armes against him, and with might and
 maine labour to suppresse the power that he hath ordine to conquer and bring under all Nations, and Kingdomes, to his subjection, the preaching and declaring the Lord Jesus Christ in the spirit by the word of truth, whereon God in Christ rides forth gloriously, conquering and to conquer, bringing in all thoughts and hearts to subject unto him.
Did you but see the miserable desolations that the Divell hath made in most parts of this Kingdom upon poore soules and all for want of the powerfull preaching of the Lord Je∣sus Christ, so that I may say as the Prophet saith, my people perish, and are destroyed for want of knowledge, so that thick darknesse covereth the whole face of this Kingdome,Psa. 11.12. and the truth of God in the professors and practisers are the onely Butt, that wicked men ruled by the Prince of darknesse,Hosea 4.6. bend their bowes and make ready their arrowes upon the string that they may privily shoote at the upright in heart.
You cannot be ignorant, but this is the mayne designe of the Divell to hinder the propagation of the Gospel by preaching, because he knowes by the power thereof, Christs Kingdome is advanced and inlarged, and I am very confi∣dent that the maine reason that hath impeded and obstru∣cted the Parliaments just proceedings, and that the people in many parts of this Kingdome are so ill-affected, is be∣cause they have not had the Lord Jesus Christ held forth to them in the preaching of the Gospel, for I have observed in my travills, since God called me into this Army, that in many of the Counties of England, there is not one Parish of tenn that hath one of your ordained men that is able to preach Christ, these things generally I have taken notice of, that where any of them are, they are either Drunk∣ards, uncleane persons, dumb Idoles, or at the best cruel Malignants that have ever been opposite to the glory of God, the Parliaments just proceedings, so that the Pro∣verbe
 in the Prophet is made true, like Priest, like people
Therefore these things considered, I hope you will all of you to the utmost of your powers indeavour that Christ may be preached in every part and corner of this King∣dome,Esa. 11 that it may be full of the knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as the waters cover the Seas.
What if some which are called Sectaries, and that of the Ar∣my have preached Christ out of envy and contention, and not sincerely; howsoever I know, and many thousand soules besides me can testifie that Christ hath been preached,Phil. 1.15, 16, 17. yea, and that effectually and powerfully to the prayse and glory of God, and the comfort of many hearts, and I bid defiance to the Divell and all his blackmouthed Instru∣ments to produce that ever those that they call Sectaries, in preaching of the Lord Jesus Christ, did by that open a gap to prophanesse, or disaffect the people from their loyall o∣bedience to the Parliament, or their proceedings; but have gained them to yeeld subjection in bringing forth the peaceable fruits of godlinesse, and righteousnesse towards God and men; therefore my thinks you and all people should rejoyce, that Christ is preached, and God made knowne.
Therefore refraine ye from that envious spirit, in causing the Magestrate to forbid us knowing that your selves are men of like passions with us, though you be the people and wisdome shall die with you,Iob. 12.2.3. 1 Cor 14.36. Iohn 3.8. but there are those that have understanding as well as you and are not inferiour to you, yea who knoweth not such things as these, the word of God came not from you, neither came it to you onely, but as well to the rest of the Saints, besides you, seeing the wind bloweth where it listeth, hould not back, neither hinder the blowings or breathings of it least God come and fight against you with the Sword of his
 mouth,Revel. 2.16. Heb. 6.9. and slay you before him, because you will not let him reigne over you nor his people; but I hope better things of you and things that accompany (the propogation, and setting forth the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, by preaching as the way of) Salvation, so I rest.

From my Quarters at Kingston upon Theames August the 20. 1647
