



Precious hearts,
I Have a sad theam to present you with, it is of sin, and the sad effects it hath produced in the world, especially on man, and in particular on my self, so that I may say in the words of the Prophet, Lam. 5.16. The Crown is faln from my head, wo un∣to me that I have sinned: for no∣thing but mischief hath attended me; yea destruction and ruine in all things that can be thought of here below: and were it not but that God who I have so offended had appeared to me indeed, as the Apostle saith, Eph. 2.4 Rich in mercy and in great love, infinite and beyond all expression, I had for ever perished, and been punished with ever∣lasting destruction from the presence of the Lord and the glory of his power, Thess. 1.5. for I deserved no less, so that truly I have experienced that good saying of the Apostle, That where sin hath a∣bounded, grace hath much more (yea exceeding much more) a∣bounded, Rom. 5.20. Oh rich grace, rich grace, and great mercies, and loving kindness, they are past finding out, they cannot be fathom∣ed, they are high, they are deep, they are long, and they are broad, so that I cannot but stand and admire, what manner of love it is that he hath bestowed on me, 1 Joh. 2.1.
I have therefore sent to you these few lines, that you may take heed and beware of sin, for it is a most deceitful, yea a most deadly cruel enemy, for it maketh such spoile on a man where it gets footing, that if mercy, yea rich mercy and love from God do not step in to help, it destroyeth soul and body, good name, relations, and all that is neer and dear: therefore take heed and beware of sin, and take that good counsel of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 16.13. Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Eph. 6.10. for if you do not, sin will break in upon you, and make grievous spoile and havocke.

For want of keeping this guard, it hath broken in on me, like an inundation of water, and yet I thought once my mountain was so set, and so strongly founded, that it was not possible it could be moved, Psal. 30.7. when I was in my Tranquility, and the candle of the Lord shone upon my head, I said I would dye in my nest, and multiply dayes as the sand, I would spread my root by the waters, I should flourish, Job 29.3, 18, 19, 20. all went well, I had attained to some good progress in the knowledge of God, and the practice of the things of God, and I was now safe, and my heart spoke a great deal of peace, but behold when I thus slept, the ene∣my sin came and stole in upon me, and I will tell you how.
1. First I grew a little cold and careless in the matters of God, in those cold, mad, and distempered yeers 1647. and 1648. and then sin took occasion, and by my base heart deceived me, presently runs and layeth hold on me, tempteth me, and draweth me away, Jon. 1.14, 15, compare Rom. 7.11. and so hath slaine, wounded, and destroyed me.
2. After that I was thus inticed, my heart being by sin deceived, then I became it's slave to serve it; and this will be the case of every one that sin layeth hold of. Now I must provide to lay alwayes for the carrying of it close and secret; and here cometh vows, oaths, wishes, execrations, and all to save, cover, and hide this ugly com∣panion sin.
3. Then sin will seem very fair, and smile on you, flatter your heart, and if he cometh once to be touched, to be discovered, and feareth he shall be dislodged, he now will come with the help of his first-born the divel, and belay you on every side. First, on the right hand, and on the left, under pretence of good towards God, towards his wayes, to thy self and relations. For so have I found it, that when I had some yeers since abandoned all the thoughts of any such thing; and in July 1650. had earnestly besought the Lord for his favour and peace for my former evils, and that he would now pardon and pass by my sin, and hide his face from my sin; the which he did, and spoke much peace to me, and did deliver my soul from the jaws of destruction; when death had surrounded me, I then did vow to the Lord to honour him and serve him all my dayes, but there was more snares beset me. For when in the yeer 1652. I was charged with evil by Master Thomas Halhead and his wife, now
 behold how sin beset me, and what alurements it layed before me, to hide it, keep it close and secret.
1. Saith my base heart, You are known to be a great professor of religion, and if you make it known, you are utterly lost in the hearts of all that are godly, for a brother offended is harder to be won, then a strong City, Prov. 18.19. you shall never be in their affections againe.
2. The name of God will be much dishonoured, you must n t tell it in Gath, nor publish it in Askelon, lest the uncircumcised blaspheme: you need not do it, it is enough you have done it to God.
3. The wayes of God that you profess, which every man (especially the Clergy, which are great enemies to it, and of you in particular) watcheth to have somewhat to speak against it, and dishonour it.
4. Your own honour, reputation and good name will utterly be lost and gone, which as the wise man saith, Eccl. 7.1. Is better then a precious ointment, better then gold and silver, Prov. 15.15.
5. You are now in a capacity to do the poor people of God some good, but that will utterly spoile you for ever.
6. You will lose your place, which is your lively-hood. These and many more was my soul beset with; and I was taken captive, and so insnared, consulting onely with my base heart, that now I set my self with all my might to pursue these instructions, that sin, my base heart, the divel and the world had layed before me, but they all proved thorns in my sides, and prickes in my eyes, Num. 33.55. this covering was too narrow, it would not serve, Isa. 28.20. and so I have sadly found to the wounding of my soul, and by reason of sin, and made a sad spectacle to men. Oh then I pray precious souls beware of sin!
Content not your selves with the knowledge of Gods wayes, to make some outward porfession; that will not go through, that will not hold out to the end, and then you will not receive the crown. You will fall short of your desired haven of rest, the salvation of your souls, which is the end of your faith, 1 Pet. 1.9. Rev. 2.10. 2 Tim. 7.8. Therefore take our Saviours counsel, Mat. 12.33. Make the tree good, look at home into your hearts, and Purge away all your dross purely, and throw away all your Tin, Isa. 1.25. for Saints after they come to be Saints, have much dross in them left, they had reed alwayes be washing and purging, to cleanse
 their hearts, and to purifie their inward parts, Jam. 4.8. Isa. 1.17. from an evil conscience, Hb. 10.22. and it from dead works, Heb. 9.14. and if you so do, then you shall know how to possess your vessels in sanctification and honour, 1 Thess. 4.4. and be meet san∣ctified to your masters use, prepared unto every good work, 2 Tim. 2.21. this heart-work, this home-work, is the business that I have wanted, and I have more wandered abroad, then kept at home: therefore in the first place sweep all clean at home before your own doors, set all things right there, or else you were even as good sit still and do nothing, therefore I pray begin there first.
2. Crush sin in the very beginnings of it, when it cometh but darting into thy thoughts, for they are evil continually, Gen. 6.5. suffer it not to abide,Jer. 4.14. give it no space, no not a minute, but withstand it, when it appears abstain from it, for there doth evil begin to appear and take place; therefore do you now avoid it by all means, with all seed, spare it not, 1 Thess. 5.22. for if once your thoughts give but a little harbor to its inticing, you are by it presently deceived and drawn aside; and sin being thus conceived, it bringeth forth. See our first pa∣rents, and in David, 2 Sam. 11.2. comp. Gen. 3.5. What sad work did sin make there, which if at first it had been narrowly looked into, had been prevented, and therefore Job, he will make a covenant with his eyes, Job 31.1. and David he would take heed to his wayes that he offend not with his tongue, Psal. 29.12. He would keep the door of his lips, lest his heart should be inclined to any evil thing, to practice wicked works with them that work in∣iquity, Psal. 14.14. For the hearr is deceitful above all, and most desperately wicked, and who can know? therefore have a very great care there, and narrowly watch, Jer. 17.9.
3. Take heed of beeing deceived by the world, let not riches, honours, good name, reputation amongst men, lead ye to any evil, no not to tell the leastly, though you may gaine a world by it, for God will not be mocked, Gal. 6.7. but all things that are done in secret he seeth, and there is nothing but he knoweth it, and will also bring it to light: for all things are naked and open to him that we have to do with, Heb. 4.13. and this I know by experience, for all the wayes of darkness that I walked in, he did see, and all my deeds of darkeness he hath brought to light. And I tell you, the world with all it's baits and allurements are very great
 snares to your holy, upright, and sincere walking with God, and they will if you be not aware steal in upon your hearts, swell and puffe you up, so that you come to be surfited and overwhelmed with the cares thereof, and the thoughts of it pierces you thorow with ma∣ny cruelties, 1 Tim. 6.10. for from that root springeth many sor∣rows and evils: how many have made a very fair and large progress toward heaven, but this snare hath hindred them and quite spoiled them? therefore dearly beloved have a care of this great snare the world; this was the last, therefore the greatest and strongest argu∣ment the divel used to Christ, Mat. 4.9. Mat. 19.20, 21. Mark 10.21, 22. Luk. 18.22. Mat. 12.21. Mat. 19.23. Luk. 21.34.36. also was one of my great snares.
I will say little more to yoa, for I know you are already, very well taught, only know it is your duty of all other to walk circumspectly, not as fools but as wise, Eph. 5.15. that you are of all others to be holy, harmeless, undefiled, to be separate from sin and sin∣ners, for holiness becometh the house of God for ever, Psal. 93.4. For he hath taken you to be his people, and you have taken him to be your God, and your God he is holy, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. Levit. 11.4. & 19.2.20. You know God is not wanting to us, But hath given us all things appertaining to life and godli∣ness, 2 Pet. 1.3. all means to help us forward in our journey towards heaven: he hath given his word, spirit, his holy and good ordinan∣ces, Nehem. 9.13, 20. Psal. 141.19, 20. & 68.11. and now if we be not wanting to our selves, what is it not but we may do?
But we must be doers as well as sayers and hearers, for there lieth all the happiness, blessed and happy, saith Christ, are you that know these things and do them. Therefore let us minde to do all the will of God: and this David he was resolved to do, I will have re∣spect to all thy commandments, and then I am sure I shall not need to fear any shame, Psal. 119.6. he would as well be holy at home in his secret closet, as abroad in the publike assembly, and if you do not keep a strict eye there, all will not, nay all cannot be well. O then I pray take these few things.
1. Be often with God by prayer in secret, keep your private watches with your God, Eph. 6.18. Phil. 3.6. Luk. 21.36. Mat. 6.5. Study the word of God, meditate on that, 1 Tim. 4.13. 2 Tim. 3.15, 16, 17. Psal. 1.2. & 119.97, 98, 99, 100.
Eph. 4.29.3. Avoid all prophane or idle talke and discourse, as foolish jesting which is not seemly, but rather giving of thanks.
1 Cor. 9.27 2 Cor. 10.54. Watch over your inbred lust, and beat down and keep un∣der your bodies, and labour to bring under subjection to the obedience of Christ every thought.
5. Forsake not, but be diligent to frequent the assembly of the Saints of God, Heb. 10.25. Act. 2.42.
6. Take it kindly and lovingly when the brethren tell or warn any one of you of your faults, let it be balme to your heads, Psal. 141.5. Prov. 9.8. but be sure if you do tell your brethren of their faults or sins,Levit. 19.17. Mat. 18.15, 16, 17, 8. 1 Cor. 16.14. Jam. 5.19, 20. 1 Pet. 4.2.2. & 4.8. do it in love, debate and reason the case with thy neighbour, and deal with him as with thine own heart, plainly and sincerely, and by this means you will and may save a soul from death.
And last of all, have fervent charity, for that is the bond of per∣fection, and all is worth nothing, where this business of love and charity is wanting, therefore Holy and beloved, as the Elect of God, put on (be you clothed with) bowels of love, mercie, and pity, for love will cover and hide a multitude of sins, and so let all your things be done in love,Col. 3.12. 1 Cor. 16.14. And now, The God of all grace, who hath called you into his eter∣nal glory by Christ Jesus,Jam. 5.20. after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen and settle you. To him be glory and dominion for ever and ever, Amen, 1 Pet. 10.10.
 Fom my house in Coleman-street London, this this 29 of Nov. 1643.

Numb. 32.23.
But if you will not do so, ye have sinned a∣gainst the Lord, and be sure your sin will finde you out.

