




THe Israelites lamented after the Lord, when the Ark was removed, and it pittyed the children of Sion to see her stones in the dust, and how can any sing a song of the Lord in a strange Land? For my own part, ma∣ny have been the troubles of
my spirit (Right Reverend) for the desolations and mise∣ries that have of late befallen our English Church; and a∣mongst the rest, this has not been, the least affliction of my soul, to see her, like Sennacherib, murdered of her own sons, to see her laid desolate, whilst her enemies cry, There, there, so would we have it.
When Ierusalem was de∣stroyed, she became an habita∣tion unto strangers; and our English Sion being now laid waste, a Babylonish Tower of Rome would fain be built by the Enemy upon our holy Hill.
But that which most afflict∣ed me, was, to see the sons of our Sion's Tower, being com∣pleatly furnished out of her spiritual Magazine, and being harnessed, and carrying bowes to resist the Darts of Satan,
should like the children of E∣phraim turn their backs in the day of battel, amongst whom I finde Doctor Vane, the Au∣thor of a Book intituled, The lost sheep returned home, to be the Ring leader and chief of the Apostate-Tribe; who had no fooner escaped out of our English sheep-fold, but straightway he discovers the Muset thorow which he stole, thinking thereby to decoy the rest of the flock into the Wil∣derness.
Now I seeing this injury done unto our English Vine∣yard, though it was not pro∣per to me to make up the fence did presume to lay these thorns in the breach, whereby I might divert the Flock from straying after novelties, and seeking after strange Pastours, and in the interim blind the Wolves, that they should not
discover the breach that is made in our Pale.
Some I know will condemn me for presuming to treat up∣on this subject, being a Theam too high for my reach, and too sacred for my calling; and with Socrates will condemn Lysia's Oration, as not being suitable for him that was to pronounce it. If there be any such amongst us, I desire them to take notice, That when the Temple was to be re∣built, all the people of Israel (without exception) contri∣buted towards the work, Ezra 11.5, 6. The Priests, and Levites, and all the children of Israel, &c. and appointed the Levites to set forward the work, Chap. 3.8. For my part, I do not desire to transgress the bounds of a well-wishing Israelite; I do not with Uzzah think to support the Ark with my own hand,
but humbly present to your judicious sense, the sweet smel∣ling flowers which grow in others Gardens; and withal, give your Reverendships a view of the wilde Thistles that bear no Figgs; leaving it to your choyse to weed out the one, and root up the other, to whom the work more pro∣perly belongs. For my part, had I not perceived that the hearts of many of the Romish Faction were hardened through the deceitfulness of that Book, insomuch that ma∣ny began to triumph over the wounds therein given to our English Church, as if the Protestant Religion were neckt in the sparring blowes; And had I not been upbraid∣ed daily with the clamorous insultings of divers Papists, that our Church wanting grounds of Replyes, was the
cause of her silence; I had nei∣ther given them this occasion to censure me of presumption, or busied my self either for their information, or the Church of England's justifi∣cation; the one more properly belonging to anothers charge, the other needless, in respect the quarrel they have renewed, is but with their own shadow; all that ever they now pretend being heretofore fully an∣swered; the force of Divinity, and weight of Reason, adjudg∣ing the Garland to our Eng∣lish Church.
Nevertheless, those an∣swers being in several pieces, and many not having the se∣veral Books, and the Doctor having couched many subject matters in one Volume, I thought it requisite that a Re∣ply were composed in answer to his objections; not the im∣portance
of his subject mat∣ter, but the ease and conveni∣ence of the people to have him answered in one piece, calling upon some to this work.
And I consulting with my self, and imagining (after so long a time of its not being answered) that the more judi∣cious amongst you might per∣haps think it below them to make a reply to that, which had already by others been most fully and plainly refu∣ted, answered) did assume the boldness to re-capitulate this ensuing Treatise, which (to∣gether with my self) I pro∣strate at your feet.
Amphion plaid ever best, when he heard poor Ithoneus blow upon his Oaten Pipe; and I could wish these rude Collections of mine might but serve as a Plain-song,
whereon your Reverendships might descant.
I did not intend that these loose pieces thrown into the Gap, should stand for a suffi∣cient Fence for our English Vine-yard; onely I was some∣thing confident, that they might be serviceable to you, and be made use of in part, as being Materials prepared for your use, wherewith you might firmly repair the Breach which the Doctor has made; which being set by your more Divine hands, might become a growing Rampire against the Wolves and Foxes that would steal into your Vine-yard, to pluck your Grapes, and a standing Bulwark to keep her up, maugre the engines of Hell and Satan.
I know it is you, to whom the charge of the Plantation
is committed, it is you that are the proper Husband-men, and know best how to fence her clusters; you are the Le∣vites must repair the breaches in our English Tabernacle.
I beseech you be not of∣fended that I have taken no∣tice of this Gap made in your Fence, but rather let this my boldness finde pardon from your goodness, and let this piece be acceptable to you, as coming from one, that in hu∣mility and love desires you to have an eye to this breach; and if (when you view the pieces I have thrown into the Gap) you finde any that are proper for your Fence, fix it down, and throw the rest by; or if (in your judgements) you think it need no further repa∣ration, yet vouchsafe to con∣firm it with your holy hand: & sith this bold action meerly
proceeded from my earnest affection, and love unfeigned towards my brethren of your houshold; and to manifest my desire to be folded under your charge, I humbly beg, that you would favorably interpret the the truths, and gently correct the errors of the same; and that against all malicious and injurious encounters of the Enemy, both I and it may find shelter under your wings. In confidence whereof, I remain (upon my knees asking your Fatherly Benediction upon your obedient son in Christ Jesus, and)
Your Reverendships most devoted, most humble and faithful Servant

From Chisenhale, Febr. 11. 1651.
