



Beloved in the Lord,
WHat reason You (above all others) have to read and consider the things which I present to your view, the Introduction to, and Ap∣plication of the truth laid before you will tell. I trust many of you are convinced that I carry
you upon my heart, and that my design in this undertaking is only to engage your hearts more fully to God. Ʋpon this account I am confi∣dent of your complyance with it.
I have reckoned it amongst my choicest mer∣cies, that the Lord hath owned me in some measure amongst you, and hath made you to feel as wel as hear what I have spoken. Yet in the midst of my rejoycing for some, I have had sad thoughts of heart for others, for whom I have sometimes had great hopes, and again as great feares; Since I have known any thing of Preaching, (and indeed it is little that I yet know of it) I have Preach'd very much by what I have seen and known of your tempers and Conditions, and I can say (through Mer∣cy) that my labour hath not been altogether in vain. I bless God that I can think on some of you with delight; the entertainment which you have given to the Word, and the gracious mpressions which you carry upon your spirits, are my rejoycing before the Lord. Yet give me
leave to minde you, that the number of Conver∣verted ones is but smal in comparison of those Convinced ones which I have observed amongst you. Many have received the Word with trembling, others with joy; yet after such sh∣kings and strong working of heart (which they could not conceal, have either grown cold again; or else have contented themselves with a luke∣warm profession; This I can truly say hath a∣bated much of my former comfort; and so strong have the impressions of these things been upon my spirit, that many sad thoughts have risen in me, that surely my labour is neer at an end in that place, and the Lord will call me off either by death (as he threatned of late) or some other way. Ʋpon this consideration I have been willing to listen to those who desired that these few Sermons might be made pub∣lick, that by this means thy might lie before you, either to quicken you, or to accuse you; that when you shall neither hear, nor see me, you may see in them how my heart stood affected to∣wards you: and possibly the view of these lines
may awaken the convictions which some of you have buried, the perswasions which in some are decayed, and the resolutions which some of you have taken up for God, but not followed: Oh when this Book fals into any such hands, (as doubtless such it will meet withall) let me in∣treat those herein concerned to suffer these two thoughts to dwel a little upon their hearts:
First, that their hearing as wel as my preach∣ing must come to judgement.
Secondly, that Convictions slighted, Perswa∣sions not improved, Promises and purposes bro∣ken, will be the worst companions that you can carry to Hel with you; yet this I am assured of, that many of you cannot perish but under the weight of many of these.
I have observed two ways, in which especi∣ally the Devil couzens convinced souls.
First, in the Time: he tels them it is too soon to be serio us in youth, another time will serve; thus many perish under delaies. To prevent this evil, I presented you formerly with
a smal Treatise
The Young Mans Me∣mento. which I hope hath satisfied you sully of the folly and danger of delay∣ing.
Secondly, he labours to deceive in the mea∣sure of the change that is wrought; if he sees that they will do something, yea and that the soul is agreed upon the time, that it must be Now while it is called to day, then he strives to limit them. First, with Negatives. He tels them they are not as they were, and therefore all is wel. He tels them they are changed; and it may be true, though they are not made New. If they be civil or moral that were prophane and unrighteous, this he perswades them is ve∣ry much: but if he suffer them to put on a form of Religion, though it reach not the heart; then he assures them that their Reformation is ful in weight and measure heaped up, pressed down, and running over; when all this time they are not come to the lowest form of those that are Christians indeed. Now, knowing that
some of you are resolved to do something, and fearing that you should be deceived, and so do nothing to the purpose. I have laid these things before you, that you might be the better able to judge of the measure of your perswasions, pro∣fessions, and performances.
And since I have undertaken to speak to all, being affectionately willing to be serviceable to you all. Let me add a word to you that re∣fuse to attend the publick Ministry in that place, to hear what hath been there delivered; yet possibly you will vouchsafe a private perusal of these truths: If this little Tract comes into your hands, I beseech you enquire seriously by it into the state of your souls; for I fear you have little close convincing Preaching amongst You. O bethink your selves of former days, when you sat under the Now despised Ministry in Tiver∣ton, which some of you called the Ministry of Christ, and your selves the seals of it; You see∣med then to have some sense of the Quickness
nnd Power of the Word; but how is it now? Are thefe Times better then those? To what considerable height are you growen in Christi∣anity since you turned your backs upon those Opportunities you once counted precious? Ah let me tel you, though you have deserted me, I can∣not cast you out of my thoughts, hopes, and Prayers, trusting that the Lord will bring back such as have set their faces to seek him in truth, as he hath done fome already, in answer to Prayer. Yet you know that I have lost nothing by your leaving of me, but the opportunities of being further serviceable to your souls; and this indeed to me is a great losse; for if I know any thing of my heart, it is this, that I value my life by the advantages that I have of being helpfull to poore souls in the great things of God.
It is an easie matter to draw up those that have no grace to any form; and this were a poor low thing to make our interest. By this
meanes it is as easie to stop young awakened souls before they come half way to Christianity; it is my fear for many of you, that you are ar∣rived no further then the forme; and my fear is as great that you will hinder others from going beyond it, by perswading them into an opinion of themselves, that they are Christians, before they are, or know what it is to be such.
If this may prevent any of you from miscarry∣ing any way, I shal heartily blesse the Lord, and rejoyce to be also a helper of your Faith.
Finally my friends of all sorts, Lay what you have heard, or may hearread to the Word, & your hearts to both, and judg faithfully in this mat∣ter. Put it to the Question whether you are Altogether Christians or no, and resolve to be such, or to be nothing. Be in good earnest with God, and cleave to him with ful purpose of heart. Oh fulfil my joy which you cannot more conside∣rably further then by a candid acceptance, and conscientious improvement of what I here
tender to you. That it may be everyway for your good, you shall have with it the Prayers of

London, Jan. 16. 1656.
