


Deare Friends,
IT hath been the great desire of some of you, that I would pub∣lish to the world My Notes upon Daniel. I had no intent when I preacht them, that they should have been further known, or more common then amongst you. These Chan∣ges and Revolutions in our Nation, have changed my Re∣solution, and something I have begun: As not being a∣sham'd to beare witnesse before the world, to what more pri∣vately I delivered to you: For the severall Censures of men otherwise minded, I can well beare them; for I did sit downe first, and count the cost; Besides for men to speak evill of those things which they know not, it is usuall. But wisdome is justified of her children.
Sirs, I cannot without much thankefulnesse to God, and comfort to my selfe but remember you, specially your most earnest and constant seeking of God, to have the Book opened, and the Seales loo∣sed, that you might see your worke, and know how to Act for Christ in your Generation. I make mention of this, that your zeale may provoke others, and stir them up to aske wisdome of God, and for Zions sake not to hold their peace, and for Jerusalems sake not to give him rest, till he establish and make Jerusalem a praise in the earth. For my part, I can speak it to Gods glory, I have found all a∣long in opening the Prophesies of Daniel and the Revelation to you, the answer of your prayers, and the fruit of your faith abundantly up∣on my soule.
I know these things when they were delivered, offended the Priests
in that Countrey, and in likelihood, being made now more publique, will increase their rage and blasphemie against the God of Heaven, because of their pains and sores. It is not destruction I wish them, but that the Lord will give them Repentance from dead workes, and that they would forsake their unsanctified places and standings, and not de∣ceive the people any longer, by their lies and beastly vanities, I say be∣fore the fierce anger of the Lord, and the wrath of the Lamb come up∣on them.
I hope there will be shortly some effectuall meanes used, to remove from the people the heaviest burthen, and sorest plague that lies upon them, which is a generation of Priests, that fatten the people for the day of slaughter: For my part, what Interest I have either with God or men, I shall endeavour to improve it to the utmost, That the Foxes, both the old and the young Cubs, which spoile the Vines and the tender Grapes, may be taken. I know people ge∣nerally, though they complain of other Oppressions and burdens, and would willingly be eased of them: yet here they have no feeling, and therefore they are the more to be pittied, and the sooner helped, in not apprehending what is the greatest misery they lie under. Those who have lately shewed so much good affection to have the Gospell advanced in New-England, I hope they will be farre more enlarged in their bowels, for the conversion of poore Heathens in our owne Land, that the people which sit here in darknesse, may see a great light, and to them which sit in the region and shadow of death, light may spring up.
Deare friends, I shall not write much, though I could say much in your behalfe, as being lights among a crooked and froward generation, walking in the life and power of Religion, where others are meer For∣malists. Besides, you have not been asham'd to own the truths of God, when they have been rendred in Pulpits, scandalous, blasphemous, he∣reticall, &c. Sirs, it is your prayers that I still desire with me, and for me. I know no people under heaven that have more encouragement then you, to goe boldly to the Throne of grace, considering what reall & full answers you have had of former seeking the Lord. Now the Lord more and more poure the spirit of grace and of supplication into your hearts, and fill you with wisdome and spirituall understanding, and keep you sincere, and without offence till the day of Christ; and thus prayes he who is

