



SIRS;
WHo knowes whether ye are called to the Common-wealth for such a time as this? It is a singular mercy, when the Lord in the way of his providence, calls men him∣selfe to imployment, and puts a faire opportu∣nity into their hands, to Act for him. Your Call to this present work was more then or∣dinary, and there is something more then or∣dinary expected now to be done by you.
I would think you should never be sitting in that House, but be thinking still on those who sate there before you, whom the Lord hath laid aside, as dispised broken Idols, and vessels wherein his soule had no pleasure; and why? ah they knew not their Generation-work, neither were faithfull to the interest of Jesus Christ. God is no respector of persons, as men sow, so they shall reap.
Charles King of Naples, was sir-named Cunctator, Delayer, because he stayed till opportunity was past: but Fabius the Sheild of Rome, was so called, because he onely stayed till opportunity was come Truly my desire and prayer to God is, that you may be like Fa∣bius: As for the opportunity, its come, its before you, and in your hands: doe ye aske, what? The Lord is now taking vengeance, and doing execution upon Babylon: in order whereunto, he hath stain∣ed the power and pride of the Prelates destroyed their Courts Canons,
and other abominations. This work he is still carrying on, for it must be wholly desolate, not a stone left upon a stone, which shall not be throwne downe. And as before he made use of the Higher Powers, for the effecting of what was then done: so he will doe for the rest, command his sanctified ones, and call his mighty ones, to ful∣fill all his pleasure upon the great whore.
It is true, as the work behind is more choice, high, and spirituall, so he will single out men of clearer principles, greater zeale, and larg∣er affections and love to him, and his Son, for it. Whether you be the men whom the Lord will honour in this worke, I know not, but this I know, it is speedily to be done; for Sion is in travail, and rea∣dy to bring forth. Is it not a goodly thing, to behold in Poets, Ju∣piter, who hath forsaken his fiery Chariot, and rainged Horses, letting all goe at randome, in the mean time to busie himself in paint∣ing upon the Clouds, sometimes Goats, Apes, Centaures, &c. To de∣liver my mind plainly (for I desire to be plain) if you stick not to the interest of Christ, and set upon his worke in good earnest, which is to destroy the Antichristian Kingdome (so far as your power and place extends) as for other things, comparatively (I speake it) they are but as Jupiters paintings on the Clouds, soon passe a∣way, and the remembrance of them hereafter, will administer small comfort to you.
I remember Christs words to his Spouse, Rise up my love, my faire one, and come away, for lo the winter is past, the rain is over and gone. If you speak to a Mariner, in winter, why he keeps at home, and lets his Vessel lye still in the Harbour, he hath something to say in reason for himselfe, viz. the unseasonablenesse of the time, but in summer he cannot excuse himselfe so: If a man should have spoken to you 10 or 20 yeares past, about this Nationall Ministry, & Tithes, and to have men preach not ordained by Bishops, you might have said then, it's winter, we are not Parliament men, nor in a capacity to help the Lord against the Mighty; well, it is otherwise now with you, and therefore suit your selves like men, and doe the Lords worke, whiles it is to day. Let not this Voyce from the Temple, passe through your eares, without taking some impressi∣on your hearts: The which is the desire of

