



My Lord,
IT was most unhappily done of Caesar, to put the letter into his bosome, which he should have read before he went unto the Consull. I shall humbly desire your Excellency (in the midst of your great Affaires) to read over this short Treatise, which was intended in publishing, specially for you, as being thereunto encoura∣ged by your Honour. Had those, whose Crownes are now fallen, and their places have cast them out, not laid a∣side Daniel, and other Prophesies of the later Times, but day and night meditated therein, and so known the signes of the Son of man, their glory would not so soone have de∣parted from them. But trusting to lying vanities, they forsooke their owne mercies.
As for other Bookes of humane wisdome and State-poli∣cies, they are almost now like an old Almanack, out of date, most improper and uselesse to the great worke of this age. And therefore such as desire to stand, and not to be lost in the night of Errour and shame, must search the great Booke of Gods Counsell: for there they shall know (and no where else) what the worke is of their owne generation. It
is not enough that a man meanes well, and resolves to doe honest and just things, but he is to consider whether the thing which he proposeth next to do, be his worke, and pro∣per to the time in which he lives.
It was in Davids heart to build God an house, and the worke seem'd to Nathan to be so pious and good, as he gave him encouragement to goe forward with it. Neverthelesse David here was mistaken, and the Prophet too: For Da∣vid was not the man, but Solomon, appointed for that businesse. As Gods thoughts are not our thoughts, nor his wayes our ways, so it oft-times falls out: what our thoughts are busied most about, and sticke fastest too, that is not the thing which the Lord intends we shall do, but he hath some other employment and service for us.
My Lord, it is for this end, I write thus to you, howsoe∣ver I hope you intend a great deale of good to the Nation, and thinke of nothing but what is honest, just, pure, and of good report: yet one thing is needfull, namely, that you search the Prophesies of the later times, to finde out what is your worke, as now proper to you: That so you may doe that good, that acceptable, and perfect wil of God in your generation. Blessed is that servant whom his Lord when he cometh, shall find SO DOING: Not only doing, but doing so and so.
That it was your worke (and appointed to you of God) to be a happy instrument for the dissolving the last Parlia∣ment. It is not only cleare to me, but something is here said in the justification of it.
But now (my Lord) the great Question is, what is next? I have purposely published this Booke, to answer this great Question, to wit, that your Excellency and others in place, may see what my opinion is, (and how grounded
upon the word) concerning the Lords works, and working at this time, and wherein you and others are to move, and follow the Lamb. I shall not speake any thing concerning the chose of the new Governours which lies before you: Only this; by knowing what is the Lords worke which he is now doing amongst us, and carrying forth in the world, it may be somewhat usefull to your Excellency in your choise, as to call out such men, as are best principled and qualified for THAT.
My Lord, Those great Statesmen who are laid aside, & lie in dust, under the guilt and shame of their actions, wan∣ted not deep policie, strong reason, worldly wisdome, poli∣ticke Councellours, and large advantages of the time: but this they wanted (which was their ruine) they were not like the children of Issachar, men that had the under∣standing of the Times, to know what Israel ought to doe.
Hence it is, that not only my self, but many more who love you truly and dearely, earnestly desire (and begg it daily of God for you) that those Prophesies which speak out the work of God to be done now in the world, may be searcht by you, and clearly opened to you. Methinks I should finde you in that voyce from heaven, saying, Come out of her my people: and to be one of the Angels pouring out the fifth Viall. About the time of Christs Incarnation, there was a great expectation amongst the Jewes of the coming of the Messiah: For they knew by former Prophesies that he was then to come.
This voyce from Heaven, and the fifth Angel is already come: but there is now an expectation to have that Prophe∣sie perfected. And if the Lord shall be pleased to perfect by you, the good worke which he hath made you instrumentall
in, that is, to be his, and our Generall still, for the executi∣on of the last vengeance upon the two persecuting powers of the world, viz. Kingly and Antichristian, it will be such an honour as few of the sonnes of men ever had.
My Lord, I shall close with this; there is no work for you in the grave, it must be done on this side: It might have been a Motto set upon Davids Sepulchre; After hee had served his owne Generation by the will of God, he fell asleep; he fell not asleep till he had served his Genera∣tion. This shall be my prayer, that in life and death it may be so with you. Even doe the worke of him that sent you whilst it is today; and when you are gathered to your Fa∣thers, that the memorie of your name may be precious a∣mong the Saints, as Davids was in Israel. And thus prays he who is

