



Dear Cosen,
YOur Friendship to me which was of old, and yet is not gray hair'd, but flourish∣ing, knows no Winter, but a constant Spring. In both your Universitie & Citie life, the Rayes of your favour have shoone on me. It is above twenty years since we were Contemporaries at Oxford, under our Reverend, Pious, Sound, and Learned Tutor, Dr. Edw. Corbet, who was a real Saint on earth, and is now a glorious Saint in heaven. The mercy of our Tuition, is not to be forgotten of us, nor can I forget your kind∣ness to me, which hath not been Aeffaeta gignendo, barren by Production, like pregnant Animals, and vegetative Trees. I am your Debtor, besides the due Debt of my Prayers for you, I here present to you this , a Thank-offering, that it may from your Christian candor find acceptance, and a sweet savour.

We live in an unhappy Age, wherein by many the Form, by most the Power of Godlyness is neglected. Though tis a Mercy, Religion is in some Forme and Fashion, yet 'tis a misery, the Fashion is so Multiform, & in every different dress so Obnoxious, & that Words and Works, are too common Antipodes. Wronging Gods Grace is Englands Epidemical sin. None of the quarrelling sides among us can plead Innocence. Though the spots of Gods children, and the Devils are not the same; yet to our shame be it spoken, all sides have too much darkened the glory of their pro∣fession, obscured the lustre of the Gospel Sun, and laid the Honour of Gods name in the dust. Seeing our streets are so foul, I would mind every one to sweep their own doors, that the times of Liberty may no longer be reproached, as they are, with a dirty, wanton, unjust Licentiousnesse, in Opinions, and Practises. The sad experience that the old man is in my self too much a Libertine, and what I have seen and heard of others, put me upon large Meditations, sundry years ago in my Lordsday Sermons to mine own Auditory, concerning the Pest of the Times, Spread∣ing At Ed∣mondsbury in Suffolk. Disease, Bane of Profession, Disgrace of Religion, Re∣mora of Conversions, Affliction of best hearts, Occasion of Blasphemy, Temptation to Atheisme, Merriment of Rome, which consists in the Abuse of Grace. Could I upon Englands tallest Mountain speak with the loudest noise of Thunder, and articulate my mind to every ear, I would say the Abuse of Grace is Englands sinne; Repent of it, O England, repent, repent. These were the words of that faithful Martyr, Mr. Bradford, when he was burning in the flames. Though it is not possi∣ble I should be so loud, vocal, and monitory, yet in∣couraged
 by some pious and judicious friends, I am imboldned to take the benefit of the Presse, and to communicate thoughts in season, to as many hands, eyes, and hearts, as Providence shall guide them to. I beseech you (Sir) the happinesse of whose Consan∣guinity and Amity, I have experienced, peruse and improve what you shall read, to an holy conviction, serious bewailing, and deep abhorrence of an odious sin which hath too black a guilt, and is loaded with many aggravating circumstances. This will be a choice divine Blessing on the Tractate, the Authors Reward, and a Testimony of the Grace of God in you. The Gospel, the precious Gospel, that hath cost the Blood of Christ, and Christians, the sweet word of Grace, the power of God unto Salvation, let it be precious in your holy esteem: And though Papists Qui de evan∣gelio Christ facium homi∣nis evangeliū, vel quod pejus est diaboli. Hier. Epist ad Gal. by their Derogatory Antichristian Traditions, World∣ly Polititians, and Hellish Libertines, doe in Hieromes tearms make of the Gospel of Christ the Gospel of men, or which is worse, the Gospel of the Devil. Do you speak it and live it, the Gospel of God and Grace. The things I would offer to mine own soul, I tender to you. Be inquisitive what may deservedly bear the brand of Gospel Wantonnesse, when it appears, and interpret it as the Messenger of Hell, the Artifice of the Devil turned Angel of Light, the not more subtile than pernicious Engine to ruin souls. Be one of Zions Mourners in your Closet Retirements, to look over this worst of sins, the predominant wrong of Grace, with a mourning spirit. Endeavour to live a severe, exact, spiritual, heavenly frame of heart, that when you are to give up your Death-bed account, the Spi∣rit of Truth, Peace, Puritie and Comfort, may wit∣ness
 with yours, that the Gospel hath transformed you into the Image of it's Glory, and hath taught you to deny that ungodlyness, and those wordly Lusts, which shrowd themselves under the protection of Grace.
And, Noble Madam, as the Tye of Marriage, and the Union (I hope) of Grace, hath made you and my dear Cosen one, so have I made you one in my Epi∣stolary address. If the divine principle of the love of God and his Gospel be implanted in you, it cannot but urge you to the detestation of, and lamentation for the prodigious sin of Gospel Wantonness: whilst some Femal vvantons study their senses and faces, not their souls, who beautifie their out-sides, whilst their insides are altogether dis-regarded; be pleased among other spiritual Looking-glasses, which religious Artists, and faithfull Writers have with elaborate thoughts composed, to honour this, so far as often to look on it, to dress your better part by it, that when it shall reflect and reverberate your gracious beauty, you may praise the infinite Beauty and Fountain of Holi∣ness, you may be Great and Good too; and this is a most rare, and happy combination. A few there are in the words of an Ancient, that are eminent in both In utroque tulo primi. worlds, and but a few; Not many Noble. 1 Cor. 1. 26. are called to eternal Honours. Goodness enamels Greatness, and shines like a precious Stone in a Ring. I like not, but altogether abhorre that morose Stoi∣cisme and Quakerisme that frowns on the Titles of worldly precedencies, as unbecoming Christians eares & tongues. Due Titles are no crimes of Language, nor unconsistent with Piety; yet I hope you have learned the vast distance between the stile of Madam, and
 Christian, and that in the divine Heraldry, the heaven∣ly Descent of Grace will out-shine all the Escutchions, and the glorious aiery appellations of worldly prece∣dencies. The childless, holy Eunuch, was by the Gospel Prophet comforted, that he should have a Name better than of Sons and Daughters. The new Name, either Beleever, or Child of God, out-titles, and out-glories the highest worldly stile. Fulgentius gave good counsel to Galle, a noble Christian, of a Godly, as wel as Gen∣tile Extraction, born of the Spirit as wel as Kin to Ro∣man Consuls; Learn to ascribe nothing to your Noble Disce nihil tibi nobilua∣te generis assignare. Fulgent. Epist. ad Gallam. Inter sacu∣lares illu∣stris super∣biae fomes. Fulgent. Tametsi spe∣ciem ali∣quam praese ferunt ho∣mines, tan∣quam in a∣gris flores, qui tamen refulget de∣cori protinvs interit atque evanescis. Calvinan Isa. 40. In saculi culmine constituti. Fulg. Praebentmalae imitationis laqueum aut bonae conversationis exemplum—Magna tales aut poena manet aut gloria, Fulgent. de Conversione ad Theodorum. stem. Although you have secular, illustrious glory, yet especially with a perfect humble heart be ambiti∣ous of the Spirits Nobilitie. If, Madam, the anoint∣ing of the Spirit teach you this lesson, that all flesh is grasse, and all the goodlinesse thereof is as the flower of the field, the glory, the ornament, the glittering shine of it will disappear in pale, gastly death, and the cham∣bers of silence and rottenness: I hope it teacheth you this also, that Regeneration is the birth of births; and that the thriving Graces of the Spirit, bosom Commu∣nion with Jesus Christ here, and highest rooms in hea∣ven, will be the Honour of Honours. Consider, Great persons are great blessings or plagues; a train follows them to Heaven or Hell, they are not saved, or damned alone. They that stand in the worlds higher ground, who either lay the snares of an evil imitation, or are the presidents of an holy conversation, shall have great, either eternal Penalty, or Glory. Hath free Go∣spel grace shined in your soul? abuse it not: Hold forth the Word of Life in a gracious life. If you, and the
 faithfull conjugal guide of your soul shall speed your motions to those heavenly, eternal Mansions, where the better than flowings of Milk and Hony, the sweet heavenly Feasts, and unglutting delights of eternitie shall be enjoyed: If you shall avoid this common scar∣let sin of perverting Grace, which with an ungrateful Wantonnesse, treads under foot the Son of God, thinks, desires, affects, and lives, as if the blood of the Covenant were an unholy thing, and offers a proud despight to the Spirit of Grace: If the study of this book shall help you both, and others to walk exactly, to redeem the time, adorn the Gospel, credit Profession, glorifie God, and promote your own, and others eternal Salvation, you will both accomplish the design of publishing the ensuing Meditations, and encourage him, who is your remembrancer at the Throne of Grace, and remains
From Edmonds∣bury in Suffolk, Mar. 18. 1658.

