



SIRS,
MANY men have written well, and effectually in the defenc of your Cause, and have sufficiently proved it, to be a righteous and glorious Cause. Nevertheles, as the Philistims stop'd the Wels which Abraham had dig'd, and filled them with earth: so it hath been the constant endeavour of some men, by fraud and falshood, to darken the cleare and evident truth which hath been opened, to the end, people might not have the benefit of such wholsome and sweet water: But the Lord of Hosts (whose Cause yours is) hath (like Isaac) digged again the wels of water; & what was stop'd by others, he hath opened: He (I say) now is a Writer for you: so that were there no Bookes extent, pleading your Cause, Gods owne hand were enough; the late booke written (as it were) with pen and inke of divine providence were sufficient. As the unbeleeving Jewes could not keep Christ in the grave, though they rol'd a great stone before the doore of the Sepulcre, but hee gloriously ascended: so this righteous Cause (which God hath put into your hands) shall rise, and shine as the Sun, far and neere amongst the Nations of the earth: In spight of enemies, let them use all the the wiles, wit, and wayes they can to keep it under.
Aristotle saith, omne inconsuetum est obscurum. I confesse the way which I here take, to justifie your Cause against all Adversaries (of what name or title soever) may at first seeme obscure, being hi∣therto by few walked in. Scire per causam, is the common rode; but when it shall be considered what light I have nd whose hand (as a Guide) I here follow. I question not, but it will be acknowledged, that a more certain way cannot be chosen, to give a clear and full satisfaction to all men desirous to know, on whose side the Truth and Right is, be∣tween you and your Enemies.

 I doe observe, that there are two sorts of men unfruitfull, Behol∣ders of Gods marvellous and great works.
1. The bruitish man (as David calls him) he never considers of them, nor sees any thing of providence therein: As Nicomacus in Plutarch fitly answered an Idet, that could see no beauty in the famous Helena, painted by Zeuxis; take my eyes (quoth he) and you shall think her to be a Goddesse. Even so, had these men other mens eyes, any spirituall discerning: they would see in Gods dispensations so much of his power, goodnesse, justice, &c. as they would say, Jehovah, there is none like unto thee; who shall not feare thee, O Lord, and glorifie thy name.
Another sort there are, who will speak of divine providence, and confesse that all things are govrned by Gods counsell, and nothing comes to passe but according to his will and pleasure: notwithstanding, they will not see his hand when it is lifted up, nor make any profitable and good use thereof. As the Papist, though in words they acknowledge the Scriptures, yet by their corrupt interpretation, in a manner deny them: So these men; though they confesse a providence, yet by their un∣sound application thereof, doe in effect deny it, destroying with one hand what they build with the other. And with this later sort I specially here deale.
I shall not trouble your Honours with a large Epistle: Only thus, as God by his Acting for you hath made it evident (and you many times in your Declarations humbly confesse it) that he is on your side, takes your part, justifies and ownes your Cause; so let it appeare o the world, by your Actings, that you are (not for your Selves and your own Interests, but) for God, as owning his Cause, which is Truth & Righteousness.
Now the Lord, who alone hath power to make you able to Act & Ap∣peare for him and his Cause (as he hath Acted and Appeared for you and your Cause) give you both hearts and hands so to doe. And thus shall hee ever pray, who is

