



Noble Gentlemen,
I Know that time is very precious with you by reason of the multipli∣plicity of affairs that lie upon your hands: you are come to the Helm of a much shaken, and almost sinking ship, and the winds, and waves are still boi∣sterous:
there are dangerous rocks, and shelves to be avoided, and therefore the greater Art, and Industry is re∣quired of those that are the steersmen. Yet my humble request to you is, that you will be pleased to spare so much time as to peruse this little Treatise: It will discover to you one of the must dange∣rous Rocks, which if not carefully shuned will certainly split our ship, and endanger all the passengers that are imbarked in it. You cannot but be sensible of the many Divisions, and subdivisions that are amongst us; and our Lord Christ hath told us in his Word of Truth, That a Kingdom di∣vided against it self cannot stand, Mar. 3.24. You cannot but see what an inundation of Errors, Heresies, and Blasphemies is broken in upon us, and truly it is as evident, that Romes Emissaries are both the Fathers, and Nurses of most of these Bastards, and that which they now hope for, and ex∣pect from you is, a Boundless Tolle∣ration of them, that so they may live,
and prosper under the shadow of your wings: But if you please to cast your eies over this book, you shall see how inconsistent such a Tolleration would be with the word of God: how destru∣ctive both to our Church and State: How dangerous to those that grant it, and pernicious to those that desire it. You are Political Shepherds, and will you not drive away those wolves that de∣vour the Flock? Magistrates are not only Custodes, but Vindices utri∣usque Tabulae, and should they not then take care of the Honor, and Con∣cernments of God, as well as of their own? Is it not their duty to take those Foxes that destroy the vines of Christ? Can. 2.15. Doth not Paul tell us, That they bear not the sword in vain, but are the Mini∣sters of God, and Revengers to ex∣ecute wrath upon them that do evil? Rom. 13.4. And that Schisms, and Heresies are evil: The same A∣postle makes it as clear, when he reckons them up amongst the works of the
flesh, and joines them with Idolatry, Witchcraft, &c. Gal. 5.20.
I know hat Politicians give many Rules, and Directions for up∣houlding, and conserving King∣doms and Common-wealths: but that of Solomons is beyond all, Prov. 16.12. The Throne is established by Righteousness: and to take care of Religion, as well as of Righteousness, conduceth much to the prosperity, and Peace of a Nation. Very memorable is that of Asa: 2 Chron. 14.2. &c. He did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord: for he took away the Altars of the strange gods, and the high places, and brake down the Images, ad cut down the groves; and command∣ed Judah to seek the Lord God of their Fathers, and to do the Law, and the Commandment, &c. and then the Kingdom was quiet before him. And chap. 15.3, 5. Israel had been for a long season without the true God, and without a teach∣ing
Priest, and without Law; and in those times there was no peace to him that went out, nor to him that came in, but great vexations were upon all the Inhabitants of the Countries, and Nation was destroyed of Nation, and City of City: for God did vex them with all adversity. The like we see: Judg 5.8. They chose new gods (saith Deborah) then was War in their Gates. It is said also of Jehosa∣phat; 2 Chron. 17.6, 10. That his heart was lift up in the wayes of the Lord, and that he took away the high places, and groves out of Judah, and then the fear of the Lord fell upon all the King∣domes of the Lands that were round about Judah, so that they made no war against Jehosaphat. I know that common exception against these Scriptures is, that these are Old Testament Examples, and there∣fore not binding, or imitable under the Gospel; which you shall see fully an∣swered,
and refted, if you please to peruse this Book. Neither indeed is the New Testament any more favoura∣ble to a Tolleration of Errors, Schisms, and Heresies, then the Old, God being as jealous of his honor now, as he was then, and corruptions in Re∣ligion being as detestable to him now, as they were then: Hence it is that our Saviour Christ, and his Apostles give so many Caveats to take heed of, and to shun false Doctrines, and Teachers of them: As Mat. 7.14. Beware of false Prophets which come to you in sheeps cloathing, &c. Mat. 16.6. Take heed and beware of the lea∣ven of the Pharisees, and of the Sa∣duces. Mat. 24.4, 5. Take heed that no man deceive you: For ma∣ny shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive ma∣ny. And verse 11. Many false Prophets shall arise, and shall de∣ceive many. So verse 23, 24. and Rom. 16.17, 18. I beseech you bre∣thren, mark them which cause di∣visions,
and offences, contrary to the Doctrine that ye have learned, and avoid them; For such serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly, and by good words, and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple. And, 1 Cor. 1.10. &c. how doth he re∣prove them for their Schisms, and ex∣horts them to Ʋnity? And, 1 Cor. 5.7. Purge out the old leaven that you may be a new lump. 2 Cor. 6.14, 15.16. What communion hath light with darkness? What concord hath Christ with Belial? &c. And what agreement hath the Temple of God with Idols? &c. Gal. 1.8, 9. If an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel, then that which we have preached, let him be accursed, &c. Gal. 5.12. I would they were even cut off that trouble you. Phil. 3.2. Be∣ware of Dogs, beware of evil∣workers, beware of the concision. 2 Thes. 3.6. We command you
brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye with-draw your selves from every brother that walketh disorderly, and not after the traditions which he received of us. 2 Tim. 2, 16, 17. Shun pro∣phane, and vain bablings; for they will increase to more ungod∣liness, and their word will eat as doth a Canker, &c. 2 Tim. 4.14, 15. Alexander the Copper-smith did me much evil, &c. of whom be thou ware also, &c. Tit. 3.10, 11. An Heretick after the first, and se∣cond admonition reject, knowing that he that is such is subverted, and sinneth, being condemned of himself. 2 Pet. 3.17. Seeing ye know these things before, beware, lest being led aside with the Errors of the wicked, you fall from your own stedfastness. 2 Epist. of John 10.11. If there come any unto you, and bring not this Doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him God-speed: for he
that bids him God-speed, is par∣taker of his evil deeds. Rev. 2.2. The Angel of the Church of E∣phesus is commended, for that he could not bear with them which were evil: and had tried them which said they were Apostles, when they were not, and had found them ly∣ars: As also for that verse 6. He hated the deeds of the Nicholaitans. Rev. 2.14, 15. The Angel of the Church of Pergamos is reproved, and threatned for suffering them that held the Doctrine of Balaam, and of the Nicholaitans: And verse 20. The Angel of the Church of Thyatira is reproved, and threatned for per∣mitting the woman Jesabel to teach, and to seduce gods servants, &c. Rev. 3.15, 16. The Angel of Lao∣dicea is reproved for being luke∣warm, and neither hot, nor cold: and such are they, (saith arverend Divine) who grant a Tolleration of divers Religions, whom God will spue out of his mouth.
Mr. Gabri. Powel.

It were easie to bring Arguments against such a Tolleration out of the Canons of the first, and best Coun∣cils, and Writings of the Fathers, as Tertullian, Athanasius, Augu∣stine, Jerom, Gregory Nazian∣zene, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Ire∣naeus, Cyprian, &c. As also from the Laws, Constitutions, Decrees, and Edicts of the best Christian Emperors, as Constantine the great, Valentini∣an, Gratian, Theodosius Maior, Arcadius and Honorius, Theodo∣sius Minor, Martian, Justinian, &c. unto which might be added the Judge∣ment of many forreign Divines that were godly, learned and judicious, be∣sides our English Divines mentioned in this Book, and many others that con∣cur with them therein, but that it would swell to too great a volumn, and prove tedious to the Readers.
Let me only add this, That such Rulers as improe their power against such enemies of God, and his Church, shall (besides the Euge of a good con∣science,
which is far better then the worlds Plaudite) delight them∣selves in the Lord, and raign in the hearts, and affections of all good men. As they do worthily in E∣phraca, so they shall be famous in Bethlehem, Ruth 4.11.
Honourable Sirs, May I not say to the same purpose to you, as Mor∣decai did to Hester, Who can tell but that God hath reserved you for such a time as this? I hope you will improve all your abilities, and interests for the decrying of such an intollerable Tol∣leration, and for the countenancing, and encouraging of the truth, and the Assertors of it, which will be your joy, and the rejoycing in that great, and approaching day, when you must give up your account to him that is no Respe∣cter of persons, but will render unto every one according to his works. My prayer for you is, That ye may be blameless, and harmeless, the sons of God, without Rebuke, in the
midst of a crooked, and perverse Nation, amongst whom ye may shine as lights in the world; de∣siring to be esteemed, as I am
Devouted to the ser∣vice of your Faith,
From my Study in Thridneedle-street; May 25. 1659.

