


My Lords,
THE reason why wee have here mentioned Your Honourable Names, is in regard the matter contained in Our DISCO∣VERER, is your deserved Vin∣dication, from many vile asper∣sions raysed up against you by some malitious and seditious tongues. You hnow in War, the Generall and cheife Commanders are sought after by every one, more then the common Souldiers. Envy is like certaine Flyes called Cantharides, who light specially upon the fairest Wheat, and most blown roses. That you are singled out by some men, and made now the subject of their falsehood and slan∣der, it is no marvaile; for it hath been so from the beginning; men evermore of best deserving, and greatest worth, have most felt the scourge of tongues. M. Cato Major a Pop. Rom. prudens vp∣pellatus
 maximis Romarum odijs exercitus est. Qua∣dragies enim series reus causam dixit, semperque absol∣tus est. Sabel l. 1. c. 6.
Elias layd this downe as a reason, why he was willing to die, I am no better then my Fathers. The like reason may move you to be patient, content∣ed, comforted: you are not worse used then David was, yea Christ himselfe, your Lord and Master was serv'd so. When an Artificer hath before his eyes a famous patterne of his worke, on which he look∣eth, he perfecteth his owne much the better. Tak the Prophets which were before you for an example of suf∣fering, men eminent for grace, gifts and Office. Quis emim paulo majori anime non malt in bello cum periclo cum his proficisci, qui in precio sunt, quam domi cum is in ocio desidere qui contempti habentur; maxime si rex ipse ad Pralium eat? Cartwright: historia Christi. Lib. 1. p 375.
Besides it must needs be a matter of singular joy unto you, to consider, how the godly every where love you, honour you, carrie you in their Bosome, and on their hearts, as the Jewels, and Treasure of the people. So that as light is loved (and men will love it) though Batts and Owles reject it: so are you under God, esteemed as two great lights of the Nation; neither doth the splendour and brightnesse of your persons appeare the lesse lovely, sweet and
 beautifull to them, for that some Night-birds can∣not without vexation and envy looke thereon:
And to say the truth, the godly every where have the more cause to love and honour you, considering it is for their sake, and the truths sake, and for the advancement thereof, that you are aspers'd; and so much we have in this Treatise manifested.
And howsoever for your owne particulars, there needed not this Vindication: for inward peace and a good conscience is enough for a mans owne sa∣tisfaction. superat conscientia, quicquid ma finxerit lingua as Seneca saith, Epist: lib: de mor: and as Ti∣berius sayd to Rhscuporis; si frans abesses, poss eam innocentiae fider. T Annal: 2. Neverthelesse finding their accusation to be false, scandalous, and seditious, we thought it our dutie to step in and so to manifest as much respect and love unto your persons, in maintaining the honour and inocencie of your names, and justnesse of your cause; as o∣thers shew their malignitie and hatred, in seeking by calumniation and slander, to blast you, and your righteous proceedings.
Charles the fift had for his devise a Ball with two Balloones, with this motto, percussus clevor, the harder I am stricken the higher I mount. Hitherto you have made this true, and we hope it shall still be so, as that in after Generations it shall be sayd, the enemies raysd
 you and by their stroaks you won honour and fame. The searcher of all hearts knowes, how desirously we desire; that as the Lord hath wonderfully blest your undertakings and Crown'd you with many glori∣ous victories; so you, even you (we say) may be THE MEN and the Instruments in Gods hand to make England and Ireland fully happy, and of you that may be sayd, and fulfilled in you, . And likewise that,
Nec tarda senectus
Debilitet vires animi, mutetque virorem.
Neither have we taken this worke in hand, without sitting down first and counting the cost: we have indeed considered the charge, and doe ex∣pect Bitter words, but we are not thereby discour∣aged at all: you have often been in the mid'st of Swords, Speares, and other Instruments of death, for us, and therefore it's the least we can doe, to suffer the Speares, Swords and Arrowes of evill Tongues for so just and Honourable a cause as this is. Therefore according to our engagement, so we shall (God willing) goe forward to stop the mouth of absurd and unreasonable men.
