


SIR,
IT is a question much controverted in these times, whether Jesus Christ, besides his spiri∣tual Kingdom in his Chrurches, and in the hearts of his people, is to have an outward Political Kingdom in the world? and there are not a few of godly, wise, and sober Chri∣stians that do conclude affirmatively for the same, and that (as it seems to me) upon undeniable authorities from the ho∣ly Scriptures. But this being granted, it will prove a matter of no lesse difficulty to determine by whom this kingdome shall be administred, whether by our Lord Jesus himself in per∣son residing here upon earth; or by his Delegates, or officers to whom he shall commit the rule and government under himself? The former hath yet received small entertainment in my heart, as seeing little clear Scripture evidence for it (whatever others may see) but rather it seeming to clash with some other weighty doctrines of the faith more clearly grounded on the Word, and to be attended with such in∣conveniences,
 as the Authours of this opinion know not well how to remove: But for the latter, it need not seem so in∣credible; for seeing Jesus Christ hath already so long exerci∣sed his spiritual Kingdome, and regiment in his Churches, by Officers and Delegates thereunto appointed by himself; why should it then seem strange to us, if his outward political Kingdome should be administred in like manner? and (as I judge) this seemes to have far clearer testimony from the Scripture then the former. But are not we in a great strait yet to finde out, who are these Officers or Delegates to whom Jesus Christ hath committed the government of this outward Political Kingdome in the world? whether to his Churches and Saints (under that reduplication) as such, or to the Civil Magistrate? I am not unwilling to acknowledge my own mistake, (and possibly it may be the mistake of some ho∣nest hearts, who are zealous now against the present powers upon this account) that I have sometimes inclined to the former, although I never had thoughts of acting against a∣ny established Government, for to bring about my concepti∣ons in such things, sure it is most dangerous and unwarrant∣able for private persons to do so; The ground of my mi∣stake was an assertion received amongst many wise and holy men, and therefore the lesse questioned by me; that the Magistrate was no Officer of Jesus Christ as Mediatour; whereupon I concluded, seeing that Jesus Christ as Media∣tour should have an outward Political Kingdom upon earth, and the Magistrate as such, was no Officer in that Kingdome, that there must be some other hands, into which this power and Dominion must be committed, and who then might lay better Scripture claim to it, then the persons above na∣med?
But I do retract my errour in that particular (for I dare not say with the Papists and Quakers, I am infallible and cannot erre,) and do acknowledge the Magistrate to be an Officer of Jesus Christ as Mediatour, and therefore in this external Poli∣tical
 Kingdom of Christ, the rule doth belong to him, and not to the Saints as Saints; though withal I doubt not but the Lord Jesus will in these last dayes raise up such to be Magi∣strates, as shall be Saints and nursing fathers to his Churches, governing more for the honour of Christ, and for the welfare and benefit of his Churches then formerly, and then shall the kingdoms of the world become the Kingdomes of the Lord, and of his Saints.
That which induced me to be of this judgement for the Ma∣gistrate to be an Officer of Jesus Christ in this outward Poli∣tical kingdom (though he is no Officer in the spiritual King∣dom of his Church, as the Erastians contend) was the serious consideration of such Scriptures as these, Prov. 8.15, 16. Mat. 28.18 Isa. 49.13. Psalme 2.8, 10, 11, 12. Psalme 72.10, 11. and indeed Christ having undertaken the work of mans re∣demption, the Father hath delivered up the whole creation unto him in order to his managing of that work, and there∣fore must Magistracy belong to him as Mediatour, Rom. 14.9. Luke 10.22. John 3.15. Eph. 1.20, 21, 22. It were a work of no great difficulty to answer the arguments brought to the contrary, and is already done by some.
Now this being granted, as it doth strongly confirme the title of the Magistrate to his rule and government, against all that would, under any pretext, challenge it from him: So it may seriously minde him to consider from whom he hath received his power and authority, and to whom he must one day be acountable for it, and therefore to use it (not only for the promoting of the civil good and benefit of men, but) espe∣cially for the advantage of the spiritual Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the interest of his Churches; for it was in this re∣spect, that Christ had this power given to him by the Father, he gave him to be head over all things to the Church; and sure Christ expects that those to whom he commits this pow∣er, as his Vice-gerents upon earth, should use it for the same
 ends, the Father did first betrust it into his hands for. And how clear is it in Scripture, that all those godly Princes and Magistrates spoken of therein, did make it their first and chiefest care to promote Religion, and to see that the Wor∣ship of God was maintained in purity, and that the Church flourished in their Dominions; not that they were Officers in the Church, and might themselves administer in the holy things, this was rebuked in some of them; but that they had an external care about the same, as sometimes that Chri∣stian Emperour Constantine of famous memory said, he was Episcopus  not  (Euseb. lib. 4.) an overseer of things without, as those nurse-fathers, Hezekiah, Josia, Asa, Jehoshaphat were; but not an overseer of things within, as Uzziah would have been.
There is an opinion entertained amongst many in these dayes, (and some of them good men too) that the Magistrate ought to meddle only with matters of the second Table, not taking inspection of things appertaining to the first; that he is only to maintaine civil peace amongst men and outward righteousnesse, not heeding Religion or the Worship of God at all, as he is a Magistrate; If this once be received by Ma∣gistrates, Jesus Christ will be little beholden to them, they must as well protect the worshippers of Mahomet, as of Christ so long as they keep the peace, and live in civil honesty amongst men; these men beleeve not the Magistrate to be Christs Officer as he is Mediatour and head of his Church, if they did they would be of another mind. But enough is said against this woful assertion by Mr. Cotton bloody tenet washed; by the Elders of N. Eng. in the Synod, Anno 1646. and by Mr. Cobbet in his book dedicated to your Highnesse some few yeares since. And the blessing of the Lord upon the care of the godly Magistrates in N. E. hath been as a Seal to attest the Lords acceptance of what they have done there about this particular.

The premises considered, I should humbly offer to your Highnesse, (may my presumption herein be indulged) espe∣cially two particulars wherein you may imploy that great power wich our Lord Jesus hath betrusted you with, as his Delegate, for the promoting that great end, for which all power was first given to him by the Father, to wit, the spiri∣tual good and welfare of his Church.
1. That you would please to put forth your endeavours towards the uniting of the people of God in these Nations, who dissenting in lesser matters, do yet maintaine the funda∣mentals of Religion, in whose spirits the vitals of Christianity are still preserved, and in whose lives the power and practise of godlinesse doth yet appear. And in order hereunto, that you would by your authority call together a few of the most judicious godly, and peaceable of such Dissenters, and lay your most solemn charge upon them that they would after (their fervent invocation on the Name of the Lord for direction and assistance in so great a work) study an holy and peaceable accommodation and agreement (so farre as may be in their principles, but especially) in such necessary Church practises, as the Churches of Christ amongst us, may walk together with more Christian love and unity. I should hope (notwithstand∣ing former disappointments) the Lord would at last give them hearts to know what concerns their and the Churches peace, after they have had such sad experience of the evil fruits of our divisions. And that then you would commend such a pacificatory agreement to the Christian people of these Na∣tions, and give some more special encouragement to those who shall be so tender of the Churches peace and union, as to practise according to the same. This were a work worthy of a Christian Magistrate, who by his office is to be an healer, Isa. 3.6, 7 and would give you the honour even to many generations, to be called the repairer of the breach, and the re∣storer of paths to dwell in.

II. That you would please to put some restrictions unto that (almost) boundlesse Tolleration now amongst us, whereby Seducers take liberty to broach such cursed doctrines as are a dishonour to the Name of Christ, and reproach and infamy to the Christian Religion; such as directly tend to the under∣mining of the profession and power of godlinesse, and to the destruction of souls. Nothing can be more evidently con∣trary to the spiritual welfare of the Church, the promoting whereof is the principal end of the Christian Magistrates pow∣er, (and not only the procuring of a civil good, which thing I cannot but often hint) then the free Tolleration of such per∣nitious and heretical doctrines. It is not a thing unknown, That seducers have been more dangerous enemies to the Church then bloody persecutors, where persecution hath slain its thousands, the deadly poison of false doctrine hath slain its ten thousands; and when the one hath killed mens bodies, the other hath murdered mens souls; the Church hath ever thri∣ven under persecution (the blood of the Martyrs being the seed of the Church, but it hath been brought very low under He∣resies. If Magistrates be the Churches Nurs-fathers (as the Scripture speaks,) sure their Office not only obliges them, to take care that her children have the milk of the Word dis∣pensed to them, but that (as much as in them lieth) it be dis∣pensed purely and sincerely without the mixture of poyson to destroy them. Magistrates are called Shepherds. Isa 44, 28. and that with respect to the Church, and therfore should pro∣tect her from ravenous Wolves: they are called Gods, but they should be poor gods, if they took no care of Religion. What ample testimonies hath the Lord given to David, Solomon, Asa, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Iosiah for their care of Religion? nor will the names of Constantine, Theodotius, Iustinian cease to be precious in and for their care of the Church of Christ. Even the Heathens, Aristotle and Plato acknowledge (from the light within them, that the chiefe care in a Common-wealth
 should be about Religion. But I presume not to add more words for this, there being so much already said in those three Trea∣tises before mentioned for the same, and in particular against tolleration of seducers, all contrary arguments that have been made, being therein fully answered.
Only I crave leave to adde this further, that I am not plead∣ing now against those lesser errours amongst us, which will be so long as we are imperfect and know but in part; I should desire in behalf of such as so erre, we might shew mutual love and forbearance, waiting, if any be otherwise minded, till the Lord reveal the same unto them: but against such grosse and damnable doctrines as were before named. Nor do I here call for fire to consume such as be seduced by such doctrines, but I cry earnestly for pity and compassion to be shewed to∣ward them, to pull them as firebrands out of the fire. It can∣not but move our bowels to see some of our dear relations, friends and neighbours, to drink in greedily such poysonous principles (through the cunning craftinesse of Seducers that lie in wait to deceive) as we know assuredly, if the Lord give them not repentance to the acknowledgement of the truth, will damn their precious and immortal souls; and to see other weak ones stumbled; and the efficacy of the Gospel so much impeded in the bringing home souls to God, which hath been so prevalent a means in the hand of the Lord, till the pretious and fundamental truths of Christ have been called in questi∣on, and denyed by wicked deceivers amongst us. We cannot but cry aloud to God and man whilest we are eye-witnesses of these things. It's true, Jesus Christ is able without the help of men to maintain his own truths, and to call home, and pre∣serve his Elect ones, and we doubt not but he will do it where means fail, even by miraculous providences and testimonies from heaven, but this is no warrant to us to neglect Gods ap∣pointed means; every one is to contend in their places for the truth, nor can we expect miracles till these ordinary means fail.
May it please your Highnesse to look into the following
 Treatise, and you may see the abominable doctrines of those people amongst us called Quakers, faithfully presented to your veiw; although I doubt not but you have sufficient know∣ledge of them already, yet I would humbly minde you of them, whilest your other weighty employments divert your thoughts otherwise; and incite you, out of your tendernesse to the honour of Jesus Christ, whose Delegate you are; out of your love to the Churches and people of God, for whose spiritual welfare you have this great power committed to you; and out of compassion to the perishing souls of seduced people; to put some stop to those seducers now in your Dominions, that they may not have such freedom and license by word and writing to broach such damnable do∣ctrines; then which no duty can be more incumbent on you, as you are an Officer of Jesus Christ in his political Kingdome, which we hope, he is about to establish in the world more glo∣riously then in former ages.
The Lord of heaven and earth blesse your Highnesse with the continuance of his gracious presence with you; keep your heart close with himself in these back-sliding times; and en∣rich you with all graces, that may fit you for the faithful dis∣charge of your duty in so high and eminent a place; that as you have done valiantly in the high places of the field, so you govern as righteously and happily in the gates of the City. Which is, and shall be the prayer of him, who is

