



SIR,
A Good Cause teach∣eth Confidence; Therefore it is, My Lord, that now step∣ing by Providence on the stage of the World, and a world of censures, I humbly crave Your Highness's Signature at the en∣trance:
The subject of this sad History, together with the great affairs now on foot, makes me believe that my poor endeavours fall directly under Your Highness's cognizance: And this, my Lord, is the only ground of my rude accost, next to the little ambition I have to die in debt to my own duty.
Here is, my Lord, presented to Your speciall perusall, a dis∣mall Story, a piece of such cruelty and impiety as reaches beyound example; such a piece of mon∣strous villany, as hath not the least adumbration to shadow it from Divine Justice. Here may Your Highness behold the greatest cru∣elty and Tyranny, with splendid equipage, walk up and down with∣out controul: A place so loaded with fatall Butcheries, Murthers, and Massacres of many thousands of poor Protestants; so invested
with Christian blood, that some eminent and unheard of vengeance cannot but threaten as the proper effects of so direfull impieties: Oh! my Lord, How many poor Christians are here begging for death in a living Sepulchre! This, this is the place wherein Your Highness may perceive the crying and scarlet sinne of murther hath made so ample a progression: Oh! let Your Highness think of those numerous tears that You may wipe away from flowing eyes, at the first sight of Liberty; That as a bird delivered from the snare, mounts with delight, so may the poor servants of the most High rejoyce in their approaching hap∣piness. For
My Lord, who knows but Your Highness is now called out by the Great Jehovah to root out this Monster, and make inquisition for blood: What godly Protestant
is there in this Nation, or beyond the Seas, (which beholding the grand Affairs now in agitation) cannot a little trace Divine foot∣steps, and conclude them to be greater pieces of Providence than ever yet ingros't the Worlds ob∣servance? To see the Victorious King of Sweden, with the no less courage of Your Highness a∣gainst the Man of Sinne: Oh! how it rejoyces the hearts, and swels the hopes of all good Pro∣testants into a belief, that now God is setting his foot on the neck of Tyranny, and Popish cru∣elty: These are, my Lord, trans∣actions, that fill the World with big expectations, and oh! that this Dagon of Cruelty may fall under the powerfull Conquest of Your Highness acquests. As it is true, my Lord, 'tis pity that Greatness should ever be out of the road of Goodness; so is it as true,
that it refreshes the hearts of all good Christians, to see Your Highness use Your Power to great∣en Truth, and expatiate the bounds of the Protestant Interest: Let me therefore take the boldness to put Your Highness in minde of that good maxim, Verè mag∣num est magna facere, & teip∣sum putare nihil.
And since, my Lord, we have entred on such a Just and Honourable Warre with the Spa∣nish Nation, (in which this Ser∣pentine vegetable grows, a Na∣tion so full of bloody resolu∣tions against all Protestants) why may not Your Highness prove that blessed Agent in Gods hand, to reduce their Tyranny to obe∣dience? There's no other way, my Lord, to curb the rage of this Ocean of blood, but by Power to break their bands asunder; and it cannot be less then a sinne of a
crying nature, to be mercifull to such cruel Tygars Happy shall they be that take and dash their little ones against the stones.
Psal. 137.
Some may say, and I must con∣fess it is true, my Lord, That Peace and quiet is the Summum bonum in Politicks; and that freedom of Religion is the unum necessarium in the body of Liber∣ty, is a Notion also that lieth up∣permost in the understandings of all men; on these hinges hang our lower happiness; Peace and Liber∣ty being inseparable companions to a sure fabrick. That Peace is built on sand, that hath not Li∣berty for it's Foundation. And for the Spaniard, Your Highness very well knows, (for it's out of the reach of question) that he is the grand enemy to the heart of our happiness; and it's good Arith∣metick to reckon our safety best guarded in a Warre with him;
neither can I imagine it any other then a blasphemy against discreti∣on, to follow the inconsiderate vogue of a clamorous peace; espe∣cially with such as shroud trea∣chery under it, as make Peace a Pandor to it. He that wisheth well to posterity, and rightly un∣derstands our quarrell, cannot grudge to contribute the best part of his estate, to the support of so good a Cause, nay he that is a true Protestant, and hath but his veins well fil'd with true English blood, will not I hope think it all lost, if it please God to call him to so great an honour. The Proverb is, He that makes a good Warre, makes a good Peace: And it is, my Lord, with the Spaniard, as with Nettles, that sting most vi∣olently, when handled most gent∣ly: So as Your Highness may conclude, That it is a good Peace, to have none with him.

For, my Lord, He that knows any thing of former transactions in Q Elizabeths daies, and con∣siders what friends the Spaniards have alwaies been, and now are, (by a naturall Antipathy) to England: If he yet doubts of the Justness and Legality of our Cause, 'tis pity but his Neck should hung in suspence with his Conscience. It cannot but be accounted a cru∣elty to posterity, for Your High∣ness to suffer such a liberty of Commerce, which the Spaniard only makes as a Trap for the thraldom of our Consciences. My Lord, If we must have a Peace, let it never be said (I had almost let my Pen deviate into that sini∣ster path of boldness, as to say cursed be the day) that England shall stoop to any conditions with Spain, unless with such honour, as may not only make our Nation formidable in the Western World,
but also that in Spain it self Li∣berty of Conscience shall usher in a Freedom of Trade, rather than a Trade draw down that hook of ruine, wrap't up in that bloody bait of the cruel Inquisition. Till then, my Lord, what Merchant can say, his Life, Estate, Ship, Goods, &c. when once arrived in Spain, are his own, if the bloody Inquisition please to call them theirs? Never let posterity be tied to so hard a bargain, as to pay their Lives and Liberties as the Interest of so sad a purchase. Therefore I may be so bold with Your Highness, as to affirm, That Peace without Liberty, is no other then a winding-sheet for both. So that, my Lord, if we look not about us, time and experience (the two great lumina∣ries of Reason) may illustrate this assertion, and too sadly form it into a truth, if that be true,
Qui ante non caveat, post dole∣bit. And
Now, my Lord, when I call back the thoughts of my boldness with Your Highness, I remember the Italian Proverb, That Paper blusheth not, yet do I, till assu∣red in hope of acceptance, from so grand a master-piece of Judge∣ment and Prudence. Your High∣ness, I doubt not, will put on so much candor, as to forget the po∣verty of this sacrifice, whose only worth (if any) is lodg'd in the Zeal and Affection to the service of all true Protestants, and my own Country: and I hope to be the sooner forgiven, when I con∣sider, that there's nothing in rea∣son to excuse a fault more, then the intentions rightly fixed, though not successfull.
May it therefore please Your Highness to pardon my presumpti∣on, and give me liberty to leave
my duty behinde me, in a few good desires to the happiness of this Na∣tion. May Your Highness press forward, and be as a standing example, a Monument of Zeal for God, even to Posterity; That Your Highness may be an In∣strument of innobling the English Nation, in reviving it's antient, and enroling its present Valour in the Records of Fame: I will conclude, my Lord, with that commendable saying of one, con∣cerning the Noble Gustavus A∣dolphus King of Sweden, That he passed through the Temple of Vertue, ere he arrived to that of Honour. Which with∣out flattery cannot unfitly be af∣fixed to the Crown of Your im∣mortall Glory. Thus will the Lord Crowne the Industry of Vertuous Actions, with the Il∣lustrious Lawrels of his own bles∣sing: That this may be Your
Highness's Portion, it shall not want the Quotidian Orisons of,
SIR,

