



SIRS,
SINCE the Imprisonment of Mr. Lil∣burne, and the other three; There is published a Book under Mr. Walwins Name, wherein he manifesteth a great desire, that the Parliament had been pleased for the satisfaction of all those their faithfull Friends who are concerned in it, and of the whole Nation in generall, to have expresly applyed each part of the Book to each censure upon it, as to have shewed in what part it was false, scandalous, and reproachfull, in what destructive to the present Go∣vernment, also to have shewed what part, sentence, or matter therein rended to division and mutiny in the Army, and the raysing of a new Warre in the Com∣mon wealth; or wherein to hinder the reliefe of Ire∣land, and continuing of Free-Quarter.
For what end he writes thus, it may easily be conjectur'd: And therefore to wipe of the aspersion and reproach from your Honourable House, we have undertaken the Justi∣fication of your Censure upon that Booke and according to the severest crimes and guilt Expressed in your Act, have here manifested the sayd Booke to deserve no lesse in every particular.
Now from this answer, we are occasioned to put you in minde, how dangerous and destructive to all formes and
 kinds of Government, are Trayterous, Mutinous, and Re∣proachfull Libels, and Pasquils, In truth the wisest of the Gentiles understood so much, and accordingly prescribed and provided remedies against it in their republicks. We have also observed the wisedome and singular care of Magi∣strates in forraine parts: For howsoever there are persons amongst them, as ill affected to their State as any herewith us, yet they know how, and doe, stop the passage and prevent the danger of such things by the due execution of good lawes.
It is true, in our Lawes there are helps provided: not∣withstanding the mischeif and miserie remaines. And why? As foolish Birds frighted a little at first with the Husband∣mans Scarerow, and after a while observing that it stirre not, are bold to sit it upon it and defile it. So when Authority either revives some former statute or makes a new act against the aspersers of the present Government, at first the Libel∣lers and Raylers are a little frighted: But seeing there is not that mooving, acting, prosecuting as they fear at first, they take so much boldnesse as to come neere you, even to your very faces, set upon you, and defile you, and not onely in your reputation and name, but your power and Government and in the vilest and basest manner as ever was known in any Common-wealth, (Sirs) we speake this out of a tender res∣pect unto you, and to shew how much we desire that the Facs of our Elders may be honoured, and their Authoritie not blasted by such a base Generation of men. Neither truely know we any cause why such Pests and Plagues in a common∣wealth may not as well be suppressed in England as in other parts, If the like strict and exact course be taken here as  elsewhere. Now the Lord give you that wisedome, both in this and other things, as may be for the Nations prosperity, peace, libertie: and your own comfort Crown and honour.
