



IT is well spoken by Philip King of Mace∣don, that the reproaches and injuries of the Athe∣nian Orators should cause him to order his words and deeds so; that themselves might be proved lyers. Your good beginning promiseth the same to the whole Nation; and we have great hopes now, that such a further progres will be made in the work of a full Reformation, as the righteous shall see it and rejoyce, & all iniquity shal stop her mouth.Psal. 107.42.
For the mutinous tumult and noise which some men make in the City, by reason of their loose tongues and pens, to obstruct your good proceedings, and to raise a new war, and involve the people again in blood, it is but a flash, and the Lord will suddenly blast it: Only it is worth your observing, how your enemies in many particulars, are like the adversaries of Nehemiah, and the honest party with him. When Sanballat, Tobiah, Geshem the Arabian, and the rest perceived that all their former Malignant designs took no ef∣fect, but the building went prosperously forward, they drew over to them the Priests, by bribery and flattery, and by these mens speeches they thought to affright the Governor, and bring that to passe which they could not do by other means.Neh. 4.1.2,3.11.15. chap. 6.1,2,4,5,9,10,12,13,14 ch. 13.28 29. This present conspiracy amongst the Prophets, is a bringing up of the rear, the last piece of the whole work: As we see on a stage severall actors, and every one playes his part, yet all make but one Tragedy; so the rising in Kent, Essex, Wales, the revolting of the Ships, the bringing in of the Scots; the Personal Treaty, and these Pulpit Incendiaries, 'tis all one plot, howsoever acted by several persons, and therefore I doubt not, but as the Lord hath discovered the treachery of the one, so he will the hypocrisie of the other, and confound the whole build∣ing, both first, and last.
Moreover we cannot but take notise, in and through what further
 difficulties and streights the Lord hath held you up, and carried you on; we are very senceable how some have left you in the work, of whom we thought better things, & did think they would have been more faithfull and reall to their trust, the truth and their own prin∣ciples. Aelian reports of Dionysius that he married two wives in one day, the one followed him in his wars, the other accompanied him only at his return: Men are forward enough to come in when the fight is over, to have a part and share in the spoil and fruit of the vi∣ctory, but what they deserve, is to be considered of, and this to be minded.
Ignavum fucos pecus a praesepibus arcent.
I have made the more hast to publish this First Part, because I perceive not only Royalists and Cavileers accuse you of high in∣justice against the Person of the King, and that the action hath been formerly carried forth meerly by power, without Law, reason or conscience: But also, the lawfulnesse of the thing, is by some better minded, and persons more honest, doubted, and are not cleerly satis∣fied therein: And for these later, I say, specially for their sake, I have taken in hand, not your cause so much, as the cause of the whole Nation, and have not only given a satisfactory answer to whatsoever may be objected against the act, but justified what hath been don by your authority in point of Law and conscience, to all rational and indifferent men.
I confesse it yeelds to the soul but little peace, when our actions have no other bottom or foundation, but opportunities, power, ad∣vantages, successe. But when we know it is Gods work, and we see it don in Gods way, then the present opportunity, power, and succes, is a manifest and infallible witnes, that as the Lord owne the work, so he will honor the workmen, & be their mighty protector.
And this I prove to be your case, not that the action was just be∣cause you had opportunity and power to do it, but being in it self just, and you lawfully called thereto; the power and opportunity which God gave you, did manifest his approving your zeal & ju∣stice. Now the God of peace, and the Lord of hosts, be ever mightily present with you, to counsel, direct, protect, and prosper your endea∣vors, that we may no longer talk of Subjects liberty, and right things, but know them and enjoy them, we and our posterity; and this being accomplished, he that desires the Publick good, resteth Yours to serve,

