



Dearly beloved in the Lord:
IT was at your request that I first preached this Sermon; and it is more to satisfie your desires than mine own, that I now print it. They that know me, cannot but withall know how backward I have ever been (being conscious to my own weaknesse) to publish any of my labours in this kind; and your selves can bear me witness, that it was my earnest request, that you would have laid this burthen upon abler shoulders, especially ha∣ving so great choise of godly and learned Mini∣sters whom you invited to the Funeral: But when you persevered in your desires and re∣quests

to me to undertake it, my chiefest care was to make choise of such a subject, as (through Gods blessing) might come home to your hearts, and direct your behaviour under so great a burthen, as is the losse of a dear and and only Son. I knew that your affections were strong, and that you had need of a great deal of heavenly wisdom to enable you to mo∣derate them; and whence is this wisdom to be learned, but from the sacred Scriptures, which are richly stored with precious promises, as with so many cordials to revive and strengthen us in our greatest necessities. Ʋnless thy Law (faith David, meaning principally the promi∣ses contained in it) had been my delights, I should have perished in mine affliction, Psal. 119. 92. But as those which are faln into a swoon, may be fetched again with hot waters poured down their throats: so they that are troubled and pressed down under the heavy burthen of sor∣row and grief, may by patience and comfort of the Scriptures recover hope and joy.
The Text which God directed me to treat of was both seasonable and suitable to your present condition; as not onely teaching you how to behave your selves under such an affli∣ction,

but holding forth to you sound and suf∣ficient arguments to perswade and induce you to the practice of the same: I beseech you therefore to read it over and over again, and remember what the Father said; these are Verba vivenda, & non legenda solùm, words to be lived and practised, and not to be read only: Such a sentence it is as a man would fetch from China upon his bare feet, rather than be with∣out it. Take, I pray you, your correction as from Gods hand, and humble your selves un∣der the smart of it: yet withal look to Christ, and entreat him that your Faith, Hope, and meeknesse may not be overturned by it, but rather that the affliction may bring forth Pati∣ence, and Patience Experience, and Experience Hope. Consider who it is that hath done it: Is he not your heavenly Father? Now if your na∣tural Father had done some shrewd turn at un∣awares, by breaking a thing wherein you much delighted, when you heard that he did it, you would be quiet, though before you were much moved: Should you not say with Christ? Shall I not drink of that cup, that my Father will have me to drink of? Remember, I pray you, what the Apostle suggesteth, Hebr. 12. 9. We

have had Fathers of our flesh that have corrected us, and we gave them reverence: Shall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of our Spirits, and live? v. 10. For they verily for a few days chastned us after their own pleasure; but he for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holinesse.
Consider, I pray you, if God when you were first married should have told you, I will give you two children, and you shall bring them up so many years, and then I will take them away again; would you not have accepted gladly of this offer, and taken it thankfully too? why? the event doth tell you no lesse than if he had spoken so afore-hand, and will you now mur∣mur or repine at his dispensation? Is not God the chief Father of all the Families in Heaven and Earth, and we but Foster-parents to our own children under him? Is it not a mercy that God hath made you instrumentall for the en∣larging of his Kingdom, though he hath taken both your children from you? Say therefore with Job, The Lord hath given, and the Lord hath taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord. At least say with David, I was dumb, and opened not my mouth, because thou Lord didst it. Oh! la∣bour

for good old Eli's temper, It is the Lord, let him do what seems good in his eyes, 1 Sam. 3. 18. Consider that God who hath done it, is Love, and if you look upon it as an effect of his anger towards you, yet be of good comfort, that God that would not have sinful man to let the Sun go down upon his anger, he will not re∣tain his anger for ever, because he delighteth in mercy, Micha. 7. 18.
But I presume that one thing addes a great sting to your affliction, which is, that hereby you want an Heir to enjoy your Estate, and to preserve your name: for all men naturally af∣fect immortality, and because they cannot en∣joy it in themselves, they desire it in their po∣sterity that survives them: But for a medicine to this malady, remember what the Lord spea∣keth, Isa. 56. 3, 4, 5 Let not the Eunuch say, Be∣hold, I am a dry tree. For thus saith the Lord to the Eunuchs that keep my Sabbath, & choose the things that please me, and take hold of my Covenant; even unto them will I give in my house, and within my walls, a place and a name better than of sons and of daughters, I will give tbem an everlasting name that shall not be cut off.
Let me but adde one word more, and I have

done; Consider what a mercy it is, that God hath given you so many Christian friends that sympathize with you, and help to bear your burthen; so many godly and able comforters to speak a word in season to your afflicted souls, so many faithful Ministers and Christians that daily pray for you, and beg of God that he will support you under this heavy losse, and make it up in some better blessing. Remember, I be∣seech you, what our Lord and Saviour Christ saith, Luke 14. 26. If any one come unto me, and hates not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea and his own life also, he cannot be my Disciple.
Now the God of comfort be your comforter, and give you a large measure of prudence, pati∣ence, self-denial, with a full and free resignati∣on of your▪self, to the absolute disposal of the All-wise and All-merciful God, that you may as well in heart, as in words say, Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven, which is the servent prayer of
From my Study in Thred-needle-street Jan. 14. 1658/9.

