



Providence hath so ordered, that my First-born should be within my own Tribe: which, notwithstanding is a pri∣viledge I truly value, yet I must confesse, the means of obtaining it, are so contrary to my private spirit, that had it not been for those importunities which frequently assaulted an easie nature, I should rather have chosen to have died childlesse, then to have endured the hazards and incon∣veniences that attend posterity in an Evil Age: But having neither obstina∣cy nor ill manners enough, to deny the solicitations of my Countrey-men, especi∣ally of them that were the Prime Ma∣sters of that dayes Ceremony; I have at last suffered my self to be over-ruled against my own inclinations: And now, like a modest Woman in her first teem∣ing, I am ready to Blush at my Burden, and am affraid of the dangers of my tra∣vail,
 being as sufficiently sensible of my own weaknesse, as of the affronts and rudenesse of a Censorious Generation.
Which is a work yet more fearful to my thoughts, when I consider, that by ap∣pearing after this manner to the World, all those blemishes which might haply be over-look'd in the Current of a swift de∣livery, must now be exposed, as standing objects, to the view of Learned, Serious, and, perhaps, severe Judges: Ʋnto which disadvantage I may justly adde also, The weaknesse which commonly accompa∣nies a Dead Letter, when it is parted from the life and power of a Ministe∣rial dispensation; Especially considering (for my own part) that if I have any personal endowment worth the own∣ing, I may say without vanity, it lies rather in my Tongue then my Pen, my Hand (like Jacob in his disguise) being much rougher then my voice.

All which inconveniences (Dear Countreymen) I have named upon no other designe, but to let you see, that I value the Service of my Countrey, be∣yond my own Reputation; and that there is nothing too hard for me to grant, wherein you appear to be the suiters.
And now if in review of this Medi∣tation, you shall meet with any Doctrine, Precept, or Exhortation, that may en∣form your Judgements, quicken your Obedience, or put a fervour into your Affections, let this Little Good expiate for all the imperfections of the Work, or infirmities of the Workman; bear∣ing this in minde, That it will be a very great disorder to your designe, to be of∣fended at a Feast of Love, and to be censorious upon a Subject that pleads for Kindnesse and Forgivenesse. Let me therefore receive this as the First-fruits
 of your Obedience to the Doctrine of Love, That you can receive with meek∣nesse, the plainest truths of Religion; and that you will think any Doctrine well worth the Printing, which is worth your Practising; which as it is the main End of all our Ministry, so let it be the hap∣py effect of this poor and unworthy De∣dication, presented you by the hands of him that is
From my Study at North Crawly in Bucks. Dec. 10. 1655.




William Thomson.
John Berresford.
John Ellis.
Dr Robert Waller
Robert Brisco.
Thomas Bateman
Richard Mead.
Joseph Sible.
William Robinson.


