




I Presented you with these Christian Rules in a for∣mer edition; which being then vnexpectedly, and somewhat hastely pressed from me, were left tho more vnpersect; aswell in regard of the methode, as for many other faultes, caused by too much hast, which, vpon better leasure and reuiew, I haue endeauoured to a∣mend in this second edition: where∣in I haue also made some enlarge∣ment. Vnto the cost and paines where∣of,
I was encouraged by diuers, who assured me that the former hath pro∣ued neither vngratefull, nor vn∣profitable vnto manie. And not ha∣uing now anie more copies left wherewith to satisfie the desire of many good frends, who haue deman∣ded them; I haue putt on a hopefull confidence, that though by this my present Retreate, I am become a forrenner to my brethren, and a stranger to the Sonnes of my Mo∣ther ps. 68. Yet I should not thereby he rendred wholy vnusefull vnto my dearest Country: I acknowledge my profession obliges me to hazard for it what is most precious to me; yea and my verie life, to gaine the meanest soule to God. And if this my poore vnworthy paines, may by his gra∣tious blessing, become an instrumen∣tal cause to dispose some hearts to his diuine loue and seruice, I shall accompt my selfe, with ioy, to be re∣warded much more then a hundred fould vpon that scor. Besids D.
N. it needs must be great comfort to me, when I consider that you are to partake a more then ord nary share in the good diuidend of Gods gra∣cious blessings, for the benefitt which vertuous soules may receiue by these Rules: you who already haue so happily made him the owner of your heart, by the Character of your con∣stant sufferings for his sake: where∣by, in vertuous courage, and true fi∣delity, you haue not only imitated your noble Ancesters, but farr ex∣ceeded the president which they haue left you: for as our Chronicles doe truly ascribe to them, an vnaltera∣ble Constancy in defence of their law∣full earthly Soueraignes right: so you, now the last in your Sex of that self fame noble Family, not degene∣rating, doe generously conclude your part after a much more honorable manner, by cheerefull and constant sufferance for your true heauenly King, our Soueraigne Lord and Sa∣uiour IESVS-CHRIST: from
whom, with the great Apostle, you may in humble hope expect, that these momentary tribulations will worke aboue measure exceedingly an eternall weight of glory. 2. Cor. 4. Your ioy in this hope, may well be∣gett vertuous Patience in these your present sufferings; which will beco∣me light and easie, by his diuine loue, who best can giue strength to beare them for his sacke. This holy loue is that which gaue such inuincible cou∣rage to all the blessed Martyrs of each sex and age; as also to the tender and most illustrious Virgins, so vn∣dantedly to suffer the greatest rage & torments which their cruell persecu∣tors could inuent to exercise vpon those innocent and happy victimes of IESVS-CHRIST. This is that hea∣uenly eloquence which now perswades so many millions of verious and hap∣pie soules to forsake all the alluring pleasures, which this deluding world is able to propose vnto its greatest fa∣uorits; and to embrace the austerity
of a religious life: that dying thereby to all worldly pretentions, they may truly, and entirely liue to God. This diuine loue is finally that which hath replenished the deserts with verie Angels in purity, though inuested with humaine bodies in their mortali∣ty. Yea in the propbanest Courts, and in all sortes of secular callings, what multitudes of most holy and vertuous persons hath this odoriferous oyntment still drawne to true sanctity, in the obseruance of a most exemplar life, and vertuous Conuersation. The true practise whereof is most fruit∣fully performed by proposing to our selues (each one according to his cal∣ling) some Rule, and good methode, whereby rectifiing all our actions to the glory of God; and vniting them in true conformity, and obedience vnto his blessed will; the meanest of our acts, or sufferings: yea euen our ciuill myrth, and conuersation (ac∣companied with that holy disposition) becomes inuested wish true vertue,
and may meritt eternall recompence. And as for your particular. D. N. whose chiefe designe hath euer been the laudable practise of a vertuous Conuersation; I cannot doubt, but you haue found the subiect of this little treatise, so much the more pleasing vnto you, as it layes open, and trea∣tes in a plaine and familiar manner, the practize of those daily vertuous exercises; which a soule enamored with her diuine Spouse, is most feruent∣ly desirous to imitate. This giues me the greatest confidence that my paines herein will be gratefull vnto you: and so much the more satisfactory also to my selfe; as your vertuous example shall giue good proofe, that there is no∣thing in these Christian Rules, which may not easily be practized by a ver∣tuous soule, aspiring to holy perfection, with faithfull correspondance to Gods holy grace, in the true practise of his loue.
And this was my true and only mo∣tiue to propose to you the exercise of
these ensuing Rules, and pious practi∣ses (as iust, and fitt occasion shall be offered you) by the help whereof I hope you may so regulate your actions, both in Conuersation, and all other employments; as whether you eate, re∣create, worke, conuerse, or what else soeuer you doe; you may purely perfor∣me all (as the Apostle exhorteth vs) for the honour and glory of God, and in the name of IESVS-CHRIST. that is; in the like disposition, affec∣tion, and intention wherewith he did his actions here vpon Earth; and with his spirit of Charity, of humility, of mildenesse, of patience, and true con∣formity: renouncing your owne proper will, and all other selfe interest, to ac∣complish the will and diuine pleasure of God: for in this holy purity of inten∣tion, consisteth the verie summe, and highest point of true Christians perfec∣tion; and the happie soule which shall once arriue at this most fortunate de∣gree; will there begin her heauenly Pa∣radise, euen in this world: for shee de∣siring
nothing but purely the will of God; shee is alwayes content, and nothing can displease her.
This is the greatest happinesse which I can allott vnto my owne dearest soule; and therefore, as such, I doe also most heartily bequeath the same to yours; who am yours, as his owne in IE∣SVS-CHRIST, and in all faithfull, and affectionate seruice for euer.

