


Right Honorable,
IT is now above twenty years since I was chosen Lecturer in Warwick, at which time meeting with some opposition, your Lordship was pleased so far to own me, as
 to make me your Chaplain, and to write your Letter in my behalf, whereby you re∣pressed the heat of my adversary, and pro∣cured my peace; since which time I have wanted opportunity to testifie to the world my gratitude for so noble a favour, but be∣ing now about to publish the lives of Prin∣ces, and Nobles, who were eminent for Pie∣ty, and Bulwarks to the Church, especial∣ly to godly Ministers, against the rage of Satan, and his instruments; I could find no fitter person to dedicate it unto, then your Lordship, who hath always been a Pattern of Piety, and a Patron to the pro∣fessors of it: I am sure the whole Kingdom can testifie your godly care to present able Ministers to those places which God hath made you the disposer of: Your exempla∣ry frequenting of Lectures, hath been a great encouragement both to Preach∣ers, and people: Your house hath been always open for the entertainment of Gods Ambassadors, even in the worst of times; and you are not yet ashamed to own them, 1 Cor 4. 13. when they are accounted as the filth of the
 world, and the off-scouring of all things, and the greatest troublers of the Land: when they are for signs and wonders, and that in Israel: I need Isa. 8. 18. not mention your faithfulness, your cou∣rage, your zeal for the good both of the King and Kingdom, in the middest of our late confusions: they are sufficiently known to all, and I presume that some which are now your adversaries will acknowledge, that your interest both at Sea and Land was a great means to preserve us from being swallowed up by the common adversary: and though your Lordship be now laid a∣side like a broken Vessel, in these daies where∣in God hath stained the pride of all glory, and brought into contempt all the honorable of the Isa. 23. 9. Land; Yet I doubt not but God will re∣member your labor of love, and all the good which you have done for his house, and that it shall add to your account in the great day of the Lord. Phil. 4. 17.
Go on therefore (Right Honorable) still to enoble your Name, and Family, by lay∣ing out your self for Iesus Christ: a godly
 fruitfull life, having a fairer prospect to∣wards honor, then all the advantages in the world besides. There is (saith one) a Pihl. 4. 17. Divine and supernaturall Nobility, where God is the top of the kin, and Religion is the Root, in regard of which all other No∣bility is but a shadow.
To be entituled unto this, I presume is your Lordships care, and to have your name found in the Book of Life, is the heighth of your ambition; and to be able to read it there, will be the foundation of all your comfort: Hereby your Lordship shall have sweet peace in the most trouble∣some times; for whilest the frame of the the Spirit in the ambitious, voluptuous, and riotous person, is like the lower part of the Elementary Region, full of unqui∣etness, because the seat of Winds, tem∣pests, and earthquakes: The believers soul, on the contrary, is like that part to∣wards Heaven, which is always peace∣able, and ever enjoys true rest, and joy.

 Many examples hereof your Lordship may find collected together in this Book, which I hope will not prove useless, nor fruitless in the reading: Examples are of a very attractive nature, and whilest we read and consider what Gods Worthies have formerly by Gods grace been enabled to do, and suffer for him, and his cause, we may have our faith and hope strength∣ned, by relying upon him for the like as∣sistance in all the various changes which do befall us in this our Earthly Pilgri∣mage: For, as though an heavy bur∣then be laid upon a whole shoulder, yet it goes away with it well enough: So if the Soul and Spirit be sound, and God en∣ables a man to bear it, diseases, disgraces, imprisonment, banishment, &c. are easily born.
The Lord in mercy preserve, and pro∣tract your Lordships life, still to be a re∣fuge to the afflicted, an honor to your Country, a Patron to the Faithfull Mi∣nisters of Iesus Christ: and so fill you with all grace, and goodness here, that
 you may be filled with glory, and im∣mortality hereafter, which is the daily prayer of
My Lord,

From my Study in Thredneedle-street, July 15. 1650.
