


THrice noble Sir, whom not Man a∣lone hath honored with greatest dignity of highest Military Com∣mand, but the God of Glory al∣so hath dignified, as with pecu∣liar Interests in his speciall Grace and Favour in Jesus Christ, and with an a∣bundant measure of the saving Graces of his bles∣sed Spirit, so with a glorious and prosperous suc∣cess in all your weighty undertakings; let it not seem overmuch boldness in me who am a stranger to you by face, that I send forth this following
 Discourse into the world, under the shadow of your Lordships Name. It seemeth, according to our best intelligence here, that the subject of this Discourse, beginning to grow the great contro∣versal business of these polemick times, your Ho∣nour, with some other of the Lords Worthies in England, have expressed some desire of yours, that something might be spoken thereunto: Now I having begun to do something that way former∣ly, and (though the most unworthy of any such respect from such choice Favourites of the Lord) being often moved by some of our honoured Ma∣gistrates, and reverend Elders here, to present it to publique view, I began to conclude, that it might be now seasonable, so to do; And although I were a very babe in comparison of others, for abilities and wisdom to manage so weighty a cause of the Lord; yet I remembred him that said, Out of the mouthes of babes and sucklings thou hast ordained strength, that thou mightest still the voice of the enemy and the avenger; so that I was incoura∣ged, not alone to put forth this discourse, but to make use of your Lordships Name therein. Be∣sides, we receiving certain information (Renow∣ned Worthy) of your dear respects to the Chur∣ches here, as also to our Civill State (which I trust New-England doth not, nor ever will for∣get)
 even your cordial appearing for us, who are so much subject to the reproach of tongues at so great a distance, together with your charitable & frequent expressions of the good opinion you have of us; This also (Right Honourable) the rather moved me, as a Member of this Polity, even in way of Gratitude, to dedicate to your Excellency this Apology for Civill Christ an Governments, why they ought, in their Ci∣vil, and Political way, to restrain and punish abuses and enormities, even in matters of the Lord & of the Church. You (truly noble, and valiant Sir) have quit your self like a man of God, in managing your Military weapons, in defence of the Civill State in England, against all opposers of them, for their ex∣emplary acts of Justice, which they did, both upon delinquent Statesmen, and (as they are called) Churchmen too; even the Prelates, and their reti∣nue: Yea you have to your utmost, in your Military way, managed that cause, at first covenanted by the State, which was, not alone the bringing of all sorts of Delinquents to their condign punishment, but the reforming of matters of Religion in Engl accord∣ing to the Word of God, & the pattern of the purest Churches: wherfore (right worthy Sir) what you have fought so many bloody battels for in the field, now stand couragiously, and plead stoutly for it in peace. Israels General Joshuah was not more famous for his prowess & victories over the Canaanites in the field,
 than for his care of setling Religion in the people, ac∣ding to Gods mind, when the War was ended; wit∣ness those memorable passages that way, recorded Josh. 23. & chap. 24. King David is renowned for the like care, who after the inhabitants of the land were given into his hand, and the land was subdued before the Lord and his people, 1 Chr. 22. 14. Now (saith he) set your hearts and souls to seek the Lord your God, and arise and build his Sanctuary, &c. And chap. 27. he ga∣thereth the chief Civill and Military Commanders before him, and ver. 8. he chargeth them all (in their severall places, callings, and conditions) to keep, and seek for all the Commandements of God; and he joy∣neth with him, in special, the chief Commanders of the Army, in a Civil way, to help on the Work of Religi∣on, and of the Church, mentioned 1 Chr. 25. 1, &c. Let not therefore the least thought arise in your Noble breast (Right honorable Sir) that it is  for you to meddle in such matters, or to maintain things of that nature: But let Holiness, and the defence and maintainance thereof, be written upon your hors. bridle, as it will be upon theirs whose Conversion we are even waiting for, Zach. 14. 20. Who will be presently up in arms for Christ and his cause, against which they were so long hardened. That returning Shulamites Portraiture is represented by the company of two Armies, Cant. 6. last; of whom more also is
 spoken, Zac 12. 5, 6, 7, 8. Jesus Christ himself is repre∣sented as the Generall of the Field, and owning the godly Souldiery as his Army, who, in a cause of Reli∣gion, shall, by the dint of the sword, be instruments to bring Antichrist and his Abettors to their deserved ruin, Rev. 17. & chap. 19. Yea, but could not Jesus Christ destroy them by his own immediate hand, and is not his Truth and Word of force to overthrow all that is contrary to it? Yea verily, yet is it the will and pleasure of Jesus Christ, by humane, externall, forcible means, to restrain, and punish such offen∣dors in matters of Religion; wherefore, neither the State, nor Souldiery of England, have any cause to re∣pent of their Covenant Ingagements, in their several respective ways, to endeavour the bringing it about, that Religion there may be reformed according to the Word of God, and the best patterns of the pu∣rest Churches. Nor hath the State of England any cause to retract any wholsom penall Laws which they have made the 2. of May 48. or since, against so many blasphemous, and false Doctrines, and corrupt Practi∣ses, in matters of Religion, mentioned in those seve∣rall worthy Laws. Nor hath either State or Soul∣diery any cause to condemn their own renowned acts of Zeal for the Lord, in some exemplary punish∣ments which accordingly they have already inflicted upon some persons for such like offences; but they
 shall assuredly find it good, to be alwayes zealous in a good thing. And as they have begun to shew themselves, to be indeed with Christ, and not against him, so to continue, and go on, in despite of all false, or malignant spirits or tongues. And as for you (most Noble Sir) who in your Military way, have had so many Military disputes for the Causes of the Lord, if it be vile to be for Jesus Christ, be you yet more vile, only still keeping (as through Grace you have done hitherto) low in your own eyes; so shall you at length, after you have stood, and in your way also have fought for Christ and his Cause, com to receive that incorruptible Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give you at that day; and not to you onely, but to all those which love his appearing: Which shall be ever his prayer who is, Sir,
Lynne in New-Engl. this 4th of the 8th 52.

