




Your Townesman wisheth, that Truth in Peace, and Peace in Truth, may dwell in your hearts as one man.

GENTLEMEN,
WEre it so that Truth were understood in its Center, that Truth were apprehended in its Element, then would a Truth be received as a Truth; notwithstanding the Messenger be not he you expected. This would be nothing in hinderance, that Truth should not be embraced as a
 Truth, so that if Truth in the power thereof hath not reduced your spirits in obedience thereto, though an Angel from Heaven should divulge the truth you cannot believe it.
To that end saith the Prophet in hearing you shall heare, and not un∣derstand,Isa. 6. 9. in seeing you shall see, and not perceive a truth from an error, for the prevention hereof, observe the Apostles exhortation, prove all things, and try the spirits of men; that so you1 Thes. 5. 21. may not hold fast that which is evill, and lose that which is good, in esteeming one messenger aboue ano∣ther; in so doing you receive the mes∣sage in love to the messenger, and not in love to the message it selfe; so that it comes, ye rejoyce in man and not in truth, delivered by the man (as in∣stance) the Countrymen of Christ could not but be astonished at the Do∣ctrine delivered by him; Saying, from whence hath he these things, & whatMark. 6. 2. 3. wisdome is this that is given unto him, &c. They could not but acknow∣ledge the excellence thereof, and with admiration conclude; never manIohn 7 46
 spake like this man, (but) when they understood whose Son he was; how that he was a Carpenter, Maries Son, the brother of JAMES and JOSESvers. 3. and of JVDAH and SIMON, and that their Sisters were with them; then their note was changed; for wher∣as before they appluaded him: now saith the Text, they were offended in him.
So that Gentlemen, to this end I quote this Scripture, that so you may examine your own hearts, whether you be not offended, that God hath been pleased to call out the poorest, and weakest of his Saints, adorning them with gifts equivalent thereto, autho∣rizing them by his Princely Majesty to divulge his message to People, Kings, & Nations, and who shall with∣stand his pleasure herein, or who dare presume to murmure at the doings of the Lord, seeing they are marvelous in the eyes of men; knowing this, that all things are of him, through him,Rom. 11. 36. and to him; So that he may do with his owne, what he pleaseth; as what if he please to confound the Wise, and
 exalt the Ignorant? what if he pleaseSo accoun∣ted. to refuse the greatnesse of the Elders Scribes, and Pharisees, and accept of beggers, as Peter and John? what if he please to reject the Nobility of King Ahab, and approbate the Prophesye of poore ELIAH, of poore Tradesmen, as Taylors, Weavers &c. Should this displease you, that is the pleasure of God?
If this be your trouble that EldadGentle∣men, and Medad should prophesie, that the Saints of the most high should deliver the message of the King of Kings, that the Family of love should improve their Tallent given them by their Fa∣ther; notwithstanding your displea∣sure1 Iohn 1. . herein, I dare not, I cannot, but what I have seene and heard, declare unto you; (yea you) my Country∣men, my Townes-men, my Neigh∣bours, and my Acquaintance; under this Relation I am imboldned. I am engaged to present my Light before you, to traffick with my Tallent a∣mongst you, to the end you may see and acknowledge, God is not partiall, with him is no respecting of Persons; yeaRom. 2. 11.
 with God it matters not, of what occu∣pation he be, provided, he be lawfully called and sent out by God, approbated and authorized by his Maiesty, in that the worke is the Lords, and not mans, (therefore) it is the Prerogative of God to make choyce of what messenger he pleaseth.
So that Gentlemen, what should I say to you, or to what should I councell you, (onely this) that you would be pleased to approve of that which is ap∣proved by God, that you would receive that which is sent by God, that so I may not have the like occasion to weep over you, as Christ had over Jerusa∣lem; saying, O Jerusalem Jerusalem,Math. 23. 37. &c. So that I may not say O Preston, Preston, thou that hast been seduced by blinde Guides; insomuch that thou hast worshipped that for God which really was no God, as instance thy ex∣alting the Common Prayer, thy cruci∣fix in baptism, thy kneeling at Sa∣crament; thy reverence to the Steeple was so great, that I was reproved for turning against the wall; soBy Mr. Huddson then your Lecturer. that I may say, thou that de∣spisest the Prpohets of God, and re∣jecteth
 them that are sent unto thee, how often hath the Lord unsheathed his Sword against thee, how often hath he plundred thee, & yet notwithstanding thou canst not, thou wilt not returne, returne unto thy God; so that Preston my request to God is for thee, that the Love of Christ may plunder thee, may perswade thee, yea may conquer thee in obedience to his Majesty: that so you may become truly Noble with the men of Berea, in receiving the Word ofActs. 17. 10. God with all readinesse of minde, and in holy wisedome search the Scriptures, to the end you may truly understand by whom the Gospel was preached, and from whom they were authorized.
That in so doing this poore Tallent of mine may finde entertainment with you, so as to be received by you, not onely by the hearing in the eare, but in the understanding of the hart; the which I in all Christian love present to your consideration, desiring it may be per∣used with a single eye and impartiall Spirit, to the end you may not approve or disprove, of these few lines, in refe∣rence to the Author; but as you un∣derstand
 the matter herein contained, so Judge, and so Speake, and withall I intreat you, if you apprehend any er∣ror through weaknesse, delivered by me in that I am the weakest of thou∣sands: that you would be pleased to im∣pute it to me the Author thereof, that so Truth by you may not be Scandali∣zed; but in all wisedome Vindicated,Iames 1. 27. in that it is pure and undefiled
For the performance of which, turn your eyes upon the ensuing subject, and the Lord give you understanding to ap∣prehend the truth therein contained; which, I hope nothing there from is pre∣sented to the view of your eye; but what the text will beare me out, as that E∣liah by the Court of equity was enga∣ged, to bring to light the Ishues of A∣habs unjust proceedings, and that the more truth might be vindicated, the Gentry with the Comonalty satisfied, who was the troubler of Israel: under the same ingagement, by the same Co∣venant, are Elias friends constrained to vindicate their call, their Doctrine, & their Profession; from any report or scandal, imputed on them by Ahabs Kinsmen, under what term soever, that thereby it may appeare who halts be∣tweene
 two opinions, who are Newters, who turnes with the times: that so you may know who are the troublers of Is∣rael.
Gentlemen, this (and onely this) is my love to you: yea, my Petition for you; that you may be a discerning people, yea such a people that the Lord delights to enhabit with, then will your Shire be a joy to England, yea your Towne will be a terror to the Enemies round about you, in that truth is stronger then Kings: Truth will do as the Ark to the Philistines, make them fear and trem∣ble; yea truth is so farr from troubling1 Sam. 4. 4. 7. the Saints that it is their joy, their peace, their chifest treasure: So that my conclusion is, truth may be your Governor, your Weapon, your refuge, your all in all; that truth may preserve you from all your enemies, that truth may support you in the greatest misery, that truth may possesse you in ever∣lasting peace. So prayeth he that is,

