



Right Honorable, and Right Worshipful,
THis Sermon was first Preached, and is now Published by your special Appoint∣ment: In which respect, as also because it comes forth in a very stormy tem∣pestuous time, it humbly craves leave, to shroud it self under the wing of your Honorable Protection, until that mist of Pride and Malice, and Prejudice and Passion that is now upon the world (and that hinders Truth from being enter∣tained for its own sake) shall come to be dispelled by the glorious appearing of the Sun of Righteous∣ness.
Mal. 4.2. What there was in this poor mean piece of
mine, that should move you thus far to own it, is not yet so clear to me, as hereafter it may be: That God who first brought it to your Ears, and that hath now put it into your Hands, he may please exceedingly to glorifie himself by it, amongst you, and thereby teach others,
Zech. 4.10. and my self also, to see and say, That there is no despising the day of small things.
Among many other pressing Evils that are now upon us,
Religio à Reli∣gando taro Ho∣minibus, quam Deo. Emollit mores nec sinit esse feros. 2 Tim. 3.5. Diffudissi per omnem mundum Religios, nomi∣nis membra, Re∣ligionis vint non Habentia, Salvian. ad Eccles. Cathol. lib. 1. it is certainly very sad to consider, That the Re∣ligion of God, which was purposely appointed to cause Contentions to cease, should among so many, be the onely matter of Contention; That that which na∣turally cools, and quiets, and meekens, and mode∣rates the Spirits of people, should occasionally kindle such strange fires, and such unnatural heats, as are now stirring almost every where; a certain sign, That there is too much of the Form, and too little of the Power of godliness to be seen or found amongst us.
It was a sage Speech that formerly dropped from the Pen of a great Statesman among our selves here, and it still stands upon Record under his Name, That in Counsels concerning Religion, that Counsel of the Apostle would be pre∣fixed, Ira hominis non Implet Iustitiam Dei; i.e. The wrath of man worketh not the righ∣teousness of God.
Francis L. Ve∣rulam Viscount St. Atban, bet∣ter known by the name of sir Francis Bacon Ess. p. 18, 19. The same Author tells us moreover, That it was a notable Observa∣tion of a wise Father, and no less ingenu∣ously
confessed, That those which held and perswaded pressure of Consciences, were commonly interested therein themselves for their own ends.
My Lord, The large Experience that I have pro∣videntially had within these few years of your Lordships Piety, and Integrity, and readiness to every good work, hath mightily prevailed with me to conclude, That your Honor will excuse it; if upon this occasion I take upon me the boldness, to represent unto your Lordship (and the rest of those other worthy Senators that partake with you in the Government of this great City) some few things, in reference to present Actings.
 First then, this I humbly pray, That your Care may be most, where Gods Care is most;
Psal. 8.26. Let not those that bear the Name of God, be any way cruel or un∣kinde to those that bear the Image of God;
Eph. 4.24. Be ever tender over those that are tender, gentle to those that are gentle, meek to those that are meek, I mean, to those whom God by a supernatural work hath made ten∣der, and gentle, and meek, and humble:
Phil. 3.20. , our trading or commerce is for heaven, we are citizens of, and for the new Jerusalem. vid. Bez. in loc. Let it be the joy of your hearts, according to the Apostles lan∣guage, to see men driving an open and a free trade for heaven,
Isa. 29.19. To see the meek increasing their joy in the Lord, and the poor amongst men rejoycing in the holy One of Israel. Cruelty to the Saints hath cost the
You may please to see this excellently cleared by Mr. Tho: Goodwyn, in a Sermon of his, whereunto I refer pag. 31. of my ensuing Discourse. world exceeding dear already; England it self hath
smarted for it not a little, in the downfal of Bishops, and divers other ways:
2 Pet. 2.22. Isa. 28.22. Levit. 26. Let us take heed of returning to the old vomit again, lest our bands be made stronger, and our punishments sevenfold greater then heretofore they have been.
 Next unto this, I humbly leave it at the feet of your Honorable Considerations, whether there be not a very urgent necessity lying upon you, to use your utmost en∣deavors, That your City-Councel may from time to time cordially comply with the Kingdoms great Councel, The Parliament of England, in all their Just and Honorable Proceedings: To this purpose be pleased to cast back your thoughts upon the years new∣ly past; what great things was God pleased to do for you, and by you, so long as ye were united? How wonderfully did the Lord of hosts appear in the high places of the field, blessing and prospering those For∣ces that were sent out by them, and incouraged by you? And withal, I desire that this also may seriously be considered, What Profit, or what Honor hath it been to your City, that ye have been thus far estranged one from another? I say no more but this, Certainly your safe∣ty lies in combining and uniting; and what else but Ruine can be expected, if there should still be a conti∣nued breach between you, Divide, & Impera, Divide and Rule, is their Maxime that seek your Ruine, and that have now great hopes of effecting that upon you, by your own intestine divisions, that hitherto (through the goodness of God) they have not been able to effect in any other way.
 In the next place, I do likewise humbly move, That
ye would please in your great wisdoms to think upon some effectual course, of putting some farther Re∣straint upon Swearing, Drunkenness, Prophanation of the Sabbath, private oppressions, and acts of In∣justice between man and man, so far forth as they come within the compass of your Cognizance, and other such like Enormities, that are diametrally opposite, and clean contrary to the Laws of God and Nature. Penal Statutes there are inough; and since (knowing your zeal and forwardness) I dare not so much as su∣spect the fault to lie in your selves; I do therefore earnestly move, That you would think upon some Safe and Honorable way,
Oderunt peccare boni virtutis Amore oderunt peccare mali formidine paenae. Horat. whereby those Obstructions may be removed, that lie in the way of Execution, That so where love of Goodness will not melt, yet fear of Punishment may at least restrain from those outward daring Iniquities, that are indeed intolerable.
 But one thing more, and then I shall trouble you no farther, Hearken to the cryes of the Poor; as Jotham said to the men of Shechem,
Iudges 9.7. Hearken to them, that God may hearken to you; He that stops his ear at the cry of the poor, he himself shall cry, and shall not be heard, says Solomon:
Proverbs 31.13. And did they ever cry lowder then now? Stop not your ears at this cry therefore. There was of old (as some conceive from that place, Deut. 15.4.) to be no beggar in Israel; why should there be any among us? Be pleased to con∣sider of some speedy course, that such as can work, may work, or else not eat, as the Apostle says;
2 Thess. 3.20. and that such as cannot through age or other infirmities, that they may be otherwise provided for: I have heard that
such a Design as this hath been already thought up∣on, and set on foot; Now the Lord stir up your hearts to Reassume it, and to carry it on vigorously, even unto the full compleating of it.
Let me herein propound Jobs Example to you,
Iob 29, from vese 11, &c. a Copy set by Gods own hand in his own Book, for you to write after, How did he make the ear that heard him to bless him? and the eye that saw him, to give witness to him? The blessing of him that was ready to perish, came upon him, and he made the widows heart to sing for joy: He put on righ∣teousness, and it clothed him, his judgement was a robe and a diadem: He was eyes to the blinde, and feet to the lame, and a father to the poor, and the cause that he knew not, he searched it out, &c. Now that ye may be such Magistrates, and such mini∣sters of Justice (Right Honorable, and Right Worship∣ful) even every way such as God himself would have you to be, doing still more and more worthily, in re∣gard of all the Concernments and Ingagements that are upon you, for the glory of God, and the good of his people, That God may not onely bless you, but al∣so make you eminent blessings, in your Places, to this famous and renowned City, is the Prayer of

