


Honored Sir,
DId not the Title page be∣speak your Condescension, I durst not thus presume this Dedication: But I am thus bold, because (harmless) free from flattery, though not from
 fear: But knowing that the Lord whom you serve, who being so Great and Glorious, yet is so Good and Gracious, as not to despise the day of small things; nay, such is his Good∣ness, Zech. 4. 10. that he accepteth, succoureth, and supporteth it; not breaking the bruised reed, or quenching the smoaking flax; yea, the poor mite [with a free and Mark 12. 43. willing heart] is accepted as a Trea∣sure in Christs Treasury: And then shall not Christians? O that name Christian! not the titular, but the real Christian, that Prayeth in Pro∣sperity; and Praiseth in Adversity; that is indeed a Peice of that Master-peice of the New Creation in the Mat. 10. 39. Lord Jesus Christ; that findeth life by loosing of it; and self by throwing it away; that is watchful in every thing, but careful for no∣thing; who feasts with Divine fa∣vour and companies, with sweet fear, living in highest hope; Christ in him the hope of glory; who being above
 all in advancement, is the lowest of all in abasement! Thus was the na∣ture of our Lord Jesus, he humbled Phil. 2. 5, 7, 8, 9. himself to behold things below: Let the same minde be also in you; own truth, though in the plainest stile, the lowest form, the least appear∣ance, the meanest person; like not the face for the dress sake; but the dress for the face sake. Truth is lovely, and to be Beloved, not for the ha∣bit and notion; but for the Nature, and Naked Primitive purity, truths union with the soul; or rather with the Soul of our soul, the truth as it is in Jesus.
This I have endeavoured after in this little Tract; and I doubt no∣thing (material) shall be found there∣in, but what is consonant to Scri∣pture, and the experience of the Saints: I confess it is but a dimini∣tive, not suiting the greatness of your person, nor the excellency of your en∣dowments; but to testifie what I
 would do, and what I could wish, some attainment worthy your own∣ing and receiving: the which having not, I do beseech you to accept of what I have; it is indeed but a little little, yet it is what I have re∣ceived; not from men, or of men, but of the Lord; A few Christian Experiences, with Scripture Evi∣dences: And so far I doubt not but you will Patronize, the Lord having taught you the truth of Text and Title, in the field, to admiration: Who taught your hands to War, and your fingers to fight, through Isa. 41. 10. many and great Transactions, many and great Atchievements, many and emminent Victories? was it not the Lord? saying, Fear not, I am with you; be not dismayed, I am thy God, helping, upholding you, against num∣ber, power, policy; What speaks ex∣perience in the streets of Havant, Downs of Chereton, the Siege of Basing? may not you truly say,
 That special providence, and spe∣cial presence was not once or twice, but imminently about your person, and prospering your affairs, owning the day of small things; some∣times but as a worm amidst an host of Isa. 41. 14. adversaries; giving you resolution, strength & courage to pass through many strengths, yea many Troops, to the astonishment of spectators; and the calling forth of the highest acts of Temporary faith for the present and future ages.
But I shall say no more, such things being so well known amongst the godly in the Countrey, who were your friends and followers: Onely Right Honorable, as the day of small things may not be dispised; so those days of great things must not be forgotten: Remember, O Remember in this forgetful age, the mercies of old the Lord hath vouchsafed un∣to you: My hearts desire is, that you might live in deliverances and
 successes in time of peace, that you experimentally have been partaker of in time of war; And that God who was with you, over you, and made you instrumental, doing won∣ders in the field, would also still be with you, and make you as saving∣ly successful in your Councels. The Chariot wheels of Through-Refor∣mation drive on heavily; and I do not wonder, because great bodies move slowly; yet if sure to Gospel terms, it will bring comfort in the end, to answer all your Pains, Pa∣tience and expence: In the interim, were but the life of those Ordi∣nances put into life, which are a∣gainst Sabbath-breaking, Swearing, Blasphemy, Drunkenness, and Riot∣ing, &c. certainly a further bles∣sing might attend this Common∣wealth; but I fear the want will cause woe: Oh that Ʋnder-Officers might exercise their duty consci∣onably and carefully against such
 as these, and not be such as these themselves. The Lords day, and Gospel Ordinances, under Christi∣an Magistracy, ought not to be so slighted by any plea whatsoever, where Christian Liberty is granted, a∣way with Licentious Liberty; no con∣science consciencious, but wil confess the Commandment is holy, just, and Rom. 7. 12. good: But if any such object, That the Magistrate hath not to do in such cases; as some cry out, Penalty is Persecution; to such an Objector I shall onely say, Non est persecutor vester, sed persecutor persecutoris ve∣stri, id est erroris vestri: the Magi∣strate is not your persecutor, but a persecutor of your persecutor, that is, your error: What evil is it to put restraint unto Licentiousness? What evil to put constraint on that that makes for holiness? But what good would be manifest if penalty on either? certainly a stop to sin, and an advance of profession (if not of
 piety) and I am sure a discharge of duty: But I must return, submit∣ting, and beseeching you to pass by my failings, and to accept of these few lines; part of which you once granted the hearing of in a Fami∣ly-exercise, which is now present∣ed unto your reading; but before you pass into it, receive that which is most intended, something of com∣fort and spiritual incomes; the Lord being about believers, they are surrounded with a Gracious Glorious∣ness, and a Glorious Graciousness; you have experienced it abroad, now within: In bread fears must be re∣moved (as well as outward favors must be remembred) not by sword, but by shines, the Fathers saying, I am with thee. Now the Lord himself make you victorious over all dismayings, and lead you and your Precious, Pious and Elect Consort into the Chambers of his
 own Special Presence, where you may enjoy the Full Fruition of the Sweetest Promises, the Richest Graces, the Noblest Hopes, and the Highest Priviledges:
Which are the unfained wishes of him who is the meanest in the things of Christ,

