


Friends,
I Could not chuse but make mention of you in the front of this Discourse; and that for these two Reasons, amongst many others:

 First, Because most of you did sym∣pathize with me in my late sorrows, and were very willing and freely active for my enlargement.
Secondly, Because most of you at sundry times, either publiquely or pri∣vately have been partakers in hearing of what is here presented unto your reading: And because most have want of memory, especially to retain spiritual and heavenly truths, I have put forth this for your hands, that through the grace of Christ, every one may put home unto their hearts, ac∣cording as every one hath need.
But to be as quick as my intent, I shall cast what I have to say to you, and those whom it most concerns, into two or three words, as followeth:

1. A Word or two by way of Ac∣count.
2. A word by way of Caution.
3. But a word, and that by way of Councel.

First, By way of Account: To
 testifie that about six moneths since, a Thanksgiving Sermon for that great deliverance at Worcester, was pub∣lished under my name, intituled, Good∣ness, and works of wonder; which Sermon I own, and doubt not but that it is both Orthodox, and Consonant to the Doctrine of the Scripture, and the harmony of the late reformed Churches: And this I testifie against any such scan∣dal of Recantation or Satisfaction, knowing nothing therein for substance, but what is agreeable to the word of God: And if any can prove or make appear the contrary; namely, any er∣ror or untruth worthy recantation; or any thing of wrong, which meriteth sa∣tisfaction: Let such an offence be wor∣thily pickt out, and as publiquely stated; and let not any doubt but a ready Ac∣count shall chearfully be acknowledged: But to give satisfaction where no wrong appears; and a recantation, where no error is found, were to injure truth, and stablish error: But interdictum esse jure naturae.

 As for any expressions of tartness, if they be but words and not untruths; why should I be made an offender, or any man to be offended for a word? words have their weight, but it is matter makes an Accusation; and my wish is, since no man nominally is accused by me, that none as from me would accuse them∣selves.
And though some have a faculty to take every thing in the worst, who have a minde to make things odious: I say, though such can extract poyson out of any expression; yet conscientious hearts will not: And as for others, let them know, I was not light, but seri∣ous in the similitude: And most know, that comparisons are not conclusions; they are to set off, yet they do not con∣clude: Verba in defini∣tionibus posita, non actum sed po∣tentiam signifi∣cant. And this is no strange rule a∣mongst Logicians, That words used in definition, do not signifie the ve∣ry act indeed; but the power, apt∣ness, or the inclination thereunto: And if in definitions; why not in il∣lustrations?

 Secondly, In way of Account: Having been about two years upon the exposition of the 5, 6, 7, Chapters of Matthews Gospel, I delivered for Doctrine, from the scope of the 9 Ver. in the 6. Chapter, That the Lords Prayer, improperly, (though vulgarly) counted and cal∣led so, was but part of Christs Ser∣mon, and none of Christs Prayer: For Christ could not pray for pardon of sin, in a proper sense, who was without sin, neither guile found in his mouth: This I thought good to assert in this Epistle, to silence, if not for the satis∣faction of such who think I should be ashamed to publish, preach and own such Doctrine, because they will wilfully and ignorantly wrangle against the clear truth of the Gospel.
Thirdly, By way of Account; which is the least of all, yet something there∣in as a motive unto my self to publish these notes; namely, to silence such tongues which are too too apt for any Accusation, charging me that I preach
 nothing but other mens labors: But to testifie that I do not steal, but study, and according to my poor mite labor in the Word and Doctrine: not what I have received from men; but what I have received from the Lord, that I have delivered unto you, comparing spiritu∣al things with spiritual; studying the Scriptures against mens distempers, that if by any means I might be a ma∣nuductor, to draw any out of the fire of their sins, into the saving knowledge of the love of the Lord Jesus: This in way of Account.
Secondly, By way of Caution: Take heed of a prejudiced spirit in any of you against truth; though it comes unto you in never so plain a stile; yet if truth, esteem of it, though it come unto you in an earthen vessel; though the person be despised, yet let not the endeavor: It is a great fault of some, who are very rea∣dy and apt to represent the dark part of things, but will over look the light: All the good endeavored shall not once
 be mentioned; but if but a seeming fault, that shall be aggravated and heightned: This hath been hitherto my lot and portion; and therefore I must give it by way of caution.
Thirdly and lastly, by way of Councel: These are evil times, wherein too too many depart from the faith which was given to the Saints, that trifle and slight the precious truths of the Lord Jesus: But O, do you keep close with God, and to your Christian principles; let none take your Crown from you, be not ashamed of the Gospel, nor a shame to the Gospel; hold fast your profession, with a holy conversation; be burning and shining lights in your generation, Fighting the good fight of faith, and persevering unto the end, that through mercy you may have an entrance into everlasting glory. Two things let me intreat:
1. Read and consider; for it is with Sermons as with a playster: Let
 the playster be never so soveraign, yet if not applied unto the soar, it profiteth nothing: So if Sermons be never so soveraign, spread with promises never so precious and threatnings never so searching; yet if not applied, no com∣fort is perswaded to a poor perplexed and sick fearing soul: nor no malady asswaged or removed from the brawny and sin-festered souls; therefore medi∣tate and consider.
And then,
2. Read and resolve, as you have daily new Moans, and new Mercies, so daily new resolutions; as a daily dawning, so a drawing nigh to our re∣demption; yea, an earnest, lively, con∣stant, daily motion of lifting up the head and heart for our redeemer; yea, higher and higher, for the time is short∣er and shorter: Our Iesus will come, and will not tarry; for whose expect∣ance and appearance, let us wait and watch; and watch and wait; and
 watch and pray; and pray and say, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly:

