



THE very Title of this BOOK is a kind of Dedication; and you may justly chal∣lenge it, by bearing so emi∣nent an Office in the Artil∣lery. Letters and Arms are the two things that govern the whole World; both seem to have been mono∣polized by your generous
 Family, the former by a Learned Archbishop, the latter by your self. And though that great good Man has left this World, a grave and learned Prelate still sur∣vives, a collateral Orna∣ment to the name of Sheldon. The Book I here humbly lay down at your Feet, was compiled by a Cheshire Gen∣tleman, in Commission for that County; his Modesty will not permit him to put his name to it. Modesty! that inherent Virtue in all truly noble and generous Souls. His Labour has been great, for smaller Tracts require more judgment and
 industry than greater Vo∣lumes, as translating is more difficult than writing. He has made use of several Authors of the best note upon this Subject among the Ancients, as Plutarch, Ve∣getius, Xenophon, Homer, Justin, Tully, Aelian's Ta∣cticks, &c. the Moderns he has digested in so compen∣dious a method, that this small Book will be certain∣ly most extreamly pleasing; the bulk of other Books of this nature being so large, that they require much Time to peruse, and Money to purchase; of which two things, many persons desi∣rous
 of Experience in Milita∣ry Affairs, can spare neither. Useful I presume this small Tract will be, especially in such dangerous Times, wherein no Posture is more convenient than that of De∣fence. Especially considering that many Trades and Oc∣cupations (excepting those of Handicrafts) are seden∣tary, and in expectation, those intervals of time may be herein spent by the Youth of this populous City; by the help of this they may be their own Tutors, and every private Shop seem an Academy for Arms.

To you therefore, Ho∣nourable Sir, I Dedicate this Piece, humbly desiring you to honour it with your Acceptance; and that you may long live the Glory of this great City for your Loyalty, Conduct, and Ex∣perience, both in Arms and Peace, is the Hearty wish of,

