



Worthy Sir:
I Have found your large commendations divul∣ged by a generall fame of Learned men, both forreigne and dome∣stique, abundantly and superlatively true, by my owne experience, how your whole endeavours are directed solely to the hap∣py furtherance and benefit of the Com∣munity; Nor can I omit Mr. Comenius his Renowned mention of you as his Especiall Friend [Pag. 172. Lin. 21.] viz. that with a certain fervent and extraordinary desire of promoting the Publick good, as farre as possible may bee, you brought him and his endeavours to be first made Publicke. It was indeed, by your meanes alone, that wee came to enjoy his Prodromus, and to
 you wee must stand engaged for the com∣munication of any other of his choice Workes, you being the singular confident and principall Agent in carrying on, and acquainting of the world with his La∣bours. I cannot therefore but most deser∣vedly Dedicate this Translation of Mr. Comenius his Diatyposis, to your selfe, whom with the Author, I shall ever honourably respect. I likewise conceive my self bound to notifie thus much to the Publick, that waving my own high opinion of Mr. Come∣nius, this work of his although but an Idea hath the great commendation of divers a∣ble Scholars, to whom it hath beene im∣parted, and is gallantly approved by them, as contayning a very rationall discourse in the series and contexture of that mat∣ter, so far as it is touched and handled by him. And that it will be a thing much to be deplored, that such pious and profitable designes, should not bee encouraged by some eminent and correspondent favours from the managers of publick concern∣ments in our owne Nation at this time of
 reformation especially; since he was invi∣ted hither by certaine Honourable and active Patrons of Learning in this present Parliament, and disappoynted of the preferment they did sincerely intend him, in regard of the great distractions which happened in the State at that juncture of time when hee came over. Now Reve∣rend Sir, for your owne part, let no crosse accidents disanimate you in your earnest prosecution of a generall good, but may you chearfully encountring with, and vi∣gorously breaking through all interve∣ning incumbrances, still continue and per∣sist in this laudable way of deserving well of the Christian and learned Common∣wealth; and since I have not lately heard of what Mr. Comenius hath done in his Philologicall or Pansophicall underta∣kings, bee pleased to let me participate therein, and you shall find none readier to serve you then,
SIR,

