


WHereas your Petitioners having formerly contributed free∣ly and liberally to the King and Parliament in conjuncti∣on, do now refuse further to contribute or pay, conceive∣ing them in opposition; as by reason His Majesties Person was invaded in battell at Keinton (contrary to the many Declarations of taking up Armes for the safety of His Majesties Person) so in regard there is no expresse care of His Person and Honour in your late Ordi∣nance, for the assessing the Twentieth part in London, nor in your De∣claration for leavying of money in the Counties.
And whereas this their refusall is meerly out of Conscience, according to that information they have concerning the Divine Constitution of particular Kings in their severall Kingdomes, and of subjection to them both Active and Passive, and of the damnablenesse of Resisting; from
First, the Word of God: Dan. 4. 17. & 25. 32. where thrice in one Chapter it is said, That the Kingdomes be Gods, and he gives them to whom he will: 1 Sam. 26. 9. Who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords Annointed and be guiltlesse? And the same blessed spirit which calls David the Lords Annointed, Psal. 89. 20. doth call Cyrus a Heathen Prince the Lords Annointed also. Esa. 45. 1. Rom. 13. Let e∣very soule be subject to the higher Powers, for there is no Power but of God; The powers that be are ordained of God: whosoever therefore resisteth the Power, resisteth the Ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. Yea, we acknowledge in our Booke of Common-Prayer, that King CHARLES is Gods Minister, and that he hath Gods Authority, and so fighting against him, we fight a∣gainst God himselfe.
Secondly, Mr Calvin and other Protestants, their Exposition on Rom. 13. and 1. Pet. 2.
Thirdly, The Harmony of Reformed Churches concerning Magistracy.
Fourthly, The Doctrine of the Church of England in the Bookes of Homilies delivered, concerning civill obedience.

Fifthly, From the Lawes of the Land, which declare it to be Treason to leavy Warre against the King in this Kingdome, and to encounter in fight, and kill such as are assisting to the King, or come to helpe him, or to aid in those cases.
And the Action of the Earle of Essex was adjudged Treason, though In the reigne of Q. Eliz. he pretended nothing but removing evill Counsellors from the Queene. Now that which is evill in its owne nature cannot be the subject of any command, nor induce any obligation upon any man by any Authority whatsoever. Remonstrance, May 19. And we may not doe evill that good may come of it, Rom. 3. 8.
Sixthly, Also in regard of the late Protestation, relating to the said Do∣ctrines, and to His Majestie respectively; which Protestation you have bound your selves to maintaine, and all those that doe any thing in pur∣suance of it.
You would at least be pleased in your present undertakings for Re∣ligion, and for the Law of the Land, and the Liberty and Proper∣ty of the Subjects, to proceed in the way of Religion without violence to the Conscience, in a case that concernes no lesse then Salvation or Damnation: (As you professe your tendernesse of the conscience even in matters of indifferency.) And that first your Authenticall Divines (Dr Burgesse, Mr Marshall, &c.) may publish something for the resolving of Conscience in this way clearely out of the Word of God, and home to the Action at Keinton: taking notice also, That His Majestie tooke up Armes for the maintenance of the Lawes, concerning the publike wor∣ship of God, and for the Priviledges and freedome of Parlia∣ment, notoriously invaded by Brownists and Separatists; and that now He continues them also for the necessary defence of His Person, manifestly in danger since the battell at Keinton. To which (satisfying the Premises) your Petitioners (farre from con∣temptuousnesse and obstinacy against the cleare Word of God and Lawfull Authority) shall ingenuously condescend; and rea∣dily make payment of these severall Rates accordingly.
And pray for &c.
FINIS.
