



Madam,
THE certain knowledge I have had for a long time of your devout affection toward the saving Truths of Jesus Christ, the recent sense of manifold favours received at your hands, both since and in the time I had the honour of employment for many years in that Noble Family, and the experience of your gracious ac∣ceptance of my hearty endeavours unto your service, makes me bold to offer to your Ladiship this part of my weak Labour, as a small Testimony of my humble acknow∣ledgement of much duty.
I do here present you with some refreshing drops from that Mystery of Contentment found in the Fulnesse of Jesus Christ: In him is enough to supply all de∣fects in the inward man, and more then enough to supply all wants in the outward man which can befall us, from the disappointing and discontenting changes in persons or things of this world: yea, it is of the Lords wise∣dome
and mercy that our waies are hedged up with thorns, that we may return to our first love, Hos. 2.6, 7. That we may delight our selves in him, and en∣joy that solid, satisfactory, and unchangeable Content∣ment, which in experience we perceive cannot be found in the empty, insufficient, uncertain and perishing com∣forts of the poor creatures. Many times the Children of God enjoy most of himself when they enjoy least of the Creature. As the Sufferings of Christ abounded in Paul, so Consolation also abounded by Christ, 2 Cor. 1.5. He had most of Gods presence when he had least of mans countenance, 2 Tim. 4.16, 17, Stephens face shined like an Angels when men looked on him like De∣vils, Act. 6.15. Such enjoyments at such a time are no other (as Jacob said from his experience of light ari∣sing out of darknesse) then the gate of heaven, a pre∣lude on earth of that immediate Contentment we shall have in heaven in God alone, without either opposition or interposition of the Creature. Hence it is that the Children of God from the comfortable sense of this love have most vigour of grace sometimes under greatest outward pressures, they can glory in tribulations, Rom. 5.3. And sing praises to God in a prison, Act. 16.26. Then have they enlarged spirits when their bo∣dies are under restraint: As the Sunne re-enforceth his light in the time of an Eclipse, so the graces of the Spirit in the inward man are the more united and strengthened in an hour of darknesse from outward trou∣bles: The heat of our love as the Sunne-beam from the hard rock, is the more reflexed toward the Sunne of righteousnesse from the cold and hard re-encounters of the Creatures.

In a day of prosperity our affections lagge and strag∣gle here and there, seeking Contentment in things farre below our happinesse, and no waies proportionable to the vast desires of the spirit of man; Therefore our God in great wisedome and mercy so orders the removall of worldly objects, that our affections may be retired, a∣mazed, and with greater vigour set upon himself, that according to our measure of enlargement of heart, our measure of delight and contentment in Christ may be the greater, he dryeth up the brinks to the end we may seek and be filled with purer and sweeter contentment in the Fountain: This earnest and first-fruits of absolute and full satisfaction abiding them in heaven, makes the Children of God humble in their greatest prosperity, and patient with much contentment in their greatest adver∣sity: Faith looks to things not seen; It reckons all worldly advantages but losse and dung in comparison of the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ our Lord, and also reckons that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with that glory which shall be revealed in us. A look to things not seen preserves the soul from fainting at what we see or feel: And though the Children of God be subject to some qualms of fear in time of storms and trials, yet all these will be gone as a sea-sicknesse when our Lord shall bring us within the port of eternal salvation.
Madam, You know both whom and what ye have be∣leeved: As it's his will ye should look to the glory set before you, and endure the Crosse; So that ye should also rejoyce in the hope of that Kingdom which cannot be shaken, that eternal mansion above all possibility of de∣cay, and that Inheritance incorruptible which cannot be
defiled, and fadeth not away, reserved in Heaven for you, by his Intercession who purchased it by his merit. That your Ladiship may be comforted, guided, and guar∣ded by his Spirit in this life; and brought into the pos∣session of that full happinesse in the other life, is and shall be the humble prayer of him who in all duty is ob∣liged to shew himself, Madam,

