


Honorable Worthies,
THE Romans, what out of policie, or superstition,Pluc. & Macrob. Vide Casp. Bart. ad Rutil. l. 2. v. 42. made it heinous and capitall to make known the name of their Cities tutelar God, by whose fa∣vour Rome had attained to that height of gran∣dor and glory; it was religion to them to be si∣lent and secret in this: But our silence would be so far from being sacred, that it were a sin and high prophaning the name of our tutelar God, the great God and Lord of Hosts, not to publish and blaze his Name unto the world, especially when himselfe de∣clares, that he doth his wondrous works, that they may be had in everlast∣ing remembrance. But when I consider the sullen silence and ingratitude of many, notwithstanding so vast a confluence of mercies upon us with mea∣sure pressed down and running over, me thinkes it calls to mind what an Hebrew Writer complaines of in his time, that the Fathers had plowed,R. Hag. sowen, reaped, fanned, and set bread upon the Table, but the children had not a mouth to eat it. Surely that's a foolish and a froward child, that sees not how his heavenly Father hath provided for him, and yet wants a heart to value, and a mouth to proclaim his goodnesse. The sense of which alone prevailed upon my spirit, to attend the call of Divine Providence by you (Honourable Worthies) both first to speake, and now to publish this en∣suing homely discourse. I believe, therefore have I spoken.
It was a noble acknowledgement in David when he said, Thine, O Lord, is the greatnesse, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the Majesty: All things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee. How then can we grudge to give God his homage and tribute,
 who hold all at the will of the Lord? Our thankefulnesse what is it but the reflection of his own beames, and the eccho of his strokes? strokes laid on so home and heavy upon your adversaries, as makes some of them with the Magicians, to confesse the finger of God.
You (right honorable) have declared your high sense of so transcendent a deliverance, and I hope it will not soon die with you, being so rich a present, and earnest of future happinesse. Yet know, this doth not pay all your debt, Crescentibus donis, donorum crescunt rationes, much is given you, and therefore much shall be required of you. So then, it is proper for your soules now to ask this question, What shall I render, and how shall I stand under this weight of glory and mercy? A question so much the more proper and seasonable, as our frailties are apt to expose us in prosperous successes, unto the power of temptations; insomuch as a sage Heathen tels us this obser∣vation of his,Cicero, lib. 4. E∣pist. 3. ad Lam. that although warre be full of calamities, yet nothing is more dangerous than victory, which albeit it happen to the best men, yet it com∣monly renders them fierce, and impotent in their excesses; yea, notwith∣standing they are otherwise by nature inclined, yet by a kind of fatality they are made such. The consideration of this, I hope, will over-aw your hearts by a holy feare and watchfulnesse, not onely to shun these rockes of extremity, to which you see men in such a case obnoxious, but also to study an improvement of your mercies sutable to the greatnesse of them.
There is a memorable story of that grave Emperour Charles the fifth, a man cut out for greatnesse and happinesse, had he not dashed upon that rock which commonly splits Royal Families, an endevour to smother the Gospel by force, and fraud; this man upon some successes, was flattered by Anto∣nius Leva, and some other of his officers, to make use of his victories for the advantage and interest of his Imperiall Majesty, their meaning was, that he should thereby make himself great, after the example of Caesar & Alexander, not sparing any that stood in his way. To whom he thus reply'd, The sole mark of Alexander and J. Caesars aim,Besold. Dissert. Philo∣log. &c. was worldly glory; but it becomes me, and other Christian Princes, so to look at honour, as to take heed lest while we hunt after that, we lose our soules; and to use victory so, as we may be able to give God an account of our actions. This answer from such a man at such a time, I confesse made some impression upon me, when I read it, my prayers are, it may doe more upon you, whom for your present capacity and transactions it more fitly suits.
Shew thou your selves to God, as he hath declared himselfe to you: Wot you how? In righteousnes and holines, by these two the Lord makes him∣self glorious, and these two will be as the two pillars Jachin and Boaz both
 to your own honour, and the happines of this people. For Religion,Bodin. val. in Res. Hac ve∣lnti thyrso percuti∣untur mentes humanae Lib. 2. cap. 18. de prin. I know a name only of it is sufficient to some to maintain their own name, and to pre∣serve an interest. This hath been esteemed by Princes sufficient to charme and restrain the multitudes, forasmuch as Religion hath the strongest reason in it and for it, of all things. But if there be but a name, if there be but a shew, and singlenesse in this, the Lord will not be mocked: Yet if any should tell me, that England hath the same ground to complaine of what France did long agoe, That too many of their Chiefes had learned that Maxime of the Florentine Atheist, That as it was necessary for a Gover∣nour, so enough to seem religious outwardly, though inwardly hee were not so; I would not give credit to him upon this ground, because it is impossible that those visible and signall discoveries of God to us in all the wayes of his dispensations, should suffer us to impose upon his omniscience. Besides, me-thinks you often signifie, that religion is a tender Virgin, that must be as watchfully kept, as warily approached: The first of these, will mind you, that men be not suffered to run wild in the things of God: The other, that conscience be not imposed on by one or t'other hand The first is a Gallionisme, the other is Antichristianisme. I know none shall ever have just cause to fasten either of these upon your counsels or actions; for the one, who durst presume but that the name of God shall be as tender to you, as your own: for the other, that of Tertullian is observable, Hoc ad irreli∣giositatis elogium concurrit adimere libertatem religionis, & interdi∣cere opinionem divinitatis, ut non liceat mihi colere quem velim, sed cogar colere quem nolim. In a word, therefore endevour by steering a∣right betwixt these two rocks, to preserve our vessell from ship-wrack; and let peace between brethren be so endevoured y you, which doth as it were pitch the ship within and without, that no leaks or chinks shal sink it. Great Constantine did think it his duty and interest to perswade and urge this by his personal presence, & authority. O you Fathers of your Country, consider your children, some are stronger, some younger, some more heavy and sul∣len, others more sprightly and wanton; there are not onely diversities, but divisions among them. Put forth your authority with wisdom and tendernesse effectually, that we may not alwayes bite and devoure one another. I shall adde this, Let interest of State sway nothing to the calcu∣lation of religion to any point. Notable is that example of Scipio Ammira∣tus upon Tacitus, Sith there is no proportion between temporall things and spirituall, when thou seest Religion to oppose thy reason of State, pre∣sently betake thy selfe to religion, and accommodate thy reason of State to that, and not the contrary: for if you think to lay a yoak upon the conscien∣ces
 of men, and thereby as a strong man endevour to keep the House in peace, they will answer you with that stout Pretor, O ye Romans we reve∣rence you; and if you will have more, we feare you too; yet know, we beare a greater reverence and feare to the immortall Gods. Look therefore to this.
The other Pillar of your name, and of your safety, is Righteousnesse: Read over those innumerable Petitions written and unwritten of a long time, and yet daily presented; lay your eares to the sighes and teares of the oppressed that have no comforter, take heed that none justly appeale to the day of judgement from you, or against you; remember that your duty is by a Geometrical proportion to give to every one his right according to his capacity and merit, and to doe as you would be done by: sometime to part with your plenty by contribution, and to abate of your height by condescen∣tion, according to exigence. Salvian perswading to this very thing, brings in the Fabii, Fabricii, and Cincinnati, who refused the advantage of grow∣ing rich,Lib. 1. de Pro. that if it were possible by their impoverishment they might raise the ruines of a shattered Common-wealth. But that of Philo is notable, who saith, Jupiter had two Twins, to one of them he gave immortality, the other he made mortall: the brother that was immortall considering his own life to be endlesse, and that his brother should die, and so his griefe for his brothers death would consequently be eternal, devised this marvellous ex∣change, he communicated immortality with his mortall brother, by which both had a mixture of both. This he calls the fountain and ground of all Justice. Some will be ready to apply this against the immortallity of your present Session, me thinks it clearly tells all, whom God hath for a turn lif∣ted up above their brethren, that they declare a communicablenesse with their brethren. My aim (Worthies) was but this, that by the flourishing of Religion and Righteousnesse among you and us. I may congratulate my Countrey with this acclamation, The Lord blesse thee, O habitation of justice, and mountain of holinesse, Jer. 31.23.
This mean Sermon here again presented, together with the occasion, serves for a comfortable encouragement in the premises, by shewing the self-destroying enterprizes of your enemies, how fatall Jerusalem is to her assailants, how faithfull the Lord is in his engagements for his people. That emergency which gave occasion to our solemnity, and this discourse, beares testimony to so weighty a truth. Now that our hearts may come up to it in our respective places and duties, is the prayer of

