


NOble Souls, who and where soever ye are, Forgive me, if I presume upon your softness, and humbly implore the Honour of your Patronage. We read in the old Monuments, of Eunomius, Photius in Ep. ad Io∣annem Pa∣tricium. that, he playing upon his Harp in a solemn trial of Skill, and a String failing him, a Grashopper presently sate upon his Harp, and so symmetrically con∣sorted with the Musick, that it perfectly supplyed the Work of the broken String; and moreover was in the Cause, that Eunomius went Conquerour. I may perhaps, in this fervorous Contest, with a quick and chearfull stroke, break a String; the String of Health, or Life: But more excellent Grashoppers with Harps in their Brests, (it is the Phrase of St. Gregory Nazianzen; S. Greg. Naz. Orat 34. ; Who gives to the Grashopper, the Harp in its Brest?) than you Selves, I desire not to have in view, for the perfect supplyance of the Musick.
Ye state your Quarrel according to the Position of your Consci∣ences: which I likewise do. But I am principally gashed, and offen∣ded with the fruits of Jesuits, and Monks; because they more strike the Sense; and chiefly, because our blessed Saviour is so very much pressing on that part. Mat. 7. 16. Ye shall know them by their fruits: Doe men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? v. 17. Even so every good Tree bringeth forth good fruit: but a corrupt Tree bring∣eth forth evil fruit. v. 18. A good Tree cannot bring forth evil fruit: neither can a corrupt Tree bring forth good fruit. v. 19. Every Tree that bringeth not forth good fruit, is hewen down, and cast in∣to the fire. It returns in the shape of a Conclusion, proved to the height of Discourse: v. 20. Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them.
Agreeably to my light and sight the Monks and Jesuits stle and write their Vices, Vertues; as that impure Person, who called his Whores by the Names of the Muses; or like the Painter, who pre∣ferred the Picture of his lewd Mistress, under the Name of the sa∣cred Virgin, that it might be honour'd.

Our Saviour being hungry, after long fasting, Matt. 4. 3. the Devil rejects him to Stones in the place of Bread. Again, he being hungry, Matt. 21. 19. the Fig-tree offers him nothing but leafs. And when at the last, Io. 19. 28, 29. he cri∣ed on the Crosse, I thirst, he was relieved by the Jews only with Vi∣negar. I hope I long ago learned to Matt. 5. 6. hunger and thirst after Righ∣teousness. But when I thought to have been plentifully filled, the Jesuites and Monks did not at any Time set any Thing before me, but Stones, Leafs, Vinegar; or, as they are of the hoggish kind, Husks: that is, Fraud, Fallacy, Falshood, Lying, Slandering, Imposture, Wickedness.
In Chymistry, the Transmutations of Things are superlatively strange, if we attempt the reduction of them to nothing. I know that your Prolepsis, will easily prevent my Interpretation. Howsoever the Lot falls, My Spiritual Appetire lies not in my Ears; and I cannot be fed with gawdy Words, and Pious Orations concerning Heaven: I must behold Heaven practised.
This Sermon had been nothing but a Voice, though the Prin∣ters were the Auditors; had not impudent Slander extorted it from me, and bound it over to the Press. Now therefore, as the Monks and Jesuits are, in our Saviour's dialect, Mat. 7. 16. thistles and thorns, I shall be as Thorns in their sides; and endeavour by all means pos∣sible and imaginable, to fetch the Gerasen Hog, and the dirty De∣vil out of their mouths, that wallows in all the mire, and impuri∣ties of Fraud, Fallacy, Falshood, &c. and will be there wallowing, until it runs violently down a steep place into the Sea, and pe∣rishes in the waters. . 8. 32. Had they been soul'd with the Spirit of the Primitive Saints, they had been rapted to a Sublime Course, as reasonably and graciously caught thereunto by many sublime Con∣siderations. But these are Swine, and Lovers of Pleasure, and of their Bellies, more than Lovers of God. And when they call me to it by their new Ʋncivilities, I will plainly shew you, as ye view in the Picture of the Jesuit or Monk here, the very Hog-Devil in their Teeth, and at the end of their Tongues; and lay down the Rea∣sons before your Eyes, why I charge the Monks so highly, and why they are so monstrous in my Glass. I will not at present, farther soil and defile my self with touching these unclean Beasts: But humbly remain,

