



Right Honourable
THE sad and vnnaturall bloody Tragedies of our times may not vnfitly be compared, to the two Women striving for a Child, 1 Kin. 3. ch. one clai∣meth it as her owne; the other saith, Nay; but it is mine: the contention is so hot, that King Solomon calleth for a sword; giveth out the Word of Com∣mand; Divide: Content saith the Harlot, let it be neither mine, nor thine, but divide it: but the true Mothers bowels yearned upon her son, and said, oh my Lord, give her the living child: shee could endure no division: Such (Right Honourable) is the controversie in our Land. The malignant par∣tie pretend to fight for a Christ, and in their blind zeale they will dye too, but they will enjoy him. And you (thrice worthy Patriots) in all your Declarati∣ons say so likewise. Now the Lord to decide the Controversie, permitteth the Sword to come, and crieth aloud in our Land; Divide. Content, saith the Antichristian and malignant partie: Christ, and their Arch-Bishops, Arch-Deanes, Deanes, Preists and Deacons, and all Ecclesiasticall persons depending vpon them: Christ, and their devised worship, Temples, Alters, Tythes, and Offerings: Christ, and the residue of their Fore-fathers Tradi∣tions: thus let them but enjoy a divided Christ, and there will be an end of Controversie. But they (Right Honourable) that are holy, synceare, faithfull and true Covenanters with you (according to the light they have received) even in all the three Ilands, will have an whole Christ, or no Christ; their faithfull soules cannot endure to run division: a Christ, they must have in all his Offices: Christ to be their King, and his Commission to be maintained, Mat. 28.18.19.20. least otherwise he make good his Word against vs, Luke 19.27. Christ their Prophet, whom they will only heare (as the Father from
 Heaven chargeth vs to doe, Mat. 17.5. And Moses truly said to the Fathers, him shall ye heare in all things, he shall say vnto you: And it shall come to passe, that everie soule, which will not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed from amongst the People, Act. 3.22.23. And all Traditions of men, to be re∣jected, as holy Paul recordeth, Gal. 1.8.9. Christ their Preist; and no Medi∣atour, but him only, 1 Tim. 2.5. that the Lord Jesus may be one, and his name one, in the three Kingdomes; that we, and our posterity after vs may live in faith and love, and the Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of vs. Now the cheife cause and roote of all our division, is from the Roman Hierarchie, who have made a Law, that whosoever shall interpret, or give the sence of the holy Scriptures, contrary to their determination, they must remaine Anathe∣ma; and the Furnace did burne then hottest against the Saints, when the Civill Magistrate (that is appoynted of God for the praise of them that doe well 1 Pet. 2.14.) joyned their power with Romes proud Bishops and Preists, to persecute, and kill all them, that would not submit to the Roman Jurisdic∣tion: Hence arose all the Martyrdoms in England, from the time of Rich∣ard the second, in whose time, the Prelats obtained a Law to kill the English Subjects, that would declare the whole truth (so farre as it was revealed t them) and keepe a good conscience to God and man. Thus by penall Statutes, the popish English Prelats, and Preists did long tyrannize over the consciences of the godly and faithfull in the Land, that would not subject to their Decrees and humaine Traditions and corrupt Interpretations of the holy Scriptures: Hence it was that the thrice Noble and antient warlike Nation, our Brethren the Scots; when they contended for a Reformation ac∣cording to the light they had received from the Lord, and casting of Romes proud, papall, and prelaticall Government, with all her devised Formes of Worship, they must dye: yea and the English Bishops with their High Preists will give large summes of money towards the leavying of an Armie; and in∣cense the King and Nobility to kill, and destroy them: yea when the Lord opened your eyes, with the eye-salve of his spirit (Thrice Deare and Noble Patriots) to make a solemne Protestation, to oppose all Popery, and Popish Innovations, and to extirpate Episcopacy root and branch: Then evill coun∣sell prevailed with the King to withdraw from his Parliament, and under pretence of a Guard to protect his Person, to make way against you, that you might dye: But our faithfull Nobles, and true hearted Commons in England reply; shall our Jonathans dye, who have in part freed our consciences from Roman Traditions; and Covenanted with vs for a pure Reformation ac∣cording
 to the Word of God and preserved our estates, and liberties from an Arbitrary Government: shall they dye, that have wrought such a delive∣rance in the Land? They shall not dye; we will bleed our selves (before an haire shall fall from your heads) if either we with our persons, prayrs, coun∣sels, states, or swords can prevent it. Even so your pore Petitioner (Right Honourable) by eating a litle of the honey of Gods eternal truth his eyes have been opened to see and vnderstand, that the Royall Commission of King Je∣sus extendeth no further, but to Beleivers, that are instructed in the faith by the Gospell, and they only to be baptized, Marke 16.15.16. opposing the Decree of Pope Innocentius the third, that appoynted, that the Baptisme of the Infants of Beleivers should extend as farre, as Circumcision; thereby establishing Nationall Churches, and overthrowing the particular Churches of Jesus Christ, that are called out of the World by the preaching of the Gospell, Marke 16.15.16. for the denying of which popish consequence (as my ensewing discourse will more largely demonstrate) J must dye, and be deserted of my freinds, and allies; yee and also J have received much injustice from some, that would be counted the Ministers of Christ, which have recei∣ved my Arguments from vnder my hand fairly written, this 14. or 15. monthes, with a promise, that if they should convince me from the word of God, that I was in an errour, I would willingly recant; yet I never received any satisfactory Answer from them. Wherefore (Right Honourable) you are the Sanctuary (next vnder Heavens protection) to flye vnto for Justice: Seeing you are joynt Covenanters with all them, that stand for Re∣formation according to the Word: For it is not the voyce of the Assembly, but Christ only in the Assemblyes, we have covenanted to listen to; as Mr Case testifieth in his Sermon styled, the Covenant renewed, pag. 43. Oh consider! what a dangerous thing it is to praevaricate the least from the Co∣venant your Honours have made: as Mr. Thomas Goodwin once admonished you in his Sermon on Zach. 4. v. 6.7.8.9. p. 43. line 30.31, pag, 44. line 1.2. 3. viz. For if you should build the least hay and stuble, you will not only suffer losse; but lay a Foundation of a new rent, and division in the age to come. David not carrying the Arke according to the due order of the God of Israel caused breach vpon Vzziah, 1 Cron. 15.12.13. For God is so jea∣lous of his Glory, that he cannot endure his Worship to be corrupted with the least mixture of man, Levit. 10.1, 2. If the Reformation begun in the time of King Edward the sixt, and queen Elizabeth of happy memory, had been established according to that order, that King Iesus the great Prophet
 hath left vs a pattern for, in his Word; I am confident England had never seen this bloody day: Is not England like Egypt (you grave religious Patriots) almost destroyed; (Exod. 10.7.) because the Lawes and Orders of Jesus Christ, the Great King of his Church is not observed: The Lord put it into your hearts to be like minded to noble Cyrus and Darius according to your Cove∣nant to give libertie of Conscience, to all such as know the Lord Jesus, and are ashamed of the abominations, that they have done in the Land of their spirituall Captivity vnder Antichrist, to build the spirituall House according to the Patterne (the Lord Jesus hath left vs) in his eternall truth, that we may pray for your peace, and the Kingdoms prosperity, Tim. 1.2.1.2. And as for them that know not the Lord Jesus Christ, let them alone (as the Lord Jesus informeth you, Mat. 15.14.) vntill God call them forth out of Mysticall Babylon, Rev. 18.4. For none can perswade a pore Japhet (a pore Gentile, who is alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in him, Ephes. 4.17.18.) to dwell in the Tents of Shem, but a God alone, Gen. 9.27. least that Judgment befall the Kingdome, that Mr. Case hath threatned in his Sermon, called a Covenant renewed, page 27.28.

