



To the Honourable and High Court of Parliament:
CRaving pardon upon our knees for our boldnesse, wee most humbly beseech you to heare us a little with pa∣tience.
What DAVID spoke in his owne defence, when his elder brother charged him with Pride & haughtinesse of heart:1 Sam. 17 28, Is our answer now unto all such as shall lay upon us the like accusation: vvhat have we now done? Js there not a cause? Sundry CAUSES there are which have moved us in all duetifull manner to become instant suters to his Highnesse, and to you in the Cause of Jesus Christ.
1.1: Cause of our Peti∣tion. The great hope which his Majestie hath given of much good to bee done through the mercy of God, by your meanes in Church and Common∣wealth.
2. We take our selves bound in conscience to speake at this present: Fearing least otherwise through our silence,2: Cause. the Motions which some have made, might prove hurtfull and perilous both to Church and State. How farre the Motioners are from speaking according to the law & to the testimonie, and seeking to have things reformed in the Church of England,Esa: 8, 20 agreeable to the Patterne of the new Testament. We shall shew in our next Petition. Onely two things we desire, may be here considered, as be∣ing the speciall drift and maine of their Motions. First, in the whole there is much self-seeking: For to what end is it motioned to have the Parish-ministers raised up to an equall height (as it were) of power and authoritie with the Bishops? But that they and the Bishops together (keeping from the people their Rights and Liberties in the Gospell) may equally LORD it, and doe what they please, without controll. But our hope is that the PARLIAMENT,Psal: 122.8. beeing men in whome the Lord hath putt wisdome and understanding, will for their Brethren and Companions sake, yea and for their owne soules sake too, prudently foresee the evill, and prevent the Motion, and not put authoritie into their hands, who wilbe (if they have it) as great persecutors of the Saints, as the Prelates formerly have beene; and so instead of one Lordly and Domineering Bishop in a Diocesse, we shall then have one in every Parish, & in some more, to oppresse & suppresse all such as walke up to their light, more closely and conscionably in all Gods wayes then themselves: We know what we speake, and wee speake no more then what we have had wofull experience off, and can make good by proofe.

The next is their mixing of Heaven & Earth together: Motioning for a discipline, which is a very hotchpotch, a gallemowfry; compounded of Epis∣copie, Presbyterie, and Poperie, thinking (in likelyhood) to please all sides, by framing (like the Samaritants) a worship of sundrie religions. But the Lord sees their halting,Mal. 1, 14. and will one day reward them for it, in their owne bo∣some as they have deserved. Cursed is the deceiver, which hath in his flock a male, and voweth and sacrificeth unto the Lord a corrupt thing.
3. Cause.A third CAUSE moving us to Petition, is in regard of you who are our PARLIAMENT-MEN, What Paul said to Agrippa, we say to you; wee thinke our selves happie, because we shall answer for our selves this day before you, whom we know to be expert in all customes and questions that are amongst us. In what a forlorne and desperate State our Kingdome was come unto, before you came together, wee are all very senceable off. And howsoever many true Causes thereof, have beene already discovered by your deepe wisdome and diligence: Notwithstanding give us leave to adde this unto the rest: That because the glorious Scepter of the Lord Iesus, hath not beene hitherto advanced in our Land as it should have been; our blessings have beene the fewer,1 Sam. 2, 30. and our crosses the more. Them that honour mee (saith the Lord) I will honour; and them that despise mee shall be lighly esteemed.
And how farre it shall please God to goe forth now in the worke of re∣formation by you, wee know not; But this we know, if you altogether hold your peace at this time, yet shall enlargement and deliverance arise unto the Kingdome of Christ from some other place. And truely just it wilbe with the Lord, to purge away such drosse & filth of the scarlet whore, with the blood of the Nation, which through your neglect shalbe left in the Land.Zach. 1, 14. Psal. 2. For thus saith the Lord of Hostes, I am jealous for Ierusalem and for Sion with great jealousie; and the Nations which will not kisse the Sonne, and come under the sweete and easie Yoake of the Gospell, hee will breake them in peeces with a red of Iron. Oh that you would looke but to for∣mer PARLIAMENTS, and consider how their Statutes and Acts made about Religion, have occasioned afterwards sore troubles in the Land. And why? But because they were not made conformable to the will and Testament of Iesus Christ. And what better successe may we now expect, unlesse looking beyond State Policie, and carnall reason, there be a full closing with God in the truths of the Gospell.Prov. 21, 30. There is no wisdome, nor understanding, nor Counsell against the Lord.
We therefore before God and the Lord Iesus Christ, and the elect An∣gels, beseech you to mind the necessity of a right and full reformation. For if your care and strivings tend this way, then shall the Earth yeeld her increase, and God, even our God, shall blesse us.
4: Cause.Our 4. and last CAUSE of Petitioning, is, for Sions sake the Mount of the Lords holinesse, and the place where his Honour dwelleth. That which we de∣sire herein, is, that remouing the Hierarchy and devised Leiturgie, Christ true Ministerie, Worship, & Government, may be by Act established. But if
 it be doutfull to you whether our request be lawfull. Then our humble supplication is that it will please his majestie and the PARLIAMENT to have the difference on both sides tried and examined. as either that our Proposi∣tions and reasons may be given to our opposites to answer, and their argu∣ments (if they will set down any) to us, to answer by the word of God. Or that a conference may be had in writing, & the questions being first agreed vpon, and the arguments and answers advisedly set downe till both parties have fully sayd, (laying aside all by-matters) and so the whole exhibited to the PARLIAMEMT, to judg off. Or any other course which by you shall be thought meetest, for the finding out of the truth by the sacred Scriptures.
And if this may not be granted us, then our last request is, for our returne out of exile, and releasement out of bands, and that we may be suffered in peace under his majestiss government within his dominions (which we had rather then under any other whatsoever) to walke in the fayth of the Gos∣pell, according to the testimony of Christ: we carying our selves in all loy∣altie peace & godlines as becometh the faithfull subjects of the Lord. And this we hope will not be denyed, seeing strangers are suffered which differ (as well as we) from the Hierarchy & worship there established, we being his majesties naturall subjects.
But howsoever it be, wee wil not cease to pray for you. And that the Lord wilbe favourable to the land, and take away his wrath from it.
