



Thrice Noble and Valiant Heroes,
THe state of the Saints con∣gregated, or scattered, for their spirituals, or tempo∣rals in this Nation, may not un∣fitly bee compared to Noah in the Arke. If you shall demand where∣in
 was Noahs safety? Was it in the Arke, or out of it? I answer, First, not in the Arke; for there was ly∣ons, and beares, and ravenous beasts, &c. the uncleane as well as cleane, Gen. 7.2. Secondly, out of the Arke no safety; for there was the roaring winds, the ra∣ging waves beating, and hee no Pilot, knew not what course to steare, nor no haven to friend; the waters so prevailed, as all the high hills that were under the whole heavens, were covered fifteene cu∣bits upward, Gen. 7.19, 20. Where was then his safety? It was by faith in the free promise, Gen. 7.1. Heb. 11.7.
So thrice Valiant Worthies, where are the Saints safeties for
 their temporals in these distres∣sed and distracted times? Is it in the City, or out of it? In the Camp, or out of it? In the Land, or out of it? In City, Campe, and Kingdome, is no peace; we have the uncleane, as well as the clean; the malignant, as well as true-hearted; the accursed Chams, as well as the compassionate Shems and Ia∣phets; the treacherous Ioabs, as well as true-hearted Amasa's: out of these no peace; for hee knoweth no∣thing, that knoweth not this, the whole earth is in uproare: and whosoever contendeth for the faith of Iesus, the Christ, (though hee have an evidence in himselfe that hee is borne of God, 1 Ioh. 5.1.) yet, hee is made a prey in all
 countries and Kingdomes where the Papall Government beareth sway: Where is their safety then? Onely in the free promise, Heb. 13.5. Let your conversation be without co∣vetousnesse, and bee content with such things as you have; for hee hath said, I will never faile thee, nor forsake thee: v. 6. So that wee may boldly say, the Lord is my helper, and I will not feare what flesh can doe unto me. Hence the Be∣liever triumpheth, Hab. 3.17. Al∣though the figtree shall not blossome, nei∣ther shall fruits be in the vine; the la∣bour of the olive shall faile, the fields yeeld no meate, the flocks shall be cut off from the folds, and there shall bee no herds in the stals; yet will I joy in the Lord, and reioyce in the God of my sal∣vation, v. 18. If it be demanded,
 where is the Believers safety in spirituals? Is it in the Believer, or out of him? I answer, not within him, (viz.) in his workes, duties, or qualificati∣ons; for he is partly flesh and partly spirituall; so that hee must confesse his best workes are weak, unclean, imperfect. Hence (with the Church, Esay. 64.6.) the Believer acknow∣ledgeth, that all his best works are like filthy ragges, and will stand him in no steed to justi∣fie him before God. Is it with∣out him in the ordinances of God; as in prayer, hearing the word preached, Baptisme, or the Lords Supper? These returne the same answer to the Belie∣ver,
 (as Iohn the Baptist did to the Pharises, Ioh. 1.20.) that they are not the Christ. What are they then? Prayer is but thy Orator to poure out thy humble request to thy Father in the name of Christ, for what thou wantest. What will the word preached do? Declare the good will and free love the Father of heaven beareth unto thee in the Gospel of his Sonne. What will Baptisme and the Lords Supper doe? Exhibite outwardly those mer∣cies in the bloud of a Iesus, that faith believeth, and the spirit inwardly witnesseth, and sealeth to thee in the free pro∣mise, that through the bloud
 of Iesus, thy sinne is pardo∣ned, thy person accepted in the Beloved one. But with one vote they deny that they are the Christ. Where is their safety then? Onely believing in a crucified, dead, and risen Iesus, Act. 13.38, 39. Hence holy Paul glorieth, I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me; and I live by the faith of the Sonne of God, that loved me, and gave himselfe for me, Gal. 2.20. To redeeme me from all iniquity, and to purge me to be one of his peculiar ones, zealous of good workes, to the praise of his glory, Tit. 2.14. This Treatise was written for the consolation of some
 poor drooping Saints in the point of assurance, as the tract it selfe will more largely de∣monstrate. It is a balm (though a spirituall one) as requisite for a Souldier, as for a Citizen, if a Believer; for a soul true∣ly setled in the knowledge of this point of assurance, hath gained a rich treasure, a pre∣cious diamond, that will stand thee insteed at all seasons, in prosperity and adversity, in health and sicknesse; yea, and the houre of death. And while you live enjoying this, it will adde true valour and courage to all your noble acts, and he∣roicall exploits, that you doe for your Countries liberties,
 and to preserve a Kingdome from arbitrary and tyrannicall governments, that those nati∣ons are subject to, that are subdued by the sword. This cordiall taken and possest by faith, will make you valiant in fight, to put to fleight the Armies of the Aliens, that are risen up to destroy our King∣dome, that sometimes was as Eden the garden of the Lord; but now (where the field of warre hath been) it is almost made a desolate wildernesse. The good Lord encrease your faith in his precious promi∣ses, especially in the grand pro∣mise made to you in the bloud of his Sonne Iesus, the Christ;
 and valour and courage for your Countries liberties; and give you meeknesse of spirit to bear with tender consci∣ences, that stand for a Refor∣mation agreeable to the word of Christ, that the Lord Iesus may bee one, and his name one in the three Kingdomes; that wee and our posterity af∣ter us may live in peace, and love, and the Lord may de∣light to dwell amongst us. And so, while your Honours, with your Noble Ioshua (the Honorable Parliaments Heroi∣call Commaunder) goeth out with the hosts against our op∣pressing Amalekits, I and the Saints united will betake our
 selves to the Mount, to pray for your good and prospe∣rous successe, and the King∣domes deliverance.
Orpington, in Kent. May 15. 1645.

