



HONORABLE GENTLEMEN,
YEE are in place of high Trust under the Supream power of this Com∣mon-wealth: whom God hath y,
1. Advanced to highest dignit
2. And made prosperous even to wonder and admiration.
Never was this Common-wealth more populous. Never were
1. Armies more potent,
2. Souldiers more resolute,
3. Successes more (if I may use the word) Fortunate. The Heavens have been Auspicious: The Celestiall In∣fluences Propicious: And God himself obvious to the eyes of all that can see, In Miracles, in Mercies, in Victo∣ries. Eternall fame attendeth the Assertors of our Liber∣ties here, Immortall glory in Heaven.

 But my Intentions aime in particular at you, Noble Trustees; For yee are the Fathers of the Clergy, to pro∣tect or to punish, to Settle or Sequester according to merit and desert. And I, having from the first hitherto endeavoured to advance the Justice of the Cause, so far as my weak abilities could attain. To which end I both preached it up in the Countrey, and penned an Apolo∣gy, which had the allowance of an Imprimatur by M. Iohn White, 1643. But it miscarrying, how I know not, I made it as common as I could with my pen, witnesse two Co∣pies wherewith I presented the Honorable Committee at Bury: besides others which I gave to some Comman∣ders, and other friends in the countrey. And now the last September I preached the substance of this wherewith I now present your Honors, in my Cure at Mickfield in Suff. But how it took I may in part judg. I therefore now flie to you as to my City of Refuge, humbly craving safe∣guard under the wings of your Benignity, hoping of bet∣ter acceptance from the Presse, then from the Pulpit at that time.
This subject I know well is not pleasing unto all: it hath I know not whether more enemies or friends. Men love Liberty, Restraint is tedious to the most. Every one would rule, few are willing to be ruled, unlesse it be un∣der such a person, or in such a way as they do best affect. But I look
1. Upon Government in generall, as upon a speciall gift of God.
2. Upon the present Government as upon a Notable and Singular Dispensation of over-ruling Provi∣dence.
And as Ioshua said to the people, Choose you whom Jos. 24. 14.
 yee will serve, as for mee and my house we will serve the Lord. So say I, Let others doe what they please; I, for my part will honor the present power with all realty and faithfulnesse: and I will submit thereto; both for his sake that hath set it up: and for conscience of my duty.
The nature of this Discourse considered, I durst not adventure it abroad but under favour, and Protection of Authority. And I hope your Honors will
1. Both allow the matter,
2. And Protect the Author, who layeth himself low at your feet: humbly craving acceptance, and, if worthy, countenance against all Anti-Parlimentarian Criticks, Carpers and Deriders.
And so resteth he that is, and will be
 From my Study, July, 31. 1650.
