


Madam,
IT abides (I know) in fresh remembrance with you, by whom, and with what transcendent praises both of the Worke & its Author the Aphorisms in this ensuing Tra∣ctate examined, were commended to your perusall, to be an Enchiridion or Manual still in your hand, or rather a Pectorall and Antidote next, your heart to defend it against errors and inward Anguish. But so abundantly hath God enri∣ched you with the knowledg of, and zeale for that pretious Mi∣stery of Christ, that you quickly saw the Misterie of iniquity that lurked in it, therefore cast it aside as unprofitable, yea noxi∣ous. Yet afterward finding some of the Ministers with whom you had acquaintance, deceived by it, you intreated me to take it, and give you my judgment of the worke, and my exceptions against some Mistakes in it. And as the deceit was urther pro∣pagated, so you urged me to increase my exceptions, and now at length that which was not purposed at first is come forth to pub∣lique view, an Answer to Mr. Brs Aphorisms. Alas that wee are brought forth in such an Age, wherein the defence of Christs cause is left to fools and carkasses of men, the Learned and po∣tent declinng the service; that in the midst of our Civill, or rather uncivil broyls one against another, there should be found such as fall foule with the Grace of God and Merits of Christ al∣so: that to preach the Gospel of Christ purely, after the example and precepts of Paul and Luther should render a man in the o∣pinion of so many, an Heretick; but to follow Arminius and Bellarmine, gets applause: that we are forced to see men vio∣lent and using force to subvert, not to enter into the King∣dom of Christ. If this reatise shall by the assistance of Gods mercy, be in any degree helpfull to cure this Malady, they that finde or see the benefit, are bound to praise God for you, that by
 you as a speciall instrument instigating, it came to see the Light. Whatsoever weakness there is in it, will redound to the shame of the Author, not at all reflect upon you, whose desire it was (could you have attained it) to have had the best Patron employed in the defence of the best Cause.
I expect that Mr. Br. will come forth, and that speedily with a vehement Reply. But whatsoever he saith, I shall follow the precept of the Apostle, Tit. 3. 10, 11. He hath had a first, and two hundred of Admonitions (as they report which come from him) which he laies as heaps of sand, not answering any of them, how should I follow the Apostles precept in not rejecting, in ha∣ving any thing more to do with him. The present Worke had no other relation to him, but as to the undeceiving of the simple which had received infection from him. But if my beloved and Reverend Brother in the work of the Lord, which commended to you Mr. Brs Aphorisms, and hath made it long his work to pro∣pagate it through many Counties, yea undertaken in the Western Counties to be the defnder of all that Mr. Br hath written in that Book (the performance whereof is by many Ministers there expected) will take it up as his task to Apologize for him, and affirm the Apology (as in his name) so to be his owne; I shall in despight of all infirmities of mind and body, so long as breath lasteth, by Gods assistance Anti-apologize for Christ, and that not in such an expression of words as I have used to M. Br (whom I look upon as an Impostor) but in such a spirit of meekness and Reverence, as is meet to be used towards so pious and learn∣ed a Divine, who cannot, dares not against the light of his con∣science hold any Truth of God in unrighteousness.
The Lord give unto you to keep your station firm in the Light and heat of the Sun of Righteousness, that the splendor thereof may more and more shine into your understanding, and the heat thereof more inflame your affections to the pure Gospel of Christ, that you may be able to comprehend with all Saints what is the breadth and length and depth and height: And to know the love of Christ, which surpasseth all knowledg, and be filled with all the fulness of God. This is the request of
From my Lodging, Decemb. 24. 1653.
MADAM 
