



Honoured Sirs,
IT may seem strange that I should adventure to dedi∣cate so plain a Discourse (calculated for this meridi∣an) to so Learned a Society; But the
 Providence of God having by your free choice placed me in this Charge wherein I stand, I take my self obliged to ren∣der an account to you (above any o∣thers) of this my undertaking. I have found by sad experience, in those few years I have here lived, what ex∣tream need my people have of some such help as this, to be ready at hand to admonish them of those things, they are to Know, Believe, and Practise in order to their salvation: As also to acquaint them with such Scriptures (collected together under severall Heads) as declare Gods mind and will concerning those particulars. I could not therefore satisfie my self, without endeavouring to minister to their ne∣cessities in this kind according as I was able, especially being perswaded that a Book of this nature left in every fami∣ly might (through the blessing of God) be a very proper means of their instru∣ction for the present, and might teach
 them also hereafter, when my mouth will be stopp'd with dust. This con∣sideration (among others) engaged me in this work; in which at first I did not intend to be so large; but handling such variety of Subjects, it hath swelled to the bulk you see. You may perceive by the whole that the great Master-Builder hath appointed me to labour in the foundations. And blessed (yea for ever blessed) be his Holy Name, that he hath accounted me worthy to be employed any way about his spirituall building. I shall not need to make any apology for the plain∣nesse of my work, if it be but sure and well laid. Such as it is I hum∣bly present unto you, as an evidence of the great desire I have (accord∣ing to my poor ability) to feed the people committed to my care, with knowledge and understanding, and to guide them in the way wherein they should go: As also to testifie to the world
 my great Obligations to that Religious and Eminent Society. God Almighty blesse your Colledge with his choicest blessings, and grant that Reall Piety, and all Ʋseful Learning may flourish within your wals from Generation to Generation, This is the earnest Prayer of
Honoured Sirs,

North-Cadbury, May 5th. 1659.
