


Much honoured and highly Beloved.
IT might be Construed self-arrogance, that so despicable a person in parts, newly broken out of the black Cloud of Obscurity, should (not onely pub∣lish to the world, but withall) tender so rough-hewen a work to the speciall view & scrutiny of them whom Christ hath made and named the Lights of the world. But this imputation will appear undeserved, to as many as shall consider that what is here presented to so great a fulgor of judgement and learning, comes with a request not of Patronage alone, but of Correction also. Of Patronage where it defends the Truth in the Truth: of Correction where it halteth into the defence of error in steed of the Truth, or of the Truth but not in the Truth. The work it self will sufficiently speak me out not fit to be registred inter Doctos, yet hath it been still my study not to commit any thing by which I should deserve to be pronounced indocilis, untractable to learn where the
 Lord holds forth a faithfull Teacher. It is the height of my ambition and patheticall heartiness of my humble re∣quest, not so much to all of you Collectively (which is unattainable) as to every of you divisively, who in these slippery times (Honored Worthies) stand fast in the truth of Christ, to be recalled by you into the way from which you shall finde me any where straying: but so that by the Authority of the Word you lead me into it, that I may gladly be a follower of such a leader. As to the Book to which this answereth, whatsoever Fate this shall have in mens judgements, surely that must have a stinch with all the judicious and orthodox. Neither could it so long have stood unshaken, had he not cunningly prepossessed the minds of his Readers with Affection and prejudice, the two worst Clouds which oft bemist the judgement of them that are both pious and prudent, that in seeing they do not, because they would not perceive the truth for a season. The Affections of many he attracted to himself by professing himself a zealous Presbyterian. This pretext made not a few to look over and beyond his Contagious doctrine, to behold and regard the person of the man for his unanimity with them in discipline. This vizzard is at length so faln from his Face▪ that the most do and all may see him under this profession, to have been but as the Anabaptized Jesuit, taking his station there from whence he thought to have most advantage to promote his Po∣pish doctrines, Concluding that under that name his Fraud would not be so easily espyed. And is there now any which seeth not he would be Episcopal, Presbyterian, Independent, for any Government, for no Government, helping him to drive home to the head his soul-subvert∣ing doctrines into the hearts of men? Prejudice against the sacred Truth which he oppugneth, he fomented by aspersing the whole Doctrine of the Gospel and the re∣formed Churches of Christ with the black brand of Anti∣nonianism,
 reserving onely the Papists and Arminians, whom he followeth, free of it. How much he hath pre∣vailed in sowring with the leaven of Scribes and Phari∣sees which is hypocrisie, the vulgar sort not onely of the people, but of the Ministers also, with this gross impo∣sture, would be incredible, if experience did not manifest it. Therefore finding this Feat so soveraign to the attain∣ment of his ends, assoon as he heard of exceptions in the Press against his Aphorisms, his first indeavours have been to fill with prejudice the minds of men against the both work and Author thereof, dispersing thorow this Citty by his Printer that it is the Hant-shire Antinomian that excepteth so against him. How irrational and malicious this his inditement against me is, may appear hence, that I dwell in one of the obscurest nooks of this English little world, so unknown as he is famous, that he could not so much as hear of my name, saving by some one of his Cir∣cumforaneous Legates (which having their Provinces as∣signed either of one or more Counties, are still Circling and Compassing them, first to disperse this his Mystery of iniquity with such accurateness, that there may be no one that hath the repute of a pious Gentleman or Mini∣ster a stranger to it; and then by their frequent visitations to examine how the Baxterian Faith thrives in each per∣son, and to hold them fixed to it) These returning once in six or seven Moneths out of their Circuits to their Grand Master may possibly speak in things which they know not, what they think may be plausible to him. It hath not been unknown (I acknowledge) to some of these that I disrelished his doctrine, and did hinder the embracing of it: But might not this my dissenting be as properly termed Treason as Antinonianism?
Yet because I understand that these sparkes of false▪ fire have no sooner faln than taken in some, I am forced to Apologize somewhat (and that with the more Confidence
 because to you that have the eyes of your understanding most clear rightly to Censure or judge) that prejudice may be no hinderance to the truth. What I shall speak herein must relate partly to my self, partly to Mr. Br. and partly to the doctrine it self which he hath drawn into Controversie Condemning it of Antinomism.
1 What I shall speak of my self shall not be with an heart and a heart, the one open to let out what it listeth, the other reserved to retein in secrecy what is not for ad∣vantage to the ends sought after: but in plainness and simplicity I shall deliver the whole and naked truth of my judgement as before the Lord my Judge and Justifier. Neither is there need of hiding and Tergiversation, for I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: It is the power of God to salvation &c. And as sweet to me as the salvation which it bringeth. I therefore profess my self clear from all that is rightly Called, and hath been judged by the reformed Churches and their Champions Antinonianism, i. e. op∣positeness to the Law. These things I acknowledg my self to hold and teach: 1 That Beleevers are not under the Curse of the Law as the Curse. 2 Nor are the Afflic∣tions which befall them so the Curse of the Law, or re∣venging punishments for sinn, but the fruits of the tender Love of a good and provident Father working for good to them. 3 That they are not under the Law as a Cove∣nant of works. If these things be Antinonism I acknow∣ledg my self an Antinomian: yet such as onely the blind∣ness madness and malice of men possibly may account so, but that I have the Apostles and all the Protestant Chur∣ches and Writers (without any exception) under the same aspersion with me, having all stoutly maintained all these as Gospel-truths against the false Apostles, Pa∣pists, and Arminians, in their severall generations, with∣out the Contradiction of any except Papists and Armini∣ans, to whom Mr. Br. not without some fellowes, hath
 lately Apostatized. 4 Yet I still grant the preaching of the Law, and that in its full perfection and all its terrors, usefull to shake in pieces all the carnall Confidences and self righteousness of man, that despairing of safety in him∣self, he may be forced to seek it out of himself from meer Mercy, in another which is Christ the Saviour. 5. That the Law is still a perfect rule and directive of all morall righteousness and obedience both to beleevers and unbe∣leevers, so that in both all variation from it is sinn, but Conformity to it is regularity and obedience. In respect of my judgement therefore about the Law, I question not my discharge from the imputation of Antinomism among the truly wise and orthodox, except to be a Christian be Antinonianism.
2 As to Mr. Br, it is evident that he asperseth the in∣nocent with the Fault whereof himself is guilty. He de∣nies Christ to require under the Gospel, the perfect holi∣ness and righteousness which the Law commandeth, and Consequently that it is not either our duty to perform it, or our sinn to fail in it, or that the Law is an adequate and Competent rule of morall obedience, Because it Com∣mands more than it is our duty to perform. He saith not Christ requires it not in order to this end, but simply and absolutely he requires it not. If this be not Antino∣mianismPart. 1. p. 213. &c. then Islebius himself hath been unjustly Char∣ged with it.
3 As to the matter yet remaining Charged by Mr. Br. and others with Antinomianism, it may be reduced prin∣cipally to four heads. 1 Justification as an Immanent Act in God; As actually Completed in the redemption which is by Christ & in Christ; (both these before we beleeve:) 3 The absoluteness and irrespectiveness of it, freely with∣out Conditions: 4 Christs satisfying for mans sinns a∣gainst the Gospel as well as against the Law. Though I have spoken of all these enough, of each in its proper
 place within this Tractate, yet somewhat for the fuller Clearing of my meaning may be said here also. The first and second I shall for brevity join in one as of no small Cognation. As farr as I hold and have declared my self to hold them; 1 I have also manifested in due place, how they are or seem at least to be grounded upon the Scriptures; 2 They are expresly and boldly asserted by many of the most Conspicuous Divines in piety and Learning, that any of the Protestant Churches have enjoyed ever since the Reformation. 3. And that without the Contradicti∣on or exception of any Church or Orthodox Writer for well nigh a hundred yeares, made against it: A great and probable Argument that it was the Common Judgement of all the Churches. 4. Mr. Rhaeterfordt in his Exercit. A∣polog. holds it forth not as the private opinion of some par∣ticular men, but as the Common Judgement of all the Churches. And the Remonstrants take it as such: For so I remember they oft argue in their Apol. and elswhere, Justificatio est purus putus Actus in Deo immanens &c. not that they express what Arminius his judgment and theirs after him is in this point: but that from this as a conclu∣sion which they knew common to, and would not be de∣nyed by any Protestant, their Argument would stand firm against them. Neither know I any one of the Protestants that hath written against them, excepting against it. 5 I never read any (to make me dissent in judgement from these Worthies) that hath given his reasons against it save Mr. Br. alone: and he handles the question, like a man spoyled with Philosophy and vain deceit (as the Apostle ter∣meth the use of exotick learning in purely Gospel mat∣ters) after the traditions of men and Rudiments of the world, not after Christ; Col. 2. 8. And his nakedness in such his arguing is enough discovered by a learned Writer whose worth I shall still honour, but have not so much as an Am∣bition ever to match. Mr. Ken∣dal. He tells us indeed that Dr Down∣ham
 hath written against it as delivered by Mr. Pemble. But I could not get the book to see his reasons, nor know I any thing which he hath written but as I have heard from others. Besides I have been told that some of the late Reverend Synod, disrelished the doctrine, but cannot finde that any one of them hath published his reasons for such a disrelish. And Charity will not permit me to har∣bour the lightest imagination that any of those grave Di∣vines culld and selected out of the whole Nation for their eminency in godliness and learning, should without any means used for information and conviction, exercise a Ty∣ranny over the Consciences of their lesser brethren to force them into an implicit Faith to beleeve as themselves beleeve: specially when doing it they shall put out that which they think at least to be the light of the word in their conscience, and in consenting with them without hearing a reason, they shall dissent from others (whom their Modesty will confess to be of no less deservings in the Church) who have given their reasons.
Yet still I hold, 1 that those Scriptures which treat of Justification by Faith do all relate to the transient justifi∣cation which no man partakes of till he beleeveth. 2 That no man is personally justified, but onely in Christ the pub∣like person, till he be by Faith united to Christ. That righteousness and life so discend to us from the second A∣dam, as sinn and condemnation from the first. As by the offence of one judgement came upon all to condemnation: so by the Righteousness of one the free gift came upon all to Justifi∣cation of life, Rom. 5. 18, 19. In Adam the publike per∣son we were all represented, he was all, and we all con∣sidered in him, God saw us in all our individuall persns in him, though we through Adam saw it not: so that Aam sinning we all sinned in him and became dead in law and guilty of condemnation before God, as if we had been then being and actually sinning. Nevertheless as to our
 selves we were not personally sinners and guilty, untill we had a personall being in and from Adam. So in Christ satisfying Gods justce for sinn, the Elect were all repre∣sented as in a publike person, satisfying in him & by him, and so all in him and by him justified and absolved in all their individualls from sinn and condemnation before God: Nevertheless we are not personally so justified, un∣till we have a personall being and new being in Christ and from Christ. 3. That this Transient Justification is a justifying or being justified before God passed at Gods Tribunall set up in mans Conscience, from which he pro∣nounceth absolution to a poore sinner denying himself and resting upon Christ alone for Mercy. So that now, and never untill now he hath boldness to pierce by Faith into the Holiest, and plead his righteousness before him that sitteth on the Mercy-seat. Thus our justification which was before in God and in Christ, is not at all derogatory to the justification which is by Faith: but onely prevents that this latter may not be derogatory to the praise of Gods Grace and Christs merits, which have completed all without our subserviency for us: and thus God is all, seen to be all, and our boasting excluded. This hitherto is my judgement untill I shall be better instructed—Tu si quid novisti rectius istis, Candidus imperti.
And at length if it shall be granted to be an error, yet it cannot be Antinomism, being a deviation not from the doctrine of the Law but of the Gospel. It was not the judgement but malice of Mr. Br that gave it this brand of ignominy.
3 To the free absolute and unconditionall Justificati∣on, I need not to Apologize for my self at all. It is to the truly pious of the Ministery to whom my words are di∣rected, who (among other) have given this evidence of your godlinesse, that ye have not forsaken your first Faith by declining to Popery or Arminianism, what others
 judge of me is to me a small thing (saith the Apostle of such) I weigh it not. But ye no doubt teach that the ve∣ry promulgation of Justification runs upon no other con∣dition but Faith alone, and upon Faith, not as a quality or vertue, but instrumentall to apply the righteousnesse of Christ to Justification, that works and the universall conditionall Justification which Mr. Br. hath learned of his Masters, are to be excluded. In this your doctrine is one and the same in sense and substance with theirs that affirm Justification to be unconditionall. And it is indif∣ferent to me to deliver the same truth in their words or yours: Onely I find that they make use of both the for∣mer and this Conclusion, as strong Fortresses against Po∣pery and Arminianism, which causeth Mr. Br. with so much impetuousnsse and impotency to use his Mounts and Mines against them. Neither can I see any ground of objecting that either of these two doctrines can in any re∣spect dull the affections to good works, sith it is confessed that they have no co-officiating with Faith to Justifi∣cation.
4 To Christs satisfying for sins against the Gospel as wel as against the Law, I doubt not but ye see both the ni∣city and falsity of Mr. Brs Negation thereof. The chief Doctrines of the Gospel are Grace and Gratitude, Justifi∣cation and Sanctification. If Christ hath not satisfied for our long unbelief and contempt of the word of Faith be∣fore we beleeve, and of the infirmities of our Sanctifica∣tion and Thankfulness when we have beleeved; or that there are sins against the New which are not sins against the Old Testament also; or that the Lord Jesus is not the Mediator of the New Testament but of the Old onely; or that in any of these it should be Antinomianism to dis∣sent from Mr. Br: These all are so grosse Paradoxes that your gravity and wisedom cannot without Nauseousness smell them: plainly enough declaring indeed that what∣soever
 standeth in his way of Babel building he will curse it (though never so sacred) and fright them that are as feeble as fearfull, with his scar crow of Antinomianism, though he make himself never so ridiculous thereby to the intelligent and prudent.
I have no more to say upon this subject, and what I have said hath been before him that being omniscient knoweth that I have spoken singly the whole truth, and nothing but the Truth. Neither can all the strength of my jealousy suspect any least or greatest thing besides these wherewith either Mr. Br. or any of his Disciples cn charge me as with Antinomianism, so that I do with some confident boldnesse appeal to your judgment whether I deserve from them this imputation. Inded such soul-re∣viving comforts have flown in upon me from the Grace of God in Christ, that out of the abundance of the heart the mouth will speak, and I can scarce Preach any other thing then Christ and him Crucified; yet in holding forth a wounded, I hold not forth a maimed Christ to the peo∣ple, but Christ with all his benefits, in particular to San∣ctification no lesse then to Justification. If it be Antino∣mianism so to reduce all to Christ, and derive all from him, I must undergo the worlds condemnation for Christs sake that hath justified and will at length receive me.
One thing more I have to add, and I shall be no further tedious. It may be a Charge against me that I am too plain, broad and unsparing in my words against Mr. Br. throughout this Tractate. That which I have to say for my self is,
1 That it ariseth not so much from my own temper, as from the occasion thereof given by Mr. Br. I am ready for Christs sake to become the footstool of the meek, but where I find a self▪ exalting, I cannot cry Abreoh. When I see Mr. Br. usurping the Chair to passe sentence and cen∣sure upon all the Divines that have written, these are lear∣ned,
 those unstudied Divines, to exalt and degrade better men than himself as they are more either concurrent with or abhorrent from his Bellarmin and Arminius: I cannot, I dare not use words that might strengthen but rather vili∣fie the self▪ confidence and arrogance of the man. So when the Wolf comes in sheeps clothing to devour, when un∣der the profession of a Protestant and Presbyterian Di∣vine, he vends his Popish and Arminian under the name of Protestant Tenets, dissembling his confederacy with the enemies thereof,
Si natura negat facit indignatio versum.
The view of such hypocrisy is enough to make a sheep a Satyrist. Had I been to deal with a Papist or Arminian, that had discovered themselves unmasked, I should have spoken in another Dialect.
2 It sprang from other mens yea Ministers too much admiration and almost adoration of him, when from all parts there was such Concurse in a way of Pilgrimage to him, to blesse him or be blessed by him, and the admirers returned to the deceiving of others, with no lesse applaus and triumph, than the Turks from visiting the shrine of their Mahomet at Mecha; It was requisite to discover whether he were a God or an Idol to whom such honour was presented.
3 I have herein Christ and his Apostles my leaders, from whom though we seldome heare a course word against any other sort of men, yea of sinners, yet when they speak against Impostors and Heretikes, speci∣ally such as bring their own works and righteousnesse to Justification, they so speak as if they were made up of bitternesse and invectives. Ye hypocrites, sowred with the leaven, and whose doctrine is the doctrine of hypocrisy, Mat. 16. 3. 6. 12. Ye Serpents, a Generation of Vipers, how can ye escape the judgment of Hell, Mat. 23. 33. Wo unto you, wo unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for ye shut up the Kingdom of
 God against men, ye neither go in your selves, nor suffer them that would to enter, &c. Mat. 23. 14, 15, &c. Children of hell, blind guides, fools and blind, whited Sepulchres, ver. 15, 16, 17, 27. The Publicans are justified rather then you, enter into the Kingdome before you, Lu. 18. 14. Ma. 21. 31. More joy is in Heaven for one sinner repenting, than 99 such, &c. Lu. 15. 7. False brethren, Gal. 2. 4. Subverters of souls, Acts 15. 24. Grievous Wolves, not sparing the flocke, Acts 20. 29. False Apostles, deceitfull workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ, Satans Ministers transformed into Mini∣sters of Righteousness, as Satan transformed himself into an Angel of light, 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15. Doggs, evil workers, the Concision, Phil. 3. 2. Let them be accursed, Gal. 1. 8. I would they were cut off, Gal. 5. 12. with many other the like passages. It savours not of the spirit and zeal of Christ and his Apostles, not to speak home to this kind of men above the rest. But if I have not fully proved Mr: Brs principles and doctrines to be the same in substance with these false Apostles, as elswhere in this Treatise, so speci∣ally Part 2. Chap 19. I acknowledge my self not to un∣derstand either Saint Paul or Mr. Br.
My Request now shall be such as hath equity in it, that as far as ye find this Tractate Orthodox and Consonant to sound Doctrine, ye will be pleased to grant it and the Author of it your Patronage, and prayers for a blessing upon it, and where ye see it otherwise, to vouchsafe to its Author your Admonition, not suffering him to stray, whom charity binds you to reduce into the way. This is desired as from all so from every of you, by
From my Lodging in Aldersgate▪ street, Decemb. 24. 1653.

