



PEACE among Brethren is the Pearle that is lost in these dayes; which many pretend to seek, and all justly complaine is wanting; many out-cryes there are for it, in the mouth's of some, whose hearts and principles are full of warre and contention; Their words are Ps. 55. 21. softer then oyle, and yet they be drawne swords;
 Yea such is the hypocrisie of this age, that it is become al∣most the Character of a Malignant, or Atheist, in all com∣panies, with much seeming zeale and devotion, to pray and desire Peace, Union, Reconciliation, neglecting the while all meanes that may conduce to the same.
Others there are (and those not a few) who long for Peace, and that sincerely, but not hitting the right way to attaine to it, doe often cast more Oyle into the flame, and make the breach wider. This following Discourse (though it be the meanest of any that ever hath been pre∣sented unto you) points out the surest and readiest way to finde this Jewel, (i.) Fellowship with the Father, and his Sonne Jesus Christ. Fellowship with God necessarily begets fellowship between men. He onely is an enemy to Man, that is not upon tearmes of friendship with God. God is love, and when we are in him, and walke with him, wee cannot but be like him. Could wee fully appre∣hend God as our Father, Christ as our Head, all the Saints his members, chosen and beloved, wee should no longer bite, teare, and devoure one another: a spirit of Love, Goodnesse, Meeknesse, Long-suffering, that is in God, and dwells in Christ, would run through all our veines; tempering our hearts, and framing our carriages Euk. 6. Ephes. 5. towards men, as God's in Christ hath been towards us. Yea, it would mollifie our spirits towards all, even the worst of men, and make us live peaceably as much as in us lieth with all men. To give no offence to any man. Rom. 12. 1 Cor. 10. Titus 3. 1 Cor. 4. Mat. 5. To speake evill of no man. To blesse when wee are blasphemed. To give up our cloakes to him that takes away our coat, &c. And because there is a generall distance growne between men and God, an inter∣mission
 of spirituall fellowship, therefore these Scriptures are become now Apocryphall, which were precious Truths formerly to the Saints, (and it may be still are to a few) who studied rather to conforme themselves to the strictest Rules, then wrest the Rule to their owne carnall sen∣ses and corrupt lusts; a practice too common in these times.
Oh that wee could then doe as the wise Traveller, who being wilderd in a Forrest, despairing to finde the way forward, returnes thither where he first lost his way: We have lost our way, our selves, our God, and all almost, by an O∣ver-violent contention about Things externall: Wee have cast durt upon each other, that will not be wiped off our names in many Ages, opened the mouth's of the wicked, rejoyced the hearts of Papists, grieved the Spirit of God. Oh how happy should wee yet be, if wee would returne to our GOD, renewing our fellowship with him in the Spirit!
Surely it was better with us then when wee made our Hos. 2 Fellowship with God, Holinesse, Righteousnesse, our chiefe studie, when Christianitie, and the power of God∣linesse, was the Cement that united us together; When wee were distinguished from the world, and knowne to one another by the style of Saints, Professors of Godli∣nesse, Honest-men.
It is one of my firmest Principles, and by Gods Grace shall ever be my practice, to make union and communion with God my maine worke, to studie peace with all men; To Love, Honour, Receive SAINTS quà SAINTS; To receive, I say, those whom Christ hath received. The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
 binde up every one of your soules in that bundle, and so preserve your whole spirit, soule and body blamelesse un∣to his comming, which shall ever be the most unfeigned prayer of

