


YOur commands have hardened me, against the conscience of my poore abilities, to offer to you my two mites, one from the Pulpit, this other from the Presse.
The wise God is pleased to trust the treasure of his Gospell, in ear∣then2 Cor. 4. 7. vessells. Such glorious and sweet discoveries of himselfe the Lord hath given us in it, that the weakest2 Cor. 10. 4. may by it be helpfull instruments unto the strongest. The weapons of our warfare are mighty, not from our selves, but through God, who glorifieth strength in2 Cor. 12. 9. weakenesse.
This truth of his, concerning reconciliation with him, is one of the principall; by it the soules of men are over∣come to doe for God ('its called justification of life,Tit 2. 11, 12. (Rom. 5. 8.) because the putting forth of spirituall life in us begins in that,) and God himselfe is overcome to doe for men.

I studied how to speake a word in season: as for a day of Fast, it is the businesse of that day, to make attonement; As for your selves, of all the preparations you can make, for that great work you have in hand, it is the chiefe. This ingageth heaven for your assistance, fits you for the worke, rayseth your affections to it, continually gives aPs. 23. 3. new and fresh increase of strength; it restores the soule, which otherwise growes weake in all it's acts, by decayes of nature in the body, and the guilt of sinne upon the con∣science; when sinne is pardoned our youth returnes, andPs. 103. 5 is renewed like the Eagles: It will knit you all together in a mutuall and an heavenly love. The Thebans in their. Athen. l. 3 Armies had a band of men they called sacra cohors, which consisted of such only, who were joyn'd together in the bonds of love; these they esteem'd the prime of all their strength in battell: This is the priviledge of those who are at peace with God; they are an holy band, all knit together by that heavenly bond.
Now the God of peace that brought againe from the dead our Lord Jesus, the great shepheard of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good worke to doe his will, working in you that which is well plea∣sing in his sight, through Jesus Christ. This is the prayer of

