


My loving Neighbours and Friends,
OUR Blessed Saviour intending to give Peter a charge of his Lambs and Sheep, enquires first concerning his sincere love to him, John 21.15, 16, 17. Simon son of Jonas, lovest thou me more than these? he saith unto him, yea Lord, thou knowest that I love thee: He saith unto him, feed my Lambs. V. 16. He saith to him again the second time, Simon sonne of Jonas, lovest thou me? he saith unto him, yea Lord, thou knowest that I love thee, he saith unto him, feed my Sheep. V. 17. He said unto him the third time,
 Simon sonne of Jonas, lovest thou me? Peter was grieved, because he said unto him the third time, lovest thou me? And he said unto him, Lord, thou knowest all things, thou knowest that I love thee. Jesus saith unto him, feed my Sheep. Which words plainly intimate thus much unto us, that Ministers who are called to take charge of Christs Flock, had need of much love unto him; no service about them being approved, if it flow not from this fountain (but be undertaken for by-respects) and there being no possibility without this love well to endure the many blasts and storms they will meet with (from without) in the discharge of their calling, nor the much toil they will have, even from the flocks themselves. The truth is, the paines and labour and sufferings of the Ministerial Function are so great (where 'tis conscientiously discharged) and there are so many other waies wherein we might make our lives more comfortable (as to worldly contentments) that he must needs be a man of great ignorance and inex∣perience (or intends not to be over-diligent and faithful in his Ministry) that takes on him that sacred Calling, meerly for temporal advantages. But whoever lifts up his heart to think how much our dear Lord and Saviour hath done for him (who endured the Crosse, and despised the shame to redeem mankind) and shall consider what glori∣ous rewards he propounds to those who turn many to righteousnesse, surely cannot grudge to be em∣ployed
 in the work of so gracious a Redeemer, or to spend and be spent in his service. This conside∣ration hath drawn me often to think with my self by what means I might best promote your everlast∣ing welfare. And after many serious thoughts, I have judged it exceeding expedient for your benefit, to draw up a discourse of this nature, and to give to every Family among you, one of them. And I blesse God that hath put it into my heart to set about it, and hath enabled me to perform it. 'Twas your benefit, and the winning of your souls to Christ that was the grand motive to this undertaking. And if that great businesse (through the blessing of God) may be any way advanced thereby, I shall ne∣ver repent of my pains, but shall very much re∣joyce that the Lord hath enabled me (in any mea∣sure) to be serviceable to you in the furthering of your salvation. And that you may the bet∣ter know how to make use of this Treatise, I shall acquaint you in brief with the whole designe thereof.
In the first part, I have couched together in three Chapters the chief and necessary things that are to be known and believed concerning God, our selves, and the Mediator between God and man. That so those that have a mind to know, may (in short) be informed of the main things they are so deeply concern'd to be acquaint∣ed with. And because 'tis of exceeding great conse∣quence, that people should well understand how
 the things they profess to believe are grounded on Gods Word, I have collected together most of those Scriptures that are scattered up and down in the Book of God (upon which the Articles of our Faith are founded) and have reduced them to se∣veral heads, and printed them at large, that so they may be as several constellations, or clusters of Stars, giving you the more light, and clearer assurance of the things they are brought to prove. This course I have taken also in the second Part, in reference to the things that are to be practised. My intent herein being, that my Book should fully inform you what is Gods mind and revealed will concerning those particulars I treat of, which may be of singular use to you in several respects.
1. To strengthen and confirm your own belief of the Articles of the Christian Faith; to awe your Consciences with the authority of Gods Word, and to engage your hearts to the practise of those things that shall appear to be your duty.
2. To enable you to instruct your children and servants in the Principles of Faith and obedience from the Scriptures here set down to your hands; which every one is not able readily to find out that has not some such help.
3. To secure you against Errors now so rise among us. Seeing you may hereby defend the Faith once delivered to the Saints, and confute the enemies of truth, as our Saviour did the De∣vil, by alledging the Sacred Scriptures for the things you believe and practise.

In the Second Part I treat of the things that concern your practise. And because consi∣deration of our waies, and examining the state of our souls to God-ward is a matter of so exceeding great use, that scarce any thing undoes Mankind more than the neglect of it, I begin with that. And oh that I may prevail with you to a conscien∣tious Practise of it. I have heard of a Gentleman that uPon his Death-bed laid this one command up∣on his wild Son, and engag'd him to the perform∣ance of it by a solemn promise, that he should eve∣ry day of his life be half an hour alone: Which this young man constantly observing, and spending▪ his half hours retirement (at first) in any kind of vain thoughts, at last he began to ponder with himself, why his Father should enjoyn him this pe∣nance; and the Spirit of God suggesting to him, that his intent therein could be no other but to bring him to consider of his evil waies, and whither they tended, and what would become of him hereafter if he went on; it pleased the Lord so to set those thoughts home upon his heart, that he became a new man: Of so much advantage is consideration, and frequent taking our selves in private to think of the state of our souls.
In the three next Chapters I handle the Do∣ctrines of Repentance, Faith, and a new na∣ture and reformed life, being indeed the main things wherein the power and life of Godlinesse consists. And therefore I intreat you give the
 more heed unto them.
In the Fifth Chapter I treat of maintaining a daily, close communion with God, and shew,
1. How we should awake with God in the mor∣ning, and so begin the day well.
2. How we should pour forth our souls in se∣cret prayer and thanksgiving unto him; private prayer being every ones duty, and a great help to Holiness. And that people may not be slight and formal in these duties, and so offend in the man∣ner of doing them, I give some Directions for the right performance of them.
3. I shew how we should diligently read the Scriptures, the Oracles of God, which are able (through the operation of the Spirit) to make us wise unto salvation.
4. How we should live continually as in the sight and view of God.
5. How we should live by Faith, in ten par∣ticulars.
6. How we should be diligent observers of the Providence of God, that so we may order our services of prayer and praise accordingly.
7. How we should practise the great duty of daily watchfulnesse, continually watch∣ing;
1. Over our thoughts, that we lodge not sin∣ful thoughts in our minds.
2. Over our Affections, that we allow not
 any sinful motions, and stirrings in our hearts, but labour speedily to suppress them.
3. Over our words, that we offend not (as we are exceeding apt) with our tongues.
4. Over our actions, that they may be such as proceed from a right Principle, are conform'd to a right Rule, and are directed to a right end. These are the things we must watch over.
Next I set down what are the things we must watch against. In the general, all sin what∣ever. But in particular,
1. Those sins we are most inclin'd unto by our own temper and naturall constitution.
2. The sins we are most exposed to by rea∣son of our calling, condition, state and course of life.
3. The sins of the times and places where we live.
4. Against all occasions and temptations, that we foresee are like to endanger our souls.
5. Against dishonouring God by the immo∣derate and undue use of lawful things.
6. Against Errour; where the danger of it is shewed, and some preservatives are given a∣gainst it.
In the next place is shewed, how we should watch for opportunities of doing and receiving good: And some Motives to watchfulness are pro∣pounded, and the Chapter shut up with these two Directions.

1. That we should besides our solemn prayers, send up frequent, mental, ejaculatory prayers unto the Lord for his Grace, help, and assist∣ance.
2. That every night we should retire, and reflect upon all our actions, and whole behavi∣our in the day past, and so set all at rights be∣tween God and our souls before we go to sleep.
And because, whoever desires to grow in Knowledge and Grace, must conscientiously make use of, and improve the means of Grace that God affords him, therefore in the Sixth Chapter I treat.
1. Of the careful observation of the Lords day. Shewing why we should observe it, and how. For my part I never saw true Religion and the power of Godlinesse thrive in any per∣son, family, or Parish, where the religious and conscientious observance of that day was neg∣lected.
2. Concerning heaing the Word; where directions are given;
1. How we are to prepare our selves before we go to hear.
2. How we are to behave our selves in time of hearing.
3. What we are to do after we have heard. And oh that I might prevail with you to read these Directions often (especially on Saturday-nights)
 that so you might come prepared. The great reason of the unprofitablenesse of preaching, and that Sermons do no more good, is, because people come without preparation.
3. Seeing that Heavenly duty of singing Psalms and lifting up the praises of the most High, is now by some question'd (as indeed what is not that tends to Gods Glory and mans good?) I pur∣posely handle that subject, and prove it to be a duty under the Gospel, answer the Objections against it, and give some Directions for the right performing of it.
4. Forasmuch as Christians might exceedingly benefit one another by Religious conference; thereby warming and enlivening one another, and provoking one another to love and to good works,
In the next place I speak of that duty, and set down some Rules concerning it.
Lastly, Because without meditation 'tis not to be expected the Word should do much good, nor that the soul should ever thrive in Knowledge and Grace, I shew the excellency and benefit there∣of, and give some Directions for the practise of it.
The Seventh Chapter treats of the danger of frequenting, and unnecessarily conversing with bad company, whereby many have been everlast∣ingly undone. A man that prayes to be delivered from temptations, must not wilfully run himself
 into them. And because 'tis the duty of all true Christians both for their own peace sake, and that they may adorn the Gospel of Christ, to serve their generation in some honest and commendable way (avoiding Idlenesse, that great snare of the Devil.)
In the eighth Chapter I discourse of diligence and conscientiousnesse in our particular places and callings.
And that the Name of God may not be blas∣phemed by the ill lives and practises of such as professe themselves Christians;
In the Ninth Chapter I treat of just and up∣right dealing in Trading and Commerce, giving some Rules both to buyers and sellers, and shew the necessity of making restitution of, or satis∣faction for ill gotten goods.
The Tenth Chapter contains the duties of Go∣vernours of Families, which I desire all that are in that relation often to read over, and seriously to meditate upon. There is a great duty lies upon them, and greater than they usually are aware of. They may be exceeding instrumental of the salva∣tion of those under their care, if they discharge their duties as they ought. But through their neg∣lect of the Worship of God in their houses, and their ill lives and examples they prove too often an occa∣sion of the ruine of many in their Families. And because very much of the life of Godlinesse consists in a faithful discharge of relative duties,

The Eleventh Chapter shews the duties of Husband and Wife.
The Twelfth of Msters and Servants.
The Thirteenth of Parents and Children.
The Fourteenth of such as are in office and of Inferiours.
The Fifteenth of People towards their Pa∣stors and spiritual Guides. O what an honour would it be to Christian Religion, if all they that call themselves Christians, would endeavour to walk uprightly and faithfully in their respective places.
And seeing it is a real kindnesse, and an ex∣cellent expression of true Christian friendship, to keep one another off from the pit of destruction, and to help one another on towards Heaven,
In the Sixteenth Chapter I treat of that great and hard duty of Christian reproof and admonition, which if it were prudently and faithfully dischar∣ged, would (by the blessing of God) much abate sin in the world, and exceedingly advance Piety.
The Seventeenth Chapter contains the duties of rich and poor. Many duties belong to them both; and both have great temptations, there∣fore they had need be careful to discharge the one, and avoid the other.
The Eighteenth Chapter speaks of the duties of Young and Old. Ministers find by experi∣ence that the Word hath the greatest operation on those that are young, who have not contracted
 such strong habits of sin, nor so long resisted the Grace of God, nor so much provoked him to give them up to their own hearts lusts, as many anci∣ent people have done, who have liv'd a great while in an unconverted state, under the light of the Go∣spel. I have therefore shewed young persons the danger of delaies, the advantages of turning to God betimes, and answered the Objections that many are apt to make against it. And be∣cause a Minister is also to have a care of the souls of the Ancient, and (to his utmost skill) to en∣deavour their salvation, I have laid down several awakening considerations for them to think upon, I have shewed them the danger of vain presumpti∣ons and groundlesse hopes of Heaven. I have set down some of those false grounds and sandy foundations whereon many ancient people build their hopes of happinesse, that so they may be unde∣ceived, and may look better about them to secure their souls, while there is time.
In the Nineteenth Chapter there are Directi∣ons given for the healthy and the sick. To deal wisely and faithfully with sick persons in order to their souls welfare, is one of the hardest pieces of the Ministerial work, and requires much skill to perform it aright. And seeing a Minister is not ever at hand to visit such sick persons as may need his help (and many times they stand in need of much help and instruction) I have drawn up such directions as I judged needful for
 them; which they may mke use of, when they cannot have the help and assistance of a Minister. I have shewed how they should examine them∣selves: And that they may not slubber over that great businesse, but may come (in some measure) to discern the multitude of their sins, and the manifold waies, whereby they have offended God: I have set down a Catalogue of the duties commanded and sinnes forbidden in the ten Commandments, as also the sins against the Gospel: That so people may not only in general say they are sinners, (and yet when they come and professe to humble their souls, and to confesse their sins unto God, can find few they are guilty of) but may see themselves to be exceeding vile and sinful: I know 'tis very unpleasing to people to search their own Consciences, and find them∣selves great sinners: They had rather sit down with a false peace, than arraign and terrifie themselves in this manner. But who that is in his right wits, would content himself with a shadow of repentance, or a shadow of Faith, without finding the substance and truth of these Graces in his soul, when his everlasting welfare depends upon it. Those Directions there mentioned may be of use also to all persons, who desire at any time more solemnly to humble themselves before the Lord for the sins of their life past, and more especi∣ally before the receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

The Twentieth Chapter contains a discourse of the four last things, Death, Judgment, Hell, Heaven. There I shew the necessity of Learning (even in time of health) that great art and skill, how to die well. Next, what the Scripture declares concerning the day of judgment, and the everlasting state both of the righteous and the wicked: And methinks the serious consi∣deration of these weighty matters, should hugely affect us. O did people oftener think and consider of those things, they would live at another rate than usually they do. All the businesses of this life would seem small and little (even like childrens play) in comparison of securing the soul to all eternity.
Thus (My Loving Neighbours and Friends) I have given you a short draught and scheme (as it were) of my whole Book. What entertainment it will find with you, I know not. I can in some measure of sincerity say, that an hearty desire of your eternal happiness first set me upon this work. And now (throw the assistance of God) it is fi∣nished, my prayers shall not be wanting that it may do you good, yea, much good. If any of you will not afford leisure to read it, nor time to consider of the things therein contained, but after you have had it a little while, shall throw it aside, then I desire you seriously to think before hand, what account you will be able to give to God of this your wilful neglect, when you shall stand at his
 dreadful Tribunal. For my part, I have no other design upon any of you, but that you may attain eternal life. My great desire is that true Plety and Godlinesse, that that Religion that saves souls may flourish among you. My desire and en∣deavour is that where the saving work of Grace is begun upon any of your hearts; it may be carri∣ed on daily, and that you may encrease and a∣bound more and more in the fruits of holinesse and righteousnesse, to the praise and glory of God. And where this blessed work of con∣version is not yet begun, my hearts desire and prayer to God is that it may be wrought, if it be his holy will. You see the plot and design I have upon you is of so innocent a nature, that you have no reason in the world to go about to defeat me in it. 'Tis my duty to shew sinners the evil and dan∣ger of ignorance and ungodlinesse. 'Tis my du∣ty to perswade, intreat, and be earnest with them to leave the tents of sin and Satan, and to come in to Christ, that by him they may have pardon and life, And O that I could even compel them to come in, Luke 14.23. Were it in my power, not a soul among you should refuse or stand out. But if (notwithstanding all my prayers, intreaties, and endeavours) many among you will still prefer a life of bruitish sensuality, before the life that consists in righteousnesse, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost: If Satan that cursed murderer (who you know labours to ruine you soul and bo∣dy
 for ever) must still be preferr'd before that blessed Saviour, who suffered and endur'd so much to redeem mankind, and offers you salvati∣on on so fair terms: If neither the joyes of Hea∣ven, nor the torments of Hell can affect you, but the pleasures and profits of this world must still ingrosse your minds and hearts; remember what I say unto you, it will one day cut you to the ve∣ry soul to consider that you were shewed the way to eternal life, and invited, perswaded and intreated to walk in it, but you would not. O Neighbours, think with your selves (I beseech you) that 'tis but a short time, and your souls must be either among Saints or Devils. Does it not concern me therefore to be earnest with you, and in all seriousnesse to call upon you, to work out your salvation, now while you have time? For the Lords sake, as ever you intend to see Gods face with comfort, remember these few following directiōs.
1. Take heed of a loose conversation, of li∣ving to the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. If ye live after the flesh ye shall die, Rom. 8.13. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, Gal. 5.19. Which are these, Adultery, fornication, uncleannesse, lalciviousnesse, idolatry, witch∣craft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, drunkennesse, and such like: Of the which I tell you before, as I have told you in time past, that they which do such things shall not inherit
 the Kingdom of God. Never comfort your selves with the hopes of Gods mercy in Christ, if ye live in known and wilful sins. The holy na∣ture of God will never be reconciled to sinners, while they go on in their sins. And Christ came to destroy the works of the Devil. He came not to save men, by bringing them to Heaven in their ungodlinesse, or to Glory in their sins, but to destroy their sins, that would keep them out of Glory. If he save us, his Grace must have dominion in our hearts. Without holinesse no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14.
2. Take heed of worldly-mindednesse. I do not go about to perswade you to idlenesse or neg∣ligence, in your Callings, but to take you off from the eager and inordinate love of this world, which duls and deads the heart to Heavenly things. Beware lest ye be the thorny ground. Look to it, that the cares of this life do not choak the good seed that is weekly sown among you. Some people give up themselves wholly to the world, and thrust God out of their hearts and houses; Take you heed of that. Believe it, that man that hath the main bent of his heart set upon pleasing God, and whose great end is to be happy with him for ever, will be careful only so to converse with this world, and only so to mind things temporal, as he may not lose things eter∣nall. He will first and chiefly seek the Kingdom of God, and his righteousnesse. He will look
 upon all outwartd things as accomodations only in his passage, but at Heaven as his home and happinesse. He will cordially desire and endea∣vour so to walk in his particular Calling, as he may be faithful also in his general, and may se∣cure his soul to eternal life.
3. Be careful to get a distinct and clear know∣ledge of the things that concern your salvation. Ignorance will not excuse any man when 'tis caus∣ed by his own negligence. The main things that concern salvation, you may know, if you will give your minds to it. God hath not left you in darknesse, take heed of shutting your eyes.
4. Take heed of neglecting or slighting the publick Ordinances, and means of Grace. To have no appetite to the Word, to apprehend no great need of it, and to find no profit by it, is a mark of a dead and gracelesse heart.
5. Take heed of formality and resting in a meer outward performance of religious services. Learn to distinguish between Religion the end, and Religion the means. Religion the end is, To attain a gracious frame of Spirit, to enjoy God, to fear him, love him, and have our na∣tures conform'd unto him. Religion the means is, to perform such religions duties and services as God hath appointed for the attaining this end. Now if we rest in the means, i. e. in a bare per∣formance of religious duties, without desiring to enjoy God in them, or labouring to get our
 hearts into a better frame by them, and aiming at those higher ends to which they were ap∣pointed, our services are rather a mocking of God, than a true and sincere worshipping of him. It will do us no good to be of the right Reli∣gion as to external profession, if we be slight, and formal, and perfunctory in the duties of that Religion. Take heed therefore of having only a form of Godlinesse, and denying, or se∣cretly hating the power thereof. What will it profit any man to be thought godly and religious, if God know him to be ungodly? Our Saviour hath told us that except our righteousness exceed the righte∣ousness of the Scribes and Pharisees (and yet theirs was outwardly a very strict religiousness) we cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, Mat. 5.20.
6. Take heed of contenting your selves with meer civil honesty, and a fair, just outward conversation. This is very commendable, yea and necessary, but this is not sufficient to salvati∣on. Without regeneration and true conversion there is no salvation to be expected. Not only loose livers, but meer civil persons need a fur∣ther change. There are many people that applaud themselves in their own righteousnesse; they give every one their own; they defraud no man; they pay what they owe to all men. Do they so? I am glad of it. But let us a little examine whether they be so just as they pretend. Possibly they give every man his due, and would not defraud
 any man willingly or knowingly of any thing. I commend them for it, But do they give God his due? They owe their hearts to him: They owe sincere obedience and spiritual worship to him: They are bound to love him above all, and delight in communion with him, and to make Consci∣ence of the duties and services he requires. They ought to fear and reverence his holy Name, to delight in his Word, to sanctifie his day, to attend upon his Ordinances, to be ten∣der of his honour, to decline all waies of sin∣ning against him, either by wicked thoughts, irregular affections, sinful words, evil actions. Their whole life ought to be a living unto God, and his Glory ought to be their end and aim in all their undertakings. They ought to renounce the devil, the world and the flesh, and to serve him faithfully all their daies. Now then come, and let us consider, Do they do thus? Do they in∣deed give every one his own? Do they give unto God, what of right is due unto him? They make Conscience of being just towards men (and they do well in it) but are they careful also of paying God what they owe to him? And what kind of righteousnesse call you this, to be righteous to∣wards men, and unrighteous and unjust toward God? Is this a righteousnesse any man dare stand upon, and plead for his justification before Gods Tribunal? You see then there is more requi∣red than an honest, outward, fair conversation to save the soul.

7. Take heed of deceiving and ill-grounded hopes of Heaven. Secure your state in Grace, and then your title to Glory is unquestionable. Look to your evidences for Heaven. Take heed of mistakes about the great work of repenting and believing in Christ. Many think they have those Graces, when indeed they have only a sha∣dow of them. Examine your selves whether ye be in the Faith: Prove your selves. Who∣ever is in Christ is a new Creature; old things are passed away, old carnal principles, old sin∣ful inclinations, old wicked practises, old ungod∣ly company are passed away and left by them that are true converts. Ask your selves whether your repentance be a repentance unto life? whether your Faith be a saving Faith? What the true characters of Repentance and Faith are, you may find in the 2d and 3d Chapters of the second Part of this Treatise.
'Tis carnal hopes that deceive the world, and hinder people from looking after a saving conversi∣on. Content not your selves therefore to say, you hope you shall be saved, but prove and try whe∣ther you are such persons as God hath promised salvation to. Prove by marks of Grace in your souls that you are true converts, and then hope for salvation, and spare not, and the Lord con∣firm your hopes. Great things and of everlasting consequence, should be made as sure as is possible. Ask your selves what evidences you have you are
 converted. 'Tis proof must carry it, and not con∣fident presumption. Take God in Christ for your only happinesse and end: And Christ as Mediatour, for your only Lord and Saviour. Accept him for your Sovereign, as well as for your Saviour. Be sensible of your continual need of his Bloud, Spirit and intercession, and give up your selves sincerely to him, to be ju∣stified, sanctified, guided, directed and ever∣lastingly saved by him. Let his Interest be up∣permost in your souls, and you are blessed for ever.
8. Pray earnestly unto the Lord to be esta∣blished in the truth, and to be preserved from Errour, giddinesse, and apostacy, which is the sin and shame of these times. Let not the diffe∣rent Opinions that are now going, be an offence unto you. Remember that though men are muta∣ble, and change from one opinion to another, and grow wanton and wild-headed, yet God and Christ, and the Scripture, and Heaven, and the way thither, are still the same: These change not: Mind you these things. Take heed of that threefold Apostacy that this age is too guilty of. Namely,
1. Of Judgment, from the Truths of God.
2. Of Affection, from the Ordinances of God.
3. Of Conversation, from that sober, hum∣ble, and circumspect walking, which all true
 Christians should make Conscience of. Let not the treachery of false brethren dishearten you: He is the right Souldier that is not discouraged by those that run away, but still presseth on to victory. In a word, lay not out your zeal on externals, or opinions and the smaller matters of Religion. Look to it, that there be in you an unfeigned and fervent love to God, his Truth and children: Let most of your daily care be about the right order∣ing and governing of your hearts and affections: Labour to mortifie lusts, and advance Grace. To conclude this, separate speedily from the sins of Christians, but never from the Ordinances of Christ.
9. Count those your best friends that loving∣ly and faithfully admonish you of any sin or evil they see you going on in. If you were going ignorantly into a house infected with the plague, you would think that man your friend that pluckt you back, and acquainted you with your danger. What a madnesse then is it for any man to be offended and angry with him, that out of true good will and cha∣rity to his soul, desires to preserve him from ever∣lasting perdition. Can it be thought by any sober man a malicious thing to endeavour to save a soul from sin and Hell?
10. Take heed of prejudices against a strict and holy walking with God, The Lord deli∣ver you from that mad opinion of the world, that like not serving God so much, nor making so
 much ado to be saved. Consider is there any thing in the world doth better deserve your care and dili∣gence, and will better pay you for it? I know car∣nal people think the way of Religion a melancho∣lick and sad way; But I must not spare to tell them the truth; They will never live a truly safe, peaceable and comfortable life, till they are con∣verted, and have engaged their hearts in an humble, holy walking with God. They ignorantly flee from Godlinesse as from sorrow and trouble, but the truth is, they flee from joy and peace. What should trouble that man that is a member of Christ, and has escaped out of the power of Sa∣tan, and is freed from the wrath of God, and the danger of everlasting misery?
O Neighbours! let not the ignorant scorns and senselesse reproaches of wicked men discourage you. He that hath good grounds to believe that he shall live for ever in Glory With God and his holy Angels as soon as his soul parts from his body, I think is a happy man, and so will be acknow∣ledged by every one that has not lost his reason and understanding. There is a time coming when the proudest and most stubborn sinner will be glad to change condition with the meanest Saint. Let me therefore intreat all those that have entertain'd any hard thoughts of the waies of Godlinesse, but to make triall what a holy life is; and if they do not find more comfort in a serious turning unto God, and in a sincere endeavour to approve
 their hearts unto him, then in the waies of sin, let them take their course, let Heaven go.
11. Nourish and maintain a tendernesse of Conscience: Be very circumspect in your daily walking. Look upon sin as the greatest evil. Make up every breach between God and your souls betimes. Pray earnestly for the guidance of the Spirit of God, and to be kept from Temptati∣ons.
12. Have a care of your Families, that true Piety and Godlinesse may be countenanced, encouraged and promoted in them. Let your houses be Bethels, houses of God, and not Beth∣avens, houses of iniquity. If you neglect family-duties, and the religious observation of the Lords day, and private instruction, and so let those under your care be nuzled up in ignorance, prophanenesse and ungodlinesse, provide to an∣swer it to God when he shall call for you. Remem∣ber, I faithfully warned you of the sin and dan∣ger of such neglects. I cannot expect Religion should ever much thrive among us, till Gover∣nours of Families be careful to train up those under their Government in the Principles of true Piety, and in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord.
Lastly, Labour to maintain peace and love among your selves, Mark 9.50. — Have salt in your selves, and peace one with another. Labour to get your hearts seasoned with the graces
 of humility, self-denial, and true Charity, and this will keep you in peace among your selves. Let there be no heart-burnings, contentions, brawlings, backbitings or defamings heard of among you. Help one another on towards hea∣ven. Imitate that which is good wherever you find it, but learn evil of no man. Encourage one another in the waies of Godlinesse. Abhor to draw or intice one another to any sinfull course or practise. Do all offices of kindnesse and humanity one for another. As you have opportunity, let it be your desire and endeavour to do good to every body, hurt to no body. Learn that hard lesson of forgiving wrongs and injuries, and praying for, and wishing well to those that are your enemies. 'Tis a hard lesson, but Gods Spirit can teach it you. Remember our Saviours Words in Matth. 6.14, 15. For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your hea∣venly Father will also forgive you. But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses. And the words of the Apostle, Col. 3.12. Put on there∣fore (as the elect of God, holy and beloved) bowels of mercy, kindnesse, humblenesse of mind, meeknesse, long-suffering. V. 13. For∣bearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel against any, even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye. V. 14. And above all these things put on Charity, which is
 the bond of perfectnesse. V. 15. And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which also ye are called in one body, and be ye thankful. I shall conclude with that divine and affectionate ex∣hortation of the same Apostle, Phil. 4.8. Fnally brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatso∣ever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any vertue, and if there be any praise, think on these things.
And now O Lord, thou who hast put into the heart of thy unworthy servant to write these things for the good of this people, be thou pleased by the gracious and effectuall working of thy holy Spirit, to make them useful to them, (and to all others into whose hands they shall come) for the promoting knowledge, Faith, and obedience among them, and the furthering of their salvation. What is here agreeable to thy holy Will, write upon their hearts. O let it not be in vain that this help is afforded them. Grant successe (I humbly be∣seech thee) to this poor endeavour, and take thou all the Glory. Good Lord give this peo∣ple a right understanding in all things. Guide them in the way wherein they should go, to at∣tain eternal life. Open the eyes of the ignorant among them, turn the hearts of the prophane, reduce the erroneous, and encrease thy Graces
 daily more and more in the hearts of those whom thou hast savingly wrought upon. O let thy blessing be on this people: God Almighty blesse them. Let Truth and Holinesse, reall Piety and the power of Godlinesse, Let sound∣nesse of mind, and uprightnesse of heart and life; let true Faith and fervent love; let charity and good works (through the operation of thy holy Spirit) abound among them. That so living here in thy fear, and serving their gene∣ration according to the Will of God, they may at last (through thy infinite mercy, and the merits of our blessed Lord and Saviour) be re∣ceived into thy Heavenly Kingdom. This is the earnest and hearty Prayer of,

