


SIR, whosoever I am, is not much materiall to know. I humbly beg your Pardon for intermed∣ling with your Quarrell, without your Privity and Knowledge, which you, of all men, are best able to maintain without Abettors or Assistants. And I hope you will look upon it onely as an Errour of Love, that I should presume to answer that Pamphlet, which your self had so severely condemned to Neglect, and resolved to confute onely by your learned Silence. For all the world knows how speedily you could, if you pleased in so just a Cause as this, have set forth a Rejoynder, because you have already so soon an∣swered far abler Adversaries then this Refuter, what∣soever Opinion himself and his Friends have of his Scholasticall Abilities.
Indeed it was my desire, and in my own Judge∣ment it would have been more for my interest and quiet, if I had been silent, or at most served onely
 as an under-workman to have fitted and prepared Ma∣terialls for an abler Artist to have raised a more last∣ing Monument and Obelisck to your Name and Me∣mory. And so conscious I am to mine own Weak∣ness and inabilities to endure the Wind and Sun, and so little thoughts I had, when I first set upon this Business, of doing any thing for the Publick, that now all is finished and exposed to the world, I cannot but wonder that it could be drawn from my Retire∣ment, to run so hazardous a Course. And how∣soever I may be concealed, yet I cannot but fre∣quently blush at the many Censures that will pass upon the Unknown Author, though no man speaks, or thinks of me.
But now such as it is, I humbly throw it at your feet, not for approbation and applause, but for pardon and patronage. It has nothing to commend it but the chearfulness of the Oblation. It is no ambitious nor covetous Exhalation, but a perfect Nidabah and Free will offering of Love. And such I doubt not will be acceptable. It was this alone that made the poor Widows two mites a richer present to the Cor∣ban then the Gold and Silver talents of the more wealthy but less willing Votaries: and the very Heathens could smell, that one grain of this Incense made a sweeter Perfume in the nostrills of their gods, then the greatest clouds of smoak that arose from o∣ther Hecatombs.
But you well may wonder how a Defence of two sheets should swell into such a Volume, and what strange over-ruling Influence should raise a Cloud of a hand-breadth to fill and overspread the whole face of Heaven.

 And the very truth is, Sir, I my self am much a∣stonished at the Bulk, now all is finished. But I shall give you my Reasons, that made the work to enlarge thus insensibly under my hands.
Sir, you have an Adversary more Confident then strong; one that (as I could tell you from credible information) does not only Publickly brag that he has made you a Dunce, but in every Sermon almost of note that he makes has one Use of Confutation against the learned D. Hammond: Nay that his ordinary Coun∣trey Lectures, and Homilies to the People are full of such Ovations, and not the meanest Pulpit round about him, but has been turned into a Divinity Chair, where Professor-like, he has disciplined, and arraigned, and condemned you in a Scholasticall way.
But I insist not on Report, it is his Pamphlet I fix on. That you, and the world may see, I do not wrong him (especially because he It is my de∣sire and pur∣pose, to have fair wars with you, and my Pen shall not drop a disrespective syllable of you. pag. 17. I hope it may contend with your reply for Civility and fairness in carriage of the Controversie between us, pag. 39. professes Respect) I shall here, with your Patience, give you in a short List of his Fair and Civill usage.
First then, in a Sarcasticall Irony and Jeer, he calls you great Critick, that is in plain Terms, an empty whiffling Grammarian, and sayes, he is Pag. 10. loth to enter into a Contest with so great a Critick, as your self, touch∣ing the meaning of a word. And what is it? The poor English Monosyllable, Mince.
Then in the very same Section he ranks you among the number of those Pag. 10. erroneous Persons (no less then Hereticks without doubt) that in the first broaching of
 their Errours Mince the matter and speak more Caute∣lously, then afterwards, when they are fleshed, and en∣couraged with success.
Next he tells you (and in the very same breath where he professes Respect) that he is pag. 17. resolved to swallow none of your Proofless dictates; and that pag. 15. you must pardon him if he entertain not your vehement Asse∣verations, as solid Arguments, as if they were Proposi∣tiones per se notae.
But he has hitherto used you kindly. For in another place in plain terms he challenges you pag. 19. to shew any thing for the justification of your Tenent from any Schoolman to be had in Pauls-Churchyard, or at least in the Library at Oxford, the great Bodleys Library.
And as if this had been too little, again he tells the world, that he is pag 37. confident that no learned man, either Protestant, or Papist did ever ascribe such growth to the Ardency of Christ as (you) this Replyer does.
Then almost in every Section he slyly questions Pag. 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 10, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 24, 34, 37, 38, your Philosophy, and Logick, and skill in the Art of Reasoning, and Syllogism, or sayes Pag. 6, 9, 11, 12, 16, 18, 21. you are imperti∣nent, and speak little sense or Pag. 3, 13, 14, 19, 21, 22, 25, 26, 27, 30, 31, 34, 35, 38, 39. scornfully puts you to learn, what you are yet ignorant of, from such a place in Scheibler, and Suarez, in Thomas, or Scotus, in Petrus Hurtado de Mendoza, Capreolus, Albertinus, Raunandus, and Collegium Complutense, (hard names, and that make a deep and reverend sound in our English ears, not acquainted with such charms,) and this with such slighting behaviour, as if you were some Novice or Fresh-man in the Schools, and knew not how to speak, but in a Criticall way.
But, what is worst of all, he craftily accuses you as a Factor for Popery and broaching such doctrines, that a. 9, 30, 31.
 the Protestants generally oppose in Bellarmine and his Complices.
Nay he is not ashamed to charge your Doctrine, as if it were little less then Pag. 27. Hereticall, and speaks in plain terms that your Assertion is Nay not on∣ly Aquinas, but generally all the School∣men and Civi∣lians too, are so precise in this Particular, as that among the Degrees of Damnable Propositions are ranked by them, not onely Pro∣positions downrightly Hereticall, but also, Propositio sapiens Haeresin, Propositio male sonans, every Proposition that doth but smell, that hath but a smack of Heresie, that sounds but ill and suspiciously &c. Mr. H. Jeanes of Abstinence from all Appearance of Evill. 8o. Oxon. 1640. p. 34, 35. and for this he quotes Albertinus, and Alphonsus à Castro. vid. loc. Propositio male so∣nans, harshly sounding in the ears of Christians, that are jealous of their Masters honour, and that now (since his Resutation is published) he hopes it will be ingeniously confessed by your self upon a review of it.
And then (for a close) he declares in his very Title Page that he has proved it to be utterly irreconcilable with the 1. Fullness of Christs Habituall Grace. 2. The Perpetuall Happiness, and 3. the Impeccability of his Soul.
I confess at first reading I was troubled at this usage: but since I see it is the Mode of confuting D. Hammond. And therefore finding the Adversary Confident and Scornfull but withall very weak, I resolved to display both his Ignorance and Folly to the view of all, even the meanest spectators. Nor could I in Justice do less to one, that had so unworthily handled you, without any Provocation.
Indeed what course was else to be taken to answer such severe, but uningenuous Criminations? Should I onely have tamely replyed, that I had well weighed your Reasons and considered his Replyes, and care∣fully consulted the Authors he referrs to, and had found he was mistaken, and so left him to a further
 Proof and Confirmation of his Objections? I con∣fess that this had been a very short way, and satisfactory enough. For by the Laws and Rules of Disputation, no∣thing more is required of the Respondent but to deny, or distinguish, where he sees cause, or else plainly to grant the Argument: and the Opponent (whose place your Refuter evidently sustains) is bound to pro∣secute his Objection, till he make the Defendent to yield to the force of his Reason, or by Distincti∣on to shew that it concerns not the Question. But then withall I considered, that if I should have taken this course, I should have said little, to the greatest part of Readers in your Apologie and De∣fence.
For first, I saw that his Reply was Printed (I sup∣pose with Licence and Approbation of the present Uni∣versity) at Oxford. And then secondly, I understood that he had many Admirers, especially among Coun∣trey Divines, and young Students, for his skil in Schoole-learning now a stranger among us. And third∣ly I considered, that he being a writer of tall Name, and strong repute among many, I should have gain∣ed nothing but contempt among them, for such An∣swers; and that the Denyall of a Nameless Author, without Credit, and without Fame, would not at all have Ballanced against the weight of so valued a Schoolman. But lastly, which most moved me, I was not ignorant, that as the Books he referrs to, were very rarely to be had, especially in Private Studies, so even those, that had them, would rather have be∣lieved his suggestions, against mine, then put them∣selves to the Trouble and Expence of consulting and perusall of Authors, to umpire the difference. And
 therefore I judged it necessary for the Readers sa∣tisfaction, and the full defence of that Truth you maintain, to lay down the Authors words at large, and clearly thence prove either his prevaricating or mistakes.
And this is one main Reason of the increase of the Bulk.
A second Motive that drew me to this length, was my unwillingness altogether to spend time in the unprofitable discoveries of an other man's errours, but I rather desired to be didacticall and instructive. And therefore where I saw reason, and the argu∣ment was profitable and materiall, I let my pen run beyond the ordinary limits of an elenchticall dis∣course. And because I saw little or nothing as yet said on either side, to explain the nature of that ardency and love, which was the subject matter of the Dispute, I resolved, as occasion offered, to state it as clearly, as I could, and to my poor abilities o∣pen the true nature of it, that so the Reader might be satisfied in the business of the Controversie, and not altogether lose his prospect after the substance, a∣midst the clouds and smoke of contention, but aswell discover the full lineaments and pourtraicture of that truth, you maintain, as the mistakes of your ad∣versary, and his false shapes and phantasms of it.
A third Reason was because I found your Refuter, having upon the matter done with your , fall to oppose your Doctrine in gross, by Arguments drawn from the fullness and perfection of Christs habi∣tuall grace, his perpetuall uninterrupted happiness and impeccability, and from thence had largely digressed to censure a passage in your Treatise of Will-worship,
 about the sense of the first and great Commandment of Love, and this I must confess made me willing to amplifie and digress, as well as he. Nor have I onely contented my self to answer his Arguments, and acquit and vindicate your Doctrine from the coarse aspersions thrown upon it of Popishly affected, but in a Scholasticall way have treated of the Themes them∣selves, as well as discovered the gross ignorance of your Adversary. And because his discourse lead me to consider those high and noble Themes of the Love of God, and perfection both Legall and Evangelicall, as also Christs two fold state of Comprehensor and Viator, I was willing to treat of them with that Industry and care, as so weighty Arguments deserved, and have as well Didactically as Eristically considered them. And withall upon occasion where M. Jeanes and M. Cawdrey did agree upon the same common principles of opposition to you, I have (though contrary to my first design and aim) fallen upon a vindication of some passages in your Tract of Will-worship, which M. Cawdrey and he had censured, and upon that occa∣sion also I have cleared and confirmed diverse passa∣ges in your Account to the Triplex Diatribe.
And then, which is the last great Reason of the bulk of this Discourse, I have taken occasion to prove the Invariability, of Gods love, and to demon∣strate that it is no changeable transcendent quality, but one immutable and substantiall act against Crellius and the Socinians, and yet withall declare how God not∣withstanding this, is, and may be said to love some more, and some less. I have spoken also of the na∣ture of Acts and Habits, in order to that habituall and actuall love of Christ the main business of the
 Controversie; I have proved and confirmed the full∣ness of Christs habituall grace; I have treated of his merits, and the nature of his sufferings, and the great∣ness of them in his bloody agony; of his twofold will; and how as God-man he was in capacity to pray; of his ardency in prayer, and how he might earnestly desire a removall of that cup, which yet he came to drink off. I have treated also of the severall kinds of love agree∣ing to him, as viator and comprehensor; of his zeal and hope, and trust in God, and shewed what love of con∣cupiscence and complacency in him was capable of in∣crease, and how all these are different from ardency in Prayer. I have also taken occasion in order to M. Caw∣drey but with some reflexions on M. Jeanes to treat of counsels Evangelicall, and Gospel-freewill-offerings, of perfection of life and perfection of state, of works of supererogation, to speak of originall sin, and the opi∣nion of S. Austin in it; of Man's threefold state; of growth in grace; of different degrees in glory; of the inequality of the Saints and Angels love of God in hea∣ven; and of Adam's possibility of proficiency in grace in the state of Innocence; of lukewarmness and since∣rity; of justification, and of the difference of the two Covenants, and Mans severall obligation under them, with other points of this nature, together with some Metaphysicall and Philosophicall notions interspersed. All which as they are themes of high nature, and would not admit of a running discourse, so they are not altogether digressions from the main Argument, especially in order to the Refuters manner of reason∣ing, that in many parts required it. And becausethe Reader will not ordinarily meet with such arguments treated on in our language, especially in a Scholastical
 way, I was willing to gratifie him in them, to the ut∣most of my power. And if he be offended with this my labour of love, and too officious desire to please him, I here promise before you, that if he pardon me this once, he shall not have occasion to blame me for a second-such-offence.
And now having given you the true Reasons of the length of this Discourse, it will be fit I also make you some account of my stile, and my manner of handling it.
As then your Refuter every where pretends to Phi∣losophy and the Schools, so fit it was I should treat him in a Scholasticall way and in writings of this kind: The best ornament arises from the strength and reason of the discourse, and he is most eloquent, that can express his matter clearest, and make such knotty stuff plain. I have seen the statue of a Roman Gladiator pourtrayed naked, and as combating his enemy in the midst of the Amphitheater. And it was a piece of high worth, and curious art, and more rich in the lively repre∣sentation of the wrathfulness of the look, the stretched and well set muscles, the strong and brawny parts, and the vigour and agility of the limbs, then if he had been carved in the robes of a Senator.
And therefore since my work was for argument and defence, I chose to build my Fabrick not curious, but strong, and because much of my materials were of marble, I laboured onely to polish, not to paint it. And this is the genuine true beauty, that springs from the naturall compactedness, and solidity of the stone; and he that strives to trim it with painting, though of gold and vermilion, doth but hide, not adorn it. Such embellishments are onely fit for less solid ma∣terials.
 And therefore, Sir, as I cannot tempt my Reader, or beguile his patience to the end of the discourse, with artificiall expressions, and curious conceits, and lively flashes of wit: so I must tell him that if he look for colours, and varnish and elo∣quence, he must not seek after Architects and School∣men, but Limners and Romances. For though Em∣broderies and lace, rich jewels, and curled tresses, are the usuall ornaments of brides, yet they are as un∣handsome, and commonly suspected as meretricious in matrons.
I care not then for neatness, if you, that are best a∣ble, judge me solid and strong. And I doubt not but the knowing Reader will be better contented with the plain demonstration and proof of a conclusion, then if I had written in a strain of the declamations of Quintilian and Seneca's controversies.
But yet Sir, because the age is more for phansie then reason, and better pleased with fine and aery discourses, then with solid and plain, and because I have known some exquisite Architects that have been curious Pain∣ters too, I was willing, where the matter would bear, and needed rather illustration then proof, to let my phansie take wing, and to range and sore about like a haggard Hawke, that in a Sunshine day more minds her weathering then her prey. And willing I was, though in the middest of the Schools not to be al∣wayes severe, but amidst business and reason to yield a little to the garbe and mode of the age, and to gra∣tifie the Printer so far, as to let the world see, that where my expressions are plain, and after the man∣ner of the Schools, it arose not altogether from bar∣renness of wit, and a lowness of expression, but ele∣ction and choice.

 And for this as I have the authority of a great Ma∣ster of wit and method at Rome: so I have seen in noble buildings, where the foundation has been of rough and solid stone, and the pillars of marble, and the walls of plain Ashler, yet the Pillasters and Capi∣talls, and the Architraves and Freezes, that bear no stress in the building, have been artificially carved.
And now having said this, Sir, I have but onely told you my design and platform, I speak not of my performance. That were a piece of vanity unpardon∣able. This was onely in Idea, in my prospect and aim, and what I desired to accomplish and perfect, when I undertook your defence. For I thought you deser∣ved the best Apology could be writ, which (pardon me your modesty, if I say) none can make but Doctor Hammond.
If I have done any thing in order to the vindication of the truth and you, I have then my ambition, and all the reward that I desire is, that you will not enquire after me, nor ask after my name. But if you and the Reader shall find nothing in me to content you, then inflict upon me the worst censure, that can befall a bad Author, and enquire not at all after me, but let me be forgotten, and thought unworthy of a name. Whether then you approve or condemn, I have my sole aim, if I continue unknown.
