


Worthy Patriots,
YOur desire (which I inter∣pret in the nature of a com∣mand) hath caused me (contrary to mine own di∣sposition and inclination) to appear in publique.
I can behold nothing in these my poor Labours that may deserve your acceptance, onely this I can say, That I have endeavoured in these two Sermons to discharge a good con∣science to God, to his Church, and to You in particular, in which I do and shall find com∣fort.
It is no small mercy, That plain preaching of seasonable Truths (which was formerly
 stifled by Sectarian spirits) is now revived and countenanced through your Patronage; this will stand upon your account for good at the great day of the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ.
I am not ignorant of the rash censures of unstable spirits that have passed upon me for preaching these Sermons, because I have med∣led with their Diana; and I expect much more unfriendly dealing now they appear to pub∣lique view; but I shall say with the Poet,
—Hic murus aheneus esto
Nil conscire sibi, &c.
I can speak it in sincerity, That I have not intended to bespatter any mans person, but to set out the loathsomness which is in the Tenets of those men that have studied (under the spe∣cious pretence of piety and Christian Liberty) to enslave these three nations of England, Ire∣land and Scotland, yea (and which is worse) to unchurch them.

 It is now above thirty years since my reve∣rend and learned Tutor, Mr. Arthur Hil∣dersam (whose name and praise is yet fresh in the Church of God, being in his life time accepted of all the godly, though differing in judgment, as Fuller witnesseth in his Hi∣story of Britain, Cent. 17. Book 11.) did fre∣quently advise me (and others) to beware of separation from the Church of England (which errour began then to be busie in the land) assu∣ring me, That Separation was likely to be the bane both of Church and State; (How pro∣phetick his words were, the wofull experience of diverse years by past hath sufficiently in∣formed us) And therefore, whilst he suffered much trouble and restraint under the exorbi∣tances of Prelacy, he acted both by preaching and writing against this bitter weed of Separa∣tion; insomuch as the learned Dr. VVillet (in his Epistle dedicatory to Christs College be∣fore
 his harmony upon the first of Samuel) sti∣leth him, Schismaticorum (qui vulgò Brownistae) malleum.
What difference there is between the Brow∣nists formerly, and our Separatists now, I yet descern not, (both of them in words and deeds denying to hold communion with our Church) save onely that these later have put a fairer dress upon this Monster, that it may appear more amiable.
Being warned by this divine Oracle, most consonant to Scripture, I have endeavoured (ever since the Lord counted me faithful put∣ting me into the Ministry) to bear my weak testimony against this general errour of the time; both because it is the fruitful mother of manifold Heresies, depriving the Church of all means to suppress them; and also because from this Church-separation, hath proceeded State-separation even to the depriving us of all our
 birth-privileges as subjects, if Gods mercy had not seasonably interposed.
Now God almighty direct you in those great affairs that are before you; and help you in the strength of his holy Spirit to contend earnestly for the faith once committed to the Saints, both against schism and heresy on the one hand, and also against all prophaness and ungodliness on the other hand, That ye may be called the re∣pairers of the breach made in the Church of God, the restorers of paths to dwell in, that so at the last the kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ may be advanced in the power and purity of his Ordinances among us, and Ireland may be in∣deed Insula Sanctorum. So still shall pray

From my study in St. Thomas-street in Dublin March 1659.
