


IN the fathomlesse depths of infinite good∣nesse and wisdome, a designe is laid through the cleare discoveries of Gods perfections and glory, to compleate and accomplish his servants happpinesse. There is not any thing that befals them in this valley of teares, but by his con∣trivance, it brings with it a secret in∣fluence, and activity, to raise them to the mount of joy. I need not tell you how neere the dust Gods people of this Kingdome were, they yet retaine the dints of contempt and scorne: but hath not a strong reflection of Gods power beene cast upon us, from that very cloud under which we were? are there not de∣liverances created for us, even beyond our hopes? hath not the Lord raised you up (most Noble Senators) as once he did that Pillar to the Israelites to be a light to us, and darknesse to ourExod. 14. 20. enemies? Indeed at present we are in the midst of a red Sea, the whole face of our Kingdom's besmeared with bloud. But is not God able to make of these threatning and discoloured waves, wals of defence and safety? hath he not a Canaan reserved for En∣gland
 also? he is certainly full of bowels towards his, and the true Israelites with us cannot want strength to draw them forth: But God will not have his mercies abortive; when the appointed time of deliverance comes, even in the Mount heEzek. 36, 37. will be seene, yet will he be sought unto for this: In his servants hearts he hath an armory of faithfull prayers, these he appoints to prepare his way before him; and till he findes himselfe en∣countered with the compleate strength of his owne Spirit, heGen. 32. 24. 2. will not be conquered. This is that meanes of meanes, the life and vigour of all the rest that a Nation hath of safety; of whose prevalencie (most religious Statists) my imperfect meditations (with which at your command I lately presented your eare, and now your eye) be pleased to honour by your Patronage, and crowne by your practice. Be yee wrastlers with the God of Hea∣ven, and yee shall be sure to foyle your enemies on earth: It is the humble motion of him, who is

