



WHen first I received your Summons to this work, I might have apologized for my self with Elihu, I am young, and ye are very old, wherefore I was afraid,Job 32.6, 7 and durst not shew you mine opinion. I said dayes should speak, and multitude of years should teach wisdome. But out of
 the mouth of babes and sucklings hath the Lord ordai∣ned strength, &c. and his strength is usually perfected in the creatures weaknesse.2 Cor. 12.9. He can make a few barley loaves yield toothsome and wholesome nourishment unto many thousands; He can make the words of Na∣amans faithful servants greater in operation, then the words of a great and good Prophet. Indeed many in our dayes look upon Preaching and Preachers, as Na∣aman did upon the waters of Jordan, with Syrian eyes. Preaching is foolishnesse in the worlds estimation, and Preachers are bablers; Saint Paul that great Apostle was so reputed and censured: the despicablenesse of the carthen vessel does too often (through Satans sub∣tiltie and innate corruption) prejudice hearers against the heavenlinesse of the Treasure I cannot accuse any of you;1 Thess. 2.13. surely, what the Apostle saith of the Thessa∣lonians I may say of you in a judgement of charity, (I hope also of verity) When ye received the Word of God which ye heard, ye received it not as the word of man, but (as it is in truth) the Word of God. But where's the fruit of your so receiving the Word of God? The Word of God so received by them wrought effectually in them; hath it wrought also effectually in you? Hap∣ly your faith may be as 'twere in travail, and readie to bring forth some works of mercie and charity: Now if the midwifery of this Sermon (in the Review) may
 expedite the birth, I have what I levelled at, and shall blesse God for your summons (though as much unex∣pected as undeserved) to the Pulpit and Presse: Believe it Sirs, 'twere better for you to have the stone in the bladder or kidneys then to have such a stone in your hearts or bowels, and such a cramp in your hands, as does utterly indispose you for the doing of good with your goods. I could name you some eminent Saints,Mr. Nicho∣las Bifield, Vide Dr. Goge his Epistle to the Read∣er before Mr. Bifields Commen∣tary upon the second Chapter of the first Epistle of St. Peter. And Mr. Jeremiah Whitaker, who lately died in the Lord, and now rest∣eth from his la∣bours, &c. that for some years lived, and at length died, labouring under those bodilie distempers; but not any that lived and died, labouring under this soul-disease. He that refused to give a crum of bread on earth, was denied a drop of water in hell: Unmerciful men shall finde no mercie. There's fulnesse of bread, but ô that I could say, There's fulnesse of good works in this famous City! The former (though a good blessing of God in it self) was one of Sodoms (O that it were not one of Londons) Vices. The latter was one of the Macedoni∣ans (O that it might be one of Londons) Vertues, to cool your affections unto earthlie treasures, and enkindle them unto heavenly, and unto works of charity (which even to a Proverb is grown cold) is the faithful endea∣vour and aim of this Sermon. I know, not any man willingly (though manie deservedly) when he is dead would have those two words for his Epitaph, infoelici∣ter foelix, unhappie in being so happie; 'twere better
 have these two, foeliciter infoelix, happie in being un∣happie. O then let the zeal of your faith sparkle forth in works of charity: All men have not the honourable capacitie of being Almoners of the King of Heaven and Earth, as you have, who can better spare two ta∣lents then some can two mites: The Lord grant, that as he hath been unto you, so you may be merciful and bountiful unto others: That as you are rich in worldly goods, so you may be rich in faith and good works, and in Gods set time be personally and fully possessed of the heavenlie Kingdome which he hath prepared for, and promised to them that love him; So praieth

