


BEsides my readinesse to gratifie the desire of some among you, and willingnesse to give some signal of my unfeigned love
 to you all, I have been easily induced to publish the following Treatise, by these following con∣siderations, viz.
1. That I might the better confirm these things wherein you have been instructedLuke 1.4.: and not seem to labour altogether in vain, by bestowing so much time on that which was to vanish in the hearing: a sad lot which waits on the best things committed to leak∣ing ears, as water poured into a vessel full of chinks.
2. That I might benefit those absent, yea if it may be, the people that are yet unborn, Psal. 102.18.
3. That I might leave a memo∣rial with you, whenever it shall please the Lord of the Vineyard, whose I am, to call me off from you, and so supply my absence,
 though by death, speaking to you, when I cannot see you, yea li∣ving with you, when dead and laid in the dustSic Ma∣thaeus cum prae∣dicasset Hebraeis & ad gentes ire pararet, utile judicavit si iis quos corpore deserebat, aliquid memoriale doctriae suae relinqueret. Ut Bel lib. 4. de verb. Dei non scrip. c. 4. notavit ex Eusebio..
4. Because the matter thereof is weighty, and the designe of no small consequence: it is to guide you in your going to God, how to converse with him, to manage well your performances; in which if you are defective, the whole will be unprofitable. Religion is curious clock work, if but one wheel fail, so wll all the rest: and as one string in a Lute dissonant and unharmonious to the rest corrupteth the whole Musick. There is in every duty absolutely required righteousnesse quoad sub∣stantiam operis, and no lesse quoad
 modum: the matter and the man∣ner are of equal concernment; the flie in the Apothecaries oint∣ment, and miscarriage in the Chri∣stians performance, render both unsavoury. If you are resolved to the duty (as I hope you are, and more, Practitioners in it,) see here what it is will adorn your sacrifice; why it must be so accommodated, and how it may be discerned: besides other things which occur for your information therein.
There are, its true, other more excellent Discourses of this nature extant, some of the same metal bearing a better stamp: but this I commend to you soonest, be∣cause your own, it is hony that was gathered for your use, milk drawn from your own brest, and therefore most proper for you; it is a sheaf gathered out of your
 own field: a dish taken from your own table, if it be not so well filled as might be expected, so circumstantiated as the subject doth deserve, you cannot despise it, except you blame your selves who chose the Cook.
Accept it then with the same love it is offered: read it with the same diligence you heard it. If any among you may be in∣formed, convinced, confirmed, resolved, comforted, quickned, by any thing here presented, I shall account a sufficient recom∣pence, and rejoice that I have not run in vain.
And now, my Beloved, since I have opportunity, suffer me in the eye of the world to exhort you. The publishing of these things was chiefly intended for you, let it be your care, to be
 the principal Proficients by it; here is a talent committed to your careful improvement, lay it not in a napkin, hide it not in the earth. Now be doing; move (Planet-like) uniformly; Covet grace rather then gifts, as to pray more fervently, though lesse notionally; yet strive to come behinde in no spiritual gift. Be men of excellent spirits: and ex∣presse sincerity by your fervent endeavours after communion with God and fellowship with Christ. Like the Eagle, soar aloft, but out of love to Heaven. Trade for grace, your trading on earth is slack, unprofitable. Let your conversation be now, where you would have it to be shortly, when you shall be here no more; be not slack in closet-services; do not you as others that restrain prayer before God, but continue in prayer and watch in the same with
 thanksgiving; O pray continually, and that not out of form, but feeling. Serve God faithfully; keep close to Christ your Cap∣tain: Stand in your order, (O 'tis a stragling age!) fly not from your colours! quit your selves like men, and men of valour, souldiers in the spiritual war for Christ and his truth; manifest your actual membership of the Militant Church, be mindeful of the yet suffering body of Christ; join your mutual forces for her help: fervent prayer will do it; be not weary nor wanting. But my-thinks I hear you reply, and say with Samuel, God forbid that we should sinne against the Lord in ceasing to pray.
I will therefore dismisse you with prayer to God for you, in the words of old Eli, Go in peace, and the Lord of Israel grant you your Petitions, which you have,
 or shall so ask of him for your selves or others! To his Grace I leave you, and remain

