



Madam,
WHen you were pleased to make your desires known to me, That I who had perform'd the first Of∣fice of Friendship to You both, would likewise do the Last to your deceased Consort, I found a double task in my hands; the one, to compose my self, and the other, this Sermon; as likewise, an indispensible en∣gagement of making that smal portion of time, which was too short for the former, sufficient for both. Now being thus divided, and streightned between my Studies and Passions, I could not but expest that my Auditors should bewail the sadness of my Discourse, and be as sensible of my want of time as my self. And therefore though I could civilly have denyed all other Sutors, who deemed it wor∣thy of a longer life (which was judged to enjoy but an hours breath, and then to be buried with him to whose death it owed its birth;) yet an innocent Ambition of publishing my Obligations to either part of your self, hath obtained its reprieve, and made me so inclinable to your Com∣mands (which indeed I could not pardonably resist) as to reconcile my Respects to you with my Judgment of it, and so, for your sake, to allow it publick Liberty (if indeed this be not a severer Sentence, then any to which I could have adjudged it.) If it may be so happy as to raise you matter of spiritual joy from the ground which has been watered with your tears, by convincing you that your dea∣rer self is gone to Heaven before you, so much to your ad∣vantage, because to his, I shall have the better thoughts of it for your sake.

 I might easily have spent a longer Discourse upon the Coffin then I did upon the Text (nor was it for want of respect to the Truth or Him, that I strewed so few flowers on his Herse; but that I might appear to be so perfect a stranger to that over-bold flattery, which has so frequent∣ly intruded at such melancholy Solemnities, as rather to be acknowledged to have fallen short in many particulars of his Commendations, then to have exceeded in the least. And as I was the more obliged to be free of my Eulogies, in respect of Himself, because he would never accept them from any when alive; so the less, in regard of his acquain∣tance, amongst whom his Civil and Christian carriage hath already brought him into so much Credit, that any good Word of mine will come too late.
Though you lost as great a Temporal Blessing in him, as your utmost Ambitions could have aspired to, yet I know you are so much a Christian, as to be sensible whom you are obliged to love above him, and so patiently (at least) to part with what God has thought fit to take to himself, and to be fully satisfied with what he has left you.
If the assurance of having so considerable a part of your self, (as he was) in heaven before you, may be a means to wean you from the world, & engage you to live in the Lord (like him) that when you dye, you may be happy and Bles∣sed with him to all eternity, you will make a very good im∣provement of your loss; in order whereunto you may pro∣mise your self the Prayers of

Octob. 18. 1659.
