



MADAM,
THE Souls of Sovereign Princes, who under God, govern the Empires of the World, give Laws to Mortals, and with their beck, force the loftiest Cedars to bend, and pay Homage to their Royal Crowns and Scepters, are amongst the rest of Creatures, as the Meridian SUN a∣midst the Stars, of whatever Brightness and Magnitude.
They are the Visible Images of the Ma∣jesty of God, Ministers of his Power, and Representatives of his Infinite Adorable∣ness; And therefore, are by the Divine
 Oracles, called GODS, [Psal. 81.6.] and a strict Injunction is issued forth, to all, that we Love their Persons, Obey their Commands, and support their Crowns and Dignities, under severest Pe∣nalties, [Rom. 13.1. & seqq.] The consent of all Mankind, by Divine Instinct, con∣spicuous in the Laws of Nature and Na∣tions, hath so engrafted this Sacred Prin∣ciple of Loyalty in Mans Heart, That Time and Custom, as St. Austin observes, hath past it, into a Natural Covenant, for the well-being of Humane Society, in regard of their Royal Power and Ma∣jesty, to pay Obedience to their Laws, and to Venerate their Person. [Aug. l. 3. Conf. c. 8. n. 2.]
As the Civil Excellency and Jurisdicti∣on, deriv'd from the Light of Nature, confirm'd by the consent of all Ages and Nations, and authoriz'd by the Sacred Pan∣dects of Gods positive Law, doth render Princes Illustrious and Awful, in their Royal Thrones and Pavillions, by a due Administration of the Sword of Justice, in Peace and War, for the Tranquility of their People, and the Terrour of their Enemies: So hath wise and gracious Pro∣vidence,
 furnish'd their vast Souls, with a more copious Train of Natural Endow∣ments of Wisdom, Fortitude and Vigi∣lancy; with a deeper Penetration, into the Arcana Imperii, the Maxims of State, Interests of Nations, Humours of Peo∣ple, and other secret Mysteries of Govern∣ment; and with more abundant Influences of Super-natural Lights and Helps, where∣by, to prosper their Realms, propagate their Crowns, and secure their Royal Persons and Prerogatives; That, being accom∣plish'd with all Natural, Moral and Super-natural Supplies, they may become more Illustrious Stars of Piety, in the Firma∣ment of the Church, more Renown'd Champions of the Rights and Mysteries of Religion, and most impregnable Bull∣warks of true Faith and Holiness, against the publick Assaults, and private Am∣bushes of Worldly Wisdom. And there∣fore the Prophet Esay, [cap. 49. vers. 23.] gives them the Illustrious Characters; That Kings are the Nursing Fathers, and Queens the Nursing Mothers of the Church: And our Blessed Lord tells us, That the several Interests of the Church and State, are so rivited to each other,
 That we give not God his Due, unless we obey Caesar, [Matt. cap. 22. vers. 21.]
These, Madam, be the stately Columns, which support the Majesty of Earthly Princes; But if they also be fix'd on the Sacred Bases of Religion, and Christian Fortitude, That Majesty becomes much more Illustrious and Adorable.
In your Royal Person, They are en∣rich'd too, with the Magnificent Sculp∣tures, of a most Illustrious Birth, whereby you are link'd to the Noblest, Royal and Imperial Families of the Western World, and actuated with the lofty Blood of the Dukes of Ferrara, and the Spirit of the most Renowned Countess, Matildis of Mo∣dena. They are adorn'd with a most Ma∣jestick Reliev of a propitious Fortune, whereby you are Espoused to the Greatest of English Monarchs, JAMES the JUST, the VALIANT, and the VICTORIOUS; and thereby are QUEEN of England, Scotland, France and Ireland; of the Terra Firma, and Islands of the North-East of America; of the Golden Coasts of the Southern Africa; of a large Tract of the Indian Asia; and of the vast Seas and Oceans, which wash their rich Shores,
 and opposite Banks. And they are at∣chiev'd, with the rarest Cornu-copia's of Super-natural Blessings, whereby, to ren∣der your Soul Holy, your Virtues Tran∣scendent, and your Examples astonish∣ing, and attractive.
But Madam, All these sublime Excel∣lencies, which conspire to render your Most Sacred Majesty, Great and Illustrious, makes this my Approach to the Throne of your Grandeurs, more rash and unpar∣donable; That at so vast a Distance, I presume with a Vulgar Eye, to view so bright a Sun; and to interrupt your Royal Thoughts, with so Mean an Offering; your Seraphick Soul being already fix'd, in Contemplation, and Admiration of the Immense Grandeurs of your Super-Sera∣phick Patroness, Holy MARY, the QƲEEN of Queens, unto whose Rich Sanctuaries of all Super-eminent Virtues, this Apology is ambitious to lead You.
The Summ of my Plea, is, First, That the Design of this Apology is Magnifi∣cent: Secondly, That the Matter is Holy: And Thirdly, That the giving it a pub∣lick View, is a Just Debt; For, It ex∣pounds the Super-eminent Mysteries of the
 Life and Glory of the Holy Mother of JESUS; It shews, in little, the Im∣mense Perfections of Nature, Grace and Glory, drawn to the Life, by the Power of the Almighty, in the exactest Copy, of the Infinite Original, possible amongst Pure Creatures: And It justifies, to a Mis-believing Generation, the Rights and Pri∣viledges of that Divine Creature, chosen above All, and therefore qualified above All, to be the Mother of JESUS; whose Blood therefore in JESUS, was Satans overthrow, Mans Ransom, and Heavens Purchase. Thus far, the Merits of the Cause, humbly sues my Pardon, and your Majesties Protection.
My further Plea is, Three great Ex∣cellencies, wherein your Sacred Majesty communicates with the Divine Mother of JESUS: At the Font, you were Enno∣bled with the Illustrious Name of MARY; by your Espousals, you are dignified, with the Majesty of a QƲEEN; and by your Education, you are Endowed with the brightest Characters of Clemency, which are ever Active in you Royal Breast, for Relief of the Oppressed. All these Perfecti∣ons seem to imply a Generous Inclination
 in your Sacred Majesty, to protect the Assertors of the Prerogatives of your CHIEF, the Divine MARY, the QƲEEN of Men and Angels, the most CLEMENT Advocate of afflicted Christians; especially assaulted within your Kingdoms, by your Subjects; by those who presume to stile Themselves, Disciples of JESUS; while they brand the Just Rights and Prerogatives of His Divine Mother, with the most Infamous TEST of a prophane IDOLATRY; and rob Her, of the noblest Perfections of her Mysterious Life, of the choicest Privi∣ledges of Divine Grace, of the richest Pearls of her Crown of Glory; HER most just Claims to all Super-eminent Praises, Titles of Honour, Veneration, and Power, to aid HER humble Clients; though con-naturally engrafted on, and in∣separable from, the Sacred Stock of HER Divine Maternity, Innocency and Holi∣ness; whereby SHE incomparably tran∣scends the Highest Choires of the Glorious Angels: As the Kings Daughter, amongst the Trains of Honourable Women; and as the QƲEEN standing at his Right Hand, clad in a Mantle of Gold, em∣broider'd
 with Jewels of an Infinite Va∣riety, [Ps. 44. ver. 9.] Whom the bright∣est Seraphim, by a Divine Commission, pro∣claims Blessed above All, [Luke c. 1. v. 28.] Whom the Holy Ghost commands, to be pro∣nounced GLORIOƲS, by all Tongues, and through all Ages, [Ib. v. 48.] Whom The Daughters of Tyre shall present, with their richest Offerings: To whom the Powers of the Earth shall bend their Knee, and offer their Prayers, [Ps. 44. v. 12.] Whom the Daughters of the Hea∣venly Sion admire, amidst the Splendors and Perfumes of HER Glory; And whom the QUEENS of the Earth, with their Troops of Ladies and Maids of Honour, have praised; as the Glory of their Sex, their Myrour of Perfection, and the live∣liest Idea of Christian Majesty and Gran∣deur: [Cant. c. 6. v. 8.]
It may indeed be some ground of just Admiration, to the Criticks of this curi∣ous Age; who nicely pry into the hidden Causes of all Truths, however lock'd up in the privatest Closet of Gods All-knowing Breast, who reveals Them: Why the Evangelists, who by Divine Inspiration, compiled the Sacred Gospel of JESUS, for
 direction of our Christian Faith and Wor∣ship, speak so sparingly of the many stu∣pendious Mysteries of the Life and Glory of Holy MARY, the Mother of JESUS? Whereas they so exactly enlarge themselves in reporting the Grand Mystery of Christi∣an Religion, the most transcendent Sacra∣ment of Gods Love to Man, the Prodigy of the Almighties Power and Providence, for Mans Sanctification and Glory, the In∣carnation of Gods only Son, Equal and Con-substantial to Himself; especially since Holy MARY had so near a Report to that amazing Wonder of Mercy; and did there∣by lay the Noble Foundation of our Chri∣stian Faith, & of all our Religious Duties; open the rich Source of our Sanctification and super-natural Felicity; and erect the Basis, of all the sublime Grandeurs, of Her own surpassing Innocency, Holiness and Glory.
But Madam, this Grand Motive of Mans Admiration, is the very True Rea∣son of those Divine Scribes profound Si∣lence; If that Voice may be call'd Silence, which with loudest Ecchoes proclaims Holy Maries Immense Prerogatives, and fills Heaven and Earth with a Sacred Amaze∣ment,
 of the Prodigy of Gods Love, in the Amplitude and Magnificence of her Ex∣cellency, Perfections and Splendour; For her Divine Maternity once allow'd, it by a connatural sequel of a Wise and Gracious Providence, ushers in, all the stupendious Train of super-eminent Gifts and Privi∣ledges, Catholick Tradition, and the most ambitious Affections of HER devout Cli∣ents, can attribute to the most Innocent, most Holy, most Glorious Mother of JESUS.
Thus, the design of the sacred Publishers of the Gospel of JESUS, being to proclaim to the World, the Mysteries of JESUS; and therein to create a Belief of the Divi∣nity of the Son of Holy Mary, of the Sacra∣ments of his Mercy, and of the Wonders of his Grace; This marvellous Alliance of Di∣vine JESUS, to Holy MARY, is the most lofty, the most voluminous, and most illu∣strious Panegyrick possibly to be utter'd, to the Majesty of the most excellent and most perfect PURE CREATURE, and will ex∣tend the Glory and Veneration of the Mo∣ther of JESUS, as far as any Apostle or Preacher of Christian Truth, ever did, or ever shall, carry the Empire, Majesty and Glory of the holy Name of JESUS.

This St. Matthew seems openly to ex∣press, when having reckon'd up the renown'd Genealogy of JESUS; as Man, descending from the most powerful Monarchs, the most illuminated Prophets, and most Victorious Captains, the Sun ever beheld; He makes a brief Transition to his Divine Nature ac∣cording to the Prediction of Esay, [c. 7. v. 14.] thence to shew, in short, what an E∣minent Creature, how richly qualified in all degrees of Excellency, Holy Mary must be, since JESUS, that great God-Man, was born of MARY. [Matt. c. 1. v. 16.]
So that, Madam, this one Glorious Title of the Mother of JESUS, summs up, in a word, whatever Excellencies, possibly, by the Almighty Power of God, may meet, in One PƲRE CREATƲRE; whereby, suitably to Gods miraculous Design, to fit Her, to that Ineffable Grandeur of a Mother of GOD; which con-naturally creates the most Illu∣strious Idea, of a Creature, by Birth, the no∣blest and most Beautiful; by Grace, the Ho∣liest and most Innocent; and by Predestina∣tion, the Happiest and most Powerful; the Providence of an Omnipotent God of all Glory, the Wisdom of a most endearing Lord of all Majesty, and the Tenderness of
 a most liberal Father of all pure Lights, could prepare in the Divine bosom of holy MARY, for the Reception, Inaugurati∣on, Espousals, and Priest-hood, of his Son JESUS.
No wonder then, that the Evangelists of the Glory of JESUS, having proclaim'd holy MARY, the Mother of JESUS; and thereby laid a most solid Foundation, whereon to build up a most Magnificent Temple of Glory, to the holy Name of MARY; They leave the Superstructures of all Her Su∣per-eminent Praises, Titles of Honour, Worship and Invocation, to be propagated and finish'd, by the holy & emulous Tongues, Pens and Affections of all succeeding Ages.
And herein, the sacred Design of Provi∣dence hath been already, so stupendiously successful, that there seems to have been an holy Envy, in the most Illustrious Persons, of all States, Nations and Times, of the Ca∣tholick Church; even from the first blossom∣ing of Christianity, to these days; (wherein through the Mercy of our good God, the Zeal of our gracious Soveraign, and the Piety of your Sacred Majesty, the Buds and Blossoms of Christian Religion, begin again to appear in these Lands; and the Brittish
 Empire speaks the Language of the Saints, in her publick Oratories and Liturgies,) to Magnifie the Name of holy Mary, the Mo∣ther of JESƲS, to Worship Her Preroga∣tives and Royal Power, and to crave Her Prayers and Protection. Every True Chri∣stian, inspir'd with the Spirit of the Disci∣pleship of Her Son JESƲS, accounting it his special Duty, to Praise and Honour the Memory of the Sacred Mother, since they daily offer their Sacrifices at the Altars of the Son; and to Petition holy Mary, to be∣come their Advocate at the Throne of Gods Mercy, while they adore JESƲS, with their TEARS and AFFECTIONS.
These, Madam, be also the sublime Thoughts, the Seraphick Desires, the zeal∣ous Exercises of your Sacred Majesties Royal and Religious Breast; in Imitation of your Illustrious Ancestors, whose stately Fabricks, rich Endowments, and Exem∣plar Lives, consecrated to the Memory of holy MARY, the Mother of JESƲS; and who, to propagate Her Grandeurs, ennobled your Rising Sun, at the Sacred Font, with the Magnificent Name of MARY; where∣with you now ennoble the Imperial Crown of the British Monarchy; have enrich'd
 Your generous and lofty Soul, with a pious Emulation of Her imitable Vertues, and their Memorable Actions. Thus to perpe∣tuate the Truth of King Solomons Prophe∣tick Song, That the QƲEENS of the Earth, shall ever eccho forth Canticks of Praise and Glory, to the Holy QƲEEN of Heaven, [Cant. 6. v. 8.] While by your Sacred Majesties Religious Examples, Your Kingdoms, and their vast Appen∣dants, be again reclaim'd to JESƲS; En∣gland once more becomes the DOWRY of MARY; and that by the powerful Media∣tion of the Divine Mother, to her Bounti∣ful Son JESƲS, the British Empire may prosper, in TRƲTH, PEACE and PLENTY, under the Royal Scepters of an eternal Issue of King JAMES the JƲST, and Queen MARY the PIOƲS; which is the humble, earnest, and daily Petition of,
Madam,

Febr. 28. 1686/7.
