


WHen that holy Prophet fore-told the sorrows and ill usage which the Sonne of God should finde among sinfull men in the days of his flesh, he cries out, Who shall declare his Generation (Isa. 53. 8.) which many understand of his eternal, some of his Ge∣neration in the fulnes of time, the mystery whereof was beyond words: Others of his holy seed, his crosse being fruitfull, and his death giving life to an innumera∣ble Generation. But besides all these we may with good probability interpret the word Generation  Est generatio, seculum, tempus vitae humanae & per Synecdo∣chen, homines una aetate & generatione vi∣ventes Buxt. for the time or age in which Christ was born, lived and died. And then the meaning is: whose tongue shall be able to speak, or pen to write the History of His Age? Where
 shall Rhetorique enough be found to draw out or deli∣neate with lively colours, the malice and enmity, the plots and conspiracies, the villanies and cruelties con∣trived and acted against that innocent Lamb Jesus Christ: Together with his most glorious victories and triumphs over them all? Who shall declare his Generation?
I believe there hath scarce been a Generation, since that of Christs so journing upon the Earth, more hard to declare then this. We may well cry out, Who shall declare this Generation? What Age hath brought forth such monstrous births of man, or such mar∣vellous births of God? When did man or God shew more of Himself? Did men ever assay to destroy a Nation by pollicies and by power, by threatning and by flattering, by confederacies abroad and combinati∣ons at home, as some have assaied to destroy this Na∣tion? Or hath God assaied to deliver a Nation by tem∣ptations, by signs, and by wonders, and by warre, and by a mighty hand, and by a stretched-out arm, and by great terrours, according to all that the Lord our God hath done before our eyes? Some have said of Zeno∣phons Cyrus, that surely it was written (Non ad hi∣storiae fidem, sed ad Principis effigiem) not to shew what Cyrus personally was, but what a Prince in ex∣actest compleature may be fancied to be. Such censures
 I am perswaded after Ages will give of the true Stories (I hope some pens will write the truth) of these times, that surely they are poeticall raptures, or feigned Ro∣mances to shew the height of imagination, not the reali∣tie of action. For whether we consider the strange beginnings, the difficult proceedings, the variety of judgements, the contrarietie of opinions, the stands and motions, the effects or issue; of these warres and troubles, together with the faithfulnesse or falsenesse of men, the power and goodnesse of God discovered in them, it will be found the most improbable relation that ever was put to paper.
The providence of God, which acts in all Nations, hath (as it were) striven to represent such scenes of action in England as are hardly parallel'd by any that are past. His works among us, have not only justice, but beauty and wonder; not only mercie, but skill and art in them (Though to do them be his pro∣pertie, not his studie, his nature, not his labour) Man cannot so much as be suspected to have done these things, God hath done like God. The Lord needs not sub∣scribe his name to his work, for, that his Name is neer, his wonderous works declare. It must be said by way of assertion, This God hath wrought, as well as by way of admiration, What hath God wrought?
God hath done so much for us, that the most which re∣mains
 for us to do, is to Admire and be Thankfull. If these Talents of mercy have not fair improvements, we shall be cast for the most unprofitable servants and idle Stewards that were ever trusted by the great Master of heaven and earth. Sad will their reckoning be, who sleight these mercies, but theirs saddest of all, who put forth a hand to corrupt and spoil them. The reason given by the holy Ghost, why his blood must he shed, who shed∣deth mans blood, is this, because in the Image of God made he man. God hath made our victories and deli∣verances in his own image; There's not one of them, but looks like God. What their doom shall be, who by envie or self-ends, who by sowing divisions or making sides, who by somenting jealousies or nourishing discontents go about to murther them, the perpetuall equity of that first statute-law puts into the mouth of every ludge. Right honourable, that these works of God may be ae∣clared by all manner of declarations, perfected into all manner of perfections, and that God who hath wrought them may be honoured with all manner of honours should now be Your special care and study: the care also and stu∣dy of all, who tast the comforts and share in the blessings of them: of which number, I thankfully subscribe my self, and,

