



Honoured Sir,
YOƲ know, that a Life full of Vertue, con∣stant and equal in the Profession and Holy exercises of Religion, is what our blessed Lord hath recommended to his Disciples, as the way to eternal Happiness; and how unbecoming a Christian it is to give loose reins to his own Cor∣ruptions, or take pleasure in those that do so.
Hence it is, that no occasion hath presented, since You were called to a Publick and Honourable Station, to do GOD and your Country Service, but you have embraced with Zeal, and managed with Prudence.
As God hath preserved his Covenant in your House, and recommended the Religion you Profess, by the Pious Example of so worthy a Father, so nei∣ther the Vanity of the World, nor the influence of a degenerate Age, hath had any power on You, to do any thing unworthy of your Self, of your Family, or of Religion.
This watchful Conduct no doubt, hath fixed the eyes of the People on You, and captivated their Hearts.
Go on Sir, in your Zeal for GOD, in your ge∣nerous tenderness of the good of Mankind; in your watchfulness over your Self, in your special Respect to such as Fear God, and in your Holy disdain, and contempt of Sinners; And let this be your Motto, Valiant for the Truth.

Nothing but your Zeal for God, and Ardent wishes for the Reformation of our degenerate Age, could move You to Request the Publishing of the fol∣lowing Discourse, (and I doubt not but it was Your leading the way that provoked others to joyn with You in the same Request) which Request I have now yielded to, after some struglings with my self to commit to the Publick, what I fear hath not much more to Recommend it, but Your candid Interpreta∣tion, and the charity of the Auditors, before whom it was delivered.
However Sir, the Friendship wherewith You are pleased to Honour me, with a faint hope, that Pro∣vidence may design Benefit to some by it, hath ven∣tured its fortune in the world.
If it may in the least Answer the design for which it was intended, the awakening any to a Zeal for God, his Truth, & that Reformed Religion we Profess, I shall bless God that ever it was Preached or Pub∣lished, how little soever it doth please the Curious, or what Censures soever I incur on its account.
I leave it therefore, Sir, such as it is, to the pro∣vidence of God, and under Your Ʋmbrage. And that God may Honour, and set You more and more to do him Service, and multiply his Blessings of all sorts upon Your Family, is the Prayer of
SIR

Shepton-Mallet, June 19. 99.
