



IT is a ponderous speech of the wise man, and worthy of all wise mens deep∣est consideration;Eccles. 8.6. Because to every purpose there is time and judgment; therefore the misery of man is great upon him. Jerom tels us that the Septua∣gint and Theodotio did read, in stead of [therefore the misery of man is great] because the knowledg of man is great upon him: and he conjectures the difference to arise from the likeness of the two Hebrew words  &  the one signifying knowledg, the other evil or misery: but the truth is, the want of this knowledge, or wisdome, to know and judg of times and seasons, is that which brings great misery upon the sons of men: And so is the true sense of the words; because there is time and judgment for every purpose, and but a time: And men have not judgment to discern and take that time, therefore the misery of man is great upon him; men bring upon themselves and others extream trouble and misery; because they do not wisely discern,Opportunity is time fitted and framed by God for the accom∣plishment of his designs. and lay hold on the time and opportunity (for so  sig∣nifies opportunum tempus;) which God doth give them for the bringing about of all lawfull and righ∣teous
purposes and designs: Therefore it was the wisdom of our blessed Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, that when he came about that great design of saving souls he took his fathers time; So you hear his fa∣ther bespeaking of him, In an acceptable time have I heard thee,Isa. 49.8.  In tempare op∣portuno volun∣tatis vel placi∣to. and in the day of salvation have I helped thee; therefore it was a day of salvation because it was an acceptable time; the time which his father set him for the work: oh how acceptable a Redeemer was Christ to his father, because his fathers time was acceptable to him! Noble Senators, how much you are con∣cern'd in these texts I leave to your selves to judg; There is a complaint made by God, Jer. 8.6. I hearkned and heard, but they spake not aright; no man repented him of his wickedness, saying, what have I done? I beseech you as you love Christ, this poor Kingdom, and your own souls, let not this complaint be verified of any one of you; Turn in upon your selves, and bring to remembrance; commune with your own heart upon your bed, and every one ask your selves this que∣stion, What have I done? Ask your selves what you have done as men? What you have done as Parlia∣ment-men? what you have done in reference to the first table, in reference to the second table? What you have done in reference to Christ, his Truths, Worship, Govern∣ment, Ministry, Ordinances, People? What you have done in your Covenant with God, and your Declarati∣ons to the world? Yea, oh that you would alter the question a little on the negative part, and ask your selves what you have not done in reference to all these? Whether indeed you have taken the accepted time wch God hath fashioned and prepared by his own hand, for the accomplishing of the great work of Reformati∣on,
wherewith God hath entrusted and honoured you? By the improvement whereof you might have been so many Ioshuahs, Saviours and Redeemers, to have resto∣red the preserved of England? Whether you have gone about the work in Gods strength, in Gods methods, and to Gods ends? Surely never had Parliament fairer op∣portunities, better helps, greater encouragements to have set up Jesus Christ in his Throne (the greatest honor and interest that States & Kingdoms are capable of) then you have had; & I humbly hope we shal not have cause to say only, have had; but that God wil stil entrust you with the work, and bless you in it; and renew upon you all those glorious advantages, whereby you shal be encouraged, and enabled, to carry it on against all oppositions of men and Divels. We cannot but take no∣tice, with much thankfulness to God, and you; re∣joycing in the Lord greatly, that now at last (to use the Apostles words) your care for the Publique good hath flourished again, in those self-denying,. quod jam tan∣dem reviruistis Phil. 4.10. and Kingdom-refreshing-votes, which have lately past, your Honourable House; which we look upon as the fruit of your late Serious and extraordinary humiliation, within your own walles, and an answer of Prayer, your own, and the rest of Gods people's who lifted up their hands and voices to God with you, and for you on the same day. Only I beseech you, Honorable, and much Honoured Patriots, give out now real, and last∣ing Demonstrations, that this motion of yours, is not meetly ab extrinseco, but that it flows from in∣ward principles, and gracious impressions of God upon your Spirits. Go on, and do worthily in the eyes of all the Kingdom and at home, the Churches abroad: and though you are taught of God to be humbled for your
failings, yet let no discouragements enfeeble your hands in the work of God, and the Kingdom; but with David encourage your selves in the Lord your God.1 Sam. 30.6. And though you know how to be vile before God; yet as∣sert your Honor and glory before men; by being zea∣lous, and expeditious, stedfast, and unmoveable, in the work of the Lord;Gen. 49.24. and the Blessing of Joseph be upon your heads, whereby your bow may abide in strength, and the arms of your hands may be made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Iacob, from whom you are the shepherd, and the stone of England.
And the Lord undeceive this poor people, and o∣pen their eyes, that they may see, their peace to be bound up in your safetie; and that the best way to secure their own Rights and Liberties, is, to assert and vin∣dicate your Priviledges. This I am confident of, when ever the Power and Authority of Parliament is trodden under foot, the wall is broken down, the de∣stroyer comes in, and, without a rescuing arm of Omni∣potence, the Kingdom undone. If the Lord wil give the Parliament an heart to be active for Christ, and the Kingdom an heart to be active for the Parliament, I hope yet to see it a flourishing Kingdom: and you a flourishing Parliament; The Lord Iesus ruling, and triumphing in both: which is, and shal be, the hear∣ty, and dayly prayer, of

