



Learned Friend,
YOu have not the least in∣terest in these papers, whom your desired Brother hath left Inheritor not to his Expe∣ctations only, but his Vertues; which here are presented to you. Not as you have seen

them in their own native beauty and splendor, as they beamed out themselves to the eye of those that did con∣verse with him, while alive, but as you have seen the pi∣cture of a man taken in his winding sheet, in more dark and lifelesse colours: and yet as to the visage and aire, such as, that, without an Inscri∣ption, you might at first sight be able to tell whose picture and image it is. The view whereof, I know not whe∣ther it may affect you more with grief or joy; grief, be∣caufe it ls not himself; joy, because you have so much of his shadow to converse with, as long as you shall survive. I send it to you, Sir, to perfect the Copy, for the truth is, there is none that can draw

it to life, but your self; it be∣ing not only imago tua, but imago tui; that therefore you would every day adde one line to the finishing of this excellent piece,Nulla dies fine linea. is the designe of this third dedication.
It concernes you highly; for though the death of your ho∣noured Brother hath left you the Birth-right, it is his Life only that must give you the Blessing: Your Advan∣tages are rare, a pious fathers counsels, a gracious mothers tears and prayers, the inspe∣ction of a learned and indu∣strious Tutor your daily con∣verse with silent and vocal Libraries, dead and living mo∣numents of learning. Above all, that which the great Rab∣bi among the Jewes, and A∣postle amongst Christians,

puts as a Crown upon young Timothies head, that from a childe thou hast known the Scriptures,2 Tim 3.15 which are able to make thee wise to salvation; These are your advantages, and Prayer your emprove∣ment: the exercise whereof you have learn't both by Pre∣cept and by Pattorn; may the Gift of Prayer be accom∣plished with the Grace of Prayer, the sweet and secret teachings of the Spirit of Grace and Supplication.Zech. 12.20. The Lord make you to abound in that holy duty, our heavenly ; the traffick and trade whereby we fetch in the merchandize of the Hea∣venly Jerusalem. Great obli∣gations presse you to a vi∣gorous emprovement of your advantages, the recruit of

your tender Parents com∣forts, the honour of your Noble Family, the expecta∣tion of your worthy friends, the name of your excellent brother; whom dying, me thinks, I hear bespeaking of you thus,
Vive tuo, frater, tempore, vive meo.
That you may do worthily, and answer all these engage∣ments with an overplus of satisfaction, may a double por∣tion of your Brothers spirit rest upon you. It is, Sir, and shall be the prayer of

