

Right Worshipful and Beloved,
I Desire to rejoyce with you and for you; in this great mercy of God, in resto∣ring you to your Habitations, from which some of you have been so long divorced; or to your Liberties, in the surprise whereof you have been no better then priso∣ners in your own Houses: Which that it may be a mercy indeed, give me leave, as one that loves you, to commend unto you a few Cautions.
1. Take heed, I beseech you, now that you are returned to your old Hou∣ses, you do not return to your old sins; now you are restored to your Civil Liberties, you do not backslide to your former sinful Liberties: What they were, you best know: give me leave to minde you what your Christian friends in the Kingdom have taken notice of and bewailed in you: Pride
in your apparel, sumptuousnesse in your houses, excessive delicacie on your Tables; (whose sins these were, Ezek. 16.49 will tell you) profanation of Sabbaths, contempt of the faithful Ministery of the Word, compliance with Episcopal Super∣stition formality in Religion, almost scorn of the godly, and of the power of God∣linesse, and the like.Gal. 4.16. I speak not these things to shame you, but as a Mini∣ster of Christ and a friend to admonish you; and I hope I shall not become your enemy because I tell you the truth. Ile assure you, Friends, you have as much cause to keep days of Humiliation in Chester for your old sins, as days of Thanksgiving for your new Mercies. A voice was heard upon the high pla∣ces,Jer. 3.21. weeping and supplication of the children of Israel; for they have perverted their way, and have forgotten the Lord their God. This was the posture of Is∣rael returning out of Captivity, and I wish from my soul it may be Yours.
2. Enquire the way to Sion with your faces thitherward; and to that end, purchase to youselves an inward, spiritual,Jer. 50.5. powerful Ministery, whatever it cost you. Say not you are poor; or if you do, know that this is the next way to recruit your estates: the Gospel never comes empty-handed to a people; it bears its own charges with advantage:Prov. 23.23. O then, buy the truth and sell it not; buy it at any price, sell it at no price. Prove God herewith, I beseech you, and see if he do not open the windows of heaven and pour out a blessing upon you, and make your later end (with Job) more prosperous then your beginning.Mal. 3.10. Job. 42.12. 2 Tim. 3 5.
3. Labour to be Christians in good earnest: A form of godlinesse will not serve the turn (it is a moth that will insensibly eat out the beauty & strength of a Church or people) Studie the power of it. You have now made an Expe∣riment, whose service is better,Deut. 28.47, 48. Gods or your Enemies. If God be God (with you now) serve him, and serve him like Himself; Be perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect:Matth. 5. ult. if after all this you dally with God, and settle up∣on your lees again, I must prophesie to you in the Name of the Lord; The troubles you have suffered have been but the beginnings of your sorrow.
4. From henceforth know your friends from your foes; learn to distin∣guish between Complements and Realities: The Bramble said to the trees, Come and put your trust under my shadow. Trust Brambles no more.
5. Studie Thankfulnesse for this blessed turn of Providence in returning your Captivity. They say abroad in the Kingdom, The Lord hath done great things for you:Judg. 9.15. Will not you eccho back again, Yea, the Lord hath done great things for us, whereof we rejoyce? The Lord teach you to prze your naked walls more then you have done formerly your sumptuous surnisht houses; to improve your Freedoms to better purpose then ever heretofore. How you may be thankful, this ensuing Sermon, preached for the Celebration of your Deliverance, will direct. You bear the greatest share in the mercy, I wish you may bear the greatest share in the duty.
6. Finally, Brethren, farewel: Be perfect, be of good omfort, be of one minde, live in peace, and the God of Love and Peace shall be with you. So prays

