



THe sorrow of the New Convert, lookeing upon Christ crucifi∣ed, the Holy Ghost hath pleased to shadow forth unto us inZech. 12.10. Scripture, by the sorrows for the losse of a

first-borne, as one that is in bitternesse for his first-born; Ut amare∣scee su∣per primo∣genitum. rachamim from re∣chem, which sig∣nifieth the wombe, be∣cause of all compassions the mothers compassions are the most tender the Hebrew reads it infinitively, not personally. to take in both Sexes; cer∣tainly, because those sor∣rowes, especially on the mo∣thers side, are the strong∣est and the most impressive of all natural affecti∣ons.
What your sorrows then are, for the losse of this Gentleman, whose praema∣ture death, (if it be law∣ful to call it so, now Gods work is finished) hath occa∣sioned first the preaching, and then at your too pre∣vailing solicitation, the

printing of this Sermon, cannot be easily imagined. A first born, and such a first-born, as few Parents have either boasted of, or mourned over. A Son, who was what you could wish for a Son, or from a Son. A Son you have lost, for the losse of whom I can be content to let you mourn, and with all my heart sit down and mourn with you, for Your, the Nati∣ons, and mine own losse.
Yet to keep your sorrows from over-flowing the banks, Remember, I be∣seech you, that your trial is not parallel with the trial

of some of Gods Wor∣thies.
It is not the trial of Job, who had all his Sons and Daughters slaine and bu∣ried in one tempest.
Not the trial of David, whose darling son was exe∣cuted, in the very act of treason and parricide.
No, nor the trial of A∣braham your father, who must resign up his Son, his first-borne, his only Son, whom he loved; the Heire, not of Abrahams possessi∣ons only, but of the Promi∣ses too; and (that which is above all aggravations tre∣mendous,) Isaac must be the

Sacrifice, and Abraham the Priest, to offer him up with his own hand.
His Piety to God, must be cruelty to his Son, yea, (had not the Command of the Law giver intervened) most unnatural murder.
Deare friends, your losse though invaluable, is not imbittered with such tem∣ptations.
A Son, a first-born, but dying in the arms of your Loves and Prayers. Not more sent for home to his fathers house, (as it were in anotherThe Small Pox ac∣cended in∣to a burn∣ing fever. fiery chariot) then willing to go.
Neither hath his death

made you or your samily Orphane. A brother he hath left behinde him, to inherit your estate and his Brothers vertues: A Brother, in whom his Bro∣ther lives; though King∣smell be dead, yet Lucy is alive. A Brother so like his Brother,Minut. Foelix. that (as he said of the two friends) Crederes unam animum in duobus esse divisam: You would think one soul ani∣mated two bodies,
Sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic ora gerebat.
Both one in Nature, as in Name,
They look, and speak, and act the same.
Three Sisters, also hath he left, sharers of the same spirit of sweetnesse and Piety with himself; Re∣cruits of your comfort, and vessels to propagate, though not the name, yet that which is better, the good∣nesse of your family.
Certainly, my worthy friends, God hath mixt your Cup with many sweet in∣gredients, so that you may well bespeak your own soules with your elder brother, the Lord Jesus Christ; The Cup that my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it? Behold, it is but a Cup, not a Sea of bitter∣nesse,

and of a fathers tem∣pering, not an enemies, and it is a gift, not a cutse; Oh if Jesus Christ could thus alleviate his Cup, which was ful of his Fathers wrath, how much more may you drink and forget your sor∣rows, whose cup is mixt with so much love? The very things which seem to aggravate your losse, do lighten it. The better your Son was, the easier your trial
It is our great infelicity that we invert our argu∣ments, and when God hath put sweetnesse into the Pre∣misses, we put bitternesse

into the Conclusion. We are wittie to aggravate our own afflictions, and for the most part mistake the ac∣cent; that which should help us bear our burden, makes it intolerable; we can tell how it might have been better, and think we could bear any trial but this, and so we dispute our Crosse when we should take it up, and give God coun∣sel when God looks for o∣bedience.
But God hath taught you better things, and things which accompany salvati∣on, though I thus speak. And I do greatly rejoyce, to

behold that Christian meek∣nesse and patience, that sweet submission to,Lev. 10.3. that gracious acquiescence in the Will of God: Your si∣lence before the Lord where by you evidence to your selves and others, your trial to be the rod of a Father, the fruit of love. You do not only bear your Crosse, but adorn it.
The Lord cause all grace to abound in your souls, perfect the good pleasure of his grace, and the work of faith with power. And the Lord continue you both comforts one to another, and bles∣sings

to all your Relations,1 Sam, 2.20. give you a rich recompence for the loan which is lent to the Lord; and now one channel is dried up, cause the remaining to over-flow with mercy. Make your surviving off-spring dou∣ble comforts to you, and blessings to the world. Yea, the lesse you have of the creature, fit you for, and fill you with, MORE OF HIMSELF.

