


Honourable and ever to be honoured Gent.
WHat Encomium the Apostle gave the beloved Disciple, I hope the world wil give me leave to bestow upon you, without the the least suspition of Flattery; You do faithfully whatsoever you do in the Publike Trust committed to you:1. Joh. v. 5. and I beseech you look upon it as Gods honouring of you, more then your honouring of God: a heart to be faithful, and happinesse to be successeful in Gods designes, is a double engagement: which I heartily desire may not lift up your hearts, unlesse it be in the ways of God, in whose Name you have gone out and prospered. So that you may go and bear a part in hisBarak. Judg. 5.13. Excellen∣cies Song: Then he made him that remaineth to have dominion over the Nobles, among the people the Lord made me have dominion over the mighty. As an ac∣knowledgement of which honour God hath done you, give me leave hum∣bly to suggest a few Returns of Thankfulnesse that will no lesse become you, then crown and perfect your work.
1. Make it, I beseech you, your prime designe to surrender up that Citie to God which God hath surrendred up to you, by engaging your best abilities and interests for the bringing in and encouragement of a learned, godly, Orthodox Ministery into the City, the Spiritual Militia that must secure the peace thereof. If Heresie and Schism break in, I shall set down and cry, Chester is lost the second time; and in which more miserable, it will not be easie to determine.
Agrippins to Nero.2. Studie onenesse in your affections, and onenesse in your Counsels: Unitie and you are unconquerable. Remember whose suggest it was, Divide & im∣pera.
3. Let your distinguishing favours run counter-motion to the enemies: let Malignants have no more encouragement then may demonstrate you more studious of their Reformation then their Ruine: Let them have no more cause to call the proud happie,Hagg. 3.15. Vers. 18. nor to say, They that work wickednesse are set up: but let them return, and discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serveth God and him that serveth him not.
4. Be tender (O be tender, I say, as of your own lives) of the willing faith∣ful party who in City or Countrey have served you in this Cause of Christ and the Parliament, to the very last drop of livelihood and blood: O to studie now the Rest, Refreshing, Recruiting of that languishing people more then your own interests and advantage, will render you more truely honourable then all your Victo∣ries,
and bring the blessing of perishing families upon you and your posterity. To that end, imitate the true gallantry of Nehemiah: read his 5 Chapter, especially from the 14 verse to the end; and the Lord grant you may get it by heart. Then shall they that are delivered from the noise of the archers in the places of drawing water, rehearse the righteous acts of the Lord,Judg. 5.11. even the righteous acts towards the inhabitants of the Villages in Cheshire; then shall the peo∣ple of the Lord go down to the gates.
5. Studie Self-conquests, Sin-victory. He that is slowe to anger is bet∣ter then the mighty, and he that ruleth his spirit, then he that taketh a City.Prov. 16.32. Fortior est qui se∣quam qui fortis∣sima vincit moenia. If after ye have conquered the Lusts of men, you are conquered by your own Lusts; if after you have led your enemies captive, Satan can take you captive at his will; you are undone for ever. The Lord make you, every way, more then Conquerors, &c.2 Tim. 2.26. Rom. 8.37.
6. Lastly, remember what General Joab did when he had taken Rabbah of the Ammonites, and do ye likewise now ye have taken this Cheshire-Rbbah; send for King David; yea, send for that King who is Davids son and Davids Lord, King JESUS; give him possession, and set the Crown of glory upon his Head, bowing your beads before him, and casting down your Crowns, saying, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but to thy Name give the praise.Ezek. 48.35. O let not the Ci∣ty be called by your Name; but let the Name of the City be from this day, Jehovah-shammah, The Lord is there.
Worthy Sirs, what is now my faithful advice to you, shall be always the humble request for you at the Throne of Grace, ofPsal. 115.1.

