



My Lords,
THE world is too narrow for our passions (we may soon over-joy or over-sorrow the best or the worst estate which earth affords or can inflict) What an Atome then is it to our understandings? The world is too little and too low-prized for the minde of the least, of the poorest man, who hath the understand∣ing of a man: what A nothing then is it to (such as yours are) Great and noble mindes? And yet (as inconsidera∣ble as it is) they who have only the world to rejoyce in, shall not (shortly) have a world to rejoyce in. The fashion of it pas∣seth away daily, and the matter of it is of no long continuance. The beauty of it was stained in its infancy, and the frame of it must be consumed when it is a few (who knowes how few) years elder. This should call off our thoughts from eager earth∣ly pursuits, and pitch them upon a higher and more enduring substance. This should provoke us to put the moon (all changeable excellencies) under our feet, and make us rest∣lesse till we are cloathed with the Sun, an eternall excellen∣cy? 'Twas the designe of the ensuing Sermon, to befriend souls with such a change of cloathing: and to entice them into the joys of a name written in Heaven, that they might not too much read or rejoyce in any, (no not their own) on earth.
 I know the victories and successes of a just warre, endebt us not only to Thankfulnes, but to Ioy. Such victories are the exactest pieces both of the wisdom and power of God; God is called a man of warre, but nothing shews him more a God then warre. And among all warres, a warre with spirits, (though but with the spirits of men) shews most of God. The great promise of restoring Ierusalem is thus prefac'd. Thus saith the Lord, which stretcheth out the Heavens, and lay∣eth the foundation of the earth, and formeth the spirit of man within him, (Zech. 12. 1.) All reforming about spiritu∣alls, begins at the forming of spirits. Whether God forms spi∣rits, or breaks spirits (which will not receive his form) his work is admirable. God hath begun a warre with, and a work upon spirits in our dayes: Some spirits are beautifully formed, others are justly broken. T'is a duty to rejoyce in both, chiefly in the former. We must rejoyce (for the Angels in heaven do) when we hear the spirits of other men are formed, but the best cause of joy is when we finde our own are. How much soe∣ver the publike is reformed without, or how many soever are formed within, yet if any heart lie ruin'd, or life unshap't, he may (in the midst of all these joys and triumphs, for he shall) lie down in sorrow. That your Lordships may have many rejoicing daies, and a rejoycing eternity▪ That your Names may be written in the fairest and greatest letter which Honour can make on earth, and that they may be written in the fair-est and greatest letter, which Glory Shall make in Heaven, is the prayer of

