


NOBLE SENATORS,
TO serve Your and the Kingdoms Thankfulnesse for the late mercy of God, in putting Chester into your possession; give me leave from the Presse to present unto your view what might have been burdensom from the Pulpit; a short List or Catalogue of some eminent Providences, wherewith the mercy of the day being clothed, will appear very rich and glorious.
1. And first, you may please to observe, that the very lengthning of the Siege, was the advance of the Designe, while in the issue it appears to have been nothing else but an ambushment of Providence laid of purpose to draw on the enemy to their own destruction: Surely their pride and power have not met with a more burdensome stone in all their bold and confident Adven∣tures, then the Siege of Chester; upon which God bath broken them with breach upon breach, and blest you with victory upon victory worth many Chesters; and when he had done, cast that also in for an advantage. Thus many times do we look upon disappointments of our hopes, as frowns of displeasure, which afterwards we finde to be Plots of Mercy. Who would not wait upon that God; who if be withhold a mercy for a while, pays in∣terest for the forbearance, of more worth many times then the principal it self.
2. That in three Storms of the greatest disadvantage that height of walls, depth of trenches, impregnablenesse of Forts, and multitudes of enemies (as many in the City as yours in the Siege) could render, the Forces were con∣fest by the enemy to have done more execution then they received, either in their assault or retreat: wherein one particular providence must not be silenc'd:Lieut. Col. Venbles. an active Commander who was four times upon the walls; and though through the unexpected disadvantages of the designe, not seconded according to expectation, yet was brought off harmlesse, save onely a slight wound on his arm, to minde him what arm it was that made his rescue.
3. That in all the Sallies which the enemy hath made upon the Parlia∣ments Quarters, they had more cause at their returns into their strong Hold, to
wring their hands then to ting their bells, being always sent home with more blowes then they give.
4. That our Engines during the Siege have constantly done more execution upon the enemy within, then theirs have done upon our men without, though the oddes of all offensive and defensive advantages were on their side; where∣by God would manifest the difference, between having walls and bulwarks for Salvation,Ia. 26.1. and having Salvation for walls and bulwarks.
5. It was onely an unexpected Help to our side, that a Blinde of Providence caused them to leave the Prospect of a Steeple so neer the City-walls undemo∣lished from whence our men did perform daily justice upon the Rebels, slaying one of their steruest, and divers others. So God oftentimes beats the enemie with their own weapons.
6. The patience and constancy of your Souldiery, was eminently remark∣able, which was such, as though there were temptations enough to storm it, as extremity of weather, want of pay, clothes, food, unparallel'd hard duty all the time of the siege, being forced many times to fetch their water from Sam. .15. the gate of Bethlem, and that not for wantonnesse, but for necessity; their bread from the enemies Quarters▪ the stores of the languishing Countrey be∣ing drained, and expected supplies from neighbouring Counties failing, to the ex∣treme harassing and hazarding of their Forces both abroad and at home: I say such notwithstanding was their constancy and patiece, that none of all these could conquer it; Providence always stepping in with timely Supplies and admirable Resenes in their deepest discouragements and desertions. In the mount the Lord hath been seen.Gen. 22.14.
7. The nature of your Forces which performed this service, renders it the more observable; they being not an united Brigade cull'd and form'd for such a de∣signe, but a collective Body out of some few adjacent Counties, the more capa∣ble of discontent, and uncapable of Commands, had not God put a singular Spirit of Wisedom and Activity into the Commanders, and of wil∣lingnesse or awe into the Souldiers: So that here you have that word made good again:Zech. 46. Not by might nor power, but by my Spirit, saith the Lord of Hosts.
8. The enemy were not so high all the time of the Siege in their demands, but your terms were as honourable in the Surrender; which received this addition,Magmon est te∣stimohium pro o qui judicium ad sario com∣minit. Abulens. that the enemies themselves confesse Conditions were never bet∣ter kept since the wars began. A testimony out of the mouth of an adver∣sary, is double honour.
9. Of what Consequence the Successe is, let Chesters expectation from Ireland, and the preparations of the Irish Cut-throats for Chester the Key of this Kingdom, the Rest of that poor fainting County; the trembling of all the malignant neighbouring Strong Holds in Wales; and the securing of your Northern Leagur from the approach of an enemy: the opening of the way of Trade between London and these parts; the dashing in pieces of the
Enemies Designes, who lo, were hastning now to the Infallible relief of their Garisons in Cheshire and Lancashire; the reducing of the North, the ab∣solute Conquest of Scotland, and then back again to the sharing of Eng∣land: for all this, and more too (Sisera-like) they had not onely designed, but dispatcht in their vain Confidences: The strengthning the hands of our Friends thorow the whole Kingdom, who shall hear and rejoyce; the weak∣ning of the Enemy, who shall hear, and their heart shall melt for fear. Let these, I say, and many other Improvements (too many for an Epistle, but not too many for our Thankfulnesse to enquire into) let these Speak.
10. And all this, whether it have not been the cheapest Purchase the Par∣liament hath made, since it was constrained to redeem this poor sold Nation with Money and Blood, I appeal to your Selves, and to that exhausted County, which in the pursuit of this Service hath, to their exceeding Ho∣nours, issued not much lesse (if I be not misinformed,) then 40000 l. the very last vital blood that was left in their veins.Psal. 110.. Surely the Lord made them a willing people in this day of his power. There is yet a passage or two wherein you shall behold Mercy and truth meeting together, Righteus∣nesse and peace kissing each other.
11. Ʋpon the same day that the enemy began to fortifie the City of Che∣ster, and make their Outworks, that very day three yeers, the Parliaments Forces entred the same:

Feb. 3. 1642.
Feb. 3. 1645

12. The King mustered the Cheshire Forces, summon'd, disarm'd the Train∣bands upon Holt-Heath, Sept. 24 1642. and upon the same day three yeers, the Kings Army was routed upon Routon-we may rightly call it Routing-Heath: and another Brigade which was intended for a Reserve, commanded by the Earl of Lichfield and the Lord Gerard, defeared upon Holt-Heath (as I take it so it is called) where the Earl of Lichsield was slain; and all this in the Kings view, He then standing in Phoenix-Tower in Chestr. Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see; but they shall see; I pray God to Repentance, and not to Shame.
Vide Passages and Treaties of the Siege and taking of Chester.Honouable Parriots, these sew passages to which you have already further discoveries, and may sinde more, hold forth much of God; His Wisedom, his Strength, his Justice, his Mercy, beaming forth in the Light of this day. And this you may observe, as the result of all; It is Fidelity God prospers and Crowns in his Service. Now that God who hath made your Armies faith∣ful to you, make you every day more and more faithful to himself; that what was Moses Honour, and His too who is Moses and your Lord▪ the Lord Jesus, may be the Parliament of England's renown to all Generations, They were faithful to him that appointed them in all his House, in doing all things according to the patern: Which as it was the travel of this Cautionary,Heb. 3.2. not Accusatory Ser∣mon (now the second time waiting upon your Commands) so it shall be the daily prayer of.

