



Right Honourable and Beloved,
IT is no small advantage to the holy life, to begin the day with God. The Saints are wont to leave their hearts with him over night, that they may find them with him in the Morning; when I awake I am still with thee, saith holy David, Psal. 139.18. Before earthly things break in upon us, and we receive impressions from abroad, 'tis good to season the heart with thoughts of God, and to consecrate the Early and Virgin operations of the mind, before they are
 prostituted to baser objects. When the world gets the start of Religion in the Morning, it can hardly overtake it all the day; and so the heart is habitua∣ted to vanity all the day long; but when we be∣gin with God, we take him along with us to all the businesses and comforts of the day; which being seasoned with his love and fear, are the more sweet and savory to us.
If there were no other benefit of the Morning Ex∣ercise, than to be an help to us in this setting the mind on work upon holy things, before it receive taint from the world, and the distraction of our or∣dinary affairs, it should upon that account be a very welcome guest to our dwellings.
But there are other benefits, not a few that do attend it wherever it goes; namely, that it hath be∣come an happy occasion through Gods blessing of ma∣nifesting the Unity and Brotherly accord of the Ministers of this City; whilest by their mutual la∣bours they strengthen one anothers hands in the Lords work; and by a joynt testimony confirm those truths which each one apart, dispenceth to his own Auditory; for in the mouth of two or three Witnesses shall every word be established.2 Cor. 13.1.
Besides, that by the course which this Exer∣cise hath hitherto held, each Auditory cometh to have a taste of the several gifts which one and the
 same Spirit dispenseth for the use of edifying; and this not without some conformity to the antient pattern,Other fruits and advanta∣ges of the Morning Ex∣ercise, see in the Introducti∣on, Serm. 1. to∣wards the end. where the several Congregations of the same City, were not plures Ecclesiae Collaterales, divers Sister-Churches, but one and the same Church, meeting by parts in several places, fed and supplied by Officers in common, who by turns in each place dispenced the word to them, having their Government in common.
Now this Morning Exercise hath the Lord once and again sent amongst you; there is a Providence that goeth along with Ordinances; the journeys of the Apostles were directed by the Spirit, as well as their doctrines, Acts 16.7. The course of this Exercise, though it hath been ordered by mans choice, yet not without Gods direction.
To you is this word of Salvation sent, (saith holy Paul, Acts 13.26.) not come or brought, but SENT; and that as a message from our hea∣venly Father, without whose providnece a Sparrow falleth not to the ground. Now it concerneth you to see what use you will make of it: Sermons dye not with the breath in which they were uttered; If the dust of the Preachers feet bear witnesse against the despisers of the Gospel, their Sermons much more; Matth. 10.14, 15. Wherever the Word is preached, 'tis ; for a testimony; how for a testimony?
 either to them, Matth. 24.14. or against them. Mark. 13.9. God keepeth exact account or reckoning what means and advantages each place or people have enjoyed: Three years have I come seeking fruit, Luke 13.7. alluding to the three years of his own Ministry, which then were fully elapsed. This SECOND Miracle did Jesus in Canaan of Galilee, John 4.54. He taketh notice of a first and a second; so 2 Pet. 3.1. This SECOND Epistle write I unto you; and Jer. 25.3. These THREE AND TWENTY years have I spoken the Word of the Lord, rising early, &c. You see God keeps a Memorial how many years the Gospel hath been amongst a people, yea, every day is upon account; for so it is added, even unto this day. What pressing Exhortations you have had; how many, and how long you have enjoyed them, all is upon the File; therefore it concerneth you to see that all this be not without fruit, and some notable good effect; that your account may be with joy, and not with grief and shame.
The rather I urge this, because the Exercises of this Month have not been ordinary Morning Exer∣cises, but all the Arguments were picked and cho∣sen, (as the Preacher sought to finde out ac∣ceptable words, even words of truth, Eccl. 12.10.) and disposed into a certain order for the greater bene∣fit.
 It is observed that the Psalms of David that are alphabetically disposed, are most exact in the com∣posure; so I hope I may say without offence, these Ser∣mons digested into a method, are the more accurate; with what perspicuity and strength they are managed, as to the Doctrinal part, and with what warmth and vi∣gour as to the Application, I cannot speak, being strict∣ly enjoyned silence by my Brethrens severe modesty; but the World will judge, and you I hope will evidence by your own growth in grace, and the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.
These Sermons which with so greedy attention you formerly heard with the hearing of the ear, are now written for a memorial; and that they may be subjected to your view and more deliberate consideration: I say they are written not only for the Churches use, but yours in special; and oh that they may be written upon your hearts, engraven there with a durable Character, such as shall never be defaced!
Honourable and Beloved, I hope I need not presse any of you to get these books into your houses; I can easily presume it of the abler sort amongst you; and would earnestly presse it upon the meanest, even the ser∣vants in your Families, that they would abate not only of superfluous expences, but deny themselves some∣what, even of their ordinary conveniences, to purchase these Sermons; which, if the Ministry should fail, (a
 judgement which England was never in such danger of since the Gospel was restored) and all other helps both in pub∣lick and private should be cut off, which God forbid; yet this one Book, next to your Bible, would be a stock of Divinity which might furnish you with the knowledge of the Essentials of Religion, and be like Manna to you in the Wil∣dernesse, till you come to Canaan.
To that end therefore, that which I would with greatest se∣riousnesse urge upon you, is to get the substance and power of the truths contained in them into your hearts, and so to incul∣cate them, especially the general heads of them upon your chil∣dren and servants, that they may be trained up in the know∣ledge of these vital principles, which are of such use for the begetting and increasing of the life and power of godlinesse. It will be sad, if what was chiefly intended for your use, should finde least fruit amongst you; and that which is a common good, should be not a Monument only, but the aggravation of your unfruitfulnesse.
But I hope better things of you my dearly Beloved, and things which accompany salvation, though I thus speak The good Lord who hath put this price into your hand, give you an heart to prize it, and to improve it; that you may not re∣ceive this grace of God in vain. In this hope I commend you to God, and to the Word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which are sanctified. I am

