


MY LORDS,
WHat Complaint that blessed Reformer HEZEKIAH sent once to the Prophet ISAIAH, that the ISAIAHS of our time do now make in your ears, who are our REFOR∣MERS, The children are come to the birth,2 King. 19.3. and there is not strength to bring forth. To make some discovery where the OBSTRU∣CTION lieth, is the humble and faithful endea∣vour of this Sermon; which as it waits the second time upon your Commands; so if your
Lordships please (at your sparer times) to let your eye second the travel of your ear, it may through his power,Rom. 4.17. who quickens the dead, and calls things that ARE NOT, as though they WERE, become some way serviceable to the Work you have in hand (the end of its first and second attendance upon your Ho∣nours.) There was a time when Temple-workEzra 6.14. PROSPERED in the hands of the LORDS AND COMMONS OF JUDAH, by the prophesyings of HAGGAI AND ZECHA∣RIAH: O that such might be the blessed fruit of that abundance of GOSPEL-PROPHESIE which hath been preacht in the ears of Eng∣lands Parliament, since the time you were first engaged in this great Work, not onely of STATE, but of CHURCH-Reformation. Truely, my Lords, we desire to look upon your Call of us the poor Ministers of Christ to this Service, not a STATE-COMPLEMENT, but as your truelyActs. 17.11. NOBLE desires of consulting with the Oracles of God. And for a real evidence thereof, give me leave, I beseech you, to become an humble Petitioner to your Honors for two things.
First, that now you are in the work of
Temple-Reformation, you would provide an Antidote against Gospel-contempt, in some remarkable punishment to be inflicted upon Sermon scorners, especially when they shall dare such a wickednesse in the face of Heaven and earth, of God and the Church: since it cannot but be taken notice of by your Lordships, that there be some, who to this day hear Sermons, in the very same posture they were wont to see Stage-plays: to the infinite scandal of Religion, and provocation of Al∣mighty God.
Secondly, that in your own persons you will give a president to all the Kingdom of your willing and ready submission to the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST: With what eyes you are pleased to look upon the Ministers thereof, I know not; sure I am, whatever faithful ad∣vice in their humble Addresses to you hath the Imprimature of SCRIPTURE upon it, comes arm'd with the AUTHORITY OF HEAVEN; He that heareth YOU, heareth ME; and he that despiseth YOU, despiseth ME;Luke 10.16. and he that despiseth ME, despiseth HIM that SENT ME. Ʋpon such an account, it was an heavie word which the Prophet spake once to a King;
I know God hath determined to destroy thee, BECAUSE thou hast not hearkned to MY COUNSEL: The contemptible Prophet had no contemptible GOD to back him: The application of it be to the enemies of CHRIST, and of the WORK you have in hand. However, it is a thing not to be thought of with∣out trembling at; All power in heaven and earth is in HIS HANDS,Matth. 8.18. 2 Cor. 10.6. to avenge all Gospel-Disobedience, to WHOM great and small must give an account (and who knows how soon?) what they have done with all the Ser∣mons that ever they heard: Which that it may be seriously and savingly laid to heart by Parliament and Kingdom, shall be the instant Supplication of

