


SIR,
IT was by your hand I received the commands of that Honourable House, whereof your selfe are a Member, to Preach and Print these poor labours, long since; and therfore I hope I am so much the more capable of your pardon, if by the same hand, I crave the advātage to present thē to their favourable acceptatio: together with my humble Apologie, that I come so extreamely late with the tender of this service: occasi∣o'nd partly by the conscienciousnes of mine own weaknes; and partly by the crowdes of intervening distractions; through which at length I have forced my way, that I might no longer lie under the suspition of neglect to their Commands. To this, divine pro∣vidence hath added a new encouragement and
and advantage, and that in reference to your selfe; while in the interim of this ne∣cessitated suspension, some of these notions (lying by me) served to celebrate
In a day of thanks-giving kept at Lau∣rence Church London, for that purpose. Feb. 5. 1643. that great Victory and Deliverance (amongst ma∣ny others) which God gave into the hands of your fidelity and Zeal, against that for∣midable Armie of Rebels, at Namptwitch in Cheshire: so that now at length they come forth not as the Work only, but as the blessed returne and fruit of a day of prayer; then the travell, now the birth (or celebration) of a great, yea of many great, Deliverances, and Victories. So that concerning this Text and Sbject you may sing with the Church, Psal. 48. As we have heard, so have we seen: What you heard from this Text, and Sermon while you were here, that you have seen since your undertaking of this eminent Service for God and the Kingdome; Namely, that Gods Rising time is his Enemies Scattering time, his haters stying time; while in 22. Con∣flicts with the Enemie, you have bin Hono∣red with 18. Victories: all which, notwith∣standing, that you got not by your own Sword, neither did your own arm save you,
Psal. 44.2.3. but Gods right hand, and Gods arme, and the light of his
countenance, because he had a favour to you, and to those poor bleeding Counties; this may a bundantly evidence, that in all these bles∣sed successes, you have had no other Artilery, but what you have wrested by main strength of that Arme, out of the hands of those proud daring Rebels; and so David-like have you cut off Goliah's head with his own Sword: and the surviving Enemie may complain
Heu patior telis vulnera factameis. Certainly Sir, among all those Worthies who have been engaged in these Battels of the Lord of Hoasts now in these latter dayes, there is none that haue seen more of God, then your self have done; and without flat∣terie I speake it, I verily beleeve none have observed God more in the passages of his providence then your selfe. This, as it hath been your wisdome, and a Perspective glasse to discover the love of God to you, for whoso is wise,
Psal. 107. last. and will observe these things even they shall understand the loving kinde∣nesse of the Lord, So Sir, let it bee both an encouragement, and engagement, to carry you on in this Service, with invincible courage, and resolution.
It may be, after all the hazzards you have
run, and the exhausting of so fair a lively∣hood, as Providence had bequeathed you, in your Countrey and Kingdomes ser∣vice; and a long attendance here, you shall not return so accomplisht, as might answer your merits, or the just expectation of those gallant spirits which have accompanied, and served you in this Designe.
But let it not dishearten you, you return not without the amplest expression of the Parliaments affection, and Cities esteem, that these draining times, can possibly reach to: And let me tell you this; your second Expe∣dition, cannot be so unballa'st of second cau∣ses, as your first was; which yet you may Christen,
1 Sam. 17.12. as Samuel did his Victory over the Philistines; EBEN-EZER, hitherto hath God helped.
I must confesse Sir, your adventure seems somewhat like that, of that
Regulus. gallant Roman, who taken prisoner by the Athenians, and trusted upon his honour to go to Rome, and procure a peace, between the Romanes and them, or else to return to his imprisonment; upon the failing of that designe, scorn'd life and liberty, in respect of his honour, resol∣ving to return to death and torture at Athens,
rather then to out-live his honour at Rome.
But Sir, the more your hazzard is, the greater is your honour. When poverty, and obscurity, exposeth it self to a doubtfull danger, for publike safety, it is no great mat∣ter; miscariage it self, to a desperate condi∣tion is the cure of it's misery; what is it for lepers, hunger-starved lepers, to adventure on the enemies? If they kill us,
2 King. 7.4. wee shall but die, if we sit here, we shall die, if we enter in∣to the City, we shall die by famine; This is not resolution but necessity: but for one without the verge of danger, to interest and hazzard himself, in a publike reseue of Religion, and Countrey, is a character of true Fortitude.
Me thinks, I hear those bleeding Counties, crie unto you,
Josh. 10.6. as once the Gibeonites to Jo∣shua; Slack not thy hand, come down quickly and save us: and I know there is a Joshuah∣like spirit, both of compassion, and valour beating in your veines.
It was a life-breathing Motto, which the Israelites gave to God in their Warrs.

"Who among the gods is like unto thee,
Psal. 86.8. Je∣hovah! While their Souldiery, before their joyning battell with the enemie, encoura∣ged
one another thus, Trust in him, who is the Saviour of Israel in affliction: And this day thou fightest,
Judg. 6.14. pro confessione unita∣tis divinae; Therefore thou mayest carry thy life in thy hand securely: Words worthy to be engraven upon the palms of the hands, of all those, whither Commanders, or Soul∣diers, that fight the Lords battells.
But what shall I need to multiply words? Sir, you have exprest too much faith and re∣solution, to bee out-dared by any difficulty in the cause of God, and your Countrey.
Go, therefore, in this thy might, thou migh∣ty man; have not I sent thee, saith God? And let the sword of the Lord, and of Brereton, be as dreadfull, as once the sword of the Lord, and of Gideon, that you may smite your ene∣mies as one man.
Sir, while you are fighting abroad, this shall be the prayer of him, (among thou∣sands) at home, who humbly craves leave to let the World know he is,

