



HOnoured and worthy friends, these Sermons were yours from the Pulpit, and now they present themselves yours from the Presse; whither they were importuned by many of your selves and others, whose interest hath prevailed against mine own inclinations. I presume you will own them now, having first given them roome (I hope) in your hearts, you will not refuse them entertainment into your houses. They come out I must confesse very late, and the times are somewhat al∣tered since I preacht them to you. But the change of the times hath not lessened the encouragement and comfort they hold forth to you, and the rest of the King∣dome:
our hopes still are infinitely above our feares; because our feares are but from dying men, but our hopes are in and from the living God, who is working out his own glorious Ends by the desperate oppositions and resistances of his implacable Enemies: this cals for dutie at our hands; for if God support our hopes against all oppositions, it is our turn to maintaine duty against all temptations; these Sermons presse this also upon you; by the perusall whereof I desire your memo∣ries may be revived, your Affections edged, your hearts engaged, and your hands strengthned to all the duties God and the times call for; you had need to bestirre your selves, the enemies doe, and there is a curse issu∣ed out from the Angel of the Lord against all those that go not forth to the help of the Lord against the mightie;
Judg. 5.23. it is not enough not to help the mightie against the Lord; Neuters are enemies in Christs Catalogue;
Matth. 12.30. He that is not with me, is against me; and I would not have your Names there for a thousand worlds. Expect not a second service before you do any thing; he that will doe nothing now, will doe nothing then; or if he would, perhaps God then will have none of his help. The Lord loves a cheerefull giver; Speed will double your contributions, and make not the Kingdome only, but God your debtour; who would not be ambitious to be first to lay hold on such an advan∣tage? that man consults shame and ruine to himselfe and family, who having silver, gold, plate, &c. lying by him shall hazard King and Kingdome, Religion and Lawes, and a Parliament that sweats and con∣flicts for the preservation of all, rather than he will see his cupboard unfurnish't, a bag or two lie emptie, or an
abatement in his accompts: and if all should miscarry (which God forbid) in the mid'st of publike combustion, there is a Rust that will be Gods Witnesse and Execu∣tioner too, when Conscience shall cry,
Jam. 5.1.2.3. I have seen a Kingdome perish to spare that which given or lent might have saved me and the Kingdome: but kept, can serve for no other use new but to burne my flesh as it were fire.
But I am perswaded better things of you, and things that accompany Salvation (your own and the Kingdomes) though I thus speake.
Your enlarged bowels of Compassion towards ma∣ny of the Servants of Jesus Christ, both Ministers, and others, especially to your poore, naked, hungry brethren in Ireland, exprest in such a liberall contribution to their necessities, is gone forth into many places of the Kingdome, and hath provoked others to emulation and hath abounded also by many thanksgivings unto God,
2 Cor. 9.12. and I cannot beleeve that you whose bowels would not suffer you to see a few of your poore brethren perish for want of succour, can find in your heart to see your Mother the Church and Common-wealth in danger of miscarrying, and not even emptie your purses and your selves for a timely prevention of so unconceive∣able an evill. I know your hand hath not been out of any designe for publike good; and it is already I presume engaged in this service (as you are taught of God to doe it) but with the Apostles, I beseech you brethren that you abound more and more: If your Peace, Ho∣nour, Gaines were not bound up in this service,
1 Thes. 1.9.10. I would have held my peace, but your love to me, and Enter∣tainment of my Ministery commands me to studie your
advantage,
Phil. 4.17. and to desire fruit that may abound to your account: God that hath given many of you Estates, hath not, will not deny you hearts. You are deare unto me, and therefore I desire you may be not only good, but Exemplary in Goodnesse: not only blessed, but a bles∣sing in the mid'st of the Citie and Kingdome: which that you may be, shall be the enlarged prayer of him that is

