



BRethren, beloved in the Lord: when the providence of our God had brought me a prisoner unto London, it cam to passe, that almost as soon as I came into Pri∣son, there appeared a book intituled, The Dipper Dpt, &c. which when I had seene, I did presently hold my selfe in du∣ty engaged to defend the truth, against the Adversary. The Booke of what temper it is, you know. But non licet nobis esse tam disertis, we may not give railing for railing: we have not so learned Christ: The Book it great, yet we found the whole strength of it to lye in ten Arguments, which are brought for the justification of Childrens Baptisme. I shall let all other things passe, as unworthy of an Answer, and addresse my selfe unto the answer of these onely. I did prof∣fer to dispute the ten Arguments with him face to face; the first whereof we did debate, and account thereof is given: That we went no farther this is the reason: Some worshipfull Gentlemen desiring to hear, I was very willing. But the Dr. would not admit of them, without an Order from the State; but would only debate the matter in private, and not in pre∣sence of (only) 4 auditors. And whilst these things were thus in debate, I received a Message from him by the mouth of a brother, that if I would write, he would defend his Argu∣ments. I have now written as briefely as I could, and yet as largely as the time would permit.
I have joyned with him Master Marshalls look concer∣ning the Baptisme of Infants, which I had taken into my
hands to examine) whilst I was a prisoner in Cambridge: And now finding these two to joyne together, in this one thing, and to use for the most part the same Arguments, I have joyned them in the Answer. As for their Replies un∣to our Objections, I meddle not with, but leave them to o∣thers. It will be a sufficient taske for me to shew, that their building is upon the sand. I present this Treatise unto you, desiring your favourable correction, if in any thing I have swerved from the truth. If you should bee pleased to com∣mand my pen further, unto this or unto another more weigh∣ty subject; which calls for all our labours, viz. That the efficacy, and extent of Christs death may appeare unto the world, which yet in grtat part lyes hidden and obscure. I shall be willing to stoop unto your command herein, and en∣deavour to become your fervant in the Lords worke: provi∣ded that you all assist me with a plentifull streame of your prayers, that wisedome may be given unto me, that so great a work may be carried and managed by the power of the Spi∣rit of God, that gain sayers may have their mouthes for e∣ver stopped. Brethren farewell. The grace of our Lord Iesus Christ be with you all. Amen.
From Prison in the Lord Peters house. Febr. 22. 1634.

