



Worthy and well-beloved Friends,
THE death of a faithfull Minister the Gospel is no small
losse unto a people, e∣specially when the spi∣rit of errour and se∣duction is gone out into the world: It is like the taking off a Shepherd from his Flock, when the Wolves are abroad; or, the Hen from her Chic∣kens, when the birds of prey are upon the wing: It is like the removing of a Watch-man from his Watch-Tower, when the enemy is upon his march; a skilful Pilot from the Helm, or, the Helm from the Ship, in the midst of a tempestuous and a flu∣ctuating
Sea; like the slaughter of a General in the head of his Army, when the Enemy is ready to Charge. Surely none of these are of more fatal influence in the affairs of the worldly state, then the other of the Evangelical.
In such a juncture of time hath God taken a∣way from your head that Precious and Worthy Ser∣vant of His, your late Reverend and Faithful Pastor, Mr. GUALTER ROSWELL; whose e∣minent abilities, unwea∣ried labours, in publick,
and in private; impar∣tial fidelity, and com∣passionate spirit over pe∣rishing sinners; and, in a word, his great inte∣grity in all his ministe∣rial out-goings before you; I humbly conceive there are none among you but will thankfully acknow∣ledge, unless such (pos∣sibly) whom either erro∣neous principles, or loose practises, occasioned to look upon him, as their
Gal. 4.16. An expe∣ctas ut Quintilia∣nus ame∣tur? Enemy.
That this Lot may not be of so fatal consequence unto you, accept I beseech
you a few Advices from him that loveth you.
In the first place,  Be deeply sensible of your Loss. Truly your Loss is great; and unsensi∣bleness, will be the ag∣gravation of it: while your loss is but your af∣fliction, unsensiblenesse will be your sin. A sin which God severely ani∣madverts, though it do but relate to Saints of a more private station; The righteous perisheth, and no man layeth it to heart, and merciful men are taken away, none
considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come.
Isa. 57.1.
This,
Jer. 22.15, 16. 2 Chron. 34.3.35.23, 24. some restrain to the person of JOSIAS, That righteous and mer∣ciful Prince: but, the words seem more general; being taken collectively, as Ps. 11.5. And, without que∣stion, MANY godly ones, of that age, were taken a∣way by a premature death, and that, in a judicial se∣verity to the surviving ge∣neration of the profane & hypocritical Israelites: who in the mean time gave themselves to secu∣rity,
letting themselves loose to all sensual exces∣ses, And that, as it were under the protection of divine patience; taking Gods silence for Gods consent, and his long-suffering towards them, as an infallible evidence of his approbation of their wickednesses.
Now, if it were such a sin to over-look Provi∣dence in the death of righteous and merciful men, what an aggrava∣tion of guilt is it, to be blind to the severer dis∣pensations of justice, in
the untimely death, of righteous and merciful Ministers, whose lives are of a more publick and Ʋniversal influence! Surely to shut our eyes a∣gainst such signal indici∣ums of divine displea∣sure, is highly provoking to God; and may justly bring a people, or a per∣son, within the verge of that tremendous curse. Because they regard not the works of the Lord,
Psal. 28.5. nor the operation of his hands, he will de∣stroy them and not build them up.

Secondly,  Lay to heart your great unthankful∣ness and unfruitfulness under such precious in∣fluences. I am afraid, while some did despise his excellent labours, few did value them at a due rate. While some were fruitful onely in the works of the flesh, not many did answer Gods expectations,
Gal 5 2. in the fruits of the spirit.
I accuse none, I caution all; that while (possibly) you enquire into the cause of such an unexpected stroke, every one may

1 King. 8.47.  If they re∣turn to their heart. bethink themselves, and cry with the Disciples, Lord, is it I? Ah! Lord, was my murmuring, my unthankfulness, my un∣answerable conversation, my unrighteous opposi∣tion, &c. the cause of this sore displeasure? That which I see not,
Job 34.3. shew thou me; and, if I have done wickedly, I will do so no more.
Thirdly,  Seek the face of God in fasting and prayer, TOGETHER and APART,
Zech. 12 12. for the attoning of his favour, and the recruiting of your
loss.
Numb. 2.14. Had but her Fa∣ther spit in her face; should she not be asha∣med seven daies? Said God to Moses concerning his murmuring Sister. Dear Christians, God hath done more then spit in your face,
Hos. 6.13. Bern. told his bro∣ther, A rough hewen souldier, slighting his re∣proofes, pointing to his side, One day a Spear shall make way to thine heart, for counsel to enter. in this sad dis∣pensation; he hath smit∣ten you, and made him sick in smiting you; God, by this wound make way for his word to enter into your hearts. You have cause to lye in the dust, & shame your selves in Gods presence; as to deprecate (with tender-hearted Jo∣siah,)
the wrath of God; so to get your breach repair∣ed. And surely the recruit of such a loss is worth ma∣ny daies of humiliation: and the Lord accept of your faces in Christ.
I would faign have the name of Him, that shall be your Minister,
1 Sam. 1.20.  q.  Asked, or Lent of Cod. be SAMUEL. Holy Hannah will expound to you the mystery; She called her son Samuel; and why? Because, said she, I as∣ked him of the Lord. This will be your comfort and your honour; That, when you see a faithfull
Minister in your Pulpit, you may be able to say, This is He, whom we have begged of God: A mercy got by prayer, is a double mercy: a blessing and the return of prayer too; which, whatever the blessing be, is twice so much.
Fourthly,  And, that you may prosper in your choice, let me humbly begg of you, to forget all your own private opinions and differences; Divi∣sions have been the sad obstructions of Englands Reformation and Settle∣ment: I am confident
had it not been for our un∣happy dissents, and more unhappy dissentions, Eng∣land had been the most glorious people upon the face of the earth, since Christ and his Apostles left the world: For the divisions of Reuben are great searchings of heart. Of which we may say as it was said once of the contentions between the Reformed Churches in Luthers time;
Dissensus condonart potest, modo adsit fides in Christo; Dissensio∣nes vero, neque si∣sanguinem fundamus, expiabi∣mus. Me∣lanct. to Luther. Our DIS∣SENTS had been par∣donable (I speak in or∣der to matters of Disci∣pline,) through faith in Christ; but, as for our
DISSENTIONS, all the blood in our veins will never wash off the guilt.
It is time for Christians to close, and to make up their breaches. Is not Religion, tantum non, destroyed by our divisi∣ons? Ah! that all such as love Jesus Christ in CHATHAM would here in be exemplary; that you would lay by all your differences, and animosi∣ties, and unite, as one man, in this work, where∣in the glory of God, the honour of the Gospel, your good, and the good of your posterity is so highly con∣cerned;
the choise of a Minister. And, for the guiding of your choise, propound to your selves, I beseech you, some such Scripture-qualifications; as follow.
1. Let him be a learn∣ed man: I am confident it is one of the policies of Antichrist amongst us, To cry down learning, as knowing that an ignorant and illiterate Ministry would easily betray the Protestant Religion into his hands; Who should not be able to discover their impostures, nor evade their Sophistry. I do
verily believe none are enemies to learning,
Latrones prius lam∣padem ex∣tinguunt & tunc latroci∣nantur. but such as are friends to that design. Moses was skil'd in all the learning of the Egyptians; Saint Paul brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, and, verst in Heathen learn∣ing; he was able to con∣fute them out of their own
Aratus. Act. 17.28. Anacrcon. 1 Cor. 15.32. Menader. vers. 33. Epimenides Tit 1.12 Whom the Cre∣tians cal∣led a Pro∣phet. Poets. The Pontificians have felt the dint of your Learned-Protestant Ad∣versaries sword; and, therefore, now would act the Philistines plot upon us,
1 Sam. 13.19. that there should be no Smith found in all
these three Nations; lest they should make them∣selves swords and spears, weapons of defence, and offence, to stand up a∣gainst their Babylonian forces. At least, it is ig∣norance that loves igno∣rance, and errour that shuns the light.
Secondly,  He must be also a man of a sound judgement, and well verst in the Controversies of the times, that so he may not only, be able to preach truth; but, to confute er∣rour,
Tit. 1.9. and convince the gain-sayer: One that may
be able to stop the mouth of seducers;
. to
Tit. 1.11. muz∣zle them (as the word signifieth) that they may not, boldly,
The De∣vils words to Him were these; What stand I talking with thee? All men know thou art bold Rothwell, and fea∣rest no bo∣dy, nor carest for words; therefore I will talk with thee no more. See the life of Mr. Roth∣well, set forth by M. S. Clerk. and blasphe∣mously, bark against the truth. Such an one was your late, and worthy, ROSWELL; the ham∣mer of the Hereticks, of this generation: The He∣reticks were as much a∣fraid of his name, as the Devil in poor possessed JOHN FOX of Not∣tingham-shire was lately of a man of a like name, and Spirit; famous ROTHWELL.

Thirdly,  Be sure to make choice of an holy man; a man whose life may be a Continual Sermon; that may teach by his conversation as well as by his doctrine. He hath no life in his doctrine that hath not doctrine, in his life: Nay, there is not a readier way to make men turn Atheists, then for a Minister to preach strictly, and live loosely: Men will believe their eyes, rather then their ears;
Vivitur exemplo. and are lead by ex∣ample rather then by pre∣cept; whereby it cometh
to pass that the sins of the teachers are the teachers of sin.
Fourthly,  Make choise of a man of an healing Spirit; to which is re∣quired much prudence and integrity. Prudence; every fool can make divisions; it is onely the wise man that can make them up. And there must be integrity too, least, in∣stead of healing divisions, he comply with mens lusts, and serve the in∣terest of the Devil, rather then of Jesus Christ: as too many of our times do,
who would have the repute of sweet-spirited men.
Fifthly, A man there∣fore of gravity and expe∣rience would be much desired among you.  Quick∣ness of fancy, is rarely joined (especially in young men) with soundness of judgment: He that will do good in CHATHAM must carry some authority in his very person.
Whether my advice to you in these particu∣lars may not come too late, I know not; if you have prevented me herein, I shall count it la∣bour
well lost: if not, I pray God, it may be a labour well bestowed. And, The God of the Spirits of all flesh set SUCH A MAN over your Congregation,
Numb. 27.16, 17. that may go in and out before you: that the Con∣gregation of the Lord (e∣ven while you may have a preacher) may not be as sheep without a shepherd.
Fifthly, For his bet∣ter encouragement,  raise a competent provision for his comfortable subsi∣stence: that while he should be studying for
your Souls, he may not be distracted with cares for his own Family.
It is the divinity of our times, That the Mini∣sters of the Gospel must live upon the Contribu∣tions of the people; the people may indent with him for his work, but he must not indent with them for his wages; he must be bound, but they be free: and I would they were free indeed. An ex∣pedient, which these times have found out, to tye up the Ministers tongue un∣der their girdles: flatte∣rers
by this means may, probably, scrape out a live∣lyhood; but, faithful ones (without special provi∣dence) are likely to be ster∣ved; They hate him that reproveth in the gate.
It is in the power of your hand to prevent this mischief. I know not any Congregation, of that qua∣lity, in England, wherein it is a matter of more faci∣lity, & less charge, to raise up a liberal subsistence for a faithful Minister, then your CHATHAM is. (I know what I say;) Worthy Friends, make not
your Minister an Almes∣man, that the poor man dare not to reprove sin lest one of my Masters withdraw his contribu∣tion. In this sence I would have him be an In∣dependent; that he may speak the truth of God without fear.
Sixthly,  Forget not the labour of love, and the work of faith, of Him that now is at rest with God: His dear and pre∣cious Relicts are yet with you; what He is not ca∣pable of in person, pay un∣to his posterity: It is
but a small matter, when you have reapt of the Fa∣thers Spirituals, that his Orphan-Family partake of your temporals: He was content to leave them poor, that he might make you rich; in the midst of your riches, let not his precious relations remain poor.
Lastly, my request to you is, That you will own this vindication of his great faithfulness and in∣tegrity among you; and give it a room in your houses, and in your hearts. Surely, you have the most
right to this dedication, of any people in the world; in the service of whose faith he spent his Estate, and Himself to boot. Ac∣cept it, as a Testimony of my dear and deserved re∣spect to the Dead, and of my tender affection to the living; And the Lord add his own blessing: That the fruit of these poor la∣bours may be abundant, by many Thanks-givings, to the glory of God. So Prayeth

