



Noble and worthy Commissioners.
THis Covenant, so unanimously, so re∣ligiously entred into, by the Honour∣able Houses of Parliament, and Reve∣rend Assembly, (Gods two faithfull Witnesses now in England) as by your selves also, was afterward sent to the City; where, amongst the rest of the Ministers, I was to take my share in preparing the people. The Work being so solemn and great, I bethought my self how I might best serve this blessed De∣sign; The time gave me some advantage, it fal∣ling in the course of my Ministry, to preach thrice between the Warning and the Taking. I engaged my thoughts (distractions will hardly al∣low me to say, Studies) wholly upon this Work; and (blessed be God) not without much encou∣ragement: The readinesse I found in the People
to close with the invitation of God and Parliament, expressing it self, not onely in the multitudes, but in the affections of them that offered themselves to this Service, made visible in tears of joy.
Yet when I had Preacht my Sermons, and ad∣mred the Covenant, I found I had not done my work. Importunity prest me to make my thoughts publike; and consulting with the ne∣sitice of the multitudes of poor ignorant Peo∣ple, that want a Teaching Minister, while the Kingdom waits for the Covenant, rather then with mine own unfitnesse, I was not disobedient to the Motion: I had rather appear in my weaknesse, then nwillingnesse to serve the publike good. Thou∣sands of the poor untaught people, will be glad of this help, the knowing will not despise it, if ; if otherwise, they shall trouble them∣selves, more then me.
And now Right noralde and Reverend, These poor endeavours, such as they are, make hold to present themselves unto you: Streams do naturally run back into the Bosom from whence they issued. God hath pleased to onour your Nation in making them the First-fruits, and Pattern of a Through∣. to Ʋs, and all the rest of the . This Covenant received its first
life in Scotland, though it came to its first breathing in England. You sent it not with more affection, then it was entertained with gladnesse and joy, by our Worthy Parliament and Learned Assembly; and although with some small Additions, yet such, as did rather render it, more it self, then vary it.
I shall not need to beg your Patronage for my Self or Labours, in promoting this Service, The Oath of God is upon you; whereby we are con∣tented to confesse, what in your patheticall Let∣ter to our Assemblie, you were pleased upon other respects to acknowledge, That your Assistance, is become your Debt, To all that enter into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and per∣suance thereof: To the payment whereof, Your selves are already come through a painfull and hazardous travell, to joyn your Learned Assistance, with our Faithfull Assembly; to which, your pre∣sence addes both strength and Ornament: while Thousands of your Nation are preparing their Brotherly addresses, to pay the same Debt to the whole Kingdom, now almost in as great an exi∣gence, as once the Gibeonites were, when their five Kings, with all their united forces were with∣in few dayes march, to take a bloody and unnaturall revenge, for their entring into Covenant with Joshua.

Onely, We beseech you account it not our distrust or jealousie, if sometime you hear us com∣plaining with the Mother of Sisera, Why are their Charrets so long in coming; Why stay the Wheels of their Charrets?
We know the Mercy and Righteousnesse of Jo∣shuah dwels in your Bosoms, which cannot suffer you to deny or delay that Assistance to your Bre∣thren, whom you have invited into the League and Covenant of God upon so fair and honourable termes, which Joshuah durst not deny unto the enemies of God and his people, Because they had sworn unto them by the Lord God of Israel, Josh. 9.19. Although by a Serpentine wilienesse they had wound themselves into that Association. Jo∣shuahs Conscienciousnesse of that Obligation, carried Him and his Army all night to the rescue of the Gileoniles, Josh. 10.9. And truely, we doubt not, but your endernesse of this Oath of God, between England and Scotland, had before this time brough in your prepared forces, to the succour of your end ngered Brethren, had not our Creature-considence, unthankefulnesse, and other hidden Remors, hung at the Keel and Bottome of this Expedition.
The Searcher of Hearts, and Father of Mercies,
discover, and remove the accursed thing, whatso∣ever it is, That it may no longer obstruct their timely approach, nor render it, when it comes, unanswerable to our fainting Expectations. The Lord of Hosts, bring in your Forces, and come in with them; his Terrour go before them, and his Glory be their Rereward; So shall they like a Ma∣hanaim, the Host of God, be a dread to the Ene∣mies, a Reviving to the languishing hopes of Gods people, and a powerfull means to assist our Parliament and Armies, in the setling of that blessed Peace and Reformation; for which, both the Nations have Lifted up their Hands to the most High God.
Sirs, In the midst of all these Calls and Ex∣pectations, pardon, and own me, if I humbly claim my share for my Self, and poor Endeavours, both which, he cordially devotes to yours, and the Kingdoms service, who is

