


MErcies are obligations to dutie; Eve∣ry Deliverance writes us Debtor, and victorie over our Enemies, ser∣vants to the living God. It is good to receive a blessing, but it is bet∣ter to use it well; And a thankfull heart is a greater Favour, then any outward Favour for which we give thankes. When the hand of provi∣dence workes gloriously with us, our Tongues should ren∣der the providence of God glorious. Successes and E∣vents cannot make a bad Cause just or good: But they make a good Cause beautifull, and adde lustre to the Iu∣stice of it. Though God should not goe forth with our
 Armies (as sometimes he did not with the Armies of his people) but should make them turne their back upon the enemie: though he should make us a re∣proachPsal 44. to our neighbours, and a derision to them that are round about us, though he should smite us into the place of Dragons, and cover us with the shadow of death, yet we ought not to forget his name or deale falsely in his Covenant: Yea, wee ought to blesse his Name, and give him thankes, that he hath laid our bones, and powred our bloud into the Foundation of so honourable a worke. It is a sinne and a shame not to honour Christ, when in his work, we are put to shame: How shamefull then would our sinne be, if we should not honour him, while he gives us honour, in carrying on his worke? There is nothing more undu∣tifull then for a people to humble God, while God, is ex∣alting them. Not to acknowledge mercies, is at least an humbling, if it be not an Abasing of God.
Wherefore (Honoured Senators) let your hearts be ever lifted up, in the waies of God, and let God be lif∣ted up, in all your hearts. Let your pietie be as zealous (in keeping dayes of praise and thanksgiving) to record blessings, as it hath bin (in keeping daies of Prayer and Fasting) to procure them. God could tell the sraclites in the Booke of Judges, how often and from what ene∣mies
 by name, he had delivered them. Let your records be as exact in this point (to the best of your observati∣on) as Gods are. He knowes still, when, and what vi∣ctories he gives; he knowes by whom, and over whomChap. 10. he gives them. Let your registers be as counterpanes of those reserved in heaven, yea, as the copies of all those volumes of love, and care which God hath transcribed from that originall of his secret counsels, by the visible hand and pen of providence, in the actions of these latter dayes. They that retaine the memorie of mercies, seldome loose the fight of mercies: and God never breaks off (for evill) from doing them good, who speake good of his name. How many successes, what victories have been given you, since you paid this debt of praise? You and we have had joy upon joy; then add Thankfulnes to Thank∣fulnesse, till yours and our joyes be full. This filling up the Nation joy, is, and (Christ assisting) shall be the great desire and earnest prayer of

