



THese are times of Action, as well as of Consulation; and this hath been your happinesse, that while you have been consulting how to settle and assure (as an earthly felicity may be called sure) peace and Government at home, God hath prospered those with a very signall successe, who are acting in a war abroad. And though successe be no in∣fallible
 argument of a good cause, yet a good cause receives a very comfortable encouragement by successe. And as a neglect to goe on in doing good is not excusable, even while we find that the good we are doing, doth not goe on; So when it doth, our neglect is altogether inexcusable. When God seems to stand still or (as the Scripture some∣times saith) to be a sleep, 'tis our duty to a∣wake and work, how much more when he ap∣pears eminently awake and at work for us? 'Tis not good to out-run providence, and 'tis as bad to loyter and lagge behind it. The Arme of the Lord (as the Prophet long since prayd hard it might, Isa: 51. 9.) hath lately awakened for us (The occasion of this Sermon is his wit∣nesse) it hath awakened and put on strength as in the ancient dayes, in the generations of old, it hath cut Rahab and wonded the Dragon in the Sea; It hath broken (some of) the heads of Leviathan in peices, and given him to be meat to his people inhabiting the wildernesse (Psal. 74. 14.) And is not all this bottome enough for me to cry, Awake, Awake O arme of man, O arme of the Parliament put on strength and be cloathed with a holy care & courage for God and for his people, though as yet but in a
 wildernes condition, wherein we are much entan∣gled with bryars and thornes, and sometimes en∣gaged in unbeaten paths? many thousands will bear this witnesse with me, that it is. And my hearts desire and prayer to God for you is, That your Counsels both in reference to this par∣ticular mercy for which you have so solemnly gi∣ven thanks to God, as also in reference to all those important affairs of these Nations that are in your hands, may bear this witnesse also. Else I must take the boldnes (with much submission) to say, That your own Thanksgivings will give witnesse against you.
'Tis an act of high favour from God to bestow a mercy, and 'tis an act of much grace and faith∣fulnesse in man to improve it. 'Tis easier perish∣ing for want of help from God, then for want of a heart for God. 'Tis better to be in such streights, that we know not what to doe, then to make such little use of our enlargements, as not to doe what we know. And what an Obligation is there upon these three Nations, and upon your Selves, especi∣ally, who are the representative of them, to be more then active, even very zealous for the pub∣lick good, seing we daily find Sons of Beliall rising up, who are active to the utmost against it?
 Tis honorable to imitate their industry, whose un∣dertakings we abhor, and that their zeal in a bad matter should provoke ours in a good. As there∣fore the Nations have reason to pay you many thanks for your unwearied labours, and the issues of them to this day, So the Lord give you to en∣crease more and more▪ A good man may be wea∣ry in well doing, but he shall never be weary of it. And it should mightyly uphold our spirits not to be▪ (as the Apostle admonisheth the Galatians Chap: 6. 9.) weary in well doing: because (as it follows there) we shall reap if we faint not. That you may sow without fainting, and reap with rejoycing, is the vote of
SIRS,

