



THé light of the Gospel is as the Sun which shines more and more unto the perfect day.Eo hominem virtute prae∣stantē sub ve∣hit ut non ante ascendendi finē faciat, quam ad summum illud praestantissi∣mum{que} lumen pervenit. Dr Jermin out of Nazianzen. Knowlegde shall cover the earth, as waters theHab. 2.14. Sea. The light of theIsa. 30.26. Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun as the light of seven dayes. Now, if ever, are these Scrip∣tures fullfilling, a great light appeares, and in the midst of this light you are not in darknesse, but2 Pet. 1.19. the day-starre is risen in your bearts: Oh shut not your eyes against any truth of God, rest not in the things you have received, but2 Pet. 3.18 grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of Christ.1 Tim. 1.19. Many there are who of faith make shipwrack. Try1 Thes. 5.21. all things, but hold fast that which is good: You have for∣merly honoured mee with your attention when I was present among youAt Barnes in Surrey.,And you were mem∣bers of my Congrega∣tion. you were indeed the fairest flowers in my gar∣den, and much encouragement I received from you in my Ministry, for which I blesse God, and you, and for all the favours you have shewed mee: Be pleased now to per∣use these notes, which I acknowledge un∣worthy your piercing and judicious eyes: The subject of these Sermons is Christ in his beauty,Effluens ple∣nus manet. Theophylact. shedding his rayes of glory on all that stand round about him; This should be1 Cor. 2.2. the subject of all our Sermons, who are the Messiahs Paranymphs2 Cor. 5.20., under-sui∣tors for Christ: 'Tis a mercy to enjoy the light of the SunOf old it grew into a Proverb, Sati∣us esse solē non lucere, quam Chrysostomum non docere. much more the bright beames of Gospel-Discoveries. Let us walk in this light, and live up to it, let us prize it, and rejoyce in it: Now the good Lord bring your hearts more and more in love with Christ, and helpe you so to live in him, and to him now, that shortly you may enjoyGaudium in fine, sed sine fine. Bern. de divers. 19. endlesse felicity in his bo∣some; This shall be his prayer for you that is.
Novemb. 4. 1648.

