


My much honored Lord and Lady,
GOD hath said, He will honour those that honour him1 Sam. 2.30.. This is made good concerning you: The Lord hath shed much honour upon you, that you may the more honour himTh. Gataker his parley with Princes, p. 76.. It is matter of equity you should ho∣nour God more then others, see∣ingQuid aequi∣us, quid justi∣us quam ut vos honoran∣tem honoret is ipsi. above others he hath honou∣red you; and this is true and la∣sting policie: For the Lord can make great,Quod illo dint sit no∣strum nobis su∣perbientibus sit alienum. Aug. Hom. 14. and unmake at plea∣sure; it is in Him to set up, or
pull downe. TrueNobilitas summa est at{que} unica virtus. Juven. Sat. 8. Nobility hath Vertue and Grace for its chiefe in∣gredients.Acts 17.11. Twas this made the Be∣reans noble.Isai. 43.4.Since thou wast pretious in my sight, thou hast been honourable, and I have loved thee (saith the Lord to his poore Church.) But as the Lapwing hath a crown upon his head, and yet feeds on dung: so ma∣ny who are invested with the Robe of Honour, live uworthily: faults are not onely sooner espied, but areMonstrosa res est sedes prima vita ima. Bern. more odious in great ones then in others. Again,Nobilis gene∣re, nobilior sanctitate. Aug. Epist. 179. how beau∣tifull is Grace hanging in the bo¦some of Honour? What oppor∣tunities have such for well-doing? How wil their example win others? How glorious is it to be honoura∣ble in the eyes of God and good men?1 Cor. 1.26.Not many Noble are called, and therefore how doe the graces of the Spirit shine out in such? Be perswaded to count this your greatest honour to study the things of etrnity, to countenance Religion more and more, and tol Minime Deus est acceptor personarum, nescio tamen quo pacto vir∣ts in nobili plus placet, an forte quia plus claret? &c. Bern. ad So∣phim. virg.
lay forth your selves for the king∣dome of Christ, that so you may move in the highest Spheare of your power for GOD and his people, and then your Name shall be sweet to posterity, and the foundation of your House shall be laid sure.
But pardon me (Right Honou∣rable) why doe I perswade you to that which I know is the great de∣signe of your hearts, and the busi∣nesse of your lives? You are pre∣tious in Gods eyes, you are zea∣ous for his glory; and I wish that ll our Nobility and Gentry were uch as you are. You have appeared or God in the worst of timesThe true Diamond shines best in the dark., ou have been for God in tempests s well as calmes, in foule weather s well as faire: you have stood up or the truth when others have ood up against itNon tam vos quam Christum in vobis perse∣quuntur. Sal∣vian de Prov. lib. 8., and you see  is not in vain to side with God. hat wonders, what miracles ath God wrought in our dayes? our comfort lies here, that you
have acted cordially and unweari∣edly in the work: you have stood for the truth, and the truth hath stood for you. Now the Lord root you in the truth, and in the love of it, that youMatth. 7.25. may be bot∣tom'd on the Rock Jesus Christ,1 Cor. 15.50 and so be stedfast and unmoveable, al∣wayes abounding in the work of the Lord. O taste and see how good the Lord is to you, and his people that trust in him. EndeavourOrigo fonti∣um omnium mire, bonorum omnium Deus. Bern. in Cantto taste God in your mercies, and to get a spirituall Relish of that Divine sweetnesse that is in Christ: It is my humble desire to assist your ho∣nours in this great work, by these rude Notes which I here present unto you, wherein the Spirituall taste is opened and applied, besee∣ching your Honours to vouchsafe the perusall, acceptation and pro∣tection of this book. Three things command and encourage me to lay these Notes at your feet. 1. That experience which you have in Spi∣rituall things, whereby you can
judge of Divine truths, and delight in them. 2. That earnest desire which I have of making some pub∣lick acknowledgements of your great & undeserved favours to me, seeing it is not in my power to re∣taliate. 3. That confidence I have of your pardon for this my bold∣nesse, and acceptance of these poor endeavours; because Goodnesse and Greatnesse, Clemency and E∣minency doe meet in your bosoms and kisse each other. And thus commending you to God,Acts 20.38.and the word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and give you an inheritance among them that are sanctified, I rest,
Novemb. 14. 1648.

