



May it please your Honours,
THE Lord having fixed my Meditations on the Do∣ctrine of Angelicall De∣putation, and now by his Providence calling them to the Light, that they may be weighed in the Ballance of this discerning Age;
Your Honours may justly excuse this my Dedication therof to your Perusal & Pro∣tection: The Lord hath made you eminent∣ly active, and instrumentall in your se∣verall Capacities and Places for the Pro∣motion of his Glory: Yee have been the faithfull Friends and vigilant Protectors of this Isle, and so have been employed in Angelicall Services; Many Favours also yee have multiplyed on the unworthy Author of this poor Treatise. Go on, Right Honourable, to do worthily for Sion; to undermine Atheisme, Profaness, and Heresie, and whatsoever is contrary to sound Doctrine and the power of Godli∣ness, and the grand interest of CHRIST. Learning and Religion do begin once more to lift up their Heads; sober and unbyass'd Christians do bless GOD for the last great Change of Civil-admini∣strations;August. de Civ. Dei lib. 1. Cap. 7. I may say of it what Austine spake of a particular Passage of Divine Providence, Quisquis non videt, cae∣cus; Quisquis videt nec laudat, ingratus; Quisquis laudanti relu∣ctatur
insanus. By it an happy Period was set to very strange Designs, our Li∣berties and Properties secured, the Ʋni∣versities and faithfull Ministers not a lit∣tle encouraged; Peace concluded with the Nether-lands, and many Nations who scorned us before, do now apply themselves by Agents and Ambassadors unto us; Nay, the Heavens also have Relented, and af∣ter a very long and growing Drought, have rained Corn, Milk, and Honey up∣on us; and who questions but now our Burdens and Taxes will be lessened? and that by degrees, somthing will be done to∣wards the building of the Temple; viz. The curbing of insolent Hereticks and the setling of Doctrine and Discipline in the Church: So that we see it is never in vain to depend on God, who can bring Light out of Darkness, and saith to the proud Waves, Thus far and no farther! John Baptist the Voice was a breeding when Zachary was Dumb; Mans ex∣tremity is the Lords opportunity. Most men now are of his opinion, who said,
Parliaments, if frequent, are good Physick, if continuall, are bad food: They are Bona peritura, and like stand∣ing Pools, they cannot keep long without Corruption, and an ill Cream of Selfish∣ness and Faction. Experience also hath shewed, that the same persons who con∣temn the Ministry and cannot indure sound Doctrine, but heap unto themselves Teachers after their own lust; are also Despisers of all Superiority and Govern∣ment Politicall. But whither is my Cock∣boat floating? the whole Fabrick is little and despicable, the Poarch therefore may not be to great: The good Lord encourage your Hearts and strengthen your Hands, that yee may be Patrons of Virtue and Patterns of Piety. So wishes and prayes,

From my Stu∣dy in Brixton, Iune 1654.
