



SIR,
MEn of your profession have beene Lovers of Learning; Rudis miles ad Bellum con∣currit, qui cau∣sam Beili igno∣rat. Tacitus. And Great Souldiers have beene good Scholers. Moses, the Leader of Israel, was skill'd in all the Learning of the Aegyptians. Aristot. Rhet. lib. 5. Alexander was so book∣ish, that he sent for the Works of Philistus into Greece, being gone so far in Asia, that Books
were wanting: Also it is said of him, that Homer was still un∣der his Pillow, when he slept. Julius Caesar; a great Con∣queror, and as great a Scholer, witnesse his Commentaries. I need not tell you, that in our Nation, Waterhouse Apol. for lear∣ning. 127, 128. Edward the 3d. Henry the Eighth, Sir Philip Sidney, Sir Walter Raleigh, and Harding the Historian, (besides many others) were excellent both for Learning and Valour; and could equally handle both the Sword & Pen. Nihil firmius, faelicius, lauda∣bilius que Republica, in qua a∣bundant milites eruditi, saith Vegetius de Re nal. lib. 1. Vegetius. All which I
mention to provoke our Mili∣tary Worthies to the Love of the Muses. And, thanks be to GOD, Religion and Learn∣ing do grow every Day more and more in request. Plato said, There was as much diffe∣rence between a Learned and Ignorant Man, as between the
Non intellects nulla est cure∣tio morb Physitian and his Patient; A∣ristotle thought, as between the Living and the Dead.
Rome saw her best dayes un∣der her most Learned Kings; such as Numa, Augustus, Titus, Antoninus, Scientia non habet inimicum praeter ignoran∣tem sui. Quin∣til. Constan∣tine, and others. Yet Learning hath had her Enemies in all Ages, this not excepted: Lici∣nus
gave this Motto, Pestes Reipublicae Literae; Learning is the bane of a Common∣wealth.
But Sir, I know you wish well to our Universities, the Fountains of Learning. Your Activity and zeal for God, and the Truth, are so remarkable; your Love to the faithfull Mi∣nisters of Christ so cordial; and the particular Favours you have conferred on me so Nu∣merous; that, not to Love and Honor you for the first, would be Impiety; and for the latter,
The Spiders Motto, Nemini Debea; is also the ungrate∣ful mans song. Ingratitude.
You have been the Instru∣ment of conveying the Gospel
to a West Cowes in this Isle. Town that never be∣fore enjoyed it; consisting of about a thousand soules; and have helpt to build them a Luke 7.5. Synagogue. Nay, the beams of your Goodnesse, Justice, and Vigilancy doe stretch themselves into all places of the Isle: And O that wee had many Rari quippo boni, Numero vix sunt toti∣dem, quot The∣barum Portae. Juvenal. 13. Satyr. more such as your selfe to countenance Religion and good Men in this place: I wish that all our Gentry were such as you are; Then would our
At Newport. Lecture, and conference be more frequented; Vice and Heresie be more curbed; and the hands of good Pastors and People more strengthened in
the work & way of the Lord: And then should our Isle be more happy then any of those call'd the Turk. Hist. Fortunate Isles; or then Cyprus, that is called the Blessed Isle, for her great variety and abundance of all things.
So commending you, and all fearing the Lord, to the Bles∣sing, Guidance and Protection of the Almighty, I shall ever approve my self,
Sir,

From Brixton in the Isle of Wight,
1658.
