


My Lords,
AS theres a Time for every thing under the Sun, and if ever for being abrupt and brief in, it is NOW, when Time thus precious with your Lordships; So under the Sun since there is nothing but a su∣pernatural course to be taken, touch∣ing the Cure of such unnatural con∣ditioned Times: The Almighty his Word the onely Balm and Soveraign Remedy when ye have tryed all: If any therefore do amiss and miscarry Sealed with the Lord Brooks blood, immediately after slain a∣bout Candle∣mas, 1642. of you, blame your selves none but the Parliament: For I shall of no lit∣tle Burthen discharge my self here, who can but say and tell you: a re∣ceipt

I have of such rare operation and vertue given me, that within few days it shal bring him again to Him∣self, I mean the KING, after ab∣sent so long from his Parliament; whose Character if ye please to ob∣serve, this is his:
He that no Chains could binde him, Mark Evangelist the 5.) That had been often bound with fetters and Chains Which beside his unfaith∣fulness, in∣cludes his im∣prisonment, and what en∣sues, as ap∣pears, who besought not tormented to be before his time, as though the time had been foretold him. pluckt assunder by him, and the fetters broken in pieces; neither could by any man be tamed; as much to say, nei∣ther Oath, nor word, or Promise a∣vailing, or any Reason of force to per∣swade with him, as the Holy Ghosts speaking plain; by that adjuring in Gods Name, and by asking his name too, saying, LEGION, for they

were many, who spake not with the least: Nevertheless, his great words not more fierce then fearful of the Lords presence; This man wounding himself thus, bidden, Go home to his Who went to the Scots, as not marvelled at a little. friends.
And thus have made tender unto your Lordships of my service, whe∣ther or no ye accept thereof, for to bring his Majesty to you, sitting as afore time cloathed, &c. and doing withal what ye shall ask or desire.
As for the Cavaliers, what they shall do all of them, even crave a Pass hereby to take Shipping for the Low-Countreys and Germany, to be gone away; the Boors will entertain them willingly: St. Matth. 8. gives notice of two, so exceeding fierce that none might pass by that way; to wit,

that Dutch Duke and his Brother, Though had six moneths liberty to stay yet upon pain of death were commanded to depart within ten days. those possessed Princes, to return al∣so without delay Home again, be∣yond Sea.
1642. The 3. of January.In which fatal moneth of Ianuary, both the Archbi∣shop and late King were executed afterward.

The Holy Ghosts New-Years-Gift.
FINIS.
