



SIR,
THis Sermon, which is now presented to your Majesties Eye, was intended for the Ear; and now to the publick view of the whole Kingdom.
But I hope it will the better take among my Fellow-subjects, because 'tis graced with your Majesties Name and Patronage. Though the Sermon be plain (com∣ing from the meanest of your Subjects) yet 'tis Orthodox; for all to read their Duty to God, and Allegiance to their King, which was a thing (for many years, in three Kingdoms) quite forgotten.
And for this grand Impiety, and stubborn Disobedience, having our hearts divided, England as well as Israel had the same Complaint; We have no King, because we feared not the Lord. Hos. 10. 2, 3.
I know, many will carp, and say, a fitter Text might have been chosen, then to apply to your Majesty and the present Affairs, King Saul, a bad Prince.
To this I answer, 'Tis true, Flatterers are more troubled how to please, then to speak truth, or to give a timely
 Caution, as to beware of the iudgement of God. The Lord made Saul good, and is willing that all men should be saved: But if Saul and other Princes will abuse the Mercy of God, and become wicked; they must not blame God, nor be angry with the Scriptures, but thank themselves. Perditio tua e Te.—And therefore in him the Lord would have all succeeding Kings to read their Destiny: Though they sit in high places, yet they are obnoxious to danger, tumults, if not to the losing of their Kingdoms, Life and all.
But now, after this sad confusion, seeing the Lord is so pleased to give us a King again, and that in your saCRed Majesty,
1. Let God have the glory and praise, that your Maje∣sties most saCRed Life (by the Providence of Almighty God) hath hithetto been preserved, to the terrour and astonish∣ment of your Enemies, and comfort of your Friends and faithfull Subjects. Your Majesty may truely say (with Da∣vid) I waited patiently for the Lord, and he enclined unto me, and heard my crie: He brought me up also out of an horrible Pit, out of the miry clay, and set my feet upon a Rock, Psal. 40. 1, 2. And the reason, why this good King and your Majesty, had so much the favour of God, tells you, v. 4. Blessed is the man that maketh the Lord his trust.
When your Majesties just Title of Inheritance unto the Imperial Crown of this Realm, was so long Usurped by blood-thirsty men, and made themselves so strong upon Sea and Land, that most people (looking more on the Arm of man, then of God) were so incredulous, as to say, We shall never see King more in England: Yet, the Lord of Hosts, our mercifull Father, in whom your Majesty hath alwayes trusted, and found help, and deliverance out of all your Troubles, even from your Youth hitherto, (to a wonder) hath mightily defended your Majesty, made your Enemies become Friends, and without shedding of blood brought you home in Peace agair. Therefore we have just cause to sing with the Prophet; By his own right hand, and with his
 holy Arm, hath he gotten himself the Victory, and all the ends of the World have seen the salvation of our God.
In which, with joy and comfort, we may be bold to say, (with the Poet Claudian)
O nimium dilecte Deo, tibi militat aether,
Et conjurati veniunt ad classica venti.
And as we are ever bound to bless God for many mercies towards your Majesty, so we are bound to bless God for you many wayes,
1. For your Constancy in Religion, that 'twas not the loss of three glorious Kingdoms, could draw you from it, though driven to sing the Lords Song in a strange Land.
And now your Majesty do see the reward of your con∣stancy: you, who did stick close to God, the same God did never forsake you; according to the saying of your Prophetical Father of Blessed memory, who told you, in his Book, That piety will make you prosperous And therefore he had rather you should be Charles Le-Bon, than Le-Grand: Good than Great: A good lesson for your Majesties subjects, who, for ought I see, do more strive to be Great, then Good.
And what was once said of Carolus magnus, let the same still be said of you, Carolus plus cum Deo, quàm cum homi∣nibus loquitur; That he spake more with God, then with Men.
2. We thank your Majesty, To see our God again served in the Beauty of Holinesse; That our ravished Souls might once more ascend in Prayers and Hymns, or Hallelujahs, in one of the old Songs of Sion.
3. That your Majesty is resolved to settle the Church upon its old Basis, without which, God knowes, we shall have a sorry one. And this must needs be acceptable to Almighty God, That He, who hath done so much for your Majesty, that you do something for Him. King David, for the Lords favour towards him, would build a Temple to
 the Lord. So the people of Judah and Benjamin after their Captivity, did set forward the work of the House of the Lord, Ezr. 3. 8. King James (your Grandfather) coming out of Scotland into England, being a wise and learned Prince; How wisely did he decline that Government, knowing it to be pernicious both to Church and State? and became a true Patronage to the Church of England, in setting up Episcopacy, and ever after 'twas his Motto, and we found it true, (by sad experience) No Bishop, no King.
It was the eminent care of your most Royall Father, how to preserve the poor persecuted Church; for which he dy'd a Martyr: Would he have sacrificed the Church, he had not been the Churches Sacrifice.
Now coming from such Noble Progenitors, the Lord give your Majesty the same Christian courage to build the Walls of Jerusalem: For ever since your Royal Person was ba∣nished from the Church, she was like a Ship floating on the Sea, without a Pylot, obnoxious to every storm, and sacri∣legious Pirate; Every man did what seemed good in his own eyes. We have seen such a time, when 'twas lawfull for every one to choose his own Religion, or be of his own Opinion: Such a time, when every ignorant Votary, was suffered to creep to his own Image, or make his own Idol; and all was, because there was no King in Israel. Thus, we have been at Blinde-mans-buffe. And therefore, I beseech your Majesty, speedily to send us an Overseer in our Church; for we have so many now, that we are over-look'd. And I observe, never more Witches in Eng∣land since Monarchy and Hierarchy lay in the dust. And doubtless (saith Dr. Gauden) a Church may better in the worst of times, want any thing then good Bishops, and Order∣ly Ministers; for these in the midst of Persecution made Religion good against all the powers of Men and Devils. And therefore, till the Church of England be setled upon its old Basis, and we all meet in the same Center of Religion, and can all say Amen to the same Prayers and Prayses of God again; we may (saith that orthodox, pious, learned
 Doctor) write Ichabod on all foreheads: The glory is de∣parted from our Israel.
And certainly, let no man expect that Kingdom to prosper, till Gods House prosper. Let no man expect a Blessing on the Land, as long as Gods Curse lyes upon it, Mal. 3. 9. Let no man expect a Quietus est, for the enjoying of his own, as long as Gods House lyes waste, and he shut out of his, Hag. 1. 9.
As the Arke when it was harboured by Obed-Edom, brought a blessing upon him and his Houshold, 2 Sam. 6. 11, 12. so certainly, the Church brings a blessing to him that defends it; but when 'twas abused, Thousands were slain for it, 1 Sam. 5. And those that are despisers of that Apostolical Government, and for no other reason, Because they themselves can be Bishops no longer, who have Usurped that Sacred Order of Ordination, (making themselves no less then Schismaticks) in breaking the Articles of the Church of England, to which they themselves did subscribe: Let them in the fear of God, look back, and tell me, what Church under the Cope of Heaven, was more glorious, then the Church of England was?
What Decency? what serving our God with one heart, and one minde? they cannot be ignorant.
But since that Blessed Government was destroyed, what Sacriledge? what Schisme, Faction? what Robbing of the Church, and sacking of the Temple of God? they all know.
Whereas before, they were Houses for Prayer, and for the true Service of God, they since were made Stables, and Dens for Thieves.
So then, Monarchy and Hierarchy must goe together; they are inseparable, (like Hippocrates twins) they laugh to∣gether, they weep together. And indeed, experience hath taught it, on the well setling of the Church, dependeth much the safety of the Prince. Those then whom God hath joyned to∣gether, let no man put asunder: But rather let every one be affected with Davids zeal, Psal. 122. 8, 9. For my Brethren and Companions sake, I will now say, Peace be within thee; because of the House of the Lord our God, I will seek thy good.

St. Paul layes open a Catalogue of his Afflictions and miseries, 2 Cor. 11. where the good man tells of all his sufferings, (both upon Sea and Land) but in the 28. v. he tells of one affliction, which did trouble him more then all the rest; Besides those things that are without, that which cometh upon me daily, the care of all the Churches. And sure I am, this care (with every Christian soul) should go beyond all cares, we should, nay, we shall never be at peace, till we see Gods Church in a flourishing state and condition.
Great Sir, pardon my boldness, 'tis my zeal (not self-interest) that makes me cast my mite into the offering of God. I now forbear, and indeed, 'tis great folly, (seeing your sacred Majesty is so forward to promote the glory of God) to use any Arguments to incite you to it. And 'tis great presumpti∣on in any, to study to direct your Majesty, how to bring the Church to the Haven of Peace; seeing your Royal Father of blessed memory, hath left such a never to be parallel'd Book, for Prince, Parliament, Council and People, how to steer their course: And sure I am, next to the Sacred Bible 'tis the best of Books.
The King of Kings bless, direct and save your Majesty, so after many years enjoying your Crown upon Earth, you may be Crowned with everlasting Glory in Heaven: for which none shall more earnestly pray, then

