



THe Ornament of the Head in old time (if wee give
 credit to Suidas) was a Tyar.A round Cap or Coronet worne by Kings and Princes in Persia. This onely Kings among the Persians did weare upright, but Cap∣taines bending downe∣ward. Demaratus a Cap∣taine of the Lacedemoni∣ans, but then an Exile, wisely counselled the most potent King Xerxes, what course was best to bee ta∣ken for the successe of his War. Xerxes now being taught discretion not by one discomfiture onely, thanked Demaratus, that he alone had told him the truth, and gave him leave to aske what hee would. Hee requested, that hee might bee triumphantly
 carried in a Chariot in∣to Sardis the chiefe Ci∣ty of Asia, wearing an upright Tyar upon his Head. That was lawfull for Kigs onely. (Senec. l. 6. De benef. c. 31.) A Right Intention, most Gracious and Mighty Princes, not onely shew∣eth Kings, but also ma∣keth them to weare an upright Crowne, nor is but an Ornament of the Head, but the Head it selfe of all humane acti∣ons. Without this Tyar, or upright Diadam, no man shall ever enter into that blessed Kingdome in Heaven.

And although a Right Intention may bee not unfitly likened to this peculiar weare of Kings, an upright Diadem, ne∣verthelesse our Saviour compared it farre better to an Eye, and that A single one. This eye is like a Rule wherewith every straight thing u∣seth to bee tryed. A thou∣sand errours there bee, wherewith wee are in∣volved; if wee deflect our eyes but for a mo∣ment from this eye, or this line and rule. On this truely depend all things, by this all things are to be examined. For that
 cause very necessary eve∣ry way is a most exact understanding of a Right Intention, as of our end in all things that we doe. And Plato Iudged all Science unprofitable, with∣out knowledge of the best end. (Plato in That.) And although a great many doe apprehend that all things are to bee di∣rected to God, yet it falleth out with them, as it doth with some, which perceive not that they know what they know, even as wee seeke for that many times which wee hold in our hands: So for the most part wee
 are not ignorant so much what a Right Intention is, as negligent to ex∣ercise the same. This was the cause which not onely excited, but also constrained in a manner as the first Author to endite, so me to relate the same answerable, if I could, to our Tongue and mind, that the use of a most necessary thing might not onely bee per∣fectly knowne, but also exactly and daily put in practise. That man must needs offend in most things, yea even in all, which either knoweth not what a Good, what
 an Evill Intention is, or neglecteth to apply that to all his Actions, in all of them to abandon this. So great a matter it is, not onely to doe what is fit, as to aime at the right marke. The eyes of all men must of ne∣cessity bee lifted up to that All-seeing Eye. He seeth nothing, or at least seeth with offence, whosoever observeth not that eye continually. Ne∣ver shall hee be reckoned among those Kings in Heaven, which weareth this Tyar either bended f  backward:  n is  e
 the utter bane of what∣soever falleth out. Nor can that bee ever tear∣med good, which is done with an evill in∣tention. Intention is the even Rule of all actions whatsoever.
And this Rule, this single Eye, I here pre∣sent with all humility to Your most Gracious eyes, as those that are intent upon their high∣est welfare: Would to God this present en∣deavour might any way prove the fit object of a looke sent downe from them  constr 
 the purpose and mat∣ter it treates of, then the outward forme can make it. But that which blusheth at its owne naked limbes in ano∣ther Language then it was first set forth in, takes new courage from the Front, it is revi∣ved, and put in hope by the Title which it carrieth, A Right In∣tention. For this one∣ly hath skill to com∣mend even the poorest gifts.
It is observed in old Histories, that Sinaetas a poore Country man brought water out of
 the River Cyrus to King Artaxerxes in the hol∣low of his Fists. This Present was received into a G lden Bottell, and reckoned for a migh∣ty treasure. (Aelian. l. 1. Var. Hist. c. 32.) Nothing else made so slender a gift accepta∣ble, but so Good an In∣tention. Conon an Hus∣bandman presented a faire Rape to Lewis the eleventh King of France, this was like∣wise a most acceptable Gift, and requited with gold. (Io. a Coch. l. 2. Aphor. c. 17.) But who set this high price
 upon a Rape? Good Intention. For indeed neither Silver, nor Gold, nor any of those things which are accounted for mighty matters is a kindnesse, but the Will it selfe of the dis∣poser. And this is it which hath encouraged a meane person to ex∣presse his will and good desire in such a small peece of service. For it is not so much to bee valued what is given, as with what mind: because a mans respect consisteth not in that which is done or gi∣ven, but in the very
 mind of the Giver or Doer, that is, in His Good Intention. Even as also the honour of the Gods (saith the Romane Wise man) is not in Sacrifices, although they bee rich and garnished with gold, but in the pi∣ous and right meaning of the Offerers. (Seneca. l. 1. De benef. c. 6.) With the very same this Rule new limned, this single Eye is here of∣fered and devoted to your most Gracious eyes. Grant that it may en∣joy their favourable a∣spect, which then shall not feare the night of
 any misconceiving eyes, when it shall be refreshed with the Day-light of such a Sacred Counte∣nance.
Vivat, Rox, Consors, Princep,
ac Regia Prola,
In Spom, Rem, Columen, Fide,
Regnique, Sque,

