



Worshipfull and much Honoured,
ITs not the desire of Protection (the common Theam of such Epistles) but sence of dutie and the bond of gratitude puts me upon this Inscription. Truth needs no Patron, Errour deserves none. To wave there∣fore such complements; My designe in this Prologue is a thankfull acknowledgement of that great debt brought upon me by each of you, which I can never satisfie. To the one I owe (under God) my being, and well being; to the other, the dearest Compani∣on of my Life; to both my Name and Posterity. Vnworthy were I either of life or name, should I not endeavour (according to my poore model) to perpetuate their being and memorie, to whom I am an e∣ternal debtour for both. This only were motive enough to extort a publick acknowledgement. But I cannot smother in silence an other Favour (shall I say not inferiour to either of the former? Gods blessing upon poore and unworthy indeavours may make it farre su∣periour) that in the last great turne of my Life, wherein I seemed unto many a signe and a wonder, by relinquishing that Honourable Profession of Physick, to attend upon an higher Calling (though very mean in the eyes of the World) neither of you did interpose to di∣vert me from that designe, though carnal arguments were not want∣ing to have made each of you improve your utmost Authoritie for the stifling of such a motion in the very birth. I am not ignorant under what extream contempt and discouragement the Ministery lies at present: Nor can I be so stupid as not to apprehend how my own credit lies at the stake, as if Consciousnes of inabilitie in the pra∣ctice of Physick made me digresse to the function of the Ministerie. For the answering of which cavil I am not very solicitous, but wil∣lingly
in this point lay my credit at their feet who excel in that facul∣tie both at home and abroad, and upon former tryal made, know best what to judge. But certainly had consciousnes of inabilitie diverted me from Phisick, I should have had but very poor incouragement to the Ministerie, which as it is far more difficult than Physick or any other Facultie in its own nature, so considering the infinite discouragements both from without and within, I had little ground to hope it would prove more easie or advantagious than the practice of Physick, espe∣cially since this and other callings gain much credit and profit by faith∣fullnes and diligence; but the Ministery never looses more with the world than when its exercised with most pains and faithfulnes. For my own part, as the former pompe and splendour of the Clergie did not intice me, so the present outward basenesse thereof doth not dis∣courage me; but silencing all carnal Objections, I desire to be faith∣full unto him that hath called me, and so to walk in this waighty im∣ployment, as at lust (through Gods mercy) I may give up a comforta∣ble account; for which I begge your earnest Prayers, and rest
From my Study  this 14. of June. 1648.

