



Sir,
A Course of Li∣terature (as the mostDulces ante omnia Musae. Vir∣gil Georg. l. 2. Sweet andPro. 8.11 Satisfa∣ctory)
 I ever affected: and have now for more then two decads of yeeres, according to Ability and Oppor∣tunities prosecuted. As for Oportunities, none may recount them with more rejoycing then my Selfe: Ha∣ving had the happi∣nesse of Grammati∣call Foundations from so Famous aM Henry Bright late Master of the most flourishing Kings Schoole in the Ci∣ty of Wor∣cester. Ma∣ster, and of Academi∣call Superstructions
 from as Famous a Tu∣tor. Great were my En∣gagements to Him; but Vnspeakable to You. Vnder whom, so Fatherly in Affecti∣on, so Painefull in Precepts, and so Rare an Example of Lear∣ning and Piety, my Seven yeeres service for the Liberall Scien∣ces was as delightfully spent, asGen. 29.20. Iacob's for his beloved Rachel. And although I have
 now been absent from the Fountaine as ma∣ny yeeres as I enjoyed it, and wanted the Breast as long as I sucked it: (as Pha∣raohsGen. 41.30. seven yeeres of Plenty were suecee∣ded with as many of Famine;) yet hath there not been a Ces∣sation of Your De∣serts, but a continuall Obligation of mee to further Duty. I have not drunk at the Foun∣taine;
 but Your inex∣hausted Goodnesse hath streamed upon mee with ink-influ∣ence. I have not sucked the Breast; but you have fed mee with the Quill. Those Pretious Letters I meane; so full of Af∣fection to mee, and of happy Discord with∣in themselves, whe∣ther their Gravity of Counsell, or Ele∣gancie of Latine stile
 should obtaine the Preheminence. These as often as I read, (and there is none of them but I have read it as often as theyLiterae Principum sunt ter le∣gende. say the Letters of Princes are to be read,) mee thinkes I heare your old : and see you hanging againe on the Eares of your Flock those Pretious Iewells; Labour to keepe your Consciences Ten∣der:
 Study to approove your hearts to God: Se∣cretum Domini Timenti∣bus eum: Ministerium onus est Angelicis hu∣meris formidandum: : Sur∣gunt indocti, & coelum rapiunt, & nos cum Do∣ctrinis nostris sine Corde, ecce ubi volutamur! And a Thousand such, All which, inculcated to us in Common, to∣gether with those wherewith you have
 been pleased to enrich Mee in particular, should I, according to their Desert, desire to commend to publike intelligence, I must not thinke of a little Epi∣stle, but a large Pane∣gyricke.
For the greatest part of Thirty yeeres you have beene exer∣cised in that Pupillary Imployment. In which space, what a Pillar you have beene to the
 House, what an Or∣nament to the Vni∣versity, and how great∣ly Instrumentall to the Church and Com∣monwealth, as I know you desire not to heare, so all know I need not to speake. With You it hath not beene as with Some; who either have not taken more Pupils then One; (like theMarkan. Turkey-henne, which if shee see but
 one of her chickens fol∣lowing her, regardeth not what becommeth of the rest;) or if they have taken many, have refused to take just paines with them. And therefore (as I have beene credibly infor∣med) when their con∣sciences have beene wakened by their last sicknes, have complai∣ned of their Remisnes in that kind, as of one of their most pressing
 Grievances. Your Number hath beene Great, almost Fifty have I knowne in the Colledge together un∣der Your Name; (and above Thirty of them Under-graduates) Some (like the fruit in Alcinous his. Hom. Odyss l 7. Orchard) ripening; Others ful∣ly ripe, and fit to be set forth for publike ser∣vice. And for your Sin∣gular Care of them, that (as Socrates told

Habebo curae ut te metiorem tibi reddā quàm ac∣cepi. Senec. de Benef. l. 1. c. 8. Eschines) you migh restore them bette then you received them; your Constan and earnest endeavours of joyning the Muses and Graces, of making them boh Learned and Good, as you can∣not want abundant Comfort within Your Selfe, so may you wor∣thily be a President to Others.
It is Your great Ho∣nour, (as Cornelia that
 Noble Matrone ac∣counted her Of-spring her greatestHaec Or∣namenta mea sunt. Ʋal Max∣mus l. 4. c. 4 exemp 1. Orna∣ments) that out of your Nursery hath proceeded so Great a Number; that you have beene so Literal∣ly Fruitfull as to spread your Branches in a∣bundance over the face of the Land: Some, Pleaders at the Barre; some, Preser∣vers of fraile nature; Many, Instructors of





Cereus in vitium flecti, &c. Horat. untutord youth; bu Most, and some o them of all Degrees (and others very emi¦nent) Interpreters o Sacred Oracles. Al which, with the Sons of Nobles, and the Gentry, were they put together, and a Royall Head set on the top of them, would make the Better part of a little Kingdome. And none of which, I assure my selfe, but esteemes it
 his great Happinesse, hat his fresh vessell hath beeneQuo se∣mel est imbuta re∣cens, ser∣vabit odo∣rem Testa diu. Horat. seasoned with your Principles.
But such Passages,  feare give you Of∣fence. Yet I am sure I doe you no wrong, not respasse upon the Truth. And if you take it for my Fault, others will account it my Du∣ty. Give mee leave, I beseech you, to rejoyce that I am of so neere Relation to such Ex∣emplary
 Vertue; (es¦pecially since the very Plutarch. in vita Acati. mention thereof i an Incentive to imita¦tion;) and to acquain the world what you Goodnesse hath beene to Him, who earnestlyN hil mihi fuit optatius, quàm ut primùm abs te ipso, de∣inde à cae∣teris omni∣bus quàm gratissimus erga te esse cognosce∣rer. Cicero ad Dentulū Ep. fam l 1 ep. 5. Desires to approve himself Thankfull, bu cannot reach to any higher Expression thei this slender iscourse▪
The Issue it ìs o not many daies stu¦dy, and altogethe

Ita à no¦bis editur ut volun¦tati quorū dam ami∣corum ob∣securi ma¦gis quàm judicium nostrum secuti fue¦rimus. Ca¦saub in calce Nor in N.T. unworthy, if not of Light, yet of your Ac∣ceptance. However, as you formerly did the Parent, who now therefore adventureth his Head to shew you hisExcuti∣enda da∣mus Prae∣cordia: quanta{que} nostrae
Pars tua sit —animae, tibi—
Ostendisse juvat pulsa, dignoscere cautus
Quid solidum crepet, & pictae tectoria linguae
Et quod sequitur apud Pers. Sat 5 ad Corn. Heart, vouchsafe it, I humbly pray you, your Tuition, and so further oblige

