



Much Honoured (and very dear) Sir,
I Have printed your name before this book, that I might evi∣dence how deeply your re∣membrance is printed in my bo∣some. I will not tell the world how much I honor you (up∣on these grand accounts of piety and the publike) lest I be judg∣ed guilty of that odious crime of flattery; yet suffer me to say that your frequent and friendly re∣membrance of me (before, to my knowledge I saw you) and
your loving entertainment of me, when I waited on you, do de∣serve (and therefore constrain me to) a thankful acknowledgement of both, which I beseech you to accept of by this.
The subject befuls you as a Sea man: and the manner of its handling, is suitable for you as a Saint. You are called to have your business in the mighty waters; and there you have once and again (yea many times) seen the worke of Jehovah, and his won∣ders in the deep. Now my desires are, that the same spirit who mo∣ved upon the face of the waters in the first Creation (for the bring∣ing forth of the glorious fabrick of this visible world, which we behold and admire) may again (yea alwayes) move upon your heart
to the producing and perfecting of the most glorious workmanship of the second creation, in the invisible and spiritual workings of inter∣nal and mysterious godliness.
A help unto which, I humbly hope, and heartily pray this smal Manual may be. Peruse it there∣fore sometimes at your leisure; And imagine it to be (as really it's intended) a hint and help to longer meditations. I had no bet∣ter present at hand to send you; and let me therefore request you to accept of this. The truth is, I have some other maritime specu∣lations, but they are not as yet fit for sight; neither I think is the publike sight fitted for them. This onely will I hint, Englands Navy is to do service for Christ even in the Isles a far of. God who hath
done great things on the dry, will yet do as great on the deep. And I verily believe English men shal be his instruments. I Know we are untoward tools; but yet notwith∣standing God will fit us by degrees. I'le say no more but this, My de∣sires and prayers are, that the great God would thoroughly fit you for, and use in his service upon the Seas. You are best now upon your advance, as to the work of God abroad, and a great encour∣agement it may be to reflect up∣on that success that God hath al∣ready given in his late work neer home (I mean in the Holland war) verily (let me assure you) the same God will never leave nor forsake you. And my desires are, that you may have a large portion of Joshuas spirit to fol∣low
the Lord fully, in his yet to be done work. Now the Lord, who maketh his way in the Sea, go along with you, and keep you safe, and make you successeful in this expedition. I hope all who are of a publike pious spirit, will joyn to fill your sailes with a gale of prayers. Really, Sir my brea∣things are for you, and shall fol∣low you; and when ere you go, I shall remain

