



IT is one of the greatest Practical Debates and Con∣tests betwixt God and his own People, priviledged with a special interest in him, which they are natu∣rally inclined longest to keep up, and are loathest to let fall, viz. Whether he shall guide and govern them, and shape out their lot to them while they sojourn here in the World, as he himself in his own infinite wisdom shall think fit, having a blank Submission put by them into his hand, to be filled up with what kind and quali∣ty, with what measure and quantity, and with what continuance and duration of troubles, trials and afflicti∣ons himself pleaseth: Or whether he should, as to some∣things at least, consult their will and pleasure, and as it were take their advice, and allow them a liberty to prescribe to him how he should guide and dispose of them: And indeed to be here denyed to their own will, and absolutely submitted to the will of God, is one of the highest and most difficultly practicable points of self-denial (to which notwithstanding all the Disciples and followers of Christ are expresly called, and wherein he hath great delight and complacency, as favouring strong of intire trust and confidence in him); Yet if we consi∣der these few things, it will be found that there is all the reason in the World, why they should come in his will and sweetly submit themselves to it in all things, how cross soever to their own inclination, without any the
 least sinful reluctation or contradiction; which is our priviledge and the restauration of our degenerated nature to its Divine and Primitive integrity.
First, if it be considered that he hath most Soveraign, Absolute, and Incontrollible Dominion over you as the Potter hath over the Clay, for ye are the Clay, and he is the Potter; Nay, he hath more absolute Dominion over you then the Potter hath over he Clay, for the Potter maketh not the Clay, both the Clay and the Potter be∣ing made by him;Psal. 100.3. Isa. 64.8. But he hath made you and not you your selves; Ye are all the work of his hands; He hath made you living Creatures, rational Creatures, and new Crea∣tures,2 Cor. 5.17 If any man be in Christ he is a new Creature (which is the very flower of the Creation) and ye are his work∣manship created in Christ Jesus unto good works:Eph. 2.10 If there∣fore it be unsuitable and incongruous for the Clay to say to him that fashioned it,Isai. 45.9 What makest thou? Or for a mans work to say to him that he hath no hands; It's sure much more for you to say to your great Potter and Fa∣shioner, What makest thou of us? Why dealest thou so and so with us? Wo to him that striveth with his Ma∣ker,Rom. 9.21 let the potsheard strive with the potsheards of the earth,Jer. 18.6 Hath not the potter power over the clay? And are you not not in the hand of the Lord as the clay as in the hand of the Potter? He might have made you vessels to disho∣nour, vessels of wrath fitted to destruction, without being justly chargeable with any injury done to you; And when he hath in the Soveraignty of his most wonderful free Grace, made you vessels to honour, and vessels of mer∣cy which he hath afore prepared unto glory, will ye dare to quarrel with him for his disposing in his own way of your external condition in the World, and of these moveables and accessories that are wholly extrinsick, and not at all essential to your Salvation and true Happi∣ness? (For, let all the pleasures, riches and honours of
 this World, even all the delights of the sons of men in their very Extract, Spirits, and Quintessence, and when in a manner Distilled in a Lembick, till they be made to evaporat the purest Perfumes of their outmost per∣fections, be heaped on the Christian; As they make him no better Christian, nor make any addition at all to his true happiness; So when he is deplumed and stripped naked of them all, every Bird as it were of these earthly comforts taking back again from him its own Feather; He is made never a whit the worse Christian, nor his happiness in the least impared); It were certainly much more becoming you to say, It is the Lord who can do us no wrong, and who hath undeservedly done us much good, let him do to us what seemeth good in his eyes.
Secondly, If it be considered that he is of infinite wis∣dome, and knows much better what is good for you then ye do your selves; who often mistake what is good for you through your corruption, ignorance, partiali∣ty, or prejudice; But he by the most absolute perfe∣ction of his blessed Nature is infinitly removed from all possibility of mistaking what is good in it self, or good for you; and if you will adventure your Estate and liveli∣hood in the World on able and faithful Lawyers, when ye your selves are much unacquainted with, and igno∣rant of Law, and are disposed to think that the Suit that is commenced against you will ruine you, while they think otherwise; And if you will commit your health and life to skilful and painful Physicians or Chi∣rurgions, and receive from the one many unpleasant and loathsome Potions and Pills; and suffer from the other such painful Incisions and Injections, such Searchings, Lancings, and Pancings, such Scarifications, Cauteri∣zings, and Amputations; From all which ye have so great an aversation, if not abhorrency, Will ye not much rather and much more confidently commit the
 conduct and care of your selves and of all that concerns you to him, of whose undertaking there is no search as to what is good for his own People, and whose faithfulness in his dealing with them reacheth to the very clouds,Psal. 36.5. Psal. 89.33. and never faileth? The skilfullest of these may mistake, none of them being infallible, and the most faithful of them may possibly at sometimes and in some things be found unfaithfully neglective, none of them being perfect; But it is simply impossible for him either to mistake or to be unfaithful, for otherwise he should deny himself, and so cease to be God, whereof once to admit the thought is the highest blasphemy; Let therefore your confident trusting of men in their respective Professions and Cal∣lings, make you blush at, and be ashamed of your dis∣trustings and jealousings of God, and of your quarrellings with him, even when ye know not for the time what he is doing with you, and when what is done would have been none of your own choise, but doth very much thwart and cross your natural inclination: Is it not e∣nough that he is infinitely wise in himself, and for you? May you not therefore safely trust in him, and with un∣sollicitous confidence, commit the conduct of your selves and of all your concerns to him? As knowing that he cannot himself be misled, nor misgovern you; May you not in Faith without distrustful and perplex∣ing fear follow him,Heb. 11.18 as faithful Abraham followed him, not knowing whither he went, and cast all your care on him who careth for you and hath made it your great care to be careful for nothing,1 Pet. 5.7 Phil. 4.6 and thus even sing care away?
Thirdly, If it be considered, that ye have in your own experience (as the rest of the People of God have in theirs) found, that in all his by past dealings with you, even these that for the time were most afflicting, his will and your true welfare, have been unseparably joyned together, and that but very seldome and rarely your
 own will and welfare have trysted together; So that ye have been constrained when at your selves and in cold blood, to bless him that you got not your will in such and such things, however for the time ye were displeas∣sed with the want of it; and have been made to think, that if ever ye had any good days or hours along your Pilgrimage, your most crossed and afflicted ones, where∣in God took most of his will, and gave you least of your own, have been your best days and hours; Dare you say upon serious and just reflections that it hath been otherwayes? Or that ye have not reason as to all by∣gone cross providences, even the most apparently crush∣ing of them, since the day that ye were first brought un∣der the Bond of his Covenant to this day, to set up as it were your Stone, and to call it Eben-ezer,1 Sam. 7.12. The stone of help, saying, Hitherto the Lord hath helped us? May you not, and should you not then humbly and confidently trust him, that ye shall through grace have reason as to present and future ones how sadly and surprizingly soever they are or may be circumstantiated, to say,Gen. 22.14 Je∣hovah-Iireh, the Lord will see or provide? O! but it be a sweet, pleasant, spiritually wholsome and refreshful Air that breaths in that walk betwixt Ebenezer and Jehovah-Iireh, wherein a few turns taken by the most afflicted Christians in their serious, composed, spiritual and live∣ly contemplation, would through Gods blessing very much contribute quickly to reconcile them to all their respective Crosses, how cross soever, and to the keeping of them in better, firmer, and more constant spiritual health.
Fourthly, If it be considered, That by your pettish, fretful male-contented and unsubmissive contendings, strivings and struglings with him, ye will not help your selves, ye may well make your own Burden the more uneasie, and your Chain the heavier; Should it be ac∣cording
 to your mind?Job 18.4. shall the earth be forsaken for you? or shall the rock be removed out of his place? will ye dis∣annul his judgment?Joh 40.8. will ye condemn him that ye may be righteous?Job 13.33. will ye strive against him who giveth not account of any of his matters? will ye tax his Wisdom as if he did not understand what is convenient for you? will ye teach God knowledge?Job 21. is it fit that he should come down to your will rather than ye should come up to his? shall God change and break all his wisely laid mea∣sures and methods of governing his People, and take new ones to gratify your peevish Humours? he will not be diverted from his Purpose,Job. 23.13, 14. when he in is one way who can turn him, what his soul desireth that he doth, for he performeth the thing that is appointed for you: He is more just to himself (to speak so) and more merciful to you, then to degrade as it were his infinite Wisdom so far, as to suffer himself to be swayed against the Dictats of it, by such short-sighted and froward Tutors as you; the great Physician of Souls is more compas∣sionate and wise than to permit his distempered, and sometimes even in a manner distracted Patients, to pre∣scribe their own course of Physick; but he will needs do what he thought fit and resolved to do,Job 34.33 whether ye choose or whether ye refuse; only he would (to say so) have your consent unto, and your approbation of what he doth for the greater peace and tranquility of your own minds;Job 34.31, 32. Surely therefore it is meet, meekly and submissively to be said to God, whenever and however he chastiseth, I have born chastisement, I will not offend any more, that which I know not teach thou me, if I have dane iniquity I will do no more: It is the surest and shortest way to get our will in so far as may be for our well, to allow him to take his own will and way with us: for he hath a special complacency in this, and therein gives wonderful vent to the bowels of his tender com∣passion
 toward his chastised and humbly submissive Children;Jer. 31.18, 19, 20. Surely (saith he) I have heard Ephraim be∣moaning himself thus, Thou hast chastised me, and I was chastised, as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke; turn thou me, and I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord my God: surely after that I was turned, I repented, and after that I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh; I was ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth; Is Ephraim my dear son, is he a pleasant child? for since I spake against him, I do earnestly remem∣ber him still, therefore my bowels are troubled for him; I will surely have mercy upon him, saith the Lord: Thus when ye come submissively to his hand, he comes as it were sweetly to yours; and as ye gain nothing by your striving with him, so ye lose nothing but gain much by your soft stooping and silent submitting to him; If ye humble your selves in the sight of the Lord,James 4.10. 1 Pet. 5.6. he shall left you up; humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time.
Fifthly, If it be considered, That ye stand in need of all the Troubles, Tryals, and Afflictions that ye meet with; whenever ye are in heaviness through one or moe,1 Pet: 1.6. or manifold Temptations, it is always and only if need be: And if ye be well seen in the state and posture of your Soul-affairs; what Graces of the Spirit are to be quickned and drawen forth into more lively and vigo∣rous Exercise; what of these precious spices in your Gardens are to be blowen upon, not only by the more gentle and soft South-winds of Consolations, but also by the more sharp and nipping North-winds of Affli∣ctions and to be beaten as it were in the Morter thereof, that they send forth their pleasant and fragrant smell; what religious Duties are either much neglected, or but very lifelesly, coldly, formally, lazily, superficially and heartlesly performed, and to what a higher pitch and
 peg of Spirituality in the manner of performing them they are to be scrued up; what Lusts and Corruptions are to be further motified and subdued: How little your Hypocisie, your Self-love and Self-seeking, your Pride, Passion, Impatiency, Unplyableness, and Un∣submittedness to the will of God, your Carnalness, Earthly-mindedness, your immoderate and inordinate love to the things of the World, your murmuring and fretting at, your dissatisfaction and discontent with, your present lot; how little these and many other Corrup∣tions are crucified and brought at under; if, I say, ye be well seen and versed in the knowledge of your spiri∣tual condition, ye will upon serious and thorow refle∣ctions find, that ye stand in need of every Affliction ye meet with, as to all the circumstances thereof; or if ye do not, in so far ye are unacquainted with, and strangers to your selves and to the state and posture of your spi∣ritual Affairs; nay, ye will easily find, that all, even your heaviest Crosses and Afflictions, have enough adoe to work you up to what you should be at; and though sometimes ye may be disposed to think that ye could hardly bear any more, yet ye will upon due search find that ye could have wanted nothing of what ye meet with, without a greater prejudice than the Cross hath brought along with it: We are naturally froward and peevish, bent to fretfulness and discontent, inclining ra∣ther to restless endeavouring to have our lot brought up to our Spirits, then to be at suitable pains to have our Spirits brought down to our lot; and therefore have much need to be tamed and calmed by the Cross; This rugged and uneasie temper of Spirit, being the great hinderer, yea opposite of that stayed and sweet conten∣tation of Heart with and in every state; which is the very life of a Christians life,Luk 12.15. consisting (as the Lord saith) not in the abundance of the things which we possess, but in
 our satisfiedness with them whether abundant or not: To the attaining unto which blessed temper, the short∣est cut and most compendious way, is, in the first place to be well-pleased and satisfied with God himself, and with a solidly secured interest in him; and to endeavour in the next place, to be well-pleasing in his sight, to be gracious in his eyes, to stand well in his thoughts, even to do always those things that please him;John 8.29. to which desir∣able frame of Soul, it we were once through Grace brought (whereto our bearing of the Yoke, and put∣ting our shoulders under the Cross, is not a little through Gods blessing contributive;) O! how good natur'd then and easie to please would we be found to be, and how ready to construe well of all that he doth to us? seldom out of humor (to speak so) Now, if we stand in need of all the Afflictions we are trysted with in all their most sad and sorrowful circumstances (as certainly we do, because God who cannot lie or mistake hath said it,) why should we not submit our selves to his will in measuring them out to us? or what just rea∣son can there be to be dissatisfied with, or to complain of Gods giving to, and ordering that for us, whereof we stand in need, and which we cannot want without being considerably prejudged and worsted by the want?
Sixthly, If it be considered, That in all your Cha∣stisements and Afflictions God is graciously driving the blessed design of your spiritual good and profit, making them all to work together for that desirable end,Rom. 8.25. Phil. 1.19. causing them turn to your salvation through the help of the Prayers of others of his People, and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ; giving you assurance by his faithful word of Promise, that thereby your iniquity shall be purged,Isa. 27.9. and that this shall be all the fruit (O! strange and ad∣mirable condescention of Grace, all the fruit) to take away sin; and that he will not chastise you as parents
 according to the flesh do their children, to wit for their own pleasure; who however they may have a general design of good to their Children in their chastising of them, yet through a remainder of corruption in the best of them,Heb. 12.10. they are often subjected to such hurries and transports of Passion, when it comes to the act of cha∣stisement, that they much forget to consult the good and advantage of the chastised Child, and too much gratify their own pleasure and humor; but that be will chastise for your profite, that ye may be made par∣takers of his holiness: Now, if this be his design in chastising, and if this be the promised fruit of your Cha∣stisements and Afflictions, why should ye not therein submit to his pleasure, which hath your own profite inse∣parably joined within it? if ye your selves do not sinful∣ly lay obstructions in the way thereof, as otherwise, so particularly by your being displeased with this his pleasure? which yet his Grace in his own People suf∣fers not to be invincible nor final: I do not say that our Chastisments and Afflictions do of themselves pro∣duce this profite and bring forth this fruit; for alace! we may from doleful experience have ere now arived at a sad perswasion, that we are proof against all ap∣plications, excepting that of soveraign efficacious and all-difficulty conquering free Grace, and that nothing will do at us save that alone: Whatever means be made use of, this only must be the efficient producer of our profite: It is a piece of God's royal and incom∣municable prerogative which he hath not given out of his own hand to any dispensation, whether of Ordi∣nances never so lively and powerful in themselves, or of Providences never so cross, loudly allarming and clearly speaking, abstractly from his own Blessing, ef∣fectually to teach to profite;Isa. 48.17. and therefore he doth (as well he may) claim it to himself alone as his peculiar
 priviledge, while he saith I am the Lord thy God that teacheth thee to profite: Since then this is his design in all the Chastisements inflicted on his own People, and since he only by his Grace can make it infrustrably take effect, let him have our hearty allowance and approba∣tion to carry it on vigorously and succesfully, and let us pray more frequently and fervently, that by his ef∣fectual teaching our profiting may be made more and more to appear under our Chastisements; and withall in the multitude of our sad thoughts about them, let his comforts delight our souls, and this comfort in particular, that in them all he graciously designs and projects our profite, even the making of us more and more to par∣take of his holiness.
Seventhly, If it be considered, That all your Tryals and Troubles are but of time-continuance and will period with it; they are but for a season,1 Pet. 1.6. 2 Cor. 4.17. yea but for a moment; He will not contend for ever, knowing well if he should do so,Isa. 37.16. the spirit would fail before him and the sould which he hath made; though they should fol∣low closs on you and accompany you to your very dy∣ing day, yet then they will leave you and take their last good-night and everlasting farewel of you;Rev. 7.15. and 21.4. sorrow and sighing will then for ever fly away, and all tears on whatsoever accompt shall then be wiped from your eyes: It is a great alleviation and mitigation of the most grievous Affliction, and of the bitterest and most ex∣tream sorrow, to think that not only it will have a term day and date of expiration, but that it will quick∣ly in a very short time, even in a moment be over and at an end; (as a holy Martyr said to his fellow-suf∣ferer in the Fire with him, It is but winking and our pain and sorrow is all over) and that there shall be an eter∣nal Tack of freedom from it, and that everlasting solace, satisfaction and joy without any the least mixture of
 sorrow and sadness, shall succeed to it and come in the room thereof: It is but for the little space of threescore years and ten,Psal. 90.10 or fourscore (which length most men never come) that his People are subjected to trouble, and what is that very short moment and little point of time, being compared with vast and incomprehensibly long Eternity? in respect of which a thousand years are but as one day,Psal. 90.4. or as a watch in the night when it is past. And no doubt the little whiles trouble, sadness and sorrow of sojourning and militant Saints, is in the depth of divine Wisdom, ordered so, that it may the more commend and endear that blessed calm and tranquility, that ful∣ness of purest joys, and these most perfect pleasures at his right hand that triumphant Saints shall for evermore enjoy.
Eighthly, If it be considered that all along the little moment that your trials and afflictions abide with you, they are, even the sadest and most severe of them, moderat, and through his grace portable and light;Isa. 27.8. In measure he debateth with you, and stays his rough wind in the day of his east wind, And whatever difficulty ye sometimes find undersore prssours, to get it solidly and practically believed,1 Cor. 10.13. yet God is faithful who hath promised, and will not suffer you to be tempted above that which ye are able, but will with the temptation make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it;Isa. 30.18. He is a God of judgement and dis∣cretion, that suits his peoples burdens to their backs, and wisely proportions their straits to their strength; He puts not new wine into old bottles:Mat. 9.17. Isa. 42.3. Isa. 57.17, 18. Neither doth he break the bruised reed; And even when he hides his face and is wroth with his children, and smites them for their iniqui∣ty, It is only Fatherly wrath; And however dreadful that may be and difficult to be born, yet there is nothing vindictive in it; It is a Fathers anger, but contempered with a Fathers love, where also love predomines in the
 contemperature. And indeed the most extream, and the very heaviest of all our Afflictions are moderat, and even light being compared, first with what your sins de∣serve, exceedingly far beneath the desert whereof ye are pu∣nished, even so far,Ezra 9.13. that ye may without all comple∣ment most truly say,Lam 3.22. That it is because his compassions fail not that ye are not consumed; That ye are kept out of Hell, and free from everlasting burnings, to which your ma∣ny, various, and grievously aggravated provocations, have made you most justly liable: So that ye have rea∣son to think any Affliction short of everlasting destructi∣on from the presence of God, to be a highly valuable piece of moderation, and to say, Wherefore doth a living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sin?Lam. 3.39. Micah 7.9. We will bear the indignation of the Lord because we have sinned against him. 2dly, With what, others of the people of God have readily met with,Heb. 12 4. for we have not resisted to the blood, striving against sin; We have it may be all this while been but running with the footmen,Je. 12.5. when they have been put to contend with horses. 3dly, With what our selves have sometimes dreaded and been put to de∣precat, when horrid guilt hath stared us in the face, and when God was apprehended to be very angry, even threatning to smite us wth the wound of an enemy,Jer. 30.14. and with the chastisement of a cruel one, to run upon us as a Giant,Job 16.14. and 12. Job 10.16. to break all our bones; and again to shew himself mar∣vellous upon us, by taking us by the neck, and shaking us in pieces. 4ly, With what our blessed Lord Jesus suffer∣ed for his people, who all the while he sojourned here on earth, was a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief,Isa. 53.4. and might most jstly have said beyond all men, I am the man that hath seen afftion by the rod of his wrath: is there any sorrow like unto mine in the day when the Lrd hath afflicted me? And 5ly, Being compared with that far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory which they2 Cor. 4.17.
 work for you. Seing then that the sharpest and sorest of your afflictions are in all these and many other respects very moderat, gentle, easie and light, is there not reason why ye should in them, without grudging, sweetly sub∣mit your selves to his will? heartsomly saying, it might have been much worse, this falls infinitly short of what we have deserved, blessed be God that it is only thus, and no worse.
Ninthly, If it be considered, that often when in any more than ordinary spiritual and lively frame of Soul, ye have in Prayer desired the Lord that he would take any way, and make use of any means he pleased (where∣in your sin might not be) to make you more serious in the exercise of Godliness, more effectually to mortifie your Corruptions, and to further your conformity to his Image in Holiness; And ye should through his Grace be content, putting, as it were, a blank in his hand, to be filled up as himself in his own infinite wisdome should think fit, declaring that ye were satisfied on the tearms proposed by Jesus Christ, to be his Disciples, and to take up not only a Cross, or the Cross in general, but your Cross in particular,Mat. 16.24 the Cross that should be shaped out for you however circumstantiated: And when under some very sad affliction he on the matter bespeaks you thus, I am now about to grant you your own desire, though it may be in such a way, and by such a mean, as either would have been none of your own choosing, had it been left to your choice, or possibly such as ye did not think of; Will ye be displeased with me, or mis∣take my hearing of your Prayers, fulfilling your Peti∣tions, and granting you according to your own hearts desire, because I do it in mine own way, and by means of my own choising, wherein also ye left and allowed to me a latitude, and not in your way and by your means, which ye then renounced as not thinking your
 selves competent Judges thereof? Alace! here we are often sound at best to border upon a practical rewing, retracting, and lifting up again of the Blank-Submission which we professed to lay down before him; and to say by our freting, repining, dissatisfaction, immoderat heaviness, and despondency of Spirit, that we were somewhat rash, and not so well advised when we Sub∣scribed and gave in such a Submission and Surrender of our selves to him; That we did not think he would have taken such advantage of us, or would have put us thus sore to it, and, that if we had thought he would have done so, we would have been better advised before we had thus submitted to him, and with our own con∣sent put our selves in his reverence; and that if it had been any thing but this we could have born it (where∣as he saith nothing but this;) Whereby we do not on∣ly not a little reflect upon him as dealing unkindly, and doing what we would not have expected at his hand; But also make a sad and humbling discovery of much unsoundness in our selves as to our offering up of such general desires, and as to our making of such absolute Submissions to him: Let us therefore, in order to the justifying of him as both righteous and kind, and to the vindicating of our selves at least from allowing of any unsoundness, dissimulation, or unfair, and meerly complemental-dealing with God, in our submitting our selves to him in the general, without any But's or If's, any Restrictions or Exceptions; Hold at the Sub∣mission given; sharply expostulating with, and severe∣ly chiding ourselves for, this discovered practical con∣traction and contravention, And we shall find that he hath done nothing unworthy of himself, nor in the least prejudicial to us, but what is according to our own most deliberat desires, and greatly to our advan∣tage.

It were a very wide mistake if from what is discours∣ed in this Consideration, any should conclude that we intend either to commend or allow Christians praying directly and expresly for Crosses and Afflictions, let be for such and such Afflictions in particular: For, beside that we neither find it commanded in the Scriptures, nor allowedly (if at all) president∣ed or practized by the Saints recorded there; And that it seems to be a sinful limiting of the Soveraign God to a particular mean; We may easily know from sad ex∣perience, with what difficulty, repining and fainting we often bear these Crosses and Afflictions that we are most clearly called to take on, and that are unavoidably laid upon us; And how lamentably little for most part we profit by them; What hope or assurance could we then have that we should either carry Christianly under, or make suitable improvement of, such Crosses as we should unwarrantably seek, and pray for to our selves? It's true, we find some of the Saints, and these, Stars of the first Magnitude, as Moses, Job, Elias, David, and Jonas, in their distempered mal-content or fainting fits, passionatly, preposterously, and precipitantly praying, or rather wishing for death (for which they were not for the time in so good case); But that was not for death under the notion of affliction, but rather to prevent fu∣ture and further afflictions, or to have a period put to presently incumbent ones. If it should here be said, why may not Saints pray for afflictions, since they seem to be promised in the Covenant of Grace, as Psal. 89.30, 31, 32. Hos. 2.6, 7. and v. 14. And since God hath graci∣ously promised to bless all the afflictions of his people, and to make them turn to their spiritual good, profit and ad∣vantage, as Rom. 8.28. and Heb. 12.10. and else∣where? To the first part of the Objection, it may be briefly Answered, that these and others such, are not
 properly and formally promises of the Covenant of Grace, but rather Covenant-threatnings (for the Co∣venant of Grace hath its own threatnings suited to the nature thereof as well as the Covenant of Works hath its) though dipped (to say so) in Covenant-grace and mercy: And to the other part of it as briefly, that God hath promised to bless and to cause to profit by such af∣flictions and chastisements as himself thinks fit to inflict and lay on, but not these which we seek and pray for to our selves: Neither doth that Scripture, Psal. 119. v. 75. I know —that in faithfulness thou hast afflicted me, say any thing towards strengthening the Objecti∣on, or invalidating the Answers given to it; For the Psalmist only there humbly and thankfully acknowledg∣eth Gods faithfulness in fulfilling his threatning in af∣flicting him when he went astray; and in performing his promise in blessing his affliction to him for preventing his after-straying, and making him learn better to keep his Commandments; In both which he is faithful. All that is either exprest or meant in this Consideration, is, that the Saints often pray God, that he would take his own way, and use his own means to bring about these great ends mentioned; wherein there is indeed at least a tacite insinuation, that if he in his wisdom see it meet to make use of the rod and affliction in order thereto, that they will not allow themselves to decline the same, nor to mistake him in it; But that rather they shall through grace be satisfied with, and bless him for fulfil∣ling their Petitions, and granting them according to their own hearts desires, though it be by such means: Which is not praying for affliction, but a resolved and de∣clared Submission to infinite Wisdoms love-choise of his own midses to effectuat & bring to pass the prayed for ends.
Tenthly, If it be considered, that it now neither griev∣eth nor troubleth any of all the glorified, triumphing,
 and Palm-bearing Company before the Throne of God and of the Lamb, that they were exercised with so ma∣ny, and so great trials and tribulations while they were here below; It troubleth not John the Baptist that he was imprisoned, basely murthered and beheaded there in a hole, without having access to give any publick te∣stimony before his death; And at the desire of a wan∣ton dancing Damsel, through the instigation of her Adulterous and Incestuous Mother; Nor Stephen (com∣monly called the Proto-Martyr) that he was stoned to death as a Blasphemer for giving testimony to the most precious and comfortable truth of Christs being the Mes∣siah; Nor Paul that he was thrice beaten with Rods, and received five times fourty stripes save one, that he was in so many perils by Sea and Land, in the City, in the Countrey, and in the Wilderness, by the Heathen, by his own Countrey-men, and by false Brethren; That he was stoned, and suffered all these other things whereof he gives us an Historical Abridgment in his 2d. Epistle to the Corinthians, chap. 11. Nor doth it trouble any of all these Worthies, of whom the world was not worthy, that they were cruelly Mocked, Imprisoned, Scourged, Tor∣tured, or Tympanized and Racked, Stoned, Torment∣ed, Sawen assunder, Killed with the Sword, Tempted, driven to Dens and Caves of the Earth, and put to wan∣der up and down in Sheep Skins and Goat Skins, Whose Martyrology the Apostle briefly compendeth, Heb. 11. Nor doth it trouble any other of all the Martyres, Saints and Servants of Jesus, who have in the several Ages of the Church suffered so many and so great things while they were here in the World; Nay, all these their suf∣ferings go to make up a considerable part of their Song of Praise in Heaven, (where the History of these Wars of and for the Lord, will be very pleasant to them to read, however sore and bloody they were on earth;)
 And not only so, but these of them who have suffered most, wonder much that they have suffered so little, and that they are come to so excellently glorious a King∣dome thorow so little tribulation in the way to it: Be∣lieve it, there will be as much matter of thanksgiving and praise to God found treasured up under the plyes and foldings (to say so) of the most cross and afflicting providences that ever the People of God met with here in the World, as under these that for the time were more smiling and satisfying: Let us then, valuing all things we meet with, according to the Aspect they have on our spiritual and eternal state, (which is sure the just∣est and safest valuation of them) heartily allow him to take his own will and way in afflicting us.
Eleventhly, If it be considered, that as this Submission to the will of God in cross and afflicting providences is Chronicled in the Sacred Records to the perpetual com∣mendation of several of the Saints; Namely of Aaron of whom it is said, when God had slain his two Sons in a strange and stupendious manner, even by Fire from Hea∣ven for their presumptuous offering of strange fire before him, that he held his peace:Levit. 10.3 Of old Eli when he received a sad message, concerning himself and his house by the hand of young Samuel, who said, It is the Lord,1 Sam 3 18 let him do what seemeth him good: Of Job, after by four several Messengers (each of them coming immediatly on the back of the other, so that he scarcely got leave to breath betwixt, or the former to finish his lamentable narration) the terribly allarming tidings were brought him con∣cerning the plundering of his Oxen and Asses by the Sa∣beans, and the killing of the Servants with the Sword; Concerning the consuming of his Sheep and Servants by the Fire of God falling from Heaven upon them; Con∣cerning the carrying away of his Camels, and the kil∣ling of his Servants by the Caldeans, and concerning the
 smothering to death of all his Sons and Daughters while Feasting together, by the falling of the House upon them;Job 1.21, 22. who said, The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord; In all this not sin∣ning, nor charging God foolishly: Of David, who in a croud of crosses saith to God,Psal. 39.9. 2 Sam. 15.25, 26. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou didst it: And who, when forced to flee from Jerusalem by his unnatural and rebellious Son Absolom, and sending back the Ark thither, with admirable composure and sweet stooping of Soul, said, If I shall find favour in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again, and shew me both it and his habitation, but if he say thus, I have no delight in thee, behold, here am I, let him do to me as seemeth good to him: Of Hezekiah, when that heavy Message was brought to him by the Prophet Isaiah concerning the Babylonish Captivity, wherein his Royal Posterity were to have their deep share,2 King. 20.19. who said, Good is the Word of the Lord which thou hast spoken, who said moreover, Is it not good if peace and truth be in my dayes? If the threatned doom and sentence shall be for a while suspended and not presently exe∣cute: And of these Christians, who, after they had with much weeping earnestly intreated the Apostle Paul de∣servedly very dear to them, not to go up to Jerusalem, where the Prophet Agabus had foretold he should be ap∣prehended, and put in Bonds, and perceived that he was inflexibly resolved at any rate of hazard to go thi∣ther,Act. 21, 14 ceased, and submissively said, The will of the Lord be done: As, I say, it is thus Chronicled to their com∣mendation, so it is a piece of most beautiful and amiable conformity to the practice of our blessed Lord Jesus, of whom we ought to be followers as dear children in all these things wherein he is proposed as a pattern for our imitation,Ephes. 5.1. who in a great and grievous agony of trouble, and when most terribly assaulted by a strong combina∣tion
 of cross and afflicting providences, and after con∣dition at deprecating of that bitterest Cup and blackest hour, pleasantly, sweetly, and submissively subjoyned, and said to his Father,Luk. 22.42. Mat. 26.32 Nevertheless not my will but thine be done: Not as I will, but as thou wilt.
Twelfthly and finally, If it be considered, That when the whole contexture and web of Providences and more especially about the Catholick visible, militant Church, and every individual Member thereof shall be wrought out, and in its full length and breadth (as it were) spread forth in the midst of all the redeemed, perfected, glorified and triumphant company of Saints, standing round about and with admiration beholding it; there will not be found (to say so) one misplaced threed, nor one wrong set colour in it all, but every thing will be found to have fallen in, in the fittest place, and in the most beautiful season and order thereof; O! so rare, so remarkable, so renowned, and so ravishing a piece as it will by them all unanimously and with one voice be judged and declared to be? even worthy of the most exquisite Art and infinite Skill of the great Worker thereof; the severest Criticks and most difficultly satis∣fiable of them all while here below about more publick and more particular Cross-providences, will then fully and to the height be satisfied, and will all, without any the least hesitation or jarring, readily and chearfully bear him this concordant testimony,Mark 7.37 that he hath done all things well, every thing in particular, and all things in the general; though when he was a doing of them, they often presumptuously took on them rashly to censure, and to offer their impertinent and crabbed Animadver∣sions on, and their Amendations and Alterations of se∣veral of them; and will most cordially bless him that he wrought on in his own way about his Church and each of themselves, without consulting them or follow∣ing
 their way, which would have quite marred the beauty and darkned the lustre and splendour of that most close and curious divine contexture.
Every one of these Considerations hath much reason in it to perswade to this intire and absolute submission to God's will and pleasure, in what is cross to you, af∣flicted and sorrowful Christians; but O! how much weight and strength of sound spiritual reason is there in them all united together (beside the many other ex∣cellent Considerations dispersed up and down these choice Sermons, stuffed full with strong Cordials, fitted both to recover and to preserve you from fainting un∣der your many several Afflictions) powerfully to per∣swade and prevail with you, even the most averse, un∣toward, way ward, and cross-gained (to say so) of you all; without further debate, demur, or delay, in these things that are most afflicting to you, and do most thwart your inclination, to come in his will, and plea∣santly, without any the least allowed reluctancy or gain∣saying to submit to him? how might ye thus possess your Souls in patience, and how quiet, calm, sedate, and composed might ye be, more especially in trouble∣some Times, amidst these things wherewith others are keeped in a continual hurry, almost to the hazard of being distracted by them?
Let them all, my Noble Lord, prevail with your Lordship in particular, reverently to adore, silently to stoop unto, and sweetly to acquiesce in, the Lord's so∣veraign, holy, and wise ordering your many and vari∣ous complicated Trials, and more especially his late re∣moving your excellent Lady, the desire of your Eyes, the Christian and comfortable Companion of your Youth, by his stroak: As indeed all the tyes of nearest and dearest Relations, betwixt Husbands and Wives, Parents
 and Children, Brothers and Sisters, &c. are capable of dissolution, and will all ere long by Death, be actual∣ly dissolved; there being but one tye and knot of Mar∣riage-union betwixt precious Jesus Christ and the Be∣liever, that by divine ordination is eternally incapable of any dissolution even by Death it self; which, though it dissolve the strait-union that is betwixt the Soul and the Body, yet doth not at all loose the straiter bond of Union that is betwixt him and both of them, but it re∣mains still inviolable; and by vertue thereof, the Be∣lievers vile dead Body, shall be raised again at the last Day, conform to his own glorious Body, and be re∣united to the perfected-soul; which two old Intimats will then meet in far better case then when they were parted and pulled asunder; for he is an Husband that cannot grow old, sick or weak, neither can he die; he is an Husband whose Bride and Spouse is never a Widow, neither hath he any Relicts: The drawing on of which matchless Match and marvellous Marriage, is one great design of these sweet Sermons, wherein pregnant reasons are adduced by this friend of the Bride∣groom, to perswade Sinners to embrace the offer there∣of made to them in the Gospel; and to make them, who, by his own gracious and powerful insinuations on their Hearts, have entertained his Proposal, towards making up, and final, closing of the Match, to bless themselves in their choice, and to bless him, that ever he vvas pleased to stoop so very lovv as to become a Suiter to them, vvith a peremptory resolu∣tion to admit of no refusal, but infrustrably to carry their Hearts consent to take him for their Lord, Head and Husband, to be to them a Saviour, a Physician, and Treasure, even their All in all, their All above all; which day of Espousals, as it was the day of the gladness of his heart, so, it will never be any grief of heart to
 them. Let all mutinous thoughts about his dealings with you, be silenced with, It's the Lord; let not too much dwelling on the thoughts of your Affliction, to the filling of your heart still with Sorrow, incapacitate you for, nor divert you from, humble asking the Lord, what he aims at by all these Dispensations, what he would have you to learn out of them, what he reproveth and contends for, what he would have you amending your hand in, and what he would have you more weaned, self-denied, and mortified in, and what he would have you a further length and a greater proficient in; He hath told you the truth, that these things are expedient for you; study to find them to be so in your own expe∣rience. Sure he hath by them, written in great, legible, and capital Characters, yea, even as with a Sun-beam, Vanity, Emptiness, Uncertainty, Mutability, Unsatis∣factoriness, and Disappointment upon the forehead of all Creature-Comforts, and with a loud voice called your Lordship yet more seriously then ever, to seek after solid Soul-satisfaction in his own blessed and all-suffi∣cient Self, where it is most certainly to be found with∣out all peradventure or possibility of misgiving; make haste, my Lord, yet to come by a more closs confining of all your desires and expectations of Happiness and Satisfaction to your Soul, to God only, contracting and gathering them in from the vast and wearisome cir∣cumference of earthly Comforts, and concentering them all in himself as their point; study through Grace, in a sweet Soliloque, to bespeak your soul, thus, My soul wait thou only upon God,Psal. 62.5. for my expectation is from him: O blessed confinement of desires and expectations of happiness and satisfaction to the Soul! where it is as impossible to meet with disappointment as it is impos∣sible not to meet with it from every other Airth whence it is looked for; alace! it is the scattering of our expe∣ctations
 and desires of happiness among other objects beside him, that breeds us all the disquiet, anxiety, and vexation, whereas if we kept our selves through Grace under a more closs and constant confinement to him, when this and that, and the other Creature-comfort, whether Person or Thing were taken from us, there would be no deduction made from, nor any diminution made of our true Happiness; none of these, how dear and desirable soever being essentially constitutive of it, nor so much as trenching thereupon; and he in whom only all our Happiness lyes, being the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, without any variableness or shadow of turning: There are some whom he loveth so well, that he cannot (to speak so) find in his heart to see them thus to parcel out their Affections, and to dote upon any painted imaginary Happiness in Creature-comforts; and therefore on design, he doth either very much blast them as to the expected satisfaction from them, or quite remove them, that by making such a vacuity he may make way for himself to fill it, and happily to ne∣cessitate the person, humbly, prayerfully, and believ∣ingly, to put him to the filling of it; and it is a great vacuity, that he who fills heaven and earth cannot fill, a little of whose gracious presence and manifested special love, can go very far to fill up the room that is made void by the removal of the choisest and most desireable of all Earthly-comforts and Enjoyments: Happy they, who, when they lose a near and dear Relation or Friend, or any Idol, they are found of, are helped of God to make Jesus Christ, as it were, succeed to the same as its heir, by taking that loss as a summonds to transfer and settle their whole love on him; the object incomparably most worthy of it, as being altogether lovely,Cant. 5.16. or all de∣sires; there is no Earthly-comfort, Person or Thing, but hath somewhat in it that is not desirable, and that
 it would be the better to want, but there is nothing in him that is not truly desirable, nor any thing out of him that is worthy to be desired.
I am, my Noble Lord, the more easily prevailed with and encouraged, to address the Dedication of these Sermons to your Lordship more particularly, when I remember the unfeigned faith that first dwelt in your Grand mother, as an other Lois; and in your Mother, as an other Eunice; and more lately, in your own choice Lady, who, as an other beloved Pers, laboured much in the Lord; and though she had but a very short Christian race, (in which she was much encouraged by coming into your Noble Fathers Family, and her beholding how hard your blest Mother did run and press toward the Mark, even when in the last stage and turning in a manner the last stoop of her Christian course); yet it was a very swift one, wherein she did quite out-run many that were in Christ long before her; (all three Ladies of Honour, almost (if I need to say almost) without paralels in their times, in the se∣rious and diligent exercise of Godliness, and Paterns worthy to be imitated by others); and I trust in your Lordships self also; yea, and in several others of your elder and younger Noble Relations (for Grace hath had such a draught of Souls amongst you, as it useth not often to have in Societies of so Noble Extract (for not many noble are called;) which, as it deservedly draw∣eth respect to such of you as are thus priviledged, from the observers of it; so it layeth a mighty strong obli∣gation upon you, to be much for God, and in service to your Generation according to his will. Further, when I observe your Lordships Christian and Examplary Carriage, under such a conjunction and combination of so very cross, and almost crushing calamitous Provi∣dences; choosing rather contentedly and satisfiedly to be
 (if it so please the Lord, and O! that it may not) the last of that Ancient and Honourable Family, then to be found endeavouring to keep it from sinking by any sin∣ful and unwarrantable course, particularly by defraud∣ing just Creditors (though the Debt was not of your Lordships own contracting) under whatever specious pretexts and advantages of Law; whereof many make no bones, who, if they may keep up their superfluities, care not to ruine their Friends ingaged in Suretyship for their Debt, and to live on the Substance of others. Moreover, when with great satisfaction I notice how much your Lordship makes it your business to follow your Noble Ancestors in so far as they were followers of Christ; Which many great Men even in the Christian World, alace, do not much mind; Not considering that it is true Nobility where God is the Chief and Top of the Kin, and where Religion is at the Bottom; And what renowned Rauleigh saith, Hinc dictus Nobilis quae∣si prae aliis virtute notabilis; And what another saith, Qui ab illustrium majorum splendida virtute degenerarunt Nobilia pertenta sunt. And finally, when I consider, that in your Lordships retirement and abstraction from wonted converse and dealing in business, you will have access at leasure to read them, whereby you may through God's blessing be sweetly diverted from pensive and not so profitable poring on your affliction, and be much instructed, convinced, reproved, directed, edified, strengthened, and comforted. Read them then, my Lord, carefully (as I take it for granted you will) pon∣der and digest them well, and I am hopeful, that they shall through Grace prove contributive to the bringing upon you a considerable growth of holiness, and to the making of your wayes and doings more then ever such, that others of his people observing the same, shall be com∣forted,
 and made to think, and say, verily God hath not done in vain all that he hath done to yonder Noble-man.
That these Substantial and Marrowy Gospel-Sermons may come along to you all, nay to all the Readers of them, and to your Lordship more particularly, with showers of Gospel-blessings, is the earnest desire of,
Dearly beloved and afflicted Christians, And my very Noble Lord in particular, 
November 15th. 1682.
