


My dearly beloved in the Lord,
THE heart of Christ (who is the cheif Shepheard) is much set upon the feed∣ing of Beleevers (who are his chosen Flocke:Ezek. 34. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.) Before hee came into the World, he
did Prophesie, that hee would feede his Flocke himselfe: And when hee went out of the World: hee charg∣ed his Servants to doe the like. When hee had asked of Peter again and againe,Ioh. 20.16, 17, 18. whether hee loved him: He required nothing as a seale thereof, but this, that hee should feede his sheepe. Indeed, then doe wee declare our love unto our Lord, when wee feede his Flocke which is amongst us, (as it is 1 Pet. 5.2.) And if wee doe not this, wee make void the end that he aymed at, in giving us (as Pastours) to his people, which him∣selfe expresseth in the promise to bee this,Ier. 3.15. viz. The feeding of his People with knowledge and understanding. But while any indeavour to doe this, they are Pastors according to his owne heart, id est, such as himselfe is, and delights in.
This consideration (I humbly hope, I may truly say) hath made an im¦pression upon my heart, both to de∣sire, and indeavour to feede you, who are the Lambs, the Sheepe of the Lord Jesus,Phil. 1.7. For thus it is meete for mee to thinke of you all: and thus I have
you in my heart.
I must confesse I have still thought and found that there is a great difficul∣ty, in this Divine worke: And a great deale of holy VVisdome, and Strength is requisite (which I hope you pray for, in my behalfe) to feed the Houshold of Christ with not onely Meate, but with that which properly is their Portion, and that in season. I remember our blessed Lord speakes of him as of a rare Bird, and hard to bee found; Who as a wise and faith∣full Steward,Luk. 12.42 Tis . Demen∣sum cibum; each soule hath its measure, see Eph. 4.7 gives the Houshold their Portion of meate in due season. WHO THEN (saith Christ) IS THAT FAITHFUL AND WISE STEW∣ARD? To bee able to give meate (not poyson, nor Huskes) and the por∣tion of meate (that which is proper and fit for each) and this in due sea∣son i. e. when tis peculiarly needfull, and requisite) I say to bee able to doe thus; requires not onely faith∣fulnesse but wisdome too, and that in a large measure.
And if you say you have not found mee such a Steward, so Wise, and so
Faithfull; I must sigh, and seale to the truth thereof: For alas! Who is suf∣ficient for this.
But albeit this bee above my at∣tainement, yet it is in my indeavour, a true (though a weake) witnesse where∣of, I hope the insuing Treatise will be.
When it was delivered to your eare (which Job saith, tryes words, as the mouth doth meate:Iob 12.13.) You were plea∣sed to testifie to this truth, that it was your portion of meat in due sea∣son. And divers of your professed, that your soules were fed and refresh∣ed by it, as by meate suitable, and seaso∣nable for you.
This hath made your intreaty pre∣valent with mee, to represent it to your eye in Print, to try it a∣gain.
And the most precious God grant that you may bee led by his spirit in it, as in a greene Pasture, by the still Ri∣vers, and that your soules may lye downe and feede therein [SO] as that those that see you, may justly speak of you, as of a Flocke and field whom the Lord him∣selfe
hath blessed. This is all that I shall say to you about this Trea∣tise.
But I shal take the advantage of this Presse, to leave the Print of Three Words, of advice upon your hearts. The words are these.

1 Keepe to your Fold.
2 Eye your Shepheard.
3 Walke as Sheep.

1 Keepe to your Fold: Beware of wandering, from Mountaine to Hill,Jer. 50.6. (which I may safely allegorize thus) of going from one high notion to another) forgetting your resting place.
Certainly, the Churches of the New Testament, which are built up∣on the faith, and walke in the order of the Gospell,Sion is the place. Christ the rest of soules. It is hee that gives. It is there that he gives rest. are the places where Christ feedeth, and where hee maketh his flockes to rest at noone, In them are the footsteps of his flocke, and these are the tents where hee feedes his Kiddes, as it is Cant. 1.7, 8. O never bee as those weake and wanton spirits, who
wander from these Folds.
Dinah by wandering got nothing but a rape: And I wish some of late could not say the like. 'Tis true, some are gone out from us, of whom I am not so Apostoli∣call as to say; but I must bee so cha∣ritable as to pray, it may never appear they were not of us.
But its your mercy, that as yet you stand: O bee not high minded but feare, least you fall. For certainly, it is so farre from being an ascent to spirituall height,Heb. 10.25, 26. that it is a degree of falling away, to forsake the Assemblies of Saints, which are the Folds of Christ.
II, Eye your Shepherd, i.e. The Lord Jesus. 'Tis true, Men have a name of being Shepherds, but tis but as ciphers have of being figures, which all know are nothing, except one stand by them, Even Paul himselfe was not a substantiall Shepherd. It was not hee, but Christ that did all. And certainly, except Jesus Christ bee with us, we neither be nor can doe any thing.

I beseech you therefore alway to eye him, for it is he who is the Shep∣herd, and Bishop of your soules, as it is, 1 Pet. 2. last.
Now in your eying Christ, take these seasonable directions, viz.
Eye him as

1 Substantiall.
2 Sweet.
3 Sacred.

1 Eye Jesus Christ as substantiall; let never that blacknesse, and Blasphemie over-cloud your heads, and hearts, which hath made some to thinke and speake of Christ as of a forme and sha∣dow. How sad an estate were our soules in, if Jesus Christ were but a shadow, and yet the Socinians make him no more, while they deny his making any substantiall satisfaction for us; for they rather make him a meere Patterne of what we should doe, then a mediatory Patient of what we should suffer; and so deny him to be a substantiall Savi∣our. And thus likewise the Seekers over-throw the substantiality of Christ, who speake, and think of him only as
a forme of God, putting forth it selfe for a time, and annihilated afterwards; And who professedly maintaine, That Christ was but a shadow of what God would doe in our Flesh, and that themselves are as sub∣stantially God as he. But alas! how are they deceived? I hope you have not so learned;Psal. 39.6. for you know, that every man walkes in a vaine shew, and Christ is the substantiall, and expresse Image of the Fathers glory;Heb. 1.3. Col. 2.9. and that the God-head it selfe substantially dwels in him. In∣deed, all things besides Christ are but meere shadowes,Col. 2.17 he is the Body, he is the Substance, eye him, and honour him so.
2 Eye your Shepheard as sweet; enter∣taine no hard thoughts of the Lord Jesus: Perswade your soules he hath both done, and suffered all things for your sakes. He hath suffered for all your wanderings, though you were as sheep going astray, as it is, 1 Pet. 2.24.25. He workes all for you, and in you; and there remaines nothing more for you to doe, but to make sure to your selves by faith, that which he hath made sure in its selfe by love. It is true, if you wander,
his Crooke shall gather you; and it may be his Dogge worry you; but still he is sweet, for it is because hee'l not loose you. It is true, you must not be idle, hee'l have you pray, read, heare, beleeve, doe, &c. but these things shall rather be, as your pleasant walkes in his waies, then any painfull workes. In all his Dis∣pensations towards you he is, and you shall finde him sweet, therefore eye, and love him so.
3 Eye your Shepheard as sacred; Re∣member though he love Sinners, hee loathes sinne. Though he did beare the guilt of sinne upon his bache, yet he wil not beare with the filth of sinne in your bosome. O! let the words, and tenets of those, that slight sinne as nothing, and speake of prophannesse as high as of Piety, and fancy themselves as holy, and happy in acts of sinne, as in good duties: Let these and the like, be as the first begotten of Monsters, and abominati∣ons to your hearts. It is the duty of Saints to beware, not only of filthy, but of foolish talking; to avoyd not on∣ly acts, but appearances of evill;1 Thes. 5.22. to hate not only Workes, but Garments defiled
with the flesh. And fornication, and all uncleannesse is so farre to be avoyded,Eph. 5.2, 3 Jud. 23. that it is not once to be named by Saints. Remember, your Shepherd when he was but a Childe was holy,Act. 4.27 and when he was perfect, and at the right hand on high, he sent his holy Spirit to Peter, to proclaime this to all the Flock scat∣tered up and downe, that he was holy, and that they should be holy too, 1 Pet. 1.16. this Peter writ as he was moved by the Holy Ghost.
Eye therefore your Shepherd as he is, i. e. sacred, and doe you labour to be like him in all your conversation. Thus shall you doe that which is my last advice, viz.
3 Live as Sheep; Be innocent and harmlesse, be meek and patient, take heede of being Wolves in Sheeps cloathing, or of being Sheep in Wol∣vish cloathing; Neither be, nor doe as Wolves: Bite not, nor devour one a∣nother, live in love, as Lambs in one Fold. Shew your discerning eare, in not following Strangers; and your obedi∣ent eare in following of Jesus Christ. His Sheepe love him, so doe you;
and by this also, Let all men know that you are his Sheepe, that you love one a∣nother.
But affection hath carried my Pen beyond my intention, suffer me only to acquaint you with my desire for you, and my desire to you, and I have done at present.
My desire for you is, That of those whom Christ hath committed to me, I may loose none; but that at the Great day I may say; Here am I, and the Sheepe thou hast committed to me.
My desire to you is; That you would pray for me, that utterance (I say againe,Ephes. 4.19 utterance) may be gi∣ven to me, that I may open my mouth boldly, to make knowne the Mystery of the Gospell; and that I may feed you, not of constraint, but willingly; not for filthy Lucre,1 Pet. 5.2, 3, 4. but of a ready minde: Neither as being a Lord over Gods heritage, but as a faithful, loving, Wise, and diligent Shepherd: That when the chiefe Shepherd shall ap∣peare, I may receive a Crowne of glory, which Christ shall give to me in that2 Tim. 8.4
day; and not only to me, but to all that love his appearing.
But this thing I hope ye daily doe, and that I have no need to put you further in remembrance of it; I shall therefore breake off, when my heart hath subscribed that I am beloved,

