



THat Dedication of Books hath been wretchedly abused, is a thing past doubt. Holy and wise men, in all ages have complain'd of it, and some of late years have scrupled it. But yet that Books may bee dedicated, is to mee beyond controversie. Such Books as carry in them any thing besides what is truth, and of concernment, gain no patronage by a Dedi∣cation (no persons being great enough to patro∣nize errour or vanity) And such Dedications as are onely stuffed with applause and flat∣teries, as they have not been owned by any wise Patron, so they have been rejected by every understanding Reader.
When Writings, as Vessels, are fraught with rich and necessary things (and such are all spi∣ritual Truths,) with which kind of Treasure I have indeavoured to fill this Tract; And when Dedications are designed rather for ser∣vice than for ceremony (which is my design in this) then without doubt they may pass without stop or Scruple, as Ships consigned to particular Ports and persons: Nor can such
Dedications be suspected as a precarious po∣licy to seek patronage of what is written. (Cer∣tainly Luke never intended that, when hee dedi∣cated his Gospel to Theophilus) Neither may they be accused of Patent Monopoly, (as if they onely intended, the persons to whom they are directed.) Without doubt the same E∣vangelist Luke intended the General good in his Gospel, though hee sent it first to the particular hand of his most excellent Friend, as hee did also his History of the Acts.
The following Sermons are intended by mee for the general good of many. But I thought it more than meet to consign them particularly to your Port and persons, which when you have received, may pass further, as Commodities of price and profit to many souls.
Now if I bee demanded a reason of this particular Assignation unto you, spare mee to say the truth, which is this, I do heartily desire, 1 to witness how much I honour you whom God hath honoured: And 2 also to acknowledge a debt, wherein (with and for my Brother joint∣ly, and my self singly) I am ingaged unto you, which albeit I cannot repay, yet I must remem∣ber. I know your Virtue and Prudence will not bear those worthy words of your own wor∣thiness, which yet may bee spoke concerning you with truth and soberness. And I can tru∣ly
say, I never loved to rub their itching ears, who count no sound sweet, but what trum∣pets their own praises: Upon this account I shall forbear to speak that of you, to your selves, which yet I think, I am bound (for the benefit of the example) to tell others. Yet this I must needs crave your License to print, that having heard of you much by the hearing of the ear, I saw more by the seeing of my eye, when I was amongst you. And though my stay was not long, yet my observation was such, as that I must say, that those good re∣ports of your Town, do not (like the bad ru∣mours of the times) exceed the truth. If fame bee found so faithful in its reports of all persons and places, as of yours, hence∣forth It will bee a Slander to call her Liar. You are indeed as you have been famed, persons fearing God, doing justice, holding forth the truth, and practising godliness. I must say of many Towns which I have seen, The fear of God is not in those places; but of New-ca∣stle, I may say in a sober sense, JEHOVAH SHAMMAH, the Lord is there.
For you, Right Worshipful Magistrates, suffer mee, though not to applaud, yet to ap∣prove, (how much soever you are above my approbation) your worthy doings in the ma∣nagement of your power and places, wherein if you have any equals, I am sure you have
no Superiors. I could wish others did imi∣tate that, wherein you excell. You are found to bee Ministers of God to such as do good; for good; and those that do evill, Know you bear not the Sword in vain. Sabbath-breakers, Swearers, (but why should I in∣stance in particulars?) all sorts of vicious per∣sons feel your Sword sharp, and you a Terror to them; whereas your eies are upon those that are faithful: Ministers and people, fearing God, and doing that which is good, have of you the praise of the same. I beseech you give mee leave, (not to praise your selves, but to provoke others to a godly jealousie) to tell these South∣ern parts, that there is fair weather in the North; And if in any place in England, certainly in your Town, and under your Government men may and do lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. And this one thing I must needs say, Were all the Ministers in England so carefully and tenderly provided for, and encouraged, as they are in New-castle, there would not be that complaining in our streets, as there now are upon that account. Indeed the Ministers of your place have their double honour; Your incouragement of them, and provision for them is such, that I know not whether I should intreat other parts to imi∣tate your Bounty or Wisdome most: Certain∣ly both are laudable; You know not any
Minister among you by any Character, but of Christ. To preach and practise the power of godliness, is the work you equally coun∣tenance and encourage them in: and though there bee (as where is not?) some difference a∣mongst them, yet that makes no difference of them to you, who have the like care of all. What can I say of this? Spare mee to take up the Psalmists words, For my brethren and companions sakes, I will now say, Peace be within thee, yea, the peace of God (which the Learn∣ed know to comprehend in it all blessings) be for ever upon you, and yours, for your un∣parallel'd care and kindness to Christs Mini∣sters amongst you.
And for you (my Reverend Brethren) Let mee beseech you to improve so choice a mer∣cy, as you have under your Magistrates. I know you desire not (how much soever you deserve) praise: yet let mee say, you are to bee praised, for that you are of one heart, (though in all things not of one head) you minde and speak the same things of faith and life; Though yee disagree in some things of Church-rule and Order, your publick wor∣ship is in the same place, and with the same Spirit. There is not heard in your Pulpits (where you preach by turns) the noise of Axes and Hammars; Heats, Debates, Dis∣putes, are exiles at your Assemblies: you fast
and pray together, your design is the same, and your endeavours are joint, to convert sinners, and to establish Saints. Those loose and vain opinions which have pestered and plagued many places, by your zeal and uni∣ty for truth, are (through Christs blessing) marvelously prevented in your Congregati∣ons: and as for those unchristian Divisions and Animosities (which are elsewhere the sinne and shame of dissenting Professours) by the Spirit of Love and Peace, (which rules in your hearts, and appears in your la∣bours) they are either not at all, or not pre∣vailing in your place. But that I may not trouble you with more, I will onely adde this further, that I perceive yee have well stu∣died that Text, Psal. 77. which speaks of this, as Israels happiness, that God led them by the hand of Moses and Aaron. Surely the people of your Town seem to bee led but by one hand: Indeed Moses goes before, (as it is but fit) and Aaron comes after: Your Magistrates in Civils, and your selves in Spirituals, are so one in hand (and I hope in heart) that though you have offices distinct, yet your indeavours are joint, and both make up one great mercy to the people under you. As they incourage you, so yee reve∣rence them: They are not such who assume power in Spitituals, but leave your work to
your selves, and yee, (I hope none of yee) are as those who despise Dominion, nor inter∣meddle with the politick affairs. Let that heart be filled with sorrow, and that hand and head be cursed of the Lord, that indeavours (in the least) the breach of that holy and righteous har∣mony that is betwixt you: I presume, yee will say, Amen, to my prayer for you in this par∣ticular.
To you then (holy and beloved Brethren) Who fear God, and have faith in Jesus, and are blessed by, and a blessing to such a Ma∣gistracy and Ministry. Let mee speak also a few words, I bear you witness to others, that there is amongst you, the Spirit and con∣versation of the good old Puritans, (whom I mention with honour) it is your credit that you are not in this day of reproach and blas∣phemy, (which is upon profession for Profes∣sors faults) a shame to that worthy name wherewith yee are called. The itch of no∣vel opinions, the botch of vain fashions, the plague of neglect of duties, and slighting Or∣dinances and Ministry, these are not seen a∣mongst you, or on you. I verily saw much of Christ in you, your carriage was seem∣ing exact, and I hope your study is to bee what you seem for. Wo be to Hypocrites and Sin∣ners (hollow-hearted Professours, or ignorant and profane persons) in New castle. They that are
bad under Magistrates and Ministers so good, will bee damned without mercy under two of the greatest witnesses that can bee against a people. But I hope better things of you, though I thus speak. I beseech you so live, that by your good examples, (concurring with the power of your Magistrates, and preaching of your Ministers) yee may help to convince and convert evill doors, at least, to put to si∣lence the ignorance of foolish men.
To you all, Magistrates, and Ministers, and Saints, jointly and severally, let me return my hearty & humble thanks for that singular respect, which for many years yee have expressed to my ever dear and beloved Brother, whose lot is cast among you. It is to mee matter of joy and praise before the Lord, that since it plea∣sed God (who disposes of all our persons and places) to carry him so far from all relations, that he did vouchsafe to fix him amongst your selves, who abundantly make up all relati∣ons, in your care and kindness to and for him. Now the blessed God for ever reward your love to him and his. Let your goodness accept of mee (who am obliged in and for him) this short, but sincere acknowledgement for the same. I shall not trouble you with the re∣membrance of that kindness, which (when by the good hand of God I visited my brother, and saw yee,) you were pleased to express. It
is your goodness you had rather shew kind∣ness than hear praise. Therefore I judge it would trouble you, if I should blaze that, which yet was such and so great, as I have and must speak of to others, and before the Lord with thanksgiving: your receiving mee, and love to mee, was in the Spirit of the Gospel; yee did receive mee in the name of a Prophet, and in the name of a Disciple, (howbeit I am unworthy that honour.) Oh that hee who rewards a cup of cold water, gi∣ven upon such an account, would abundantly reward your large and loving respects to me (even poor me) in that way, and upon that score. My gratitude would overflow, did not the consideration of your Modesty (which loves not to hear its own applause) set mee bounds. I will therefore conclude thus, May your Per∣sons, your Government, your Labours, your whole Town, and your Universal All, be alwaies under the special favour of the blessed God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom I remain,
Right worthy, Reverend, and Beloved Sirs,

