



Christian Reader;
IF wee consider the exceeding excellency of the whole Crea∣tion, resulting from the con∣joyned and combined excel∣lencies of the severall and various species of creatures, the least we can doe is to admire; and who that admires the whole, can but observe this one particular as most remarkable? what creature it was which GOD the Creator wound up the Worlds perfection with; and that was man: Man, who though in regard of time, he was made the last of all, yet for si∣militude, the best of all, he being made after the Image of God himselfe, for so was the Counsell and Decree of Heaven concerning him before he was made, and so also was the execution of that Decree when he was made.
 So God created man in his own Image, in the Image of God created he him. The first gives him all the perfections of the rest; the second a perfection far above them all: The first gives him the possession and use of all this whole inferiour world, being then as an house well furnished by God with all other sublunary perfections, for the enter∣tainment of man, and to be tenanted by him: the second, that gives him Dominion Gen. 1. 26. and Lordship over all. And both of them shew, that as all things else were created for man, so man for God: then which, what high∣er perfection could there be? and man thus made, made up the complement and perfecti∣on of the whole. Then God looking upon eve∣ry thing that he had made, saw it not barely bonum, as before, but bonum valde, i. e. Gen. 1. 31. very good indeed: then also was man, in re∣spect of all the other sublunaries, as the Dia∣mond to the Ring; not onely shining and glorious with the best excellencies of the more inferiour natures, but also glittering and sparkling with the radiancie of his owne, and that as enriched with the divine, of which in a greater measure man at the first was made partaker: Man then was the choi∣cest
 plant of all that the Omnipotent hand of God had planted in that Garden of God where he was put; a right generous and No∣ble Vine. And had he then contented him∣selfe with that perfection and transcendent excellency of estate, which the all-wise God had thought fit, for that present to conferre upon him, paying duely his rent unto him, as he was made well able to doe; and doing this homage to him, in acknowledging him to be chiefe Lord of all, as it was very fit he should have done; and bringing forth that acceptable fruit unto him, which he might have done; for he had in him the seed thereof: then might he have so con∣tinued without any change or alteration of estate, till at the last be had gathered to him∣selfe, and tasted the most delicious sweetnesse of the Fruit, not onely of all the other Trees (which for the present was allowed him) but also of that Tree growing in the midst of the Garden by the Tree of knowledge of good and evill, even of the Tree of Life, and Gen. 2. 9. that not in the Figure, but in the substance; which thing he was by hope to have expected and waited for, till Gods time of his tran∣slation or removall from an earthly to an Heavenly Paradise.

But man, foolish man, aspiring higher then was meet, and preposterously reaching after a condition above himselfe, so at once, both fell short of what he aym'd at, and of himselfe; precipitantly falling from an higher excellency then he was any way wor∣thy of (in regard of so ill managing his af∣faires) into a condition far below himselfe. And so now againe you see him, who was once the best of all, become the very worst of all; and him for whom once the whole Crea∣tion groaned (as labouring of imperfection till he was made) now by his sin become a Rom. 8. 22 burden which the whole Creation groaneth under: I may adde, and that no lesse then such as presseth under it the Creator of the Amo. 2. 13. Isa. 43. 24. whole; yea, and by pressing, wearieth him; him, whom once you saw Gods tenant to all, now you see discharged and turn'd out of all: he, who once, under God himselfe (the chiefe Lord) had dominion over all, is now become the very drudge and slave of all, and not the slave of all the works of God alone, but which is worst of all, the slave of sin to his own de∣praved and accursed worke: him, whom once you saw the choisest plant of all Gods hand, planted by him a noble Vine, and whol∣ly Jer. 2. 21.
 a right seed unto himselfe, you now see turned into the degenerate plant of a strange Vine; a Vine like that the Prophet speaks of, fit for no use at all but for a fire. And thus his greater happinesse before, is now become his greater misery, the higher perfection of that condition being but the lower defection of this; and the greater ex∣cellency of the one, but the greater aggrava∣tion of the other: in as much as from the higher pinacle that wee fall (you know) by so much the greater the hurt and danger that doth ensue.
But is the misery then so great, as that its past all cure and remedy? And is man, who thus had lost himselfe, quite lost for ever? Yes, lost for ever, and utterly remedilesse in his misery, for any thing at all that he can doe to helpe himselfe: Yet God, not willing to lose the Master-piece of all his works, and that the choisest plant which his hand had planted, should so miscarry, then findes out a way to save him, who had lost himselfe; and to replant him, who by Satan had been so sup∣planted: to which purpose therefore, he cau∣seth a root of Jesse to put forth, and to Isa. 11. 10. & 53. 2. grow up before him as a tender plant,
 and as a root out of a dry ground; into which stock or good Olive Tree, man so de∣generated, Ro. 11. 24. might be ingraffed, and so reco∣ver his former noblenesse and generositie: his former noblenesse did I say? nay doubt∣lesse I may be bold to say, that as God, to the effecting of this for man, shewed greater wis∣dome and mercy, then he before had done power and goodnesse in making of him; so that it being once effected, he hath much bet∣tered his condition, and raised it to an high∣er excellency then before; for though man in his first estate had in himselfe a principle of life, and by that a seed of fruit answera∣ble to his present condition then, yet so as that it was wholly in his own keeping; like to a plant that grows upon its own bottome: yet now is life so in himselfe, as that it is more in another, even in Christ, from whom (by vertue of union with him) as from a root or fountain he receives vivificall power and vigour continually to produce all spirituall and living actions, and to bring forth the fruits of holinesse unto eternall life: even as the branch that lives not of it selfe, but hath all lively sap and moisture, both unto life and fruitfulnesse, from the root or stock on which it grows: and so is our estate in Christ the se∣cond
 Adam, farre more secure and glori∣ous then ever it could have been in the first: besides herein is the excellency of man in this condition, even above the Angels them∣selves, in that Christ by assuming our Na∣ture, hath thereby advanced it above theirs, Heb. 2. 16. which he never took upon him; in which re∣spect, man is now higher then those glorious and celestiall Creatures, who at the first was made inferiour to them, though but a little Psal. 8. 5. lower then they. So that look what dif∣ference there sometimes was betwixt the first Temple and the second; the very like may you see here betwixt these two conditions, if you compare them of man in Adam before his fall, as he was then by Creation, and of man since his fall, as he is now by Regenera∣tion: Only there the former house did exceed in glory, and that so far, as the ancient men Hag. 2. 3. of the Priests and Levites, which had seene the first, when they also saw the Ezr. 3. 12. last, could not but weepe with a lowd voyce to behold the difference; but here now the latter condition exceeds the former, in so much that they who shall once live to see, and experimentally to know the excellency of this above that, cannot but rejoyce with exceeding joy.

And now (Christian Reader) should I here passe over in silence the farre more ex∣ceeding and transcendent excellency which is in Christ, (the fountaine of all that in the Saints excells in goodnesse) I might seeme to obscure what all this while I have endea∣voured to cleare: for if their excellency in this renewed estate be not from him, then is it not so great an excellency as I have said: But if it be derived all from him (as indeed it is) then shall I neither give him that ho∣nour, which is his due, by being silent in such a case; nor doe thee that right I should, who by beholding of his beauty, mayst perhaps be enamoured with it, and so the rather be brought to fall in love with him, in whom otherwise thou mayst see no forme nor Isa. 53. 2. comelinesse, nor any thing else that thou shouldst desire him. Tell me therefore:
Is there nothing that thou canst behold in Christ more amiable and lovely, then in the world? Is it nothing that while the world is a lump of vanity and meere vacui∣tie, Eccles. 1. Col. 1. 19. yet that in him all fulnesse dwels? fulnesse in other things hath an attractive and invitatory vertue: the full garners drew Jacobs sonnes downe into Aegypt;
 plentitude of wisdome, the Queene of Sheba to King Salomon: and why doest thou covet the world, but from a delight de pleno tollere acervo, to take of a full heap? But alas! all this is emptinesse to the ful∣nesse of Christ, who hath transcendently in him, all that this world affords. One little piece of gold is fuller of worth then many of silver, and one little Diamond then an heap of gold, all the petty perfections scattered a∣broad in the creatures, are in him united: that great volume of excellencies spread up and downe through Heaven and Earth, is in him epitomiz'd: besides that fulnesse of Grace, of which the world hath not a dram. The world, at the fullest, is but an Ocean which is lessened by losing the least drop; but Christ his fulnesse, is the fulnesse of fire, which is not one jot diminished, though it gives light to a thousand Torches. The con∣tinuall effluences of vertue out of him, and influences of the sap of his quickning grace, into all those fruit-bearing branches (though infinite in number) that draw from him, is not the least evacuation at all unto him.
Is it nothing, that while the creature doth allure us from God, our own guilty con∣sciences,
 and the dreadfulnesse of his glori∣ous Majesty deterre us; Christ onely drawes us to him (who is the chiefest and only good,) so that through him alone we have ac∣cesse Eph. 2. 18. unto the Father? God is a Sunne, the resplendent beames of whose Majesty, so glorious an object, would overcharge, and even quite put out those presumptuous eyes, that should dare to looke up to him, unlesse overcast with the Cloud of Christ a Media∣tour. God is a consuming fire, and mortall were it for us mortalls, to come neere it with∣out the interposed Skreene of Christ his Me∣diation. First must wee come to the manger of Christs humanity, before we can have an accesse with boldnesse to the Throne of di∣vine Majesty.
Is it nothing, that while the world, in our greatest exigents, sues out a divorce, and then deserts us, yet that Christ is constant in his love, having once tyed himselfe to us with the knot of conjugall affection, which with him is indissoluble? Christ is our hus∣band: And hence, how many precious privi∣ledges ensured to us? In law uxori lis non intenditur; what then hath the law, exact∣ing obedience unto life, to doe with Christi∣ans?
 Againe, Mulier fulget radiis mari∣ti: The Husband communicates all that he hath unto his Wife: and even such a com∣munity of grace is there betwixt Christ and true beleevers; Christ his graces and a be∣leevers differing onely secundum gradum, i. e. in respect of measure or degree; but not at all secundum speciem, i. e. in kinde or quality, in which respect they are the same.
Besides all which, are all the benefits of our mysticall union with Christ, nothing? Hence spirituall life: Hence conformitie Col. 3. 3. 4. Rom. 6. 5. 1 Pet. 1. 14. Phil. 2. 5. 1 Joh. 2. 6. Joh. 15. 5. Rom. 8. 35. with Christ our head, a triple conformity, in nature, in minde, in conversation: Hence fructification for the present: Hence perse∣verance for the future, even to the end: Hence glorification also in the end; yea, and therein admission of our bodies as well as soules into eternall glory at the last. And is all this to be accounted nothing?
Many, and many are the excellencies to be found in Christ, and to be received from him, which (besides these that I have men∣tioned) I might instance in, and so lead thee still on forward in this way, even till I should, as in a maze or labyrinth, lose both
 my selfe and thee, in the contemplation of them: But because I had much rather, that thou shouldst be found in Christ, then lost in the contemplation of Christ; and because my hearty desire is for thee, that thou shouldst be more a reall Christian, and estated in him, then contemplative, and alwayes onely meditating of him; as an excellent meanes therefore amongst many others, to help thee in, and guide thee to the Right Receiving of, and rooting in Christ, I can now for∣beare no longer, to commend unto thy per∣usall this following Treatise: Not a packe of Brachygraphicall fragments, and incohe∣rent scraps, jumbled together by some prag∣maticall pen man; but a worke (upon my certaine knowledge) perfectly finished, and that purposely for the Presse, by the learned and most judicious Pen of my Most deare and late deceased Father, and then in∣tended by him to have been annexed, as an Appendix to that last worke of his, which himselfe published before his death, entitu∣led, A worthy Communicant, Or a Trea∣tise shewing the due order of receiving the Sacrament, &c. and this a Treatise, intituled, The Right Receiving of, and
 Rooting in Christ; the very Title which he himselfe did put upon it while he lived. Which fore-named Treatise (Christian Rea∣der) with all his Former Works by him∣selfe published (that gracious acceptance which they ever found from thee, and the du∣ty and honour I still doe, and shall ever owe to him) made me thus farre to deny my selfe, as to adventure (though but a bungler at it) to afford my obstretricatory assistance to this Posthumus Infant, rather then it should al∣wayes lye gasping in the Presse, ready to pe∣rish for want of helpe.
To speak any thing in the commendations of this Work, its own mouth denyes me; and is the rather needlesse, in that I have now so farre assur'd thee of its Author, who himselfe had thus finisht it for thy use, as thou now receiv'st it.
To speak much of the Author, modesty and my neere relation to him, will not admit of; and to say nothing of him, duty forbids me: With the leave of modesty then will I speake thus much onely and no more; and if any shall thinke I say too much, I will leave it to duty to excuse me. For his Fidelity and Im∣partiality in the Work of his Ministery, who
 knew him, and knowes not, that the Sword of the Spirit was in his hands, a two-edged Sword, which cut every way? not like Sauls, that cut off the leane and worst of the people and cattell, and spared Agag and the fattest cattell; but like the Psalmists Sword, which spared none. Yet so, as that alwayes mens sinnes, not their persons, were the objects of his hottest thunder-bolts.
I will here passe by his rare accomplish∣ments with all Ministeriall abilities, as bet∣ter knowne, then that I need to mention them. Alii pleni, & non loquuntur, hi non pleni, loquuntur: Alii multiscii, & muti; hi ignari, & sonori. How he was every way free from both these Ministeriall defects, thou who know'st him not in the Pul∣pit, reade him in the Presse, and judge.
For his indefatigabilitie in his labours, and all for other mens eternall profit, more then his own private and worldly benefit, he was one of Saint Chrysostoms Bees, Glo∣riosissimum animal, not because it labours, but because its labour is to others profita∣ble.
And for his inoffensive life, who knowes not that he was none of those slimy Lizards,
 who wipe out the wholesome Print of their Doctrine, with the filthy tayle of their scan∣dalous practises.
But here now, though Modesty did not, yet the Father would take me off, who tells me, now God hath taken the Arke of his blessed soule out of the moveable earthly Tabernacle of his body, and placed it in the fixed Tem∣ple of celestiall blisse, Imitationem quae∣rit, August. non laudes, that my best commendati∣on will be imitation. While he lived, God honoured him to be one of Gideons Souldi∣ers, who carried both a Trumpet and a Lampe; the Trumpet of his Ministery he let fall, and the light of his practise wee all lost when God cracked asunder his earthen Pitcher. The greatest honour I can now doe him, is not to Trumpet forth his praises, and make a blaze with his commendations; but to take up both the Trumpet and Lampe which he laid downe, in an holy imitation of him, both in soundnesse of Doctrine, and piety of practise: and in this case I am sure, what duty commands me, that Modesty will not forbid.
And thus, that God would not onely be∣stow the mantle, but double the spirit of this
 deceased Eliah, upon his surviving poste∣ritie, be it thy daily Petition at the Throne of Grace; and to requite thee, that God would redouble a blessing of his servants Labours upon thy pious endeavours, shall be the humble Supplication of
The Churches devoted Servant,

