


THe great work of Reformation which is put into your hand, hath many and great advantages: That it is undoubtedly a work which God alone can bring to passe: That he will in his own time accomplish it: That it cannot be wrought any other way, then by the advancement of the Gospel of Christ: That none can be instrumentall in it, but such is are the trees ofIsa 6. 3. 4. Righteousnes, the planting of the Lord, by whom he may be glorified: That to such the Lord hath promised, that they shall build the old wasts, and raise up the former desolations: That none can oppose the work, but such as hate to be reformed, and know not the joy∣full sound of his truth: That all such as wait for
 God in the way of his judgements, can be helpers in it: That the decree is gone forth against Babylon, that she shall be laid waste: That these are pronounced blessed, who shall take and dash her little ones against the stones; and that you are so deeply engaged in this work, that you can have no temporall safety nor subsistance, but so farre as you proceed in it; so that now you must either fall utterly, and draw with you into ruine the other re∣formed Churches; or else secure them and your selves by the building up of Zion: all these are exceeding great advantages, which I am perswaded, you doe un∣derstand and can truly value. Therefore when I spoke unto you, I found a freedom of spirit, in love to the cause and to you, which opened my mouth, as without fear, so with an assurance of acceptance: and although the shortnes of the time would not suffer me to proceed and come to a full application; yet I hope that if the thing which hath been delivered, which in obedience to your Honourable command I have here published, (so neer as I can remember, both in sense and words) be laid to heart, and rightly apprehended, the main matter of my message will be in due time effected by the grace of God in your spirits, which is, to know the true relation wherein you stand towards the Church of God; what the mystery of Babylon is; and what you ought to aim at in raising up the walls of Jerusalem within your
 selves. If time would have given leave, I should have added something concerning the extent of your building, that you must not make the walls of your Ierusalem too narrow in compasse, but be mindefull that they ought to receive all those that are going out of Babylon with you.
I mean, both your own and forreign Protestants, whose eyes are upon you, and whose peace and safety is wrapt up in your prosperity: and how farre soever you shall think good in due time to look with an eye of brotherly correspondency towards them: (whereof to put you in minde is a part of my duty, and therefore I now desire to crave leave, that at a convenient season I may be per∣mitted to offer the means thereof unto you) yet in the mean time I may have confidence and rejoyce in this, that the engagement which God hath put upon you by your Covenant, is such, that you cannot possibly be reconciled unto Babylon, if you be faithfull to it. And in your faithfull resolutions I dare promise unto my self, that the Prophecie of Ieremy the Prophet shall be accom∣plished by your proceedings, namely, that they shallIer. 5. 26. not take of Babylon any one stone for a corner, nor a stone for a foundation: but that it shall be deso∣late for ever. If thus you are resolved to depart and goe out from her, and answer effectually the call which is given, to touch none of her uncleannes; you may be
 sure that the work of the Lord and his good pleasure, shall prosper in your hand. You shall be exalted in his truth, and beautified with his holines, when he filleth Sion with judgement and Righteousnes. And you may make sure of the promise which followeth the words of my Text, that you shall not need to proceed in haste, nor goe out by slight, because the Lord will go before you, and the God of Israel will be your rereward. And that this may be so, I shall never cease to make mention of you be∣fore the Lord at the Throne of Grace, as it becom∣meth

