



SIR,
WHen importunity had prevail'd with me to this service, who was never fond of such publick imployments, 'twas not intended that this Sermon should be made more publick, by the shew∣ing it to the world: But that candid and charitable account which some persons of worth (then Audi∣tors) gave thereof unto your Honour, made you in∣quisitive after it, and solemnly invite the Publicati∣on. I was never yet so far in love with any thing of mine own, as to fancy it worth the publick view: but since 'tis so sutable to your desires, which must ever have with me the force of a command, I shall not decline this advantage of leaving some testimo∣ny to the world of those many favours, which I have received from your hand.

The Argument of this Discourse is a plaine, but a fundamentall and a saving truth; concerning which, I may take up the language of that Pious and labo∣rious servant of Christ in a businesse of the like na∣ture;
Mr. Carryll in Job. 7.6. 'Tis a point easie to be known, but hardly to be beleeved; every man assents to it, but few live it; we slight the hearing of common Principles, but common truths neglected, cause the neglect of every truth; had we more serious thoughts of Heaven and Hell, that these are, and what these are; that there is a God, and who he is; that there shall be such a judge∣ment, and what it shall be, we should more profitably improve and trade our times and talents. Under whose grave and sober judgement, I shall secure my self from the censure and contempt of them who are taken onely with new-Doctrines: It being the much unhappinesse of this present age, that so many are willing to exchange old Truths for new Notions; Solid and sober truths, for strained Allegories; Pra∣cticall Truths, for frothy speculations.
For its dresse and harnesse, that's plaine too; and such as is sutable to the Country, where it was born; indeed, such is the native beauty of Divine truths, that they suffer by that paint, which humane wit would put upon them; they ever look best in their own colours; the best Character of a Sermon is, that it be honest, and tend to edification.
That this so inconsiderable a piece, should flie un∣der your wings for shelter (besides that you have pleased to invite it) can bee no wonder to them who know with what exceeding tenderness, for ma∣ny yeers, you have there cherished its unworthy
Author. The children of our Brains, as wel as those of our loyns should learn that lesson of the Wiseman, Not to forget their fathers friends; 'Tis the too usuall con∣sequent (I wil not say effect) of great places, to swel men with thoughts of impunity; because men cannot call them to an account, they are too apt to flatter themselves, that God will not; and when once that piece of Atheisme hath siezed on their heart, they easily give the reins to pride and oppression, and what not! which fault, though in the strictest scru∣tiny, you could never be found tainted with, who in the height and continuance of your great Imployments, retain your naturall and Christian Clemency, meeknesse, and humility: yet 'tis not amiss to fortifie your heart with all possible strength a∣gainst such encroaching thoughts, where Place and Imployment is so apt to become a snare.
To this purpose, I take the Confidence to re∣commend this ensuing discourse unto your ser∣vice: which may be (like Philip of Macedon's Page,) your daily remembrancer of that which I know, is your frequent and serious meditation.
I am not so much a stranger to your affairs, to conceive you at leisure to read large Epistles; I have only one word to you, and one for you, and I have done; that to you is,
That as God hath been pleased to set and conti∣tinue you so long in so eminent a place, inabled you to such incessant labour, and preserved you under such great Revolutions of State, you would make it your businesse more and more to advance him in the Gospel of his dear Son. And wherein
(at present) can you better improve your power and interest for him, then in cherishing and pre∣serving his Great Ordinance of the Ministry. The tender compassion which I bear to those poor souls, which sit in darknesse, and the shadow of death, makes me continue to beg the utmost improve∣ment of your power for the setling of a learned and a pious Ministry in every Congregation of the Land! That the Excellency of that calling may be preserved from those virulent and bitter tongues, which are set on fire of hell! that their Office may not be publickly invaded by those, who are not called to that, but to other imployments! that oile may be preserved, and provided for burning lamps!
1 Cor. 9.7.14. That they who preach the Gospel may live up∣on the Gospel, (which in the Apostles judgment is the highest equity,) until they that go a warfare go on their own charges! That there may be a constant supply of persons fit for that weighty imployment, by preser∣ving & cherishing those Seminaries of learning, the Universities, so famous through the Christian world; without which, ignorance, error, and atheism wil sud∣denly and unavoidably overspread the Land! In a word, that they be not justled out of their Function & maintenance, to gratifie a people, who are no better friends to Magistracy, then to Ministry. And to speak what mine own experience assures to be truth, (you have vouchsafed to make me so much privy to your thoughts) I know these things you desire and endea∣vor; wherein, if after all your labour, you fail in the success, yet you have freed your own soul, and your reward is with your God.

That for you, is; that that gracious God, who hath inabled you to so continued a service, would multiply all the gifts and graces of his spirit upon you and yours! that your days may be prolonged, your health & strength continued and increased, your Honors fastned on you, that your Family may flourish, & you rewarded a thousand fold for all those incoragements, and tender indeerments, whereby you have for ever obliged
Sir,

From my Study at Tredington, May 1. 1652.
