


SIR,
ONE of the Principal De∣signs of most Dedications inscrib'd to Men of Eminence and Condition, is the imploring their Patronage and Protection. This the Authors ever pretend, and add, that their Books, being to travel in a wide and censorious World, do want a Pass∣port from some Grea Name, which may defend them from the arrogance and obloquy of Cri∣ticks, a sort of Men, that are born to be the Scourges of Mankind in
all Ages, and therefore ought ei∣ther to be tied up by the Publick Magistrate, or awed down by Persons of Celsitude and Honour; so that if Hobbs his State of Na∣ture awakens and kicks-up in 'em, they may vent all their Malig∣nity on the Dust, without any Noise of their own, or the Hear∣ing of others. They pretend, that the least Trifles and Dwarflings of Wit, are most mightily safe and secure, provided they have but kindly and favourable Patrons: And, to hear at what rate they talk, a Man would say, that those glorious and adorable Per∣sonages, whom they with so much Religion invoke, and to whom they so devoutly conse∣crate their Labours, have either the Will or the Power to give Estimation to such things, as by no means deserve it; as if, like
Deities, they cou'd Create some∣thing out of nothing, and the Merits of one Man cou'd be transferr'd upon another.
This Custom, SIR, I shall not follow, tho' I have so much good Company, it being bottom'd upon a very Chimerical Founda∣tion; but shall leave the Book and its Author to shift for them∣selves, as well as they can. Yet even this Amusement is su∣perseded by their having done so already: For, Both of 'em have, for some Years, stood the Test of France; and as it has been the Happiness of the Author to be applauded and preferr'd by that Great-Prince, for his profound Skill and Know∣ledge in these no less pleasu∣rable than useful Studies of Geo∣graphy, so hath his Book been Universally receiv'd and Una∣nimously
approv'd by the learned part of that King's Subjects, as it appears by the repeated Edi∣tions of this Work in the Ori∣ginal.
As to my share in it, that am only the Englisher, I can pretend to nothing of Merit, but only that of Translating it Faithfully. It is a Subject made more for Ʋse than Ostentation, and serves rather to the Infor∣mation than Divertisement of Hu∣mane Life. Here are none of the Heroick Flights of Eloquence, nor the more Delicate Curiosi∣ties of Wit: But the Words both are and ought to be as plain and un-metaphorical as those in the last Confession of a Dying Man. Wou'd it not be an horrid, ab∣surd and amasing Spectre, Sir, to see a Fellow, when he is rea- to Expire, use either a starch'd
Eloquence or Nice Witticisms, when he was to draw all the Linea∣ments of his Soul, to shew the several risings and tumours of his Passions, and consequently his Vices depending thereon, to di∣scover all the Deformities, and let the By-standers guess at the Landskip of his Vertues, and (in one word) when he was to write or dictate the whole Geography of his Mind? The same thing holds good in this kind of Knowledges: They must be drawn as Naked, as Truth or Nature; Otherwise, Poetry wou'd Commence Geography, and this Globe of Earth wou'd be like a Castle in the Air, not only in its local Hanging, but its real Existence.
But tho' the Argument does not admit of much Verbal Or∣nament, yet it carries a great
deal of Delight along with it, which arising from the things themselves, most undoubted∣ly, is much more real, steady, and substantial, than what de∣rives its Origine from Words. Here we are only tickl'd, but there a solid Joy runs through the whole Circle of Blood, which keeps it warm a good while afterwards. By the former we are put, peradventure, into a small sort of Ecstacy, but we are flush'd and transfix'd by the later. The First slackens and relaxes the Mind, but the Se∣cond enlarges it and fills it up. And (to instance in the Studies under my hands) when we take a Prospect of the several Scenes of this Globe, of its dif∣ferent Soils and Climates, of its various Kingdoms and Nations, of their respective Arts and Policies,
of their divers Religions and De∣votions; tho' all this be describ'd without any Rhetorical Paint and Fucus, it must needs both ex∣tremely divert and sate the wi∣dest Capacities of our Souls, not only upon account of the Nature of the Things them∣selves, but likewise of their admirable Variety: And, for my part, I am unable to ex∣press the mighty Satisfaction I took two Years ago, when I ran this thing over with my Pen, only to settle these Notices in my Mind.
It is my Opinion, SIR, that our Minds stand in need of as much Nutriment as our Bodies: As we are perpetually recruit∣ing the latter, so we must be al∣ways refreshing the former, and not let it, by continual Expi∣ration either grow Empty or be
harrass'd by Famine. Men are not to imitate their Methods in fur∣nishing their Houses, while they lay out so much in adorning all their lower Rooms, but the Garret is either Empty or fill'd with Rubbish. Yet it is gene∣rally seen, that when Men have got some small stock and smattering of Learning, there they stick and proceed no further; they have already enough for common Conversation, and talk the rest by hints and guesses; not considering, that so frail is the Mind and Memory of Man, that even that knowledge runs through it, as through a perfo∣rated Vessel, and they must imitate the Danaides in their Labour, tho' they do not in the vanity of their Labour: for in the sifting of Letters, as in other things, tho' the greater part
passes through, yet what's fine remains, and the more it's sifted the finer and richer it is: But those,
Queis arte Benigna Et meliore luto finxit praecordia Titan, tho' they have less Necessity, yet take more Care about this Reple∣tive Faculty, (as I may call it;) and as what Aliment enters the Stomach, turns gradually into Chyle, and Blood, and Animal Spirits; so they refine more and more the Notices that come into the Brain; and Conversation [the true Touchstone] turns what they Read into good and current Coin, as Midas turn'd all he touch'd into Gold.
Another Reason, for a Constant Infusion of Knowledge into the Mind, arises by immediate De∣duction from the former; since
the Soul ought no more to be in the same temper and frame than the Body, if we intend either to live happily or in health. As a con∣tinual renovation of the Blood con∣duces to the health of the Body, so a constant Redintegration of thoughts makes up the welfare and good estate of the Mind. Variety is the great Mistress of the World, and what wou'd become of Love it self, and all other Mistresses, if she was not ador'd? What Man in the World wou'd be always in the same Garb, or be always chewing the same Meat? Great∣ness it self is tyrannical and tiresom without Learning on a Day of Physick or Rain: and Men ought to value 'emselves as much upon their Minds as their Bodies.
Now, to apply, Sir, that which I have said to the present Case; what can be more charmingly va∣rious
and diversifi'd, than the know∣ledge of the several Circumstances of this sublunary Globe? What can be more serviceable and con∣ducive toward our Attainment of a Vitae Modus, (as Terence calls it) than our reading the greater World, and so learning how to form our own Microcosm? What better way, Sir, can there be taken to understand the Constitution of our own Government, and be able to shake St. Stephen's Chappel by a Logical Eloquence, than by weigh∣ing the Frames of all other Poli∣ties and Regiments on this side the Sun? What other Considerati∣ons can better incite you to a bra∣ver Mettle and more sudden Skill and Experience in the Arts of Gallantry and the Sword, than the Fancy of a Fame Equal to the extent of the whole World? These sublime and lofty Meditations have
precipitated me into the undoubted Foresight of future things: And ev'n now I see a Life, that will be the Labour and Embellishment of our Chronicles, not only the Illustrious Greatness and Divine Wisdom of your now Grandfather, with the Excellencies of that your other so celebrated Ance∣stor of your own Name, but all the Personal Perfections of your glorious Mother center'd and conspicuous in you; insomuch that as you will be the Orna∣ment and Support of the Mascu∣line, so I must necessarily Infer you the triumphant Delight of the Fair Sex; and in passionate Expectation of that time, I lay the whole World, and my Self, at your feet; Who am, SIR,

