



By the Sieur Du Vignau, Secre∣tary of the French Embassador to the Port, &c. A. D. 1687/8.
My Lord;
IMagining my self ob∣liged to give an Account to the Publick,
 of whatever I could learn of the Ottoman Policy, and different Manners of Govern∣ment, during Nine Years Abode at Constantino∣ple, and several other Parts of their Empire, which I have pass'd o∣ver; I have therefore laid hold on this Con∣juncture of their Down∣fal, to shew the Chri∣stian World, that this great Coloss, which has been hitherto respected
 as Impregnable, stands on Foundations easily mov'd and overthrown, as subsisting by such Prejudices, and false De∣scriptions, as have been made of its Greatness.
I acknowledge, my Lord, that this Imagi∣nation might pass for a Chimera, had it come into my Head, whilst Mahomet the Conqueror, Selim II. and Soly∣man the Magnificent, e∣qual'd
 the Number of their Victories to that of their Enterprises; and whilst Fortune made Kingdoms and Empires stoop to the Turkish Yoke. But these vali∣ant Conquerors, here∣tofore so Redoutable, are only heard of now by the sorry Enterpri∣ses of a piteous Defence; and I do not doubt, but every body will enter into the Sentiments which I have of the
 Weakness of their Em∣pire, especially in com∣paring what they see, with what I shall say: Whence they will judge, that a Power, which, maugre the Fierceness of its first Maxims, stoops to such supplicating Ex∣pressions for Peace, is not such as has been al∣ways describ'd, and is only capable of sustain∣ing a War, to bring grea∣ter Honour to those who attack Her.

What Occasion soe∣ver I might have of flat∣tering my self, my Lord, that this Reflection will dispose Mens Minds to accept of my Design, yet I shall fear to expose my self to the Publick, should your serene High∣ness refuse the Grace of bringing it into the World under the Pa∣tronage of your great Name.

In effect, my Lord, under whose more effi∣cacious and happy Pro∣tection, can I shelter it from the Severity of Mens Censures, than in a Family where so ma∣ny great Princes have always appeared, and where the Christian Ha∣tred against the Despo∣tick Grandure of the Ottomans, has signaliz'd it self by so many he∣roick Actions on Sea
 and Land, making con∣tinual War against them, for the Glory and Ad∣vantage of Religion, the Benefit of Commerce, and Safety of Italy?
Let a Man run over the Coasts of Africk, the Hellespont, the Archipe∣lago, Adriatic Sea, the Gulfs, Havens, and all the Isles of the Mediter∣ranean, and is there any Part which is not Wit∣ness of the Exploits, and
 great Actions, which the Valour of Princes, or Captains of the August House of the Medici's, have there perform'd?
I shall leave this Elo∣gium to the Justice and Fidelity of History, which will be far from forgetting one of her most precious Orna∣ments, the glorious Par∣ticulars of whatever your serene Highness does eve∣ry day, and whatever
 your Illustrious Prede∣cessors have done in De∣fence of the Christian Name, against the Ma∣hometan Superstitions. I leave to publick Fame, the care of finding more eloquent Expressions, and more proportiona∣ble than mine can be, to the Merit and Majesty of so August a Subject; whilst following my Un∣dertaking, of entering into the Penetralia of the Government of the
 Port, I shall endeavour to make it known, that its Greatness subsists on∣ly on the Prejudices of those who never truly understood it.
This is indeed a con∣siderable Design, but it's a Design, my Lord, which does not astonish me, and which will meet with Applauses, even amongst those who take Pleasure in censu∣ring all Mens Works,
 when it shall be seen, I have produced this un∣der the Patronage of one of the most glorious Princes of the World, to whom I esteem it my greatest Glory to be

