


WHen I had finished this little Book ac∣cording to custome, I began to study a Patron, I propounded in my thoughts divers men & that of no ordinary rank and quality, they were great men, and according to appearance good men, for I made it no small part of my study to choose such men that lov'd truth, that so they might the better protect it, but when I considered with my self, that no mortall man was infallible, and that the greatest, and best men in

the World have but a time here, and that time 1▪ Cor. 7. 29.short, and that the strongest and ablest man hath not an irresistible power of himself to with∣stand the opposition made by multitudes of false spirits: I was discouraged to confirme any of those which were in my thoughts for a Patron: then I began to propound my self unto my self, be∣cause I am best able to interpret my own meaning, and if occasion serve, to be my own Advocate, and so patronize, and protect this little Book from the violence of this our age, which loves novelty ra∣ther than truth, that which is new than that which is true, but then considering, if I should accept of my self, it would be something an undervaluing or slighting those worthy Gentlemen that were in my thoughts, and an esteeming of my selfe, a∣bove my self: as if none were so wise as my self, which is meer folly, whereupon I was almost in the minde of sending this forth into the malicious World, amongst all its enemies without a Patron, but at last the Lord put into my head and heart to think upon your incomparable The Scri∣ptures, the Books of the Old and New Testament.selves, whom I have made choice of, for your fidelity, ability and perpetuity: if I had concluded on any other,

though for the present it might have been patro∣nized and defended, but alas! in a short time, it would have been left Fatherlesse, Patronlesse and so become a poore distressed, despised and rejected little one; but oh! I could not have chosen the like: you are an immortall 1 Pet. 1. 23.seed, a Patron that will re∣main from generation to generation: you are foun∣ded Psal. 119. 152for ever. Man shall passe, nay heaven shall passe, and earth shall passe, but you will never passe Matth. 24. 35.away. I may well compare Epistles De∣dicatory to Funerall Sermons, wherein men use to commend and praise the party deceased beyond their deserts, and truly had I concluded upon any man, for my Patron of this little work, I must have flattered him, or else in stead of protection, I might have expected correction: but for your parts, you will not only deserve what I shall say, but even excell the best language that I am able to speak concerning you: and it is better so, for I had rather be defective in my Patrons commendations, than my Patron defective indeserts.
But now most compleat Patron, I humbly beg your care of this my little one, when other Patrons nare dead; whe I my self am decea∣sed

you will be alive, to succour and maintain this issue of my minde, which I conceive with submis∣sion is so concording with yours. Parents that have many children, sons and daughters, have a more private regard of their sons, because they bear up and continue their names, and amongst their sons they have a greater affection to protect, defend and preserve from danger and violence even him that most resembles the father in person and quality: Noble friends, this, even this, is the seed of your Loynes, it is your sonne, it bears up your Deut. 13. 16. names, therefore I need not question your tender regard of it, but forasmuch as it resembles and favours you, do but favour it, and in so doing you will fa∣vour me, who while I can speak, will speak for you, and while I have a being cannot but be

