


Right Honourable;
IT is easie to discourse of a good businesse, but betwixt doing and saying there is a great deal of difference. And although I labour to be rather effectuall then talka∣tive, neverthelesse sometimes discourses are requisite to satisfie such as must heare and judge of the work. What satisfaction this may give, I know not; but I can conjecture that few will be pleased with it, except those which really love the work for it self. And although I did not intend to be half so large when I first set pen to paper, as now I find my self to have been, yet I am not satisfied in mine own work, because I see that whiles I study to avoid prolixity I do not descend unto such particulars as Judicious States-men will perhaps look after in these endeavours concerning the outward wayes of proceeding, and as learned Divines will reflect upon concerning the inward manner of reconciling mens judgements, & working peaceable dispositions upon their
 affections. But my Apologie is, that particulars depend upon circumstances, and that the varietie of circumstan∣ces is almost infinite: Therefore not so much to be dis∣coursed of, as to be observed in the action, and made use of towards the effect. Neither is it fit to lay open in a discourse communicable to every one the particularities which pertain to the undertaking, and must go along with the execution. It sufficieth in this case to make the neces∣sitie and possibility of things intended to appear, which I hope is done, if not so fully as could have been, yet in some satisfactory measure towards such as can conceive and make use of generall rules applyable to cases, which every one acquainted with the nature of publick affairs easily can imagine and represent unto himself. Now the chief end for which I have put my self upon this discourse is, that I should at this occasion summe up mine own thoughts to discover the same unto your Lordship, and to let others see my way, who perhaps will concurre to further it in time and place convenient. For seeing the work is in it self most necessary, and for the Protestant cause most profita∣ble, and neither impossible nor so difficult as most men that have not tried the ford, as I have done, imagine it to be; therefore I would not have any to despair of it, nor give me occasion to complain of this age, that after so many years unblamable solicitation, I have found small reality of assistance in a publick work of so great necessity. The jealousies and fears of the times, I know, occasionate this: But as for me, I have once for all by oath unto Al∣mighty God renounced all by-respects in this businesse; and no man shall ever be so jealous over me for outward circumstances, as I shall be inwardly over my self, lest the simplicity of my mind in these purposes be tainted with worldly hopes or fears; against which as the traytours of
 good counsel, I have guarded my spirit in working it in∣to a temper, wherein I may seriously take pleasure with the Apostle in all adversities, and rejoyce in crosses and in2. Cor. 12. 10. straights, that when I shall be (as I foresee I may be) de∣serted, neglected, despised and laughed at, for embracing (as it were alone) so vast a businesse, I may then endure it patiently, and without murmuring at my ease rely upon Gods providence in it, in respect I know that he is able to shew his strength in my weaknesse. And if he will not comfort me with the wished for successe, yet I shall not faint in well-doing, because these generall grounds and rules to walk by are able to support me (if my heart be up∣right to the work) in all difficulties. Neither is it requi∣site for me to set forth and commend this matter, nor will I use perswasive arguments to induce men to give assi∣stance in it: for I desire the help of none, but of such as love the work for it self, and who are able either of themselves, or at least from these generall discoveries, to satisfie their thoughts in the possibility of more particular underta∣kings. Few men are so judicious to consider the conse∣quence, and so cordiall to assist the prosecuting of these en∣deavours, as your Lordship hath alwayes been. I speak this in true simplicity of heart, as knowing, from the re∣all testimonies of your Patronage unto the work, the thing which I say. Therefore as your Honour was the first en∣courager and supporter of me at the beginning of this Ne∣gotiation in Prussia, so now at this almost full period thereof, after this triall of my constancy, sincerity, and unblamablenesse therein, I am perswaded your favours will not be failing before it appear what preparatives may be wrought further in these Quarters, and in the Church of Denmark, where hitherto nothing hath been attempted. Who knoweth what opportunities time will
 produce hereafter? Periander, one of the renowned seven Sages of Greece, biddeth us, Expect the occasion: & the. Libr. 43. reason of this precept may be taken from Dion, who saith, Quòd plura negotia opportunitate occasionum quàm viribus rectè sunt confecta. Thus then if I may but go on without noise in mine own private slow pace, I shall rest contented: for I know that this seed must not onely be sown in the hearts of men at its own times, but also lie there a season and rot before it will spring up and fructifie. The Prophet Isaiah in a case of this nature saith, He that be∣lievethEsay. 28. 16. shall not make haste: Now I do believe; there∣fore I am resolved not to make haste. Onely two things I could wish for; First, that all outward helps be not with∣drawn from my subsistence; Secondly, that the favoura∣ble accesse which I have had unto some eminent Divines of Great Brittain, which are not unwilling to take some spirituall tasks in hand concerning this subject may be stil confirmed. If these wishes cannot be obtained, I confesse the case will be so much the more difficult, but yet no worse then either is preconceived or hath been experimented. For in both these I have been at as low an ebbe when I first did begin this Negotiation as I am likely ever to be. And now seeing I have served out my apprenticeship, I hope I shall not prove lesse industrious & happy at the latter end in continuing my trade, then at first I was in learning how to begin the same. It is some advantage in framing a re∣solution to have experience of extremities wherein Gods providence hath been seen. I can desire no more to be at rest in respect of future contingents, and in respect of present matters, I thank God for contentednesse. I will make no further preliminary discourses; for I fear me these have been too long. Therefore I intend now to come to my pro∣per subject, which at this time is,
