



VVHen the Princes and people of Judah, hur∣ried with their sinnes, and driven on by their false Prophets, were in the ready way to utter ruine, the Lord called unto them by his Prophet to make a stand, and looke about them, advising them for their safety and quiet in the midst of their distempers, to aske for the old paths, where the good way was, and to walke therein, and so they should finde rest to their soules, Ierem. 6. To tell you, that the Princes and People of this Nation, too many of them at least, are in the like dange∣rous condition, upon the like cause, and by the like instru∣ments, were to tell you, not what you dream, but what this whole Nation feels and groanes under; and therefore to call upon you to use the like meanes for your deliverance and presevation, cannot but be a likely way of doing you much good, if you have but so much grace as to hearken thereunto. But as it was Judah's grand error, if not the complement of her iniquity, to refuse to walke in the an∣cient paths, and in the way whereunto the Prophets invited them, and to chuse rather to walke in [new] paths, in a way not cast up [wherein their lying prophets had misled them] Ierem. 6.16. & cap. 18. v. 15. so I pray God it bee not Englands. We have multitudes of us come neare, very neare that desperate obstinacy a good while since, witnesse
the imprisoning so many grave orthodox Divines, that have ever walked in those ancient paths themselves, without tur∣ning to the right hand or to the left, and have done their best to lead their people with them; and witnesse also the sup∣pressing so many excellent Sermons, books and tractates, some in the Presse, others at their first comming forth, com∣posed and framed wholly for the misled peoples informa∣tion, that they might see the error of their new wayes, and returne to their old paths of duty and loyalty to God, and their Sovereigne. But, thankes be to the Lord, we are not all delivered up to that stupendious blindenesse and hard∣nesse of heart. Nay my hope and charity doe as yet perswade my faith to beleeve, that hundreds of this King∣dome, if not thousands, even of those seduced wretches, that have gone out in this present horrid Rebellion against our most Gracious King, have gone out, like those two hundred in Absalons Rebellion against King David, 2 Sam. 15. In the simplicity of their hearts, and had they been suf∣fered to have knowne, what some Divines were willing and ready to have imparted unto them, they themselves would have suffered as much as any, rather then have acted in that villany. And for their sakes it is, that I adventure the pub∣lishing these three Worthies opinions concerning the duty of Subjects to their Sovereigne though wicked and tyran∣nicall; that by the truth and soundnes of these first Refor∣mers of the true Protestant Religion, the falsenesse and rottennesse of our new Reformers (as they would be repu∣ted) may the more easilie be discovered, and that by their acknowledging such an indispensible through obedience to be due to the worst of Princes, these deceived ones may at the last bee shamed out of their Rebellion against the best.

I could have produced in this cause above threescore witnesses of the most famously renowned for learning and piety that ever the Reformed Churches brought forth; but some considerable reasons perswaded me to content my selfe, and to hope I may satisfie others, with urging only these three: First, because God himselfe prescribes that number of witnesses as sufficient for the establishing of truth, Deut. 19.15. Matth. 18.16. and with whom Gods word is of power, that number of witnesses prescribed in his word cannot but be so of prevalency, especially when their testimonies are grounded upon Gods word, as these three are. Secondly, the multiplying of witnesses would have proved over chargeable to those for whose sake the vindi∣cating of this cause by this fair way of tryall is principally undertaken, I meane, the common sort of people, who though they can be content poore soules many of them to buy the truth, Proverb. 23.23. yet being they may not sell it againe, divers will not, and some cannot, though they would be at the cost to give any great rate for it, of how great concernment soever it be; and he were unworthy to partake of that price that Christ paid for mens soules, that would not consult the best he could for the soules of the poore, as well as of the rich, all being alike pretious in our Redeemers sight. Thirdly, the poore Printers are a little to be considered in these prest oppressing times; for those few of them that are so honest and valiant, as to dare to print ought that savours of loyalty and duty to their Sove∣reigne are so hunted and persecuted from place to place, both by day and night, that to imploy them in ought that would long detaine them, were to betray them, and per∣haps those that set them on worke. Lastly, I would not willingly prevent my good friend Mr. Catford, whom as I
finde by his Epistle before the Exhortation to Peace to have taken this very way of conviction, and to have made so fair a progresse therein, that had not the inspired Colo∣nell had better information thereof, then he had lately a re∣velation of conquering after so often running away, that worke intended had beene long since finished; so it is yet hoped, and earnestly desired, that he may have liberty to perfect the same. These reasons prevailed with me to urge only the testimonies of Three, and why I made choice of these three, let the testimonies themselves be perused, and they will speake enough to silence that demand. Read then, and when ye are converted strengthen your brethren: which that ye may be and doe, is, and shall be the constant prayer of

