



RIGHT HONOURABLE,
THe form of Godlinesse is very common in these dayes of ours, but the power of it, is very rare. How few persons shall we finde in the visible Church who live and act in the strength of God? But generally, men do, what ever they do, in their own strength, and that not onely in humane things but in divine. How seldome do we see, either in Ministers or Christians, in the dis∣charge of their duties in their severall places, more then the power of men? The greatest part by farre, not one∣ly of those who are called Christians, but also of for∣ward professors, being ignorant what it is to be streng∣thened with might in the inner man, according to the glorious power of the great God. How little is there (among all our plenty) of that preaching, which is not in the plausible words of mans wisedome, but in the de∣monstration of the Spirit and Power? How few Con∣gregations (among the many that are in the Kingdome) are gathered together in the Spirit and Power of our
Lord Jesus Christ? How few of those Christians are there, in whom is the exceeding greatnesse of Gods power, together with the effectuall working of it? But the form of Godlinesse, is now become, almost the co∣vering of all flesh, and in these dayes of light and know∣ledge, it is accounted by all (that are not-down-right Atheists) a great shame not to seem to be religious. And when men, and families, and congregations, are gotten into this form, they think themselves both safe and happie, as being near the suburbs of the Kingdome of God, and close neighbours to the Saints. And this form of godlinesse, as it is of very easie compliance with flesh and bloud, in this particular, in that accor∣ding to this, men onely make their actions new, retain∣ing still their old natures; so it is also of great credit and esteem with carnall Gospellers. But the spirituall man judgeth all things, and yet he himself is judged of no man: and he being partaker of the power of God himself, can in some measure discern both the presence and want of it in others, both which he knowes in his own experience.
Now this form of godlinesse is, when men are godly without God, and anointed without Christ, and rege∣nerate not having the Spirit, that is, when they have a semblance of holinesse, but not the thing it self: a sem∣blance of grace, retaining their old natures. And such Christians as these perform spirituall duties with natu∣rall strength, heavenly duties with earthly strength, the workes of God, with the power of men. In the Religion of these men, there is the outward duty done, and it may be very speciously and plausibly, but there is none of Christ, nor the Spirit in the duty. There is their owne working towards God which is faint and faithlesse, and
not Gods own working in them towards himself, which is lively and mighty: and all the religious acts they do are onely their own operations, and not the operations of God in them.
This form of godlinesse, how pleasing soever it be to mans self, and of what reckoning soever with others, who are like himself, yet is indeed of very evill and wo∣full consequence, whether we regard the doings or suf∣ferings, unto which this form necessarily ingages.
For first, when men by occasion of this form, are cal∣led forth to do the great workes of God, and yet are de∣stitute of the power of God, their duties are above their strength, and their strength beares no proportion to to their duttes. And so sooner or later, meeting with difficulties, they faint, and languish as a Shail, their workes being too high for their faculties. For nature being strained above its power, and offering at that which is beyond its abilities, by degrees growes wea∣rie, and returnes to its old temper again. And he that sought that glory which was not his own, at last lyes down in his own shame.
Again, the form of godlinesse exposes a man to those evils, that are incident to the faithfull because of godli∣nesse. Now when a man hath the same evils, with the faithfull, and not the same power to support them un∣der those evils; when men have the same evils in the flesh, but not th same power in the spirit, the same burthens on their shoulders, but not the same everlast∣ing armes underneath them, they fall sadly and despe∣rately, to the great scandall of the wayes of God.
However, if men be not called forth to such eminent doings and sufferings, and so scape such manifest disco∣veries and downfals, yet the form of godlinesse hath this
evill in it, That it brings a man onely to the trouble∣some part of Religion, but not to the comfortable; it ingages a man in the same duties with the godly, but supplies him not with the same strength; it involves him in the same bitternesse of flesh, but doth not furnish him with the same joy of spirit. For as such a mans Religion doth not reach above flesh and bloud, no more doth his strength and comforts. And so he performes duties at a low rate; yea and his beare and empty forme, casts a blacke vaile upon religion, and utterly obscures its beauty, & glory, and makes the world judge meanly of it, and to thinke it a matter onely of singularity and hu∣mour and not of power. Whereas when a christian walkes in the strength of the Spirit, doing and suffering the will of God, beyond all strength and abilities of flesh and blood, the world often times wonders and gazes at him, and many are provoked to glorifie God, who hath given such power to men.
For this power of Godlinesse among other things hath these three advantages.
1 It makes a man do every duty strongly and migh∣tily. And whatever might take a man off from duty or distract and disturbe him in it, all falls to nothing before this power. There is that strength in each duty performed by the power of the anoynting, which de∣clares it to be the operation of God himselfe in man, and nothing else but the very power of God, that is Je∣sus Christ himselfe, in action in us.
2. It makes a man inflexible in the waies of God, that he shall neither turne to the right hand, nor to the left, but take straight stepts towards the marke set before him. No feare nor favours, nor frownes nor flatteries, nor temptations nor insinuations, nor designes of others, nor ends of his owne can turne him aside. He carries
such strength in his Spirit as he can never be bended, and so far forth as he partakes of the power of God, is as unmoveable and unchangeable as God himselfe.
3. It makes a man invincible by all evills and ene∣mies. Because all the power against him is but the pow∣er of the creature, but the power in him is the power of God. And the power of God easily overcomes the mightiest power of the creature, but is never overcome by it. And if this power in a Christian should be pre∣vailed against, God himselfe who is that power, should be conquered, which is impossible.
To conclude, the power of godlinesse, is the doer of every duty, in Gods Kingdome, the subduer of every sin, the conquerour of each tribulation and temptation, the life of every performance, the glory of each grace, the beauty of a Christians life, the stability of his conversation, the lustre of his Religion, his great Ho∣nour and excellencie both in doing and suffering, yea it is the very glory of God himselfe in the Church of God, for by faith, the Lord arises on us, and by this power of godlinesse, his glory is seen upon us.
These considerations, right honourable, moved me to discourse of the power of the Holy Ghost comming on all Christians, Ministers and people. And besides the importunitie of some other friends, your Honours earnest desires of these notes, hath especially prevailed with me to publish them. Not that I am worthy to pub∣lish any thing, but that the truth of God is worthy to be published be the instrument never so mean and un∣worthy. And although I well know the doubtfull suc∣cesse of such undertakings as these, yet in this matter I am not at all carefull, being most willing to be bound up in one condition with the truth of God, and to have with it the same common friends and enemies. Besides,
if Christ dwell in my heart by faith, I carry in my bo∣some already, my reward, out of whom I neither re∣gard praise or dispraise, good or evill.
Now I was bold to prefixe your Honours name to these Notes, because your desire of them, hath made them yours, and also your many noble favours a strong and continuall ingagement, for me to serve you, ac∣cording to what God hath made me. Especially I re∣member your extraordinary compassion, and bowells towards me, in the day of deepest distresse, when my soule drew neere to the pit, and the shadow of death sate upon my eye lids, and I had not the least drop of comfort either from earth or heaven. Your honor then shewed me the kindnesse of the Lord, and incompassed me both with your pitty and goodnesse, though then through bitternesse of spirit I tasted it not. Wherefore when I remember the wonderfull goodnesse of God to me after so great sorrow and darknesse, I cannot for∣get that part of his goodnesse, which he was pleased to administer to me by your Honours hands; And the re∣membrance of this causes me to pray, that God would double the same goodnesse on you, and that he would poure forth upon my Lord, your Honour, your noble off-spring & family, this power of the Holy Ghost, here treated of: which shall render you a thousand times more precious and excellent before God and his Saints, then all worldly Honour & Nobility whatsoever. And by this meanes shall Religion shine in your Family in its native beauty and lustre, and the Kingdome of God which stands not in word but in power, shall appear in its bright glory among you, till the Kingdome of the Son first fit you, and then after deliver you up to the Kingome of the Father, and God be all in all immedi∣ately. Which is the earnest prayer of your most humble and faithfull servant,

