



Right Honourable,
THe form of Godliness, is very common in
these dayes of ours; but the power of it, is
very rare. How few persons, shall we
finde in the visible Church, who live
and act in the strength of God? But ge∣nerally,
men do, what ever they do, in their
own strength, and that not onely in humane things, but in
divine. How seldom do we see, either in Ministers or
Christians, in the discharge of their duties in their seve∣ral
places, more then the power of men? The greatest
part by far, not onely of those who are called Christians,
but also of forward Professors, being ignorant what it is,
to be strengthened with might in the inner man, ac∣cording
to the glorious power of the great God.
How little is there (among all our plenty) of that preaching,
which is not in the plausible words of mans wisdom, but in
the demonstration of the Spirit and Power? How few
Congregations (among the many that are in the King∣dom)
are gathered together in the Spirit and Power of our
Lord Jesus Christ? How few of those Christians are
there, in whom is the exceeding greatness of Gods
power, together with the effectual working of it? But
the form of Godliness, is now become, almost the co∣vering
of all flesh, and in these dayes of light and know∣ledge,

it is accounted by all (that are not down-right A∣theists)
a great shame, not to seem to be religious. And
when men, and families, and Congregations, are gotten
into this form, they think themselves both safe and hap∣py,
as being near the suburbs of the Kingdom of God, and
close Neighbours to the Saints. And this form of godli∣ness,
as it is of very easie compliance with flesh and blood,
in this particular, in that according to this, men onely make
their actions new, retaining still their old natures; so
it is also of great credit and esteem, with carnal Gospel∣lers.
But the spiritual man judgeth all things, and yet
he himself is judged of no man: and he being partaker
of the power of God himself, can in some measure discern
both the presence and want of it in others, both which he
knows in his own experience.
Now this form of godliness, is, when men are godly
without God, and anoynted without Christ, and regenerate
not having the Spirit; that is, when they have a sem∣blance,
of holiness, but not the thing it self: a semblance of
grace, retaining their old natures. And such Christians
as these, perform spiritual duties, with natural strength,
heavenly duties, with earthly strength, the works of God,
with the power of men. In the Religion of these men,
there is the outward duty done, and it may be very specious∣ly
and plausibly, but there is none of Christ, nor the Spirit
in the duty. There is their own working towards God,
which is faint and faithless, and not Gods own working
in them towards himself, which is lively and mighty: and
all the religious acts they do are onely their own operations,
and not the operations of God in them.
This form of godliness, how pleasing soever it be to
a mans self, and of what reckoning soever with others,
who are like himself, yet is indeed, of very evil and wo∣ful
consequence, whether we regard the doings or

sufferings, unto which this form necessarily engages.
For first, when men by occasion of this form are called
forth to do the great works of God, and yet are destitute of
the power of God, their duties are above their strength,
and their strength bears no proportion to their duties. And
so sooner or later, meeting with difficulties, they faint, and
languish as a Snail, their works being too high for their
faculties. For nature being strained above its power, and
offering at that which is beyond its abilities, by degrees
grows weary, and returns to its old temper again. And
he that sought that glory which was not his own, at last
lies down in his own shame.
Again, the form of godliness exposes a man to those
evils, that are incident to the faithful because of godli∣ness.
Now when a man hath the same evils, with the faith∣ful,
and not the same power to support him under those
evils; when men have the same evils in the flesh, but not
the same power in the Spirit, the same burthens on their
shoulders, but not the same everlasting arms underneath
them, they fall sadly and desperately, to the great scandal
of the ways of God.
However, if men be not called forth, to such eminent
doings and sufferings, and so scape such manifest disco∣veries
and downfals: yet the form of godliness, hath this
evil in it, That it brings a man onely to the troublesome
part of Religion, but not to the comfortable; it engages
a man in the same duties with the godly, but supplies him
not with the same strength; it involves him in the
same bitterness of flesh, but doth not furnish him with
the same joy of Spirit. For as such a mans Religion, doth
not reach above flesh and blood, no more doth his strength
and comforts. And so he performs duties at a low rate;
yea and his bare and empty form, casts a black vail
upon Religion, and utterly obscures its beauty, and glory,

and makes the world judge meanly of it, and to think it a
matter only of singularity and humour, and not of power.
Whereas when a Christian walks in the strength of the
Spirit, doing and suffering the will of God, beyond all
strength and abilities of flesh and blood, the world often
times wonders and gazes at him, and many are provoked
to glorifie God, who hath given such power to men.
For this power of godliness, among other things, hath
these three advantages.
1. It makes a man do every duty strongly and mighti∣ly.
And whatever, might take a man off from duty, or
distract and disturbe him in it, all fals to nothing before
this power. There is that strength, in each duty, performed
by the power of the anoynting, which declares it to be the
operation of God himself in man, and nothing else, but the
very power of God, that is, Jesus Christ himself, in
action in us.
2. It makes a man inflexible in the ways of God, that he
shall neither turn to the right hand, nor to the left, but take
straight steps towards the mark set before him. No fear
nor favours, nor frowns, nor flatteries, nor temptations, nor
insinuations nor designs of others, nor ends of his own, can
turn him aside. He carries such strength in his Spirit, as
he can never be bended, and so far forth as he partakes
of the power of God, is as unmoveable and unchange∣able,
as God him self.
3. It makes a man invincible, by all evils and enemies.
Because all the power against him, is but the power of the
creature, but the power in him, is the power of God. And
the power of God, easily overcomes the mightiest power of the
creature, but is never overcome by it. And if this
power in a Christian, should be prevailed against, God
himself who is that power, should be conquered, which is
impossible.

To conclude, the power of godliness, is the doer of
every duty, in Gods Kingdom, the subduer of every sin, the
conquerour of each tribulation and temptation, the life of
every performance, the glory of each grace, the beauty of a
Christians life, the stability of his conversation, the lustre
of his Religion, his great Honour and excellency both in do∣ing
and suffering, yea it is the very glory of God himself, in
the Church of God; for by faith, the Lord arises on us, and
by this power of godliness, his glory is seen upon us.
These considerations, right honourable, moved me to
discourse of the power of the Holy Spirit coming on all
Christians, Ministers and People. And besides the im∣portunity
of some other friends, your Honours earnest
desires of these notes, hath especially prevailed with me to
publish them. Not that I am worthy to publish any thing,
but that the truth of God is worthy to be published, be the
instrument never so mean and unworthy. And although I
well know, the doubtful success of such undertakings as
these, yet in this matter I am not at all carefull, being most
willing to be bound up in one condition with the truth of
God, and to have with it, the same common friends and
enemies. Besides if Christ dwell in my heart by faith, I car∣ry
in my bosome already, my reward, out of whom, I neither
regard praise or dispraise, good or evil.
Now I was bold to prefix your Honours name to these
Notes, because your desire of them, hath made them yours,
and also your many noble favors are a strong and continual
engagement, for me to serve you, according to what God hath
made me. Especially I remember your extraordinary com∣passion,
and bowels towards me, in the day of my deepest
distress, when my soul drew near to the Pit, and the shadow
of death sate upon my eye lids, and I had not the least drop
of comfort, either from earth or heaven; Your Honor then
shewed me the kindness of the Lord, and encompassed me

both with your pitty and goodness, though then through
bitterness of spirit, I tasted it not. Wherefore when I re∣member
the wonderful goodness of God to me after so great
sorrow and darkness, I cannot forget that part of his
goodness, which he was pleased to administer to me by your
Honours hands; And the remembrance of this, causes me
to pray, that God would double the same goodness on you,
and that he would pour forth upon my Lord, your Honour,
your noble off-spring and family, this power of the holy
Spirit, here treated of: which shall render you, a thousand
times more precious and excellent, before God and his
Saints, then all worldly Honour aud Nobility whatsoever.
And by this means, shall Religion shine in your Family, in
its native beauty and lustre, and the Kingdom of God,
which stands not in word, but in power, shall appear in its
bright glory among you, till the Kingdom of the Son, first
fit you, and then after deliver you up to the Kingdom of the
Father, and God be all in all immediately;

