



IT is written, that the Kingdoms of
the World shall become the King∣doms
of the Lord, and of his
Christ: and now when all almost,
that is great and honourable, and
noble and Royal, and wise and
learned, is found against this Coun∣sell
and design of God; how highly are you honoured
of him, and how happy are you, that You yet are found
for it? You after a manifold Apostacy and defction
of many of your Members, seem yet to remain as pil∣lars
in the House of our God; yet you seem to be, among
those called and chosen, and faithful ones, that now con∣tinue
with the Lamb, who is King of Kings, and

Lord of Lords, in his engagement against, and
conquest over the TEN-HORN'D BEAST:
And to turn aside, from this work, would be, to give
up your selves to double ruine, to wit, both from hea∣ven
and earth. And therefore the Lord make you faith∣ful,
that you may do this work for God, and to fulfill
his Word; and not for your selves, and to fulfill your own
Ends.
And now as you are busie about the Peace of the King∣dom,
to settle and establish that upon a right and sure foun∣dation;
so God hath engaged my heart, to meditate the
peace of the Church. And though I have excluded your
power from having a hand in this Work, yet I have not,
in any measure, wronged you, as you shall perceive, but
rather endevoured to preserve you, from dashing your
selves, against that Rock, against which, all the ignorant
and unwise Rulers and Kingdoms of the world, both
have and yet shall, dash themselves in peeces. It shall be
your wisdom to be built up, together with the Church,
on Christ; but it would be your confusion, to go about to
build the Church on your selves and your power; seeing
this building is too weighty for any foundation; but Christ
himself. Your power will do well in the Kingdoms of the
world, but not in Gods Kingdom, which is Christs inhe∣ritance,
from the beginning to the end. You shall be hap∣py,
to be subject in it, but none must be Lord or Law-giver
here, but Christ himself. Let not the Devil who in these
last times, hath in many places translated the mystery of
iniquity, from the Ecclesiastical Kingdom of the Clergy,
into the temporal Kingdom of the Magistrate, any longer
keep it there; seeing, it will be as pernicious in this, as in
that: for it will be, no less dangerous an evil, for the
Magistrate to make himself Lord and Law-giver in the
Church, then for the Pope, or General Councel, in all

the Kingdoms called Christian; or for the Archbishop,
or National Assembly in particular Kingdoms. Men
have commonly thought, that to preserve the godly in
worldly peace and prosperity, is to preserve the Church;
whereas, to preserve them in faith, hope, love, in union
and communion with Christ and the Father, in and
through the Spirit, this only is to preserve the Church;
and this oft-times, is better done by Christ, whose work
only it is, in affliction, then in prosperity. Wherefore
do You look to the care of the State, and trust Christ with
the care of his Church, seeing he is both faithful and able
to save it perfectly. The peace of the Church lies in
Christ only, and no part of it out of him, no not for a
moment; and this their peace, Christ is able to preserve
in Himself, in the midst of the most cruel and desperate
evils of the world. Now what the true Church of Christ
is, and wherein its Peace and Unity lies, is here in some
measure declared, for the good of the faithful every∣where,
and particularly for Your good; lest you being
glorious instruments in the hand of God, for one work,
should miscarry in another. And this I have done, through
God, not because I was worthy to do it, but because, it
was worthy to be done. For why should the Church, any
longer be ignorant of the things that belong unto its peace?
and why should the Members of it, any longer lie as scat∣tered
bones, dry and dead, and not gathered up into the
unity of a living body? and who could longer indure,
to see unskilfull Physitians, under pretence of healing
the Church, wound it still deeper; and under pretence
of procuring its peace, hurry it into endless dissentions
and divisions? In this case of necessity, I could not but
speak, both out of duty and love, and I hope none of You
will despise to hear, who consider, that God, when he
layes aside the wise and prudent, chooses Babes and Suck∣lings,

to perfect his praise, out of their mouths; that so he
himself, may be the more glorified and admired, in his
weak and mean instruments. Now let his praise be above
the earth and the heavens; and let him give you the ho∣nor
that all his Saints have: and this is his hearty desire,
who humbly writes himself

