



DRead Sovereign, my Lord the King; may it please your Highness onely once to look over this ensu∣ing Treatise (and it will not repent thee, ô King, to peruse it, and read it again, and again) entituled, a Protestation concerning the Church, and Com∣mon-wealth of
England, written almost six yeers since (viz. in
June, 1641.) by a loyal-hearted subject, and a faithfull servant now in all humility prostrate; beneath your Majesties feet: May your favour descend as dew upon the grass; and let me not be∣hold the messengers of death in your countenance. A shrub may grow neer unto a Cedar; High and low, great and small, The rich and poor meet together: The Lord is the maker of them all. I would put a knife to my throat; were I man given to appetite, or desirous of dainties; I am not called to sit and eat with a Ruler: but to attend and wait, untill I have delivered mine errand to the King; it behoveth me therfore to consider diligent∣ly, what to say. Many will intreat the favour of the Prince: and every man is a friend to him that giveth gifts. But I was born for  adversity (have bin trained up in afflictiōs, & have eaten my bread in sorrow) and do desire to appear my self a true Nathanael, an upright Loyalist at all times. Not subjection alone, but duty my dread Lord, comandest my greatest observance, and most obe∣dientiall gratitude: for I am a branch spronted from a root, this many ages hath grown, spread, flourished, lived and revived in the light of the countenance, and sun-shine days of divers Kings of England, your Royall Progenitors, whose Princely bounty, and most munificent constant favours unto mine Ancestors, hath been as a cloud of the latter rain: (videlicet, Sir Hugh de Pounts un chivaler, que vint de Normandie ove le Conquerour; & trans∣acto regimine Regis Haroldi Secundi, Laurentius de la More qui erat in exercitu Willielmi Bastardi Regis in Conquestu suo Regni Angliae, &c. & Dominus Galfridus de Scalariis miles; & Sir Tho∣mas de Eschallers, & Sir John de Chalers, Knights: (Scalarii isti sunt editi atavo Galfridi senioris Hardwino de Scalariis Domino to∣tius Baroniae de Caxton in Comitate Cantabrigiae tempore Willielmi Regis Angliae, &c.) And Sir Thomas de la More Knight, who was a Courtier in the Reigns of Edward the First, Edward the Second, and Edward the Third, and was a Servant (and wrote the life) of King Edward the Second: And my Grandfather who was Servant to King Henry the Eighth: and divers others of my Ancestors, who received most Princely rewards, and gifts from their Masters the Kings of England, and had great posses∣sions and lands given unto them in the County of Oxon. &c.) Now, therefore, if I should not in most humble manner, ac∣knowledge this great munificence, and pay my due tribute of Loyalty for such Royall favours; I should be branded with the blackest note of Infamy, and be chronicled ingratefull. More∣over, as I am a member of the body of Christ my supream Head; Christian duty binds me, not onely to pray for Kings, and all that are in authority: but to labour with my hands, and assay all lawfull means possible, for the building up and repairing of
 the breaches, which all our sins have made in that mystical Tem∣ple, the Church of God. If David hath committed a great wic∣kednesse, and sinned secretly, and the Prophet tell him, Thou art the man, he must presently confesse, I have sinned against the Lord, and the Lord will put away his sin, and he shall not die, Psal. 51. 2 Sam. 12. If Peter denie his Master, and the Lord looke back (in mercie) upon him, he cannot but goe forth immediately and weepe bitterly. If God hath humbled Ahab King of Israel, Nebuchadnezar King of Babylon, the Ninivites, and
Manasseth King of Judah (that Mirrour of mercie, and miracle of Gods unchangeable love and everlasting kindnesse, and good will towards sinfull men) they shall make an humble acknowledge∣ment of their transgressions, repent and turn unto the Lord, with fasting, weeping, and mourning: And the Lord will turn away his fierce wrath, he will cancell his decree of temporall punish∣ment, and reverse his judgements denounced against them. If that wise King Solomon multiply his whoredoms, commit Spi∣rituall Fornications and Idolatry, he must become an Ecclesia∣stes in recantation of his vanities. If King
Saul make an unad∣vised adjuration to hinder the victory, to retard the successe, and weaken the hands of those that fight the Lords Battels: Shall Jonathan die, who hath wrought salvation in Israel? God forbid, the people may rescue him that he die not. If
Joab, Captain of the Host advise a disconsolate son-lamenting King to speak comfor∣tably unto his Princes, his people, his friends and servants, that being ashamed have gotten themselves by stealth into their Ci∣ties and habitations: The Ki will presently arise and sit in the gate, that all the people throughout all the Tribes of Israel and
Judah may be at strife to bring the King back to his house. If the people say unto him, Thou shalt not goe forth to Battell, for if we fly away they will not care for us, neither if halfe of us die will they care for us, but now thou art worth ten thousand of us, therefore now it is better that thou succour us out of the City, the King will  give them a gracious Answer, and say unto them, what seemeth you best I will doe. If the Prophet Jeremy counsell the captiv'd King, by yielding to save his life, let him obey the voice of the Lord, so it shall be well unto him, and his soule shall live. A wick∣ed man hardeneth his face, but as for the upright he directeth his way. There is no Wisdome, nor Understanding, nor Counsell against the Lord. Let no man presume to touch Gods people, the Servants, the Prophets, the Anointed of the Lord: for he re∣proved Kings for their sakes. Let no man speak evil of those things which he knoweth not, lest he perish in the gain-saying of Core. Let no wicked Pharoah exalt himselfe against Gods people, lest the Lord harden his heart, and speak thus unto him in the fierce∣nesse of his wrath, Even for this same purpose have I raised thee up, that I might shew my power in thee, and that my name might be declared throughout all the earth. Thinkest thou, ô man, that doest these things that thou shalt escape the judgement of God? or despisest thou the riches of his goodnesse, and forbearance and long-suffering? not knowing that the goodnesse of God leadeth thee to repentance? But after thy hardnesse and im∣penitent heart, treasurest up unto thy selfe wrath, against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judge∣ment of God; who will tender to every man according to his deeds, for there is no respect of persons with God. O, that wee knew the time of our visitation, and that wee could see in this our day, the things that belong unto our peace, least the Lord withdraw the light of his countenance from us, and least the mercie and loving kiness of our God be hid from our eyes! Thus saith the Lord to Israel, I have spread out my hands all the day unto a rebellious people, which walketh in a way that was not good after their own thoughts, a people that provoketh me to anger continually to my face, that sacrificeth in Gardens, &c. And our most holy Redeemer and blessed Saviour Jesus Christ thus compassionately bemoaneth a stif-necked, disobedient, hard-harted, gain-saying people. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem! thou  that killest the Prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee. How often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a Hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not? Be∣hold, your house is left unto you desolate, and the Apostle exhor∣teth us, Whilst it is said, To day, if ye will hear his voice harden not your hearts, as in the provocation. Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evill heart of beliefe, in departing from the living God, but exhort one another daily, whilst it is called to day, lest any of you be hardned through the deceitfulnesse of sin, Heb. 3. Let us therefore provoke the Lord to wrath no more, by our sins, but let us enter into a holy Covenant with God, to walke uprightly before the Lord, as Noah, Abraham, Moses, Joshua, Job, Daniel, King David, and all the Prophets, Apostles, and servants of the Lord have done before us, and let us re∣solve to serve the Lord our God with all our hearts, with all our souls, and withall our might: Then shall our captivity and all our sufferings and afflictions worke together for the best, for the Lord will set his eyes upon us for good, and he will bring us again unto our Lands and to our huoses, and he wil build us, and not pull us down; he will plant us, and not pluck us up, and he will give us an heart to know him, that he is the Lord, and we shall be his people, and he will be our God, for we shall return unto him with our whole hearts, and we shall be like Trees planted by the Rivers of water, that will bring forth fruit in season, our leaf also shall not wither, and whatsoever we doe shall prosper. The ungodly are not so, but are like the chaffe which the winde driveth away. The Lord will deliver them to be removed into all the Kingdoms of the earth, for their hurt, to be a reproach and a proverb, a taunt and a curse in all places whe∣ther he shall drive them. And he will send the Sword, the Fa∣mine, and the Pestilence among them, till they be consumed from the Land that he gave unto them and their Fathers. For the Lord knoweth the way of the righteous, but the way of the ungodly shall  perish. Your Majesty may read in the Chronicles of holy Writ, That King Asa did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, as did David his Father, and he tooke away the Sodomites out of the Land, and removed all the Idols that
(Abijam) his Fa∣ther had made, and also Maachah his mother, even her he remo∣ved from being Queen, because she made an Idol in a Grove, and Asa destroyed her Idol, and burnt it by the Brooke
Kidron, but the high places were not removed: neverthelesse,
Asa his heart was perfect with the Lord all his dayes. Also King
Azariah did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, according to all that his Father Amaziah had done, save that the high places were not removed: the people sacrificed, and burnt incense still on the high places. And the Lord smote the King, so that hee was a Leaper unto the day of his death, and dwelt in a severall house, and Jothan the Kings son was over the house, judging the people of the Land. And King
Hezekiah did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, according to all that David his Father did. He removed the high places, and brake the Images, and cut down the Groves, &c. he trusted in the Lord God of Israel, so that after him there was none like him among all the Kings of Judah, nor any that went before him. For he clave to the Lord, and departed not from following him; but kept his Comandements which the Lord comanded Moses. And the Lord was with him, and he prospered whither soever he went forth: and he rebelled against the King of Assyria, and served him not. And King
Josiah did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, and walked in all the wayes of David his Father, and turned not aside to the right hand or to the left. And the King sent, and they gathered unto him all the Elders of Ju∣dah, and of Jerusalem, and the King went up into the house of the Lord, and all the men of Judah, and all the Inhabitants of Jerusalem with them, and the Priests, and the Prophets, and all the people both small and great: and he read in their ears  all the words of the book of the Covenant which was found in the house of the Lord. And the King stood by a pillar, and made a Covenant before the Lord, to walke before the Lord, and to keep his Comandments, and his Testimonies, and his Statutes, with all their heart, and all their soule, to perform the words of this Covenant, that were written in this book: and all the people stood to the Covenant. And the King comanded all the vessels that were made for Baal, and for the Grove, and for the Hoast of heaven, to be brought forth out of the Temple of the Lord, and he burnt them without Jerusalem in the fields of Kidron, and carryed the Ashes of them unto Bethel. And he put down the Idolatrous Priests, whom the Kings of Judah had ordained to burn incense in the high places, &c. Moreover, the workers with familiar Spirits, and the Wizards, and the Images and the Idols, and all the abominations that were spyed in the Land of Judah, and in Jerusalem, did Josiah put away, that he might performe the words of the Law which were written in the Book that Hilkiah the Priest found in the House of the Lord. And like unto him was there no King before him, that turned to the Lord with all his heart and with all his soule, and with all his might, according to all the Law of Moses, neither after him a∣rose any like him: 2
Kings 22, & 23. Chapters.
Now, therefore, my Lord the King arise, and be doing, and the Lord be with thee. And command all your Children, your Confederates and Allies, your Nobles and your Commons, and all the people of your Kingdoms to help you, saying, Is not the Lord your God with you? And hath he not given you rest on every side? for he hath given your enemies into your hands, and the Land is subdued before the Lord, and before his people. Now set your heart and your soul to seeke the Lord your God: arise therefore, and build ye the Sanctuary of the Lord God, esta∣blish Religion in its purity according to Gods Word: settle the Church government, compose the differences, and heal the di∣stempers  that our sins have made, repair ye the breaches, and build up the waste places in the Church and State, and doe you Judgement and Justice throughout all my Dominions. And comand all the people to gather themselves together as one man, and to make confession saying. O Lord the great and dread∣full God, keeping the Covenant, and mercie to them that love him, and to them that keepe his Comandements. We have sinned, and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have re∣belled, even hy departing from thy precepts and from thy judge∣ments. Neither have we harkned unto thy servants, the Mini∣sters and Preachers of thy Word and Ordinances, which spake in thy name, to our King, our Princes, and our Fathers, and to all the people of the Land. O Lord, to us belongeth confusion of face, because we have sinned against thee. To the Lord our God belongeth mercies, and forgivenesses, though we have re∣belled against him. O Lord, we have been disobedient and re∣belled against thee, and cast thy Law behinde our backs, & have slain thy servants which testified against us to turn us unto thee, and we have wrought great provocations: therefore thou de∣liverest us into the hands of our enemies, who vexed us, & in the time of our trouble, when we cryed unto thee, thou heardst us from heaven: and according to thy manifold mercies thou ga∣vest us Saviours, who saved us out of the hands of our enemies. But after we had rest, we did evill again before thee, therefore leftest thou us in the hand of our enemies, so that they had the dominion over us, yet when we returned, and cried unto thee, thou heardst us from heaven, and many times didst thou de∣liver us, according to thy mercies. Thou didst not utterly con∣sume us nor forsake us; for thou art a gracious and a mercifull God. Now therefore our God, the great, the mighty, and the terrible God, who keepest Covenant and mercie: Let not all the trouble seeme little before thee, that hath come upon us, on our King, on our Princes and Nobles, and on our Ministers  and Elders, & on our fathers, & on all thy people; since the time of the Kings departing from his Parliaments, and people unto this day. Howbeit, thou art just in all that is brought upon us, for thou hast done right, but we have done wickedly. Neither have, our King, our Princes and Nobles, our Elders and Ministers of thy Word, nor our Fathers kept thy Law: nor hearkned unto thy Commandements, and thy Testi∣monies, wherewith thou didst testifie against them. For they have not served thee in their Kingdom, & in thy great goodness that thou gavest them; and in the large and fatland which thou gavest before them, neither turned they from their wicked works. Behold, we are servants this day; and for the land which thou gavest unto our Fathers, to eat the fruit thereof, and the good thereof, behold we are servants in it. And it yieldeth much increase unto them, whom thou hast set over us, because of our sins: also they have dominion over our bodies, and over our cat∣tell at their pleasure; and we are in great distress. And because of all this, let us make a sure Covenant, and write it; and let the King, our Princes and Nobles, our Elders and Ministers of Gods Word and Ordinances, our Fathers, and all the people of your Majesties Dominions seal unto it. And finally, may it please your Excellent Majesty, to attend unto the doctrine and exhor∣tations of the Apostle. 1 Thes. Chap. 5. and Hebrews 13.20, 21.
Quench not the spirit: despise not prophesyings: prove all things: hold fast that which is good: abstain from all appearance of evill. And the very God of Peace, sanctifie you wholly: and I pray God your whole spirit, and soule, and body, be preserved blameless unto the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ. Faithfull is he that calleth you, who also will do it.
Now the God of peace, that brought a∣gain from the dead, our Lord Iesus that great Shepherd of the sheep, through the bloud of the everlasting Covenant, Make you per∣fect in every good work to do his will, working in you that which is  pleasing in his sight, through Iesus Christ, to whom be glory fore∣ver. Amen. I have not omitted for many yeares together (my Sovereign Lord) daily and constantly to pray, for the temporall and eternall happiness of the King, the Queen your Consort, and Royall Progeny; with that integrity of heart, zeal, and de∣vout affection, as I pray for the Church of God, and the salva∣tion of my own soul. Thus rejoyceth evermore, to pray with∣out ceasing, Royall Sir,
 From my Quarters at Spaldwick in Huntingdonshire,
Feb. 22. 1646.
