



Honourable and Worthy,
AS the LORD represented these
Truths to you before, in the Ministery
of the Word; so now again, He offers
them to your second consideration,
in this Printed Book; because he hath
a minde, you should take notice of
them. And I must needs say, it is
the LORD'S voyce to you; and I hope he will move
your hearts, to regard it; though Satan hath mightily
bestirr'd himself, by casting an ill Vizzard upon the
Truth, to make you dislike it. But if you like CHRIST
the worse for a Face spit on and buffeted, you may want
a SAVIOUR: And if you like the truth of

CHRIST the worse for a scratcht Face, you may
make your dwelling place, with Errour and Humane Do∣ctrines,
which are all one. Micaiah had no sooner deli∣vered
the truth of God, but there was a False Prophet,
to smite him on the face: the LORD no sooner pre∣pares
Instruments to reveal his Truth, but Satan hath
his Instruments ready, to turn the truth of GOD into
a lye. And this GOD suffers to be done, to exercise
your skill and wisdom, that you might learn, not to be
offended at the Truth with the World; but to receive
and love the Truth, notwithstanding all the indignities
and reproaches of men. When you reade what you have
heard, you must needs acknowledge it to be the minde
of GOD, if you have received the anointing of the
Spirit: and the truth herein contained, shall prevail
with all that belong to GOD. For my part, I am not
careful touching the success of it; I can trust GOD
with that, whose Word it is. For, as the Doctrine of
the World, hath the weak power of the World to carry on
that; so the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, hath the mighty
power of GOD to carry on that; and the power of
GOD in the World shall as soon be made void, as
the true Doctrine of the Gospel, though called Error,
Heresie, and Schism, and have all the misguises of Hell put
upon it. The truth you then heard delivered, and may
here reade again, shall carry all opposition, and opposers
before it, and none shall be able to stand against it, that
engage against it: And of this, both your selves and
this generation shall be Witnesses.
If any think that I gave too much power to CHRIST,
in the Reforming of the Church, his own Body; let
them consider again, that too much, cannot be given to
CHRIST in GODS Kingdom, seeing he is, all
in all in it. Neither is that exaltation the Gospel gives

to CHRIST in this Business, any diminution to your
selves: neither by making CHRIST all in the King∣dom
of GOD, are you made ever the less, in the King∣domes
of this World. But what ever power the Word of
GOD hath given you, I will deny you none of it; nay,
I will be among the first, that shall attribute it to you.
And do desire, you would no more, any of you be dis∣pleased,
for attributing the Reformation of the Church,
to CHRIST alone, then the Redemption, Iustifica∣tion,
Sanctification, or Glorification of it, to CHRIST
alone: The former being every whit, as great and glori∣ous
a work of CHRIST, as the latter. I do most
willingly allow you, your Thrones in the Kingdoms of
this World: but only desire to reserve to Christ, his own
Throne, in the Kingdom of GOD.
There are those indeed, that would lift you up to this
Throne, not because they would have you sit there, but
place them there: they would ascribe to you, the power
only due to the Son of GOD, not because they would
have you use it, but would use it themselves; they would
derive power from you, to do that, which they say you
cannot do: & the power they attribute to you in the things
of GOD, they say, is not well in your hands, but in theirs.
And here I would desire you, to take notice of the
working of the Mystery of Iniquity, from the Head, to
the very Little-toes of the Man of Sin: At first you know
the Pope interested himself in the Emperour, and Powers
of the World (for his own advantage and support no
doubt, rather then for theirs) after, the Prelates succes∣sively,
said to worldly Kings, Lend us your power, and we
will lend you ours; Let our spiritual power, deal in tempo∣ral
things; and your temporal power, shall deal in spi∣ritual
things; and still the Clergy-power (which call'd it
self spiritual) so linkt it self with the temporal, that the

power that was not of God, might be upheld, by the power
that was of God; and (having got this advantage) they
cried, Destroy one, Destroy both; and so the Prelates were
wont to say, No Bishop, no King. And their successors in
the Kingdom of Antichrist still cry, No Minister, no
Magistrate; and so still mingle interests and powers with
the civil Magistrate; that under the Magistrate, the power
of GOD, they might cunningly shrowd that power that
is not of GOD. And thus they still, under the name of the
Magistrate, seek themselves, & the drawing off that power
that is only his, from him to themselves, to whom it doth
not belong: Being, in the mean time, really against Ma∣gistracy,
further then it is serviceable to their own ends.
Whereas, we reckon Magistracy, not less Magistracy, no
less the Ordinance of GOD, though we suffer under
it, and by it.
This Clergy-Antichristian power where ever it is, will
still sit upon the power of the Nation; the power of Anti-christ,
so domineering over the powers of the World, that
none but the power of CHRIST can cast it off. That
will still be uppermost, what power soever is supream. Be∣sides
all the experience of former Ages (which is the
greatest wonder in the World, that men consider not)
GOD gives you sparklings enough of it, in this Age;
some preaching, That the government of the Church
(which they make outward and visible, and over mens
estates, bodies, and lives,) belongs not to King nor Par∣liament,
but to the Ministers and their Elders: and better
it is, there should be no government at all (say they) then
not in their hands by whom it should be. And here lies
the Mystery of Iniquity in this, That they make the whole
Kingdom a Church, & then require a power, authority and
jurisdiction in their Church-Kingdom, which the Magi∣strate
is not to deal withal, but themselves. Whereas we

acknowledge the whole power of the Kingdom, to be∣long
to the Magistrate, and onely give unto CHRIST
the power of his own Kingdom, which is not of the
World, but spiritual and heavenly.
And here also, fully to deliver my self from misappre∣hensions,
I understand not by the Church of CHRIST,
any company of men whatsoever, who under the notion
of a Church or Saints, or any other title, may plead pri∣viledge
or exemption of their lives, liberties, or estates,
from the power of the Civil Magistrate; for that were to
justifie the Papal, Prelatical, or any other government of
a newer name, which under pretence of Jus Divinum,
shall set up and exercise an outward and visible power and
jurisdiction, free and exempted from the authority and
power of the civil Magistrate; which I utterly both deny
and detest, as Antichristian.
And therefore, I humbly represent, how prejudicial
this may prove to you in the end, to suffer a Generation
of men in the Kingdom, under the name either of Church
or Clergy, whose power, preferment, & interest is different
and excentrical from the power, welfare, and interest of the
Kingdom; and what a ballance they may prove against
the State, where they live, in turning and tumultuous
times, as they themselves know, so (I hope) you clearly
perceive it, as well as they. How they already dare lift
up the Head against you, who sees not? How do they
manifest their discontents against you, in Pamphlets and
Pulpits, in their Sermons and Prayers, because you have
not setled the Government, they have studied out for
you, as Jus Divinum, and the certain and unchangeable
minde of GOD; though they can neither make it out,
to your selves, nor to any body else, by the Word, that it
is so? And how do they labour to instill, into the people,
their own discontents; perswading them, you have done

nothing at all, because you have not done all that ever
they would have you do, though you can see neither
Scripture nor reason for it? And for this cause, rendring
you every where odious to the people. Many other things
besides, do they scramble up, and use against you, which
they conceive may make for your disadvantage, and
dis-interest in the people: because they think, they shall ne∣ver
get much higher, except they make you a little lower;
for they must (according to the law of Antichrist) set
their feet on your power, to get up to their own.
Some discoveries of this spirit you might see in Mr.
Loves Sermon, telling you before your faces, and before
the people; That some call'd you a Mungrel Parliament:
Indeed the King (as I understand) call'd the Parliament
at Oxford so; but Mr. Love was the first (for ought I can
learn) that ever named you so, and I wish he may be the
last, (but any Doctrine is orthodox, out of a mans mouth
of his Order) farther threatning you with a discerning
people, to look into your actions, and to spy out your bound∣less
priviledges; as if you must do justice, not out of the
love of Righteousness, but out of fear of Mr. Loves discer∣ning
people. Telling you also, The Clergy had done as
much service for you in their Pulpits, as your Regiments
in the Field: that by this means he might minde you,
what they can do against you, as well as for you, if you be
not servants to their designes; for they that have hereto∣fore
been for you, can (if they please) turn to others against
you, who shall be more for themselves. And in many
other things flying out against your worthy Commanders
in the Army, upon suspitions of his own; and against the
Articles at Oxford, &c. For it is no proper Presbyterial
Doctrine, that does not (at least) meddle with the affairs
of the State, which in time they may hopefully come to
order. In these and divers other things, he took his full

swing, all of them (no doubt) deeply appertaining to the
mystery of the Gospel.
The other things, he spake, to the disadvantage of the
ignorant and weak, and neither to the Truths disadvan∣tage,
nor mine, I shall clear in a short Reply, set after the
Discourse; and so shall trouble you no farther, with any
such stuffe, but only with a smart expression, from one (it
seems) of some note in the Assembly, who said, If the Par∣liament
approved Mr. Dells Sermon, it were no blasphemy
to say, They were no Parliament. So that it seems you shall
be no longer a Parliament then you approve, what the
Assembly approves; but the Kingdom hopes you are built
upon a better foundation. And to him (who hath been so
bold with you) I shall only crave leave to Reply in your
presence, If the Assembly (which I hope they will not)
should condemn that Doctrine of the Gospel for the sub∣stance,
of it, delivered then by Mr. Dell; it will be no blas∣phemy
to say, They are the enemies of the truth of Christ:
And (I hope) the last prop of Antichrist in the Kingdom.
For your selves, Honourable and Worthy, I beseech
you consider, that GOD is wonderful in counsel, and ex∣cellent
in working; & that all power is given to CHRIST,
in Heaven and in Earth, that he might give free passage
to the Gospel. And therefore take heed, after GOD hath
blest your Power and Forces in the field, and subdued that
Malignant power that was against you, and hath given
you a little peace & quietness in the Kingdom; you do not
now begin your affaires with discountenancing, disrelish∣ing,
much less condemning, the faithful and true Word of
GOD, witnessed in the Scriptures, and confest to by the
faithful and Martyrs of Christ, in all Ages; and with the
setting off from you, that Ministery, that hath most of the
Spirit in it, lest the Lord withdraw his presence from you,
and your latter end be not answerable to your beginnings.

It might be easily shewed unto you, how many great
and wise Kings and Magistrates, acting according to hu∣mane
wisdom and prudence, & despising or neglecting the
wisdom of the Word, have with all their own wisdom, pru∣dence,
and designes, destroyed themselves, and their
Kingdoms: For it is written, He takes the wise in their own
craftiness: And again, The Lord knows the thoughts of men,
that they are but vain.
And therefore renounce the wisdom of the world, with
all its fleshly Counsels, and cleave close to the true, faith∣ful,
and sincere Doctrine of the Gospel; and then, though
you have many enemies and Kingdoms against you, you
shall not be moved, but GOD will yet establish you, in all
the shakings of the World, and your Enemies shall be as
a thing of nought. I shall no longer detain you, but only
desire this, in the behalf of the faithful, GODS peculiar
portion in the Kingdom, That you would not suffer us to
be oppressed by our Adversaries, who would use your
power against us, not for you, but for themselves: neither
would suffer them, thus publickly and shamelessely to call
us Sectaries and Hereticks, who do believe and profess
the truth of the Gospel in sincerity and simplicity of heart,
according to what we have received from GOD; but
that you would suffer, yea, procure us, to live quietly and
safely under you, in the faith and practice of the Gospel,
we in all things obeying you, as becomes Christians.
The Remainder, is, to assure you, That there is no man
shall serve the State more sincerely, according to his place
and calling; nor in more faithfulness and humility tender
the Truth of GOD, either to your selves or the Kingdom
(as occasion serves) according to the measure of the gift
of CHRIST, Then,

