



CHRISTIAN BROTHER, that lookest here∣on, and art willing and desirous through Christ to search after and to receive the love of the Truth, that thou mayest be saved, and mayest further know and worship our God, and Father in Christ acceptably, in spirit and in truth, to glorifie his Name before men, wherein thou hast prophaned and polluted it, as we have done, by conforming (with the times) to the precepts and raditions of men: Ponder with us for thy direction these particulars. 1. That the Mystery of truth is not manifest to the World, the generality, but to the Saints, who are dead to the World, John 14. 22. & 17. 6. Col. 1. 26. & 2: 20. & 3: 3: 2. Hence this is found amongst them that are most full of love, Gal. 5▪ 6. John 13. 35. He that dwells (or abides) in that love; abides in God▪ and God in him, 1 John 4. 16. 3. Hence it's amongst them that to others so doe, as they would be done unto, Mat. 7. 12. And that whatsoever they would not should be done to themselves, doe not it to others. (Act. 15: 20. 29. Old Transl. Margin. v. 20. Regim. v. 29. Complut. Regius in Naturali & Graec. vetust. & optimis, aitinsig. Selden D Anno Civile, c. 21. & De Jure Gent. li 7. c. 12.) 4. It's amongst the pitifull. That yee seeke to the fatherlesse and widowes in their affliction, and keepe themselves unspotted from the world, John 1 27. 5. This Wisdome is not from below, but from above, and is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, well-perswaded, (or rightly obedient) full of mercy Jam. 3. 17. 6. It's a∣mongst such, as living godly in Christ Jesus; suffer persecution for his Names fake, 2 Tim. 3. 12. John 15. 19 & 16: 33. Mat. 5. 10, 11.
Now if thou hardly knwest such; Say to him whom thy soul loveth, O tell mee where thou feedest, where thou makest thy flocks lye down, Cant. 1. 7. and he will give true wisedome to thee, to disrne of per∣sons, and things that dffer.

Yet expect not a Rose without a pricke or spot. In many things we slip all. If any slip not in word, he is perfect, Jam. 3. 2. Expect therefore to finde this, amongst them, that in their generall aime and course, walke nearest according to that Rule, Gal. 6. 16. And be a doer of the will of God, as far as thou knowest, John 7. 17. and mainly be taken up with the know∣ledge, Grace, and love of Jesus Christ, that thy heart may be established therewith, Heb. 13. 8, 9.
For our parts, shame may cover our faces, that we have walked after as men: but henceforth our aime it so to walke as becometh the Gospel.
Cause it is of griefe to our soules, that there should be Oppositions between our Brethren and us, when the Canaanite (i. depressing Merchants) and the breach-making Perizite, are in the Land, Gen. 13. 7, 8.
The truth is, after long seeking our God, and oft discussing with our Brethren, we peaceably set upon Reformation, Practising what we were convinced was most agreeable to the Word of God: Our Brother began against us: Printing against this our practise: Yet we forbore long, till we saw, that by our silence, not onely we, but Truth suffered; then were we for∣ced to print Our just Defence of sundry Positions. And had he there staied, we had, now, abode silent, who by printing this, may each of us seeme , un∣wise, imprudent, (as Paul said oft of himselfe, being forced so to write in his owne, and the Truths Defence, 2. Cor. 12. 11. & 11. And truely, had it been our persons onely that suffered, (though therein we share deeply) by this Late Printed Epistle, with certaine Queries (being for an Answer to our Defence;) we had in this kinde held our peace; (although our Brother could not easily repaire our Damage.) But seeing Truth now suffers a se∣cond time, by our so long forbearing, we are againe enforced to this seeming folly or imprudence. And by our viewing and pondering our Bro∣thers angry bitter expressions, if we in any passage seeme to any, to have lear∣ned some of his wayes; (which we confesse we are subject unto, Pro. 22. 25.) Let our weakenesse remaine with us, and not be charged on the Cause, or Truth that we maintaine. We are learning not to render evill for evill, or railing for railing, 1 Pet. 3. 9. and hope we shall more fully be taught of God therein.
Christian Reader, If thou hast read our Brothers Epistle, we intreat thee to have one eare for this our Answer thereto: remembring what the wise∣man said; He that is first in his owne cause, seemeth just: but his neigh∣bour cometh and searcheth him, Prov. 18. 17. Consider what is said, and the Lord give thee and us, understanding in all things. 2 Tim. . 7. Amen.
