



Right Honourable,
IT is the Duty of all that Love the Lord Jesus Christ in Sincerity, to contend for the Faith that was once given to the Saints, every man in his place, according to the Calling, Office, Power, Interest, Gift, Ability that he hath received from God. And I in my place (though the weakest of many, be∣ing yet led forth thereto by special inviting Providences) have done it both formerly and at present. And I As∣sume the boldness to present my poor, plain, weak and slender labours to your Honors view, and most humbly beg your favorable construction of my design and scope in them. It is not to asperse any who are innocent; it is not to bring Saints who are weak and frail under con∣tumelie; Neither is it to exasperate the Supream Ma∣gistrate against any Persons in whom the visibility of Saintship shall be found; Nor is it to conivnce these Per∣sons (betwixt whom and my self the contest lies) of their Errour; for had there been any hope of that, I should have found out another way; but it is to preserve those who are yet sound in the Faith from infection, and it is to awaken others (who are far more able in the Scri∣ptures
 then my self) to appear for God, for Christ, and for the Truth, in such times of the great Apostasie of so very many from the Faith. And it is to provoke your Honors to a self-reflection, if thereby you may di∣scern what your own Duty may be, and whether there be not somewhat which the Supream Magistrate, accord∣ing to his Power, Place and Interest is called to do, in obe∣dience to that command. I know you will manifest very much tenderness to all Saints, though in diffe∣rent forms, and of different judgements in circum∣stantial Truths, and no question Christ will take it kindly from your hands; but there is a company of A∣postate Christians who are dispersed all over the Land, and who do sow much corrupt seed (which comes up with great increase in many places) who yet do pass with some for precious Saints. But my hope is, and my Prayer shall be, that the Lord will make you wise to judg ef Saintship according to Scriptural Rules, and not according to the large Charity of some who are truly good, though too much friends to them. You are not ignorant what a Character Christ himself gives of false Teachers, though appearing a Righteous, Innocent and Harmless People, (as these Quakers stile them∣selves) he calls them Wolves in Sheeps clothing. And Paul speaking of such, compares them to Satan in this, That they will transform themselves (as he doth himself into an Angel of Light, so they) into Ministers of Righte∣ousness. And John in his Epistles makes them all Anti∣christs, And the Scope & Drift of all the Apostles in all their Epistles almost, is to confirm the Faith which the Saints had received, and to preserve from, & recover them out of Errour; and it is to impugn such Doctrine as
 Seducers brought in among them, & the Zeal that they shewed is worthy of observation. You know also that as God is a righteous God, & loves Righteousness, and therefore if you advance Righteousness (as my hope in God is that you wil) you shall not lose your reward; For he is also a jea∣lous God in the things wherein his Glory is more immedi∣ately concerned; And his Honor is not more concerned in any thing then it is in the Doctrines which men hold and teach, and in the Worships which men give to him: therefore if you also shew your selves jealous of his Glory in these things, it will be assuredly written down in Gods Book of Remembrance what Zeal you had for your God, and the Lord will bless you thence forward. Are Magistrates for a Praise to good works, and for a ter∣rour to evil works, while only they are good and evil, but when they come to be best or worst (as they alwayes be when Religion is in them) is it so that they then have nothing to do, neither are they to meddle with them? If this be the sense of the Apostles words (as all Persons which do exclude the Magistrate from having any thing to do with the matters of God) will have it to be; it is a strange one, and hath nothing to bear it up, either from that Text, or any that I know of. But you are suffi∣ciently instructed (I doubt not) concerning your own pow∣er, and your Zeal shewed where the honour of God is en∣gaged, will provoke many whereto they will the rather be carried, considering that no sins do bring more & greater plagues upon a Nat on that professeth Righteousness, then sins against the first Table do; Now Magistrates are the Fathers of the Commonwealth, and therefore should study to preserve it from those judgments that would destroy it. Or else why are Laws made against Oaths, and such kind
 of Blasphemies, if they be not to intermedle with matters of the first Table; and are there no sins against the first Table that God hates so much as he hates Oaths? yea, there are Blasphemies of opinion that are of a more hate∣ful and harrid nature. But what ought to be done in this case, I leave that to your Honors wisdom to find out by searching of the Scriptures; knowing that the Lord hath made many of you very dextrous and skilful in the un∣derstanding of the Scripture. When you meet with Crimes of a Civil Nature mentioned in the New Testa∣ment, as Murther, Adultery, Theft, &c. You cannot Read their Penalties there which ought to be in∣flicted; you find the sins, but not the Punishments against such Offenders; What course do you take? you are forced to fly to the Old Testament, and to fetch your Light thence. There are Apostates from the true God, from the true Christ, from the true Faith in the great Fundamental of it, and from the true Worship in the very Substantials of it, and who also are Teachers of Apostasie, who yet were once enlightned, and knew the Truth; What ought to be done to such, or what course ought to be taken, that Dishonour to God may not be increased, nor the Land troubled by Gods Controversie against it? I leave it to be seriously thought of; and I hope the Lord will guide your minds (among the multiplicity of other weighty and serious thoughts within you) to the seasonable consideration of it. But if there be Sorcery and Familiarity with the Devil to be found among a People, who challenge Propriety in God, excluding all others from Interest in him; I have no cause to doubt but that such gross polluting Evils will be searched out.
 The God of Wisdom direct, and guide your Honors in all things that you take in hand, that by well doing, you may gain the Testimony of the Saints and World, that you are raised up of God, to exalt God, Christ, Faith, Truth, Godliness, Righteousness, and Mercy in this Nation. I most humbly beg pardon from your Honours, for my boldness in suggesting these thoughts of my heart, and spreading them before you, and remain

