



TIs not unknowne to You, Right Noble and Worthy Se∣nators, that the Great and Pre∣sent Controversie of these Times is about the Church, and Church Government. In the dayes of Luther, Zuingli∣us, Calvin, Bucer, and the rest of those Wor∣thies, the controversie of that age, was concer∣ning

the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, being generally stiled Bellum Sacramentarium, and the Sacramentary Controversie, the contention about it (even amongst the Servants of God) being so sharpe, that it produced most sad and wosull effects. The e was not any one thing more hin∣dred Melch. Adam. vita Oecolamp. pag. 53. Melch. Adam vit Bucer p. 213. Melch. Ad. vit Tosan. pag. 702. Melc. Ad vita Brent. pag 441. the cause of God, or the free passage of the Word, or the progresse of the worke of God be∣gun in the Church then this. This weakened and wounded the Protestant party, their weapons be∣ing turned each against other, this made them a gratefull spectacle to their enemies, this streng∣thened the Popish side, they placing more con∣fidence in their cause by these differences than in all other wayes besides. This Sacramentarie con∣troversie kindled such a fire in many Reformed Churches, that it even burnt them up, and turned them much a side from that true edification which is in Christ, and in the practise of godlinesse: And hath proved such a lasting fire, that it is not quenched till this day (although those Churches have had sword, famine, and Pestilence, to put it out.) Now in our dayes in this Kingdome, the chiefe question is about the Church and the disci∣pline of the Church, and our Controversie may fitly be tearmed the Disciplinary Controversie, which however it differs from the Sacramentary Quid? nonne vident dissidia nostra esse ami∣corum dispen∣dia, hostium compendia, & publica irae di∣vinae incendia. in the subject matter, yet it is too like it in the manner, & way of it, being likely to bring forth as sad births and fruites as did that? What? Is it not so, that we do see already (that I may speake with Hierome) that our differences about the Church

and Discipline are the losse of friends, the gaine Junius Bienu. Epist. land Has. of enemies, and the publicke flames of Divine wrath? The great differences in this Kingdome about the Church and Discipline, are one of the saddest and greatest symptomes of Gods displea∣sure against us. These contentions and opinions make us forget the proper causes of God, and that maine building up of one another, which is in faith and love, so crastily doth that old Ser∣pent Adeo veteraie hic antiqus daco impruden∣tiae nostrae ne vit illudere. know how to delude our ignorance; (as Iu∣rius speakes upon a like case.) Oh there is such a fire kindled in this Kingdome about these points, that unlesse the Lord looke downe from Heaven, and graciously be pleased to quench it timely, it may hazzard the burning and consuming all. Now it is the duty of all the Sonnes of Sion to endea∣vour in their places, the putting out this fire, be∣fore it goe too farre, as by povring out buckets of teares and prayers before the Lord, so by all other good wayes, but especially of the Ministers of the Gospell by all meane, both by themselves and by stirring up of others to doe it. The seri∣ous consideration of which hath stirred up in me strong resolutions, to lay out my selfe (accord∣ing to that measure of the gist of Christ bestow∣ed upon me) for the healing of this schisme, and quenching this fire. Now the first borne of this kind (though not the first conceived) is this present Treatise against Independant Government, and the Toleration of it, which I here humbly pre∣sent to this Honourable House, submitting it to your grave Judgements, and serious Considera∣tions,

humbly desiring your Acceptance of it: Now the Reasons moving me to take this bold∣nesse, to Dedicate this Booke to your Honours, are these. First, that great and generall liberty you grant of free accesse to your Honourable House, unto all rankes of persons, in this King∣dome, both by Petitions and Bookes. Secondly, that hereby I might take an occasion to testifie my humble duty and thankefullnesse unto, to∣gether with my high thoughts and estimation of this Honourable House for all the Indefatigable paines and care bestowed on the Publicke; See∣ing that by You (under God, and the Kings most Excellent Majesty) I, and hundreds of my Bre∣thren, enjoy so great quietnesse and freedome in our Ministeries, Estates, Persons, (after so great a storme) and that very worthy deeds are done, both to us, and to this Nation by your Providence, we accept it alwayes, and in all places, most Noble Patriots, with all thankfullnesse, and here I of∣fer to you the first fruites of my labours, as a la∣sting Monument of Gratitude. Thirdly, that by presenting it to You, both my selfe and Booke might here take Sanctuary, and have your Pro∣tection against the many Calumnies and Reproa∣ches which will be cast upon us from that spirit of Separation. Neither flye I to this Honourable House, as if I were conscious to my selfe of any crimes or just grounds of such revilings (for had I not Innocency and Integrity in my actions, and intentions, I durst not present this Booke to this Just and Honourable House, as knowing well

you are a refuge onely for Innocent and oppres∣sed persons, and persons who seeke the Publicke good) Or, as if I were not fore-armed to beare them; I know whom I serve in this worke, and Quisquis volens detrabir fama meae, iste nob addit mercedi meae. Augustirus Regium est ma∣le audire cum bene feceris. that therefore, whoever doth willingly detract from my name, doth but adde to my reward; I know also tis a Royall priviledge for a man to beare ill when he hath done well, and I have long agoe given my backe to the smiters, and by the grace of Christ hope to beare all calumnies with much quietnesse of spirit, having in part learned that lesson to goe through bad report (even a∣mongst good men) as well as amongst evill men, and to be counted an enemy (as Paul was) for telling the Truth; but I therefore present it to your Honours, and put it under your shadow, that so your Countenance and Acceptance of it (accor∣ding as you finde it) may counter-ballance and weigh downe with all sorts of men, the calumnies and censures cast upon it, to hinder that good in∣tended by it, and may the more commend the Worke to make it take with many for their satis∣faction. Fourthly, I take this boldnesse, that so I might have an opportunity, to move and stirre you up, most Noble Worthies, to put to your hands for the earely and timely compounding of this great Controversie about the Church, and Church Government: When fires are begun in great Cities and Townes, or Tumults raised, the Fathers of Families, and the Citizens run to the Magistrates and Governours to acquaint them with the case, and to desire their helpe, who ha∣ving

power to command both Men, Armes, Wa∣ters, Engines, buckets from every quarter, the fire is quickely out, and the peace setled. Now be pleased to suffer me to mind you of that which few or none doe, namely of our danger from er∣rors on the right hand, the growing and spreading evill of this present time. Every one minds you by Petitions, Sermous, Bookes, concerning the Reformation of this Church, in Government, Mi∣nistery, Ceremonies, and worship; and God forbid that a word should ever fall from my mouth, or my pen draw a line, to call you off from it. Goe on strongly and fully in the worke of Reformation to purge this Church thorowly, and purely to take away all our drosse and tinne; cast out of the way all stumbling blocks, & gather out all things that offend, let nothing be left to hurt or to destroy in Gods holy mountaine; Break downe all Images and Crucifixes, throw downe all Al∣tars, remove the High Places, breake to peeces the brazen Serpents, which have beene so abused to Idolatry and superstition, put out the unprea∣ching and scandalous Ministers, take a course for setting up good Pastors and Ministers in eve∣ry Congregation, and in your great Wisdomes, and zeale be pleased to consider of wayes to pro∣vide oyle for al the Lampes of the Sanctuary; Goe on Comfortably (for God is with you, and the Ministers with sounding Trumpets of Ministery of Word and Prayer; and the people of God with you, covering you all over with earnest pray∣ers, and and teares, as also with praises to God

for you) and be pleased to remember not to doe the worke of God by halves, or negligently. Per∣fect and thorow Reformation, will be your praise both with God and all good men, at home and abroad; and your zeale may provoke other Kingdomes, and States, and many will arise up and call you blessed, for the good Pastors, and pure Ordinances that they shall enjoy. Tis the blemish of some of the good Kings that were re∣formers, as Asa and Iehosaphat; But neverthelesse 2 King. c. ult. v. 43. 2 Chron. 15. v. 17. 2 King 18. v. 4. the high places were not taken away. It was the praise of other Kings, that they were taken away, as of King Hezekiah. Perfect Reformation takes away all possibility and hopes from men, of bringing things backe againe; but an imperfect leaves both a ground-worke, and faire possibility upon any advantage or opportunity to returne: Theodoret in his Eccle. historie relates that Theodo∣sius that most faithfull Emperor, being fully set Theod. hist. Ec∣cle. l. 5. cap. 20. to overthrow the errors of the Gentiles, he made Lawes, by which he commanded that the Tem∣ples of the Images should be puld downe. Con∣stantine the great, with some other Emperours, who succeeded Constantine, forbad all Sacrifices and worships to the heathen gods, and their Ima∣ges, and forbad any to come to their temples, but they did not demolish the temples & places wher∣in they were worshipped; so that Iulian and Va∣lens, Emperours who came after, did renew the impiety of the Gentiles, so that fire was kindled againe upon the Altars, and Sacrifices were of∣fered to the Images: All which things when Theo∣dosius

understood for certaine, hee did not onely shut up the Idols houses, forbidding all to come to the Temples, but he did extirpate them by the rootes, and tooke care to have them buried in eternall oblivion. It was the saying of Zisca the famous leader of the Thaborites, That the ve∣ry nests of the Storkes are to be puld downe, lest Diruendi sunt etiam ipsi cico∣niarum nidi ne redeant. Lavat. in Deurer. they returne againe. And may it please this Ho∣norable House to purge us thoroughly, and the rather for this, because the more perfect our Re∣formation is, according to the will of God, you shall by this lay the better and surer ground-worke, for healing and composing the great schisme, and divisions risen about the Church, and Church Government. But amidst all your care and paines in this kinde, I beseech you cast an eye upon the errors and evills of the other hand, as Anabaptisme, Brownisme, &c. and be pleased to take into your serious considerati∣ons the meanes and wayes how to hinder their growth, and so much the rather, in regard there is not now in this Kingdome (things standing as they doe) so much danger of errors on the left hand. Popery, superstition, prophanenesse, have beene so discountenanced of late, so discove∣red, and their nakednesse laid so open, as that Al∣tars, Images, pressing of Ceremonies, and pro∣phane Ministers are falling of themselves. Satan for this time hath even done with errors on the left hand, and their time is going out, grow∣ing like an Almanacke out of date. Any man who hath but halfe an Eye in his head,

and observes the course of things may see that errors on the right hand are now comming on the stage to take their turne also and to act their part; the Devill seeing he cannot effect his ends in the former wayes he went, he will now try others, as Theodoret speaks in the case of Nestorius, that Sa∣tan Theod. Heret. Fab. lib. 4. de Nest. gave over moving against the Church by out∣ward & manifest enemies, but came under the show of the Orthodox, and in the habit of great strict∣nesse bewitching many & drawing the injudicious common people to a desire after him. Satan is now transforming himselfe from an Angell of darknesse into an Angell of light, and though hee must use other kind of instruments, and goe other waies, yet tis to bring about the same things, the upholding of his kingdome and the hindring of Gods, so that he will now labour to doe that by correcting and building up, which hee did before by persecuting and pulling downe (as Luther speakes.) In a word plainly to expresse my meaning, one extremitie (as many examples both antient and moderne testifie) Nestorius speaking a∣gainst the per∣sonall union of the divine and humane nature of Christ: Ex∣tiches fell into an error con∣trary, con∣founding the natures, that he would have the humane nature so swal∣lowed up by the immensitie of the divine nature in Christ, that there was not two natures in Christ, but one onely, to wit, the divine nature, Evag. lib. 1. cap. 9. So O∣fiander broaching that error, that Christ was our mediatour only according to the di∣vine nature, Stancarus opposing that fell into another error that Christ was mediator only according to the humane Schlussels de Stancar. pag. 37. so Flacius Illyricus oppo∣sing Strigelius who made originall sinne to be but a light kind of accident, he to ag∣gravate the monstruousnesse of originall sinne, fell into that errour, that originall sinne was the substance of a man, Schlussels de secta Manic: pag. 4. hath caused another, the Tyrannie of Episcopall government in some Bishops hath brought forth the Demo∣cracie and Independencie, the violent pressing of some pretended orders hath set many against all

order, and Satan seing hee cannot doe as he did, the times not favouring those things, they being growne old, and even antiquated that every man is ready to hisse at them, hee now goes about by other waies, and if he can but effect what he is in a faire way for and what he hath begun in a great measure, he hath enough. Tis reported of the Fish called Polypus petrae cui adhaesit co∣lorem referens. Nazianz: de se ipso. Polypus, that it will be of the colour of that stone to which it cleaves, whether white or blacke, or any other: so will Satan be of that colour and that temper just that the men are of with whom he deales, and the times are of. (For besides this that Satan hath more wayes to kill Soules and advance his designes then one, as Oreg. Naz ad episcop. when he cannot have his will by persecution, then he will attempt it by schisme and sowing divisi∣on amongst ministers (as Nazianzen sheweth:) Satan will in time bring about the same things though in another way, for Independancie will bring againe what now it would cast out, name∣ly libertinisme, prophanenesse, errors, and will by some removes bring many men to be of no re∣ligion at all. Be pleased most worthy Senators to let me tell you that the greatest sort of erroneous spirits with all unstable and wanton witted men, will be much for Independant Government and Tolerations, and be to their uttermost against Sy∣nods & setled Government: Socinians, Armini∣ans, Anabaptists, Separatists, how different soever in other principles, yet will agree in this; Inde∣pendancie will both breed them, and being bred will foster them. And however in many men

who bee principall actors in this way of Inde∣pendancie, the dangers and evills may not so ap∣peare for the present, there being many things in most of the Ministers lovely, which the more commends this way, yet wise men, such as this Honourable house consists of, looke upon things and judge of them not onely as they are for the present, but as they may be hereafter, and accor∣dingly setle things; that being the great principle Legislators goe by, to presume that men may de∣generate, and things will be abused, and therefore so to provide that they may not. All errors com∣monly be best at first, most modest then, and the first Authors of errors be commonly the best and fairest. Ecclesiasticall History mentions that the Novatian errors did more hurt in the fourth Cen∣turie then in the third wherein it was first broa∣ched. The followers of Novatus did adde many o∣ther errors to his, as Theodoret relates. Arminius was more candid, and lesse erroneous then his Theod. lib. 3. Haeret: Fabul. Parvus error in initio fit magnus in fine, negligen∣da non sunt par∣va initia, ex quibus paulatim majores fiunt accessiones. followers, they having much improved the points, as some Divines have shewed. Be pleased there∣fore to give me leave to stirre you up to lay these schismes and divisions to heart, (the divisions of Reuben being great thoughts of heart) and in your great wisedomes early to find out meanes and remedies to heale the great rents about the Church and Church Government, and to hinder the further increase of this way: God hath called you together, and continued you for this worke amongst the rest; Noble Patriots doe your parts, and what in you lyes to conclude of some spee∣dy

way and course for setling these differen∣ces. Tis the praise of Cyprian and Cornelius that by the helpe of a Councell they did indeavour timely to suppresse the errors of Novatus. And in the meane while till Church Government be setled, whether it be not necessary to provide by some meanes against the spreading of this sect, and the meetings of these separated Assemblies, I leave it to your great wisedomes to consider, lest otherwise wee be overgrowne with Ana∣baptisme, Brownisme and such like. And I hum∣bly crave leave to tell you, that delayes in this kind will prove very dangerous, many falling to that way daily, and others by continuance will be so accustomed to it, that it will be harder to regaine them: Besides the Independants ly at the catch and advantage of delaies, all their hopes and strength standing in this, that it will be long before there be a Synod, or before the Church Government be setled, hoping that in the interim whilst things stand betweene two, and are unset∣led, they may both gather and increase their Chur∣ches, and make their party more considerable; and there is just ground to thinke they are not wanting to endeavour by some instruments how to effect it: The hand of Ioab is sometimes where tis not dreamt of. I could present this Honour∣able House with a sad relation of the state of things both in the City and Countrey in respect of errors on the right hand, as also bespeake You by the teares & feares of all the godly & painfull Ministers of this Church of England: But I know

I speake to the wise, and to them who are deeply sensible; and tis time for me to take off my hand lest the porch be too large for the house. Now the good will of him that dwelt in the bush rest up∣on your heads; The Lord hide you from the counsells and plots of wicked men, and from the raging diseases of the time, making you more and more his hidden ones; He make you more and more his chosen & sanctified ones to fulfill all his mind and to doe his whole worke both against all heresie and schisme, both errors on the left hand and right; Hee double and treble upon you all that spirit of wisedome, counsell, might, and una∣nimitie, which former Parliaments ever had. The Lord set your feet upon a rock, and establish your goings; He give you an unwearied spirit to goe on without fainting, till there be a perfect setling of peace in Church and Common-wealth, and till the worke of reformation so happily be∣gun be finished. And the Lord recompence into your bosomes seven-fold in blessings both tem∣porall, spirituall, and eternall, all your worke and labour of love which yee have shewed towards his name, and towards this Kingdome. And so humbly laying my selfe, and these poore endea∣vours at your feet, I rest

