



My deer and true Friend,
SInce Truth is the Daugh∣ter of Time, and triall ommends friendship, after wenty yeares experience I ay boldly call you so; It eldome falls to the lot of Gods Ministers, to find such un∣hangeable friends in such
 changeable times: Many of the Tribe of Levi have me with the Apostles hard mea∣sure, ready to have ther Eye pull'd out by such as would for¦merly have been ready to pu out their own for them; an may bemoan themselves wit David, Had it been mine ad¦versary that had done me thi dishonour, then I could hav born it, but it was thou m Companion, my guide, an mine own familiar freind But I think my self concern' to speak this to their sham that are given to change, an
 can in the turning of an hand turn Enemies, that ever since I had the honour and happi∣ness first to know you, I have found you expressly, uninter∣uptedly, and perseveringly aithfull, and the foundation of this love was laid (such as the naturallness, or rather pirituallness of it) when I had othing but the face of a tranger and the name of a rophet to render me gracious n your Eyes.
The first Signall of your nfeyned love to me was the Committing of an invalua∣ble
 jewell to my trust, your adopted Favorite, and Ne∣phew, Mr. Robert Osborne, whose ingenuity in youth pro∣mised very high attainment in his riper yeeres, had not th hand of Heaven snatcht him hastily from this Earth in th flower of his age: I speak no this to renew your griefe though you are one of th weaker sexe, yet I know yo are so much a Christian, as t indeavour a thorough, and u¦niversal submission to the han of our only wise God, and hea¦venly father, and me think
 David's consideration may serve to medicat all remainders of sorrow, that you mourn not without hope for one that sleepes in Christ; That you shall shortly goe to him, though he cannot return to you.
I have read of a King that being sollicited by Ambassa∣dors to shew them his treasure, he shewed them his Friends; and this is my aime in my De∣dications, to shew the world my Friends, to make my boast of my friends, or rather to make my boast of God all the
 day long that hath given me such friends.
Having now told the World what a Friend I have, I am further to tell my Friend what a treasure I have presen∣ted to her, but that is so great that I am not able to expresse it, or if I were, you were not able to comprehend it: I can pro∣phesy but in part, and you can know but in part, so long as we remain militant, and therefore so as we are on this side Heaven, there will be a dark side as well as a light in that parti-coloured Clowd that reveales to us, and hides from us Christ and Wis∣dom.

Christ and Wisdom do stand in the Frontispice of this Structure like those stately Pillars Jachin and Boaz in the Porch of Solomon's Tem∣ple. 1. Kings. 7.21. And as those signifyed stability and strength, so do these. Christ is the surest stability: The Apostle calls him Iesus Christ, the same yesterday, too day, and for ever. Hebr. 13.8. And Wisdom is of greatest strength, to which acclamati∣on must be given in triumph of Truth, Great is the Truth and will prevaile.

I know you have been long in labour of these lovely twins, Christ and Wisdom, as well as I; and to whom can they more providentially be set to nurse, than (as Moses to his own Mother) to you a Mo∣ther in Israell?
In the first Treatise I have travelled in birth that Christ may be formed in Soules, that a precious Saviour may be a precious pearl to precious Soules; And in the second I have been Wisdoms Advo∣cate, which is no mean ho∣nour.

If the Ambassadour be ne∣ver so mean and obscure, yet the Embassy is of greatest Mo∣ment, and will deserve well∣come from the greatest upon earth.
Christ and Wisdom are the chiefest jewells, and most ra∣diant in the most imperiall Crownes; Such things as will greaten Greatnes, ennoble Nobility, and defend their De∣fenders.
Your old Husband, my wor∣thy Friend, was so great a lover of Wisdome, that out of a greedy thirst after it, he set
 himself to the serious study of the Hebrew tongue when he was 40 yeeres old, and such was his unweary industry, that he dyed a Critick in that holy Language.
His most constant study was to compare our best Eng∣lish Translation with the He∣brew and Greek Originalls, and he gave the Translators the due commendation of their faithfullness; but the Origi∣nall Languages were the spe∣ctacles, or rather the two eyes with which he read the Scrip∣tures.

And you have been ever nce I knew you so visible a over of a precious Christ, that presume you have long agoe xperienc'd him to be the chief∣st of ten thousand, and alto∣ether lovely.
I need not complement you, nd wish I had better pro∣ision for your entertainment, or borrow Peter's lame Apo∣ogy to the Cripple, silver and old have I none, but such as  have I give; I know you prize Christ above Gold, and Wis∣om above Silver, and I might ay of this double treasure (if
 it needed indeering to you as Solomon doth of one part o it. Pro. 16.16. How muc better is it to get wisdom tha gold, and to get understanding rather to be chosen than sil¦ver.
And Solomon doth not only turn Gold and Silver int drosse by comparing them t wisdom, Pro. 2.14. The mer∣chandize of it is better than th merchandize of Silver, and th gain of it is better than gold But Paul compares all unto dung and drosse by comparing them unto Christ, Phil. 3.8
 I count all things but losse for the excellency of the knowledg of Christ Iesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the losse of all things, and do count them but dung that I may win Christ.
Having made this gratefull acknowledgment of your sted∣fast love to me, and some mani∣festation of a reciprocation in this devote, that your Soul may prosper, I shall not offer that wrong to mine own confidence, or your Candour, as to speak one word for your acceptance; The things themselves will
 speak lowder to your heart, than any language of mine ca unto your eye, or eare.
My dear Friend, I begg your pardon, together with you prayers to God for me, tha these poor labours of love ma find acceptance with the Ser¦vants of God, and that man Soules by Gods rich blessin upon them may increase wit the increasings of God: S humbly takes leave

