



AS Christ himselfe said some∣time to a multitude, the like may I, taking occasion from this my presumpti∣on, What came ye out to see? a Reed sha∣ken with the winde? it may be so: but what came yee out for to see? a Prophet? here I must change the note, nay lesse then a Prophet, for as among the sonnes of women, there was not a greater then Hee of whom Christ spake; so among the sonnes of women is there not a lesse then he whose pen now presents that service
which his tongue ought, in its proper place, did not the cloud of a darkenned fortun eclipse his apparition. Lesse in maturity and ripenes for so weighty a busines, as touching my selfe; lesse in o∣pinion of fitnes, as touching the esteeme of many who it may be have seene me sweating in the pursuite of my Recreati∣on, (fishing) but never in serving at the Alter of my God, Notwithstanding, oh my God, I am sent as a messenger before thy face, and shall prepare the way be∣fore thee.
For by a fit Metaphor drawne from the art and practice of fishing, our Savi∣our Christ hath shaddowed forth both the calling and imployment, both of his first choice Apostles, and all other Apostolicall succeeding Preachers, saying, I will make
you fishers of men. Mat. 4, 19. Such you shall bee, because such I will make you to be, & quorum pars parva fui, full twenty yeeres exercising this holy functi∣on: who although with Peter may say, I have toyled all the night and caught nothing, (for my selfe) yet with Iohn Baptist Luc. 3.10. I have some reason to beleeve that my labours have not beene altogether unprofitable, among the Men∣noes and meaner sort I fished for, which were the crowd of common people publi∣cans and sinners, very slippery Eeles, that had long lien in the mud of their misdoings, and sanguinary souldiers, the Pike and Water-wolves of the Ocean of this world, a people naturally diseased with the bloody issue. Encouraged ther∣fore by that inabling spirit of grace which
of Priscilla and Aquila, poor Tent ma∣kers, were able to pose that great Clerke Apollos: with Ieremy I presume to go to the great ones: and with Peter will once more let downe my Evangelicall sweep-net, which was not composed by the wisedome of man, or woven with the deceitfull words of Sophisters, but with the words of the Gospell, according to that of St: Paul, 1. Cor. 2.4. Neither is it any materiall net, like that in Suidas which one cast over another, while they were in single combate together, and when he had ensnared him, he slew him; nor such a cruell, barbarous, and bloody spirituall net, as the Prophet Micah spea∣keth of, Micah 7. All lie in wait for blood, every man bunteth his brother with a net. But it is that Sagena, that
sweep net which our Saviour brought downe from heaven, even the glorious Gospel of Iesus Christ preached, that wil dragg and drawe out all those that are plunged in the darkesome holes of igno∣rance, and in the muddy cares of this World, to the light of Truth, and love of supernall things. Et faelices illi quos haec sagena de profundo criminum et errorum pertrahit ad lucem. Amb. Happy, oh thrice happy they, if this draw net fasten on them, and bring them from darkenesse to light from death to life; a faeculo, from the sea of this World, ad faecula saeculorum to the shore of a bet∣ter life, even the land of the living, which as I wish to your Worship specially for my bounden duties sake, and to your ver∣tuous Lady, the field of whose loving sin∣cerity
in the remaining course of your lives, being fully charged with deeds of charity, cannot but be accomplisht with a Crest of Glory: So even from my soule I wish it to all that love to Bathe in Inno∣cency, and expect the comming of the Lord Iesus.
Sir,

