



Most honoured Patriots,
SO great hath been the impudence of many, in this scribling age, that I have even with astonishment read, and reading, blush'd at the unparalleld boldnesse of the Authours, daring even to print themselves lyars and forgers to the whole world, at least of understanding men: Nay, some have been bold to bespatter others, and prefix their names to draw credit to their falsities; by which sort, your honor hath much suffered, to the grief of yours, and the Commonwealths friends: but Paulo ma∣jora canamus. These seem Saints [offending rather out of necessity, and to get mo∣ney; at most, but thieving from the living, who may raise the Hue and Cry after them.] To one I have met with, who thinking the other but Petty Larceners, but Sucking-Rogues hath dared to rob the Tombes, and that he might with his counter∣feit colours set off a deformed cause, hath been bold to traduce his dead (and as they stiled him) dread Soveraign, and represent him to all, who have but the least know∣ledge of affairs under the notion of a notorious Forger, and superlatively cunning Hypocrite. But if he that counterfeits the Stamp, or debases the Coin be accoun∣ted a Traytor amongst most if not all Nations? What better Tittle is due to this counterfeiter of the Person of a Prince, and debaser of the reputation of a Parlia∣ment, to cheat the world? Give me leave therefore to present to your veiw the Au∣thour, before the Treatise; one both presumptuous and crafty, cunning in his pre∣sumption, and bold in his craft.

First, he takes it for granted, that multitudes by assed by affection to the late King would readily and very credulously take for currant any thing stamped with his effi∣gies; he therefore assumes his shape, and makes the late King jurare in verba magi∣stri; own his calumny and dissimulation; and that,
I. In Print; that the multitude of those understanding Animals, with whom e∣very thing in Print goes for Gospel, even to the very Ballade, might be goodlily gull'd.
II. In hard words, that many might admire it, because they understand it not, and so not dare to question one wiser then themselves; especially those that taking the height of the understanding by the Jacobs staffe of preferment, must conclude none could be so wise, but the late King to write it.
III. In a gaudy phrase, that those ools, who are taken with words, more then matter, like Trouts, might be tickled into his clutches by the gills: Those, I say, Coxcombes in folio, who are bewitched with guilded leaves, who judge of a wo∣mans beauty by her bravery, and guesse of amans worth by his gaudy outside, might with Scaevola, mistake the Secretary for Porseuna, and think it the late Kings, be∣cause of the embroidered apparell.
IV. In the late Kings name, that those Idolaters who make a King a God, and count it blasphemy to say a King may erre: who will be more then enough satisfied with the late Kings ipse-dixit, and believe the doctrine not for the reason or truth, but his say-so, might receive it as an article of their Creed, and not dare to dispute its verity.
Upon these Fooles and Bedlams, he presumes; but least these Geese should not be sufficient to defend his Capitol, these lame and blinde Jebusites to maintain his strong hold; he endeavours by his magick, to raise defences, and by conjuring up the dead to make it an enchanted Castle (truly it is no wonderin such a piece of knight errantry to meet with an Archi mago; yet none but a Don Quixote will take this bason for Mambrino's helmet, or esteem him to have a golden head, because he hath a∣brazen face) and so in subtilty set it not out till the late King was dead,
1. Being sure the dead tels no tales, and that the late King was sure enough, for denying it: and here you see the Knight is charm'd asleep, whom this Magician did suppose onely able to perfect the adventure.
2. Knowing many, though they knew, yet would not affirm his words fals, because they esteem it a kinde of more mannerly charity, to give themselves, then the dead the ly, and believe him they had rather, then travaile to disprove him: here you see others disheartned by dispaire, to be able to achieve the enterprize.
3. Believing few would luctare cum larva, quarrel with à non entitie, or answer a dead man; and so he might boast it unanswerable, because it should not, he thought, be answered: Here the Enchanter thought himself safe, because none would at∣tempt to disturbe him. But the Devil hath deceived him, and truth hath Champions who he neer dream't on, that will utterly rase his so seeming indelibility; but to let passe this Metaphor.
Lastly, He besprinkles it with a great shew of Piety; yea, so much as may detect his knavery; for what more of self-denyall may be desired, then in some places? What more of self seeking be found, then in others learning of his old Tutour, to as∣sume sometimes an Angels shape, that so he may cloak his black villany with the re∣splendent beauty of blessed Pietie.

But were  the late Kings, why was it not set our before his death, to have cleared all doubts? was he either afraid, or ashamed to own it? For opportunity, there was as much before to publish it, and the operation had been more effectuall, then when the matter was past cure.
Perhaps there was some other ground for this rate aedifice, and silver weights did move this engi; what a Iudas was this to sell his Masters fame for base lucre?
But if the main cause of the forgery, was to slander the Parliament, and the chiefe end proposed was to lay all the blood and myseries of the War on their heads; then are you engaged to vindicate your cause, and to detect the forgery, which once effected; how would his greatest friends, become his deadliest enemies, and those that now cry a Hosanna to this Book, would most clamourously then ring out a crucisigite to this Rook: Thus when you should censure him, all would eccho to your sen∣tence rejoycing in, and applauding both your goodnesse and justice.
1. That faction which now so wittingly are willing to conceale the falsehood, and doe so seemingly adore the matter as oraculous; because it makes for their advan∣tage: When they saw the cheat detected, and the Shaveling dragged out from be∣hinde the Idoll, would detest the Authour of so bad an enterprize: and when the royallists, as they will be stiled, have found how he hath wounded their Soveraigne, and murdered their late King in his repute with posterity, who will be judges with∣out exception, of the impartiall relations of the causes of the difference; will they not curse the Forger? and let them to it; and le fly vollies of execrations, that we may see, that they have not forgot their old trade, nor that all swearing and dam∣ming is a Shipboard with Rupert.
2. The good People of England; (those that have not dishonoured their Birth, nor given cause to their Parent to doubt them her own; but have undazeled beheld those direct beams, when the other bastard progeny hath winked at the oblique rays: those that have stedfastly gazed upon the noon-day, when the other have shrunk at the morning dawnings, and have not endured the appearance of the fiery tryall) would have just cause to frown on this dishonourer of their Countries Fathers, and so in∣veterate enemie of their just cause, which to wound in the body, he hath not spa∣red to flash his own in the head, ayming at you through his King, whom he would seem to adore so farr, as to sacrifice Laws, Liberties, Parliaments, and whol King∣domes to his will, the safety of all to the tyrannicall interest of One; yea, become himself a slave to make his Royall Soveraign a Tyrant; and yet here the slave dares defile his so sacred Lord, being it seems more enslaved to his own devillish mallice, as if he were so bent to ruine his country, that he will defile what he seems to account a noli me tangere, under the incureing an Anathema; so he may destroy it and its freedome.
3. Would not every man conclude, to see one murdering the very memory of his so dread Soveraign, and worse then annihilating his dead King, for infamy is worse, non-entite; nay, one of those blinde Bayards, those furious Malignants, who rage at, raile at, and brand with names unworthy an English mans thoughts; much more unbeseeming his mouth or pen, the supream Authority of the Nation, for but bringing the late King to an open tryall, in the face of the world, before which he might have evidenced his innocency if he would, or could, even that, not duty or allegiance to the late King, but his own base interest, and trayterous ma∣lice to his Country; and your Cause hath put him on this design of Forgery.

Thus shall your Cause be Vindicated from his soule aspersions, the late King from his falshood, and hypocrisie (whom dead unmercifulnes it self would not en∣der worse then he was) and the world resolved, and satisfied to behold this unpar∣rallel'd forger discovered and punished; who, when he devours the reputation of, both Parties, seems to weep over them, and wash them with his Crockdil tears, (and we may justly liken him to that monster of Nile, for as his tongue discovers his Tribe, and his lying, that he is of the old Serpents race; so his actions argue for the simile; and his striving to thrive by the ruines of both parties, is not different from the others, preying both on land, and in the water.) Who hath been bold with the God of Heaven, as well as you gods on Earth, taking his holy name in vain, and making his choicest gift bestowed on men, the glorious rayment of his Saints most blessed piety, a vaile to cover the ugly deformity of this bastard brat of his own brain: But her armour discovers the counterfeit Palas, and her wea∣pons forg'd in Hell; that she is not of heavenly race.
Lastly, by executing justice on this dishonourer of your God and Country, you shall attain the end of your call, and of your being, as Men, Patriots, Christi∣ans, which is, faithfully to serve your God and Country: which that you may un∣dauntedly doe; The Lord of Hoasts, the God of Councel still goe on, to protect, and direct you; That you may be honoured as Joshua's in our Israel, the setlers of us in the Ca∣naan of liberty, after so long Aegyptian bondage and slavery, and so sharpe a travell through the wildernesse: which that he would, and will shall be the desire and hope of.

