



Right Honourable,
WHen Lewis of Bavaria (the fifth German Emperor of that name) was sore baited by Pope John the 22.Defende me (O Cae∣sar) ab inju∣riis Papae en∣se tuo, & e∣go te verbo, scripto, rati∣onibus inso∣lubilibus ad∣versus eum tuebor. Phil. Mornay. du Plessis. Hi∣stor. Papa∣tus. p. 451. Psal. 84.11. Psal. 47.9. Anatomy of Melancho∣ly. Preface to the Read∣er. p. 7. William Oc∣kam (our Countrey-man) who merited the name of Dr. A∣cutissimus, said to him, defend me (O Caesar) from the injuries of the Pope, by your Sword, and I will defend you by word, writing, and un∣answerable Arguments against him. I dare not challenge such acute∣ness or efficacy of arguing to my poor Labours here presented to your Honours; and therefore rather humbly crave your Protection of them and their Authour, then dare to think my self your Protector.
Your Honours are under a higher Guard, even his, who is a Sun and Shield to the upright, and to whom the Shields of the Earth (the Rulers and Magistrates) do belong.
Of the Book I may say, as our Democritus, out of Macrobius, of his own works, Omne meum nihil meum: the Collection was mine, the matter other mens; and indeed, it is more then an Echo, an imperfect repetition of more perfect voices.
Yet it is what I have, and since it concernes the late transactions of he Common-wealth, your Motion in a high Orbe therein, moved me to desire your gracious aspect, and your sweet influences upon our Na∣tio incourage me to hope acceptation.
Diversions from the common road are usually look't upon as Tres∣passes; though reason and our Law allow a Commander in pursuit of publick enemies to march his men through any mans enclosure. So He∣roical actions of vertue against Tyrants, and their complices, are scil∣ed with unworthy aspersions, by them who adore a form, though cor∣rupted, and prefer private tranquillity before publick safety, though God and nature dictate. That meane which might at first have been
 chosen or refused, are no longer to be used then while they are subser∣vient to their proper ends; and when they oppose them, are absolutely to be rejected; lest what was meant for Medicine turn to poyson.
A great part of the filth cast upon the late actions, is directed against your Honours in special, an our victorious Army: But, as God hath born itness to their integrity, by giving victory over the adversaries after solemn appeales to his decision: so your Honours have hitherto so managed your trust, and bin so signally saved by the Lord, the shield of your help,Deut. 33.29 and the sword of your Excellency, that all your enemies have been found Lyars.
Go on (Right Honourable) to do worthily in and for our Land, and the good Lord suggest to you more and more efficacious meanes for the advancement of his glory, and the welfare of our Nation, support you with courage and vigour, that your Councels may be brought to the wished effect; That England which hath been look't upon as a Na∣tion forsaken of her God, may (by the good hand of God uon your care and wisdom) be made a praise in the earh, and set up in perfect beau∣ty; and that your memorial in after ages may be, These are the re∣pairers of the breach, the restorers of pathes to dwell in; which is the humble prayer of
(Right Honourable)

