



Honoured SIR:
YOur Concernments in this Book are so ma∣ny, and manifest, that it would be no less then Sacriledge in it self, and ungratitude in me, to lance it forth under the Looky∣fate of any other Tutelar. It was done at your Direction, and in your service re∣ceived its Birth; therefore cannot be free without your Manumission and Patronage: And your interest is so great in e parts and qualifications, which rendred the Author hereof Famous to Posterity, that if I did not fear a Church-Censure, I would fall into the Pithagorian error, and protest, that the Authors Soul had again lodged her self in your Body. To tell that the Author hereof was a great Master of Reason, an expert Physician, and pious Divine, is a work not at all necessary; for his enemies confess it; and his actions, and Writings do assert it to all posterity. To speak the same of you, I hold it an absolute duty laid upon him that is free to bear witness to the Truth, and is willing at every seasona∣ble occasion, to be thankfull to them, by whom he hath pro∣fited. And indeed I think, there are none can more truly a∣vouch the same then my self, who for five years together, had the happiness to be witness, to so many of your pious, and vir∣tuous actions. 'Tis true, You never courted the applause of Men, or overthrow of Widows by long Prayers; neither thought Preaching a fit Pulley to raise your preferment: you lest these Ginns of Hypocrisie to Men, that had no better
parts to become eminent: of which Nets any of themselves were ashamed, at least did not use, so soon as they had caught, what they fished for. But your piety is of a more un∣tainted Tincture. If we believe (as we ought) what the A∣postle in so many, in so pithy words inforceth: That all things profit nothing without Charity: not tongues, not faith to remove Mountains, not prophecy it self, not zeal to the fire. It is kind, it envyeth not, it is not easily moved, it rejoyceth in the truth, it beleveth, hopeth, and endureth all things: and is no more subject to time, then eternity is. This is that virtue that maketh you pious: this is it that crowneth your actions; and this is it which compelleth me (in despite of forgery or envy) to proclaime you religious. How oft have I seen you visit the sick? how oft feed the hungry? cloath the naked, comfort Priso∣ners? What Souldier of what Regiment, Troop, or Company soe∣ver, can say, but you were ever more willing to affoard, then he was ready to desire, your assistance in your Art and Me∣dicines? How many Countrey-Men, both Angles and Scots, have you helped in their sicknesses and distresses? I have known you liberally bestow on them whose former degree and parts made ashamed to beg, and nevertheless their necessi∣ties required the help of the meanest: and this was done by you undeserved, undesired, and without the sound of Trum∣pet. And the Army you served, cannot say that ever you for∣sooke them in their greatest hazards or hardships; though they forsook you in that prosperity, whereof you should have been a sharer. But it is a rule of Machiavell; That we should fall out with those, whose benefits confer'd on us, we are not able to requite; and this confidence shall make the people be∣lieve, that either we were not oblieged, or at least we have not been unthankfull; As for the skill in your profession, I need say little. Your enemies [if there be any such Beasts] will not deny it. The whole Island is filled with the Fame, and Mo∣numents thereof; And there is not an honest scarre shewn by the valiant, but is an equall trophy of his and your glory. And truly I believe not any will question this, but he whose courage could never affoard, to make him the fit object of your care and profession. I come to your reason, but that is so piercing, so profound, that I dare not meddle with its edge, nor search its bottome; least mine should be divided by the one, and lost in the other, But thus farre I dare adventure to
say, that I never saw you do an action, though many seemed triviall, but alwaies a good effect followed thereon. You ne∣ver Churched it, nor Kirked it; yet your wisdome [under the Divine providence] carried you our and up in all your enter∣prises. You spoke the truth bluntly, and yet it alwaies left an impression. You neither profest a Sect nor Sectling, yet you were respected by all, and imployed by most. And your reaching wit was never mistaken in the greatest designs, which I believe made the designers more willing to quit you. If this then be not the highest enjoyment of reason, it shall be my de∣sire alwaies to remaine in folly. SIR, (to give no further trouble) I have Translated this Book at your desire, and have according to my duty Dedicated it to You; not because either You are, or are not of these Opinions; or that I desire You to draw out an Act of resolution in reference to either: But that at this time, when most men seem to be busie in the inquest of truth, You thought it fit, that this Opinion should likewise come to the Test, in submission to that word of the Apostle, Try all things, and hold that which is good: We are commanded here, to try that which we are not commanded to hold: o∣therwise the words would be ridiculous. Try all things that are good, and hold that thing which is good: and so we should try that which we knew to be good, whether it were good, which is vain, and needless. But all things here, are meant all Doctrines, all Opinions: and we ought only adhere to that, that is able to abide the touch of Scripture, and sound reason deduced there∣from. Now whether this be such a work, or not, I leave it to e∣very triers judgment; and You to the protection of him, that in the great day of tryall, shall save you in mercy;
London 1. of May. 1659.

