


May it please your Honours,
I Do look upon it as incumbent to me at present, to express and manifest my thankfulness toward you: for not only by your Authority, but also upon the accompt of your Mecoenatick gratuity, did this Treatise issue out to publick view. And not only so, but likewise it was preffered to me, by you the honourable Commissioners, That any charge in this Nation, suitable to my capacity should be devoted to my trust. Which, no question, had been accom∣plished, had not your Honours from hence on a sudden been removed. Ʋpon consideration of which things. I cannot but thus humbly de∣mean my self in tendering my respects to your Honours.
The greatest reward I either desire or expect, is, That your Honours would be companions of all such who fear the Lord, being willing to live and die, to stand and fall with such by joynt-concurrence, espou∣sing the Quarrel of the Lamb against the Beast, the false-Prophet, the Kings of the earth, and their Armies.
I shall crave leave of your Honours to offer my single judgment in order to the right regulating of Law-matters, which I suppose you will not look upon as matters too high for me, unless you should so judge of all that I have written in the following Treatise. Howso∣ever, I shall contribute my mite to the treasury, in prosecuting these following Positions.
Posit. 1. The Law in its substantials needeth no reformation, being grounded upon the principles of pure Nature.
I shall glance a little at the discovery of the general and substan∣tial principles of the Law. In general it consisteth of a direct and indirect part. The direct part of the Law is, secundum allegata & probata. The indirect is, secundum allegata & improbata. The direct principles thereof resolve upon Allegation & Probation, or upon Claim and Instruction. Claim is either in order to Movables, or Immovables. In order to immovables, the grounds thereof be heirship, disposition, donation, and conquest. Heirship is, either of Line, or of Conquest. Of Line, secundum descensum proprium. v. g. as is between father and son. And secundum descensum accidentalem. v. g. as is between the elder, and younger brother. Of conquest, ne ultra unum gradum ascendat. v. g. Conquest being disponed to the third son, cannot fall to the first. In order to which, the Law doth say well, Primogenito Primoginitura, & caeteris Proportio: Justitia enim fit, secundum pro∣portionem. Disposition is, either mutual by way of contract, or per∣sonal by way of assignation. But saith the Law, Ne ulla sit dispositio in fraudem creditorum. Donation is either absolute, or conditional. In order to which, saith the Law, Volenti non fit, injuria. Conquest is, that which is purchased by the proper industry of the Owner, not being derived from any Predecessour. But, Quod Propria virtute ac∣quiritur, Propria ac libera voluntate disponitur. As for the Instructi∣on of Claim, whether in order to Immovables, or Movables, it must be by Evidences, either of Writ, Witnesses, or Confession. Con∣fession is, either formal, or virtual. Virtual, aut per silentium, aut per absentiam. Qui tacet, consentire videtur. Non dormientibus, sed vigilantibus sunt jura. All which principles be very consonant to Nature and sound Reason, as is evident from the very tenor of them. To which all Law-principles, in point of suit, may be reduced, as is known to all skilful Lawyers.
Posit. 2. Intail is a corrupt title of Claim.
For it hath no ground, either in Nature, or in Reason, but only in the circuit of a prodigal humour, for perpetuating a Name, which is but grasse, and the glory thereof, as the flower that fadeth. Thus the perpetuating of the Line in the person of the eldest son, by vouch∣safing the whole substance on him, is no lesse unjust then prodigal.
Posit. 3. Jure divino, upon the accompt of Divine Right, all Pleas

ought to be composed according to Conscience and Reason, without all respect to any Platform of humane Law.
So it was in the Primitive Institution of the Jewish Common∣wealth. (1) Special care was had to establish such Judges in it, as were men of Conscience and Religion, Exod. 18.22, 25. Deut. 1.13, 15. Who were to judge the People, as did Moses, making them know the Statutes of GOD, and his Laws, in judging Pleas between one and another, Ex. 18.16. (2) Because as they were to judge no other Judgment but what was GOD's, Deut. 1.17. so they were to judge only for the Lord, 2 Chron. 19.6.
Posit. 4. The Rigour of the Law is great injustice, although the Process be secundum allegata, & probata.
For, Nimium jus nimia injuria. I might instance a hundred cases, in which the peremptoriness of the Law is either too intense, or too re∣misse.
Posit. 5. Though the Law were never so just in it self, it can never be justly executed, a Platform being observed, men not being left to their own freedom in judging.
Because a Platform can never be pleaded without Interpreters. Who, I pray, shall interpret? Not the Judges: for they cannot both judge, and plead. Hoc opus, hic labor est. Not the ignorant Pursuers, and Defenders: for ignoti nulla cupido, far less intellectio. There∣fore it only remaineth, that skilful Lawyers be employed. And then be sure, of heavie burdens which they themselves will not touch with one of their fingers. And thus a Platform's abrogation is the Law's reformation. Otherwise it is but verberatio aëris.
Posit. 6. To day, the only best way of easing the People of their burdens in point of Suit, is, To remit all Pleas to the Arbitration of Neighbours.
The truth of this doth appear thus: All determination of Pleas of necessity is either upon a judicial, or (as I may so say) arbitral accompt. If upon a judicial accompt, then either according to the dictates of Conscience and pure Reason, or the principles of a Plat∣form. The former cannot be to day. Oh! how selfish are the best of men at this time? Though there be both godly and able men to day, yet cannot all places of trust be filled with such as answer the Scrip∣ture qualifications of Rulers. Not til the time, Our Officers be, peace, and Exactors, righteousness, the Judges being restored, as at the first,

and Counsellours as at the beginning. And as the former is impossible, so the other is hurtful: for as Judges qualified, as said is, are rare, and many of them to fil al places of trust cannot be found, so, a Plat∣form being established, swarms of Lawyers, the main face-grinders, do abound. It therefore remaineth that Pleas be determined by way of Arbitration among friends. And then be sure (not one of a hun∣dred otherwaies) of little expence, great moderation, and great dis∣patch. Because of the untowardness of People, I must needs adde some Cautions.
Caut. 1. The Pursuer refusing without all reason, friendly to com∣pound by way of Arbitration, it will do well, if by an Act be forfeited, toties quoties, so much of his suit as may daunt him; viz. either one half, or a third part thereof, as may be judged convenient.
Caut. 2. The Defender, upon no good grounds, refusing to com∣pound by way of friendly Arbitration, it will do well, if an Act bind him toties quoties, to forfeit an half, or a third part, more and above what is sued of him.
Caut. 3. It will do well, if some of the godliest and ablest men be appointed and authorized to that end, to attend a  Pleas, which either cannot, or stubborn persons refuse to, be composed by way of Arbitra∣tion, all due execution passing upon their Determination, whether as to the deciding of the Plea, or fining of the stubborn and refractory person.
All which, as I conceive, do stand with Reason: for as the end of War is Peace, so the end of Law is Arbitration. Were all men beaten with the Law abroad, be sure they would friendly agree at home. And many are forced to do so, when they have spent their time, wits, and estates upon it. So old Clients can, though wantons be ig∣norant thereof.
I shall not multiply words on this subject at present, but willingly rest satisfied with what is spoken already, though I might enlarge my self theron, (to which I shall be most ready, whensoever called thereto) being nothing but the abridgment of my thoughts in the matter; and hoping the poor man's counsel may deliver the City, supposing these words to be spoken in season, the exigent of time calling for the like. I have no more to adde at present, but that I am

