


TO THE Very Honourable, and truly Godly, the LORD-GENERAL CROMWELL, Greeting.
My LORD,
WHile I was thinking to whom I might dedicat this Book, in which is asserted the Authority and Non-usurpation of the Commonwealth of England, I judged none more fit then him to whose patronage I might commit it, who hath most promoted the Liberty lately obtained, under the power and protection of the God of Israel. And thus, among many, I made choice of your Lordship. Albeit I look upon Kingly Govern∣ment, as that which is inconsubsistent with just Freedom and Liberty; nevertheless, under what Power and Authority I am, be what it will, I am willing to give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's. And therefore I will humbly offer my judgment to your Lordship, in this case; which I hope will be useful to abate the seditiousness of spirit, to which many (as is at least pretended upon a conscientious accompt) are bent.
It will not be amiss to distinguish between the case of Superiority and Inferiority. Now the Word of God will have the inferiour subject to the superiour, without any resistance, not only for wrath, but also for conscience-sake, Rom. 12.1. The higher can never be without the lower, the one necessarily pre-supposing the other. And therefore, that which is lower and inferiour, ought to be subject to the higher and superiour. Hence it is Jesus Christ & his Apostles, subjected themselves to the great∣est of tyrants, even to such whose title and right depended meetly from the sword. So then, put me under the Turk's command, I shall not dispute

his power. Shew me where Christ, or any of his Apostles, dispute the authority of any power they lived under. It is undeniable, they spoke and preached against all manner of sin and vice, bearing faithful witness against it. And thus they witnessed against the sins of Princes, aswel as of the People. Howsoever, there is a great difference between a Magi∣strate, as a Magistrate, and as a man. As a Magistrate he cannot fail, but either in tyranny, or in injustice, or else in bribery. As a man, he is sub∣ject to personal infirmities as others ar. I must confess, the Gospel wit∣nesseth abundantly against all these failings. But as I understand, the Gospel doth not allow the inferiour to speak directly, and by way of ap∣plication against the Magistrate, as he faileth in his office. I do not read where Christ, or his Apostles charged any Ruler with tyranny, injustice, or bribery, in the discharge of his trust. Sure I am, there were many un∣just Judge in their time. I made, that Christ called Herod, a Fox: and Paul called Nero, a Lion But the Law could not conclude from hence, that any thing was spoken against them as Magistrates: Because as men, they were  to be  as Foxes and cruel as Lion. And thus the Law could make no other, but their speaking against personal taults in the Magistrate. And I judge it not unlawful, upon some serious ac∣compts, (though not by all persons and at all occasions) to speak against the personal sins of the Magistrate in a down-right way, as did the Bap∣tist to Herod. If this will not satisfie, then observe that Christ was not at that time subject to Herod, but to Pilate. And may not I speak against any tyrannous Magistrate, to whose Law & Government I am not subjected? Yea, against the great Turk, though I might not being under his Au∣thority. Ny, but I choose rather to say, (as the scope of Christ's words insinuate in opposition to the disdainful bragging of the Pharisees) that Christ opposeth his divine and kingly power, to Herod's tyranny; upon which accompt he defieth his despiaht, as being impossible for him to act any thing to ins prejudice, or alteration of his purpose. And as for that of Paul. it is not clear what he meaneth by the Lion. Only this much he is pleased to be a little free with his dear friend, Timothy. And truly, I may use so much freedom with my dear friend, as with mine own heart. But what is all this for the subject to call the Magistrate to his face, A tyrannous and partial Judge granting he be so? Shall I therefore, both in private and publick speak what I will (making an ordinary trade of it) against his unfaithfulness in managing his office? Scripture doth not allow me to think any thing against him in my Bed-chamber, Eccles. 0.20. [Is it fit] to say to a King. [thou] are wicked, [and] to Princes, ye [are] un∣godly? Job 34 18. Surely, It is not good to  Princes for equty, Pro. 17.26. We must not revile the Judges, nor curse to Ruler of the People, Exod. 22.28. Acts 23.5. And we see how that Paul in all his arraignments, ma∣keth his constant plea that in his preaching the Gospel he spake nothing whether against the Magistrate, or the Law of the Nation; whereupon

many times he escaped. Yea, John the Baptist doth not dispute the quar∣rel of the Romon Souldiers, but, waving State-matters, exhorteth them to their duty, as is pertinent to a Gospel-Preacher. Notwithstanding, I would have it seriously minded, that I only speak of the duty of the infe∣riour toward the superiour: so that whatsoever is really and properly inferiour, ought, without disputing the matter, give due obedience to the superiour not resisting the higher power. Now say I, every individual subject seorsim, or any inconsiderable number thereof, is inferiour to the Magistrate. And therefore ought not to resist his power. I admire how any person or persons, who are not in a capacity, yea, not so much as in a probability of withstanding the Mastistrat's power, dare adventure to do so, (unless miraculously and extraordinarily assisted as were the Prophets of old) even though, not only to them but also revera his power is tyran∣nous, and his commands unjust. Will any rational man say, I ought to resist an hundred high-way Robbers, and not give them that which they seek, though unjustly? If I did so, whatsoever evill befell me in resisting, I should be accessory to it my self as none in reason can deny.
But if it be asked, Whether or not ought the People to resist the Magistrate? Say I, The lawfulness, or unlawfulness of their resisting, only dependeth from the nature of the quarrel. It is clear to me (as is fully evinced in the following Treatise) not only the whole Power, but also any conside∣rable power of the People may vry justly resist the Magistrate, in main∣taining and promoting their own just Liberty and freedom: for as the whole Power of the People is superiour, so any considerable part thereof is not inferiour to the Magistrate's power. And thus my judgment lea∣deth me no other wales to resist a tyrannous Magistrate, but as I am added by Providence to that Body, whose Quarrel is not only just, but also whose Power is either superiour to the Magistrate's Power, or at least so far equal to it as that it is in a capacity of resisting it Now, if I either mistake the Quarrel, or the considerable capacity of resisting, 'tis my rashness to engage against the Ruler, and just with God to punish my seditiousness, though my engaging be upon zealous and conscientious ac∣compts. Let a very Pter be rebuked, though in zeal he smile Malchus, not being able to maintain his act of Resistance. As to example, had I a year or two since spoken or acted against the late Parliament, me thinks I had not only done unwisely (unless, as I said before, I had been raised up extraordinarily, as were the Prophets of old, in speaking and acting against the tyranny of the Magistrate) but also seditiously. But now it is high time for me, or any wel-wisher of the People's Liberty, to speak and act, in our several employments and vocations, against the late Po∣wer. As it is time to sail when tide and wind make, and no sooner; so it is time to engage, and no sooner, for Freedom and Liberty, when either the People's willingness, or a standing Power call for it. Then let every

man, according to his ability, (whose ambition is to promote just Free∣dom and Liberty) improve his time, letting no occasion slip, but strike the iron while it is yet hot. Sooner, it is folly; and latter, it is but a bea∣ting of the air. And thus let every cordial wel-wisher of Freedom, walk wisely, neither going a step before, nor a step behind the willingness and power of the People, in promoting the foresaid Interest. The Quarrel of just Freedom not arightly timed, is lost labour, and an untimely birth. This possibly will be called Policy rather then Piety. But it matters not if this Policy be true Divinity, as is already shewed to be. He is worthy of all commendation, who neither resisteth the Ruler's superiority, nor thwarteth, but promoteth the People's Liberty. Thus is he neither rebel∣lious nor malignant, but obedient to his superiour during his Command, and faithful to the Interest of the People. Let me obey the Tyrant so long as he commandeth, but side with the People when they oppose him.
Beside what I have spoken, (if I may be called to counsel) I would wil∣lingly offer some of my earnest wishes unto your Lordship. O that con∣strained maintenance for upholding Priests, Chaplains, and Masters in Universities, were at an end! Oh, that all who are able, and willing, to preach the Gospel, might be encouraged with all due freedom and pro∣tection therein, upon all occasions, and in all convenient places, without molestation, whether in private, or in places of publick meeting! All which shall come to passe, when that is accomplished which is foretold, in Isa. 26.12, 14, 15.
As for annual Representatives, the levelling of the Law, subjecting all to it without exception; the disposing so of all Rents, Revenues, Forfei∣tures, Sequestrations, and such like, as that competences may be provi∣ded out of them for all that want, they be things too high for me. I on∣ly take liberty to speak in order to such things as immediatly relate to the Freedom of Saints, and the Fall of Babylon. As to Religion's Interest, every wel-wisher of Zion may use freedom. Howsoever I judge it need∣less for me to speak any thing of these last particulars, seeing (as I con∣ceive) they are already taken into consideration by all these who mind the true and just Interest of the People. Nay, but (my Lord) J cannot forget, how that one day after another J hear large discourse of Levelling. But though the most part be for it, excepting the Rich, (as it was of old in the dayes of Agis and Gracchus) J cannot well learn what is in∣tended thereby. Only J do find in it, these two things which be either re∣dundant or defective, as to the nature of right Levelling. First, some un∣derstand no more, but the levelling of the Law. Secondly, others over∣turn propriety so much, as that they intend no more use of the Creation, but here to day, and yonder to morrow. J shall not dispute this case at present, but only adde some few words to what is spoken in this matter. As J understand, people so much the more cheerfully ought to engage to promote their just Civil Freedom and Liberty, how much the more the

fall of Babylon, and the interest of Zion are concerned therein. 'Tis a de∣bate to me, to engage for the one, the other not being linked therewith; though self-defence be lawful upon all accompts. Howsoever the Quar∣rel of the Lamb is that which J heed most. But if your Lordship, and others in power, will allow me in this case, to remonstrate to the world, the practice of the Jewish, Athenian, Lacedemonian, Roman, and of other ancient and notable Commonwealths, J shall be most willing to do so at command. And J shall endeavour to publish nothing, but what is accor∣ding to the Scriptures, the practice of the chiefest Commonwealths, the judgment, yea and practice of the chiefest States-men, Philosophers, Ora∣tors, and Historians. O! but all of us will be prevented in these things, by the sudden approach of the Ancient of dayes, who being come, will level spirits, powers, and estates. Till then there will be no more but the beginnings of Liberty, the earnest of what shall be when the Lord alone shall be exalted, staining the pride of all Glory, and bringing into con∣tempt all the Honourable of the Earth. Yea, as I conceive, it is impossible a solid and entire Freedom can be established, till His approach: for then He shal judge among the Nations, becoming our Lord, our King and Law-giver, the Law going out of Zion, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem. I rest satisfied in the expectation thereof, not exercising my self in great matters, nor in things too high for me. When he cometh, croo∣ked things shall be made straight, and mountains shall be made valleys. The Lord will hasten it in his time.
Lastly, J would offer my judgment to your Lordship, concerning the Power of the People, in choosing Rulers. J shall only hint at this in a word. To me it is clear, that as Nature in the state of fallen-man (un∣lesse all should go to ruin) cannot be without Government, even though all men by Nature be free-born; so neither are all capable of governing, nor of choosing to govern. The Scripture is clear in this, that only such ought to govern, who are men fearing God, and hating Covetousness, Exod. 18.21. Deut. 1.13. Job 34.17, 29, 30. Psa. 12.8. Eccles. 20.16, 17. And thus, uppon a Scripture-accompt, according to the primitive pattern of Judges in the choicest of Commonwealths, there be these four qualifi∣cations necessarily required in those that govern, 1. ability, 2. fearing of God, 3. truth, 4. hatred of Covetousness. Whence, according to the primitive and Scripture-mould of Judges, all men are uncapable of go∣verning, but such who be so and so qualified. Now the question is, Who shall choose such who are endowed with these qualifications? In an∣swer to this J premise, this distinction. As the Legislative power radi∣cally, is in the People, so by Nature they ought to choose their own Go∣vernours and Rulers. But Nature being contaminated, all men upon that accompt are not fit to make choice of their Rulers. For all men are either godly, or ungodly. Now, the major part of the People, being ungodly, will, and do choose men like themselves, as experience teacheth, unlesse

upon some selfish accompt they happen now and then, here and there, to choose some godly person or persons. But the Scripture doth not allow any to rule but the Righteous. And therefore, according to the Word of God, and the dictates of pure Nature godly men, (who are known to be such by their fruits) should be searched thorowout all the Tribes of Is∣rael and appointed Rulers. So did Moses. And our Moseses ought to do so too; to which the People in reason will be forced to condescend, and the rather, when they see judgment and righteousness abounding, while the righteous govern. And which is more, in all heathenish ancient Commonwealths, in which the Rulers were chosen by the People, the whole multitude therein followed the counsel of some few wise-men a∣mong them. Otherwise, the whole matter among them should have tur∣ned into confusion. And is it not known by experience, how that some one faction or other doth sway in all elections? though the free choice of the People be pretended? Now the generality of the People are swayed, rather by the disaffected, then wel-affected party, in al free choice til they be constrained to do otherwise. Which is a clear demonstration that they cannot improve their own Interest, but are apt to give it up into the hands of strange Lords, and cruel Task-masters. And therefore all our wise and godly Moseses, whom the Lord hath impower'd, ought to assay all means possible, to find out among all the Tribes of Israel, able men, such as fear God, men of truth, and hating Covetousness, that they may bear burden with them in the management of affairs. And such of them as be poor there is enough in the world to make them rich. But I do not expect the full accomplishment of such things, till the Ancient of dayes be come: for I see under the sun the place of judgment, [that] wickedness is there; and the place of righteousness, [that] iniquity is there. I say in mine heart, God shall judge the righteous, and the wicked: for [there is] a time there for every purpose, and for every work. Eccles. 3.16, 17. Till which time, (hoping all these things shall be acceptable to your Lordship) I remain,
My Lord, 
