


RIGHT HONOƲRABLE,
IN these our dayes we see, to our great griefe, that many which were in times past Members of our Church, have proved Schismaticks and Revol∣ters from the true Religion, and are not only men of corrupt judgments, but have steeled their fore-heads to publish with confidence their blasphemous dotages. Mr. Bidle is a prime man in this infamous rank, and a Ringleader of the Samosatenian and Macedonian Hereticks, and pleads in print with all his skill for a Creature-Christ and a Creature Holy Ghost; and he also, to the great dishonour of God the Father, denies his Ubiquity and infallible prescience of
future contingencies, and is justly charged with many more execrable Heresies. Nor have his Writings been en∣closed within the confines of our Nation, but have taken their wings and have fled beyond the Seas, to the disrepu∣tation of our dear Country in the Reformed Churches, in∣somuch that Marecsius, Professour of Divinity at Groningen, a City which gives denomination to one of the seventeen Provinces, is bold to avouch, I do not say either truly or charitably, that Socinianisme hath fixed its metrapolitical Seat here in England, and displayed openly the Banners of its Impiety.
I have some years by gone held forth an Antidote against the poison of his twelve Reasons against the Deity of the Holy Ghost, and I hope, not without all successe; since the publishing of those Arguments, he hath as is usually seen in deceivers, growne worse and worse, and levied his For∣ces against the Holy Trinity, and the Deiety of our blessed Saviour. And although I am in many respects unfit to deal with Polemical Authors; yet not hearing that an able Pen hath undertaken this task to answer this Treatise, I have once again appeared in the Field against this most subtle Adver∣sary, as Nicholas Arnoldus Professour of Divinity at Frane∣ker in West-Friesland, acknowledgeth him to be; and by the good hand of God upon me, have finished my Answer to whatsoever is material in it; and not relying on my owne judgment, I have intreated some Divines, which are eminent for Piety and Learning, to peruse it, and passe an impartial censure upon it, which they have so far approved, that they have encouraged me to expose it to publick view. And I am glad that I have a fit opportunity to make an open ac∣knowledgment with all thankfulnesse to your Honour of one Signal and Eminent Favour (to omit all the rest) vouch∣safed to me, and which was so much more acceptable,
as it was altogether unexpected, by meanes whereof a great Storme was averted from me, and I have to this day enjoyed the free exercise of my Ministerial Function where Divine Providence placed me. An Oath is a most Sacred Tye, and a high part of the Service of our Great and Holy God; and although it be lawful in it selfe, yet if it be not apprehended to be lawful by him to whom it is tendred, that man without question must run any hazard rather then staine and disquiet his conscience with the guilt thereof; and this merciful act, I hope, was neither displeasing to God, nor a ground of repen∣tance either to your Honour or those worthy Gentle∣men, which were perswaded by you not to presse me with the publick Obligation of the National Co∣venant.
I humbly crave leave to deal freely and faithfully with your Honour according to my duty, in reference to your eternal happinesse. Yet I must request the Reader, that no illogical consequences be obtruded on me, from what I shall write, to infer, That I conceive, you are destitute of Heavenly Graces, to which you are exhor∣ted. No such matter: for there is no man that belie∣veth in God, feareth, loveth and honoureth him, but he may be excited to believe on him, to fear, love and honour him; to this end, that he may use all holy means, sincerely and constantly, that heavenly Graces may not be weakned, and in the least degree impaired, and that they may be gradually intended, and more deeply rooted in his immortal soul.
The Lord hath given you a large portion of outward Riches, and it is the Counsel of the Holy Ghost, which you ought to follow, not to set your heart on them, for they are external, transitory, unsatisfying Blessings, and
common to the worst of men; and had you a greater Trea∣sure then Solomon laid out in building the glorious Tem∣ple, and in the Furniture thereof; yea, if you possessed Mountaines of Gold and Silver, yet doth not your happi∣nesse consist in these things: the favour of God, pardon of sins, and Saving Graces with Poverty, are incomparably better then all the Riches in the world; but he requireth that you should make a returne of proportionable thank∣fulnesse and sincere obedience to him, and to exercise libe∣ral beneficence unto the poor Saints, and to pious uses.
Nor hath the Lord only bestowed Riches upon you, but Honour also, and ranked you amongst the Great Men of this world; Seek, I beseech you, chiefly to be great and gra∣cious in the eyes of the Lord, and great in the hearts of his servants, and then you have a fair Prospect to the best Ho∣nour; at length you shall be as great as you can desire to be, and in the mean time have more solid Greatnesse, Honour and Reverence, then the Greatest men in the world, which are unholy and unjust, can have; which as the ancient No∣bility of Rome, may deservedly weare Moones on their shooes, as Plutark writeth; which are a lively Embleme of mutability.
God hath blessed you also with Stately and Sumptuous Buildings, be you sure to lay the foundation on the Rock Christ; If men ask (saith Chrysostom) why do such and such men build fair houses? it will be answered, to preserve an immortal memory; and that such houses may be called the houses of such Great men; but this is not (saith the golden mouth, Homil. 30 in Genes.) to procure credit but discredit to themselves: for you shall hear words of many contumelies; This house belongs to this man, to this cove∣tous man, to this Robber of Widowes and Orphanes, to this Extortioner. If you desire to have an eternal name and
memory, the way to procure it, is to be enamoured with the Celestial Jerusalem, which is above, and not made with mortal hands; it is to make your Sumptuous Buildings to be the Churches of Christ, and entertain him in your best Rooms: Provide for eternity by that which is transitory, and this wil be the most compendious way to solid prosperi∣ty, and the perpetuity of your Family. And touching all outward things, my hearts desire to God is, that you may from a truly enlightned judgement say with Queen Mary, which was in her a commendable speech, I set more by the salvation of my soul, then by ten Kingdomes, Fox To. 3. pag. 221.
Besides, the Lord hath not placed you in the low condition of a servant, to be at the command of others; but he hath honoured you with the Title of a Master over many servants. Let holy Davids resolution be a standing rule to you, to walk with an upright heart in the midst of your house, to coun∣tenance, encourage, and reward those that are vertuous and of an unblameale conversation, and to use the wholsome re∣medy of reproof and admonition to recover such as shall in any kind be scandalous; if they reform, to restore them (as Pharaoh did his Butler) into favour; but if they remain incu∣rable, to eject them as unprofitable to you, and dishonoura∣ble to your Family.
I may not forget to put your Honour in mind of that ne∣cessary and excellent Duty of a Christian, to be adorned with Faith, and to live by Faith in all conditions. Let nei∣ther your Children, nor your Riches, nor Honours, nor frowns, nor flatteries of men keep you one hour from the bles∣sed and sweet communion with Jesus Christ; let your soul be so ravished with his transcendent Beauty, that in some De∣gree you may say with Elzear Count of Arran, (my Author is Sales) if my godly wife Delphina, if any one will seek me,
he shall find me (in the assiduous Meditation) on the wounds of my blessed Saviour. And with that Honorable Confessor and Sufferer for Christ, Galeacius, One hours communion with Jesus Christ, is better then all the world. My Lord, All the spiritual sweetnesse of a Christian, is derived from his bitter∣nesse, and the life of the soul is from his bloudy death: To enjoy him, is a Heaven upon Earth, and when outward Bles∣sings do flow to you from the fountain of his blood, they are then indeed, as a field which God hath blessed. I add, That this will make you to live above all Creature comforts, and to be truly happy without the happinesse of the world; this will be a cordial and a mighty supporter in the saddest affli∣ction, and in the approach of death, the King of terrors; this will make you active for the honour of our blessed Saviour, who hath fulfilled the Law, and suffered the Curse due to you, for your salvation.
Above all, my Lord, be careful whether you eat or drink, or whatever you do, to do all to the glory of God: all other ends in all Actions, Natural, Civil, Moral and Reli∣gious must be subordinate to this highest end, which ought to be as the Master-wheel of a Clock, to set the inferiour wheeles on work. An Action may glitter in the eyes of men, yet if Gods glory be not stamped on it, it is counterfeit met∣tal, and no Coyn for the Lords Treasury, its not currant and approved in the Court of Heaven; 'tis as a fair body with∣out a head, as Lactantius speaks: 'tis a dead work, and wants that which is the principal. Godlinesse, as it is distin∣guished from Holinesse, is required hereunto, and it is a di∣vine impression on the soul, whereby it hath a tendency to God, as light bodies do ascend upward: Although no credit nor profit would redound to a godly man thereby; yet he who is , Godly and Religious, will move to God, as his Center and ultimate perfection. To move you effectually
to act for God, frequently call to mind the glorious Majesty, and the transcendent Excellency of our great God, and this will be a heavenly Load-stone to attract your soul with great delight and contentment to draw nigh to him, and think al∣so what great things he hath done for you; both your natural and your gracious being are from him, and when your soul is put into an excellent frame, and beutified with the Image of God, yet it is like to an artificial Jack, which moves not at all, not to a supernatural end, without the weight of his exci∣ting grace, to give you a Will to work according to that Su∣pernatural Principle, nor to affect without his co-operating grace what you do will, Phil. 2.13. And therefore as wise Solomon saith of Rivers, They come from the Sea, and return back into the Sea; So let it be with your Honour, as all the good you have comes from God as the efficient cause, so let him have the honour of all as the final cause thereof.
I have no more at present to trouble your Honour withal, only my Prayers shall be to our gracious God for your true and solid happinesse, and the happinesse of all your dear rela∣tions, and do intreat you to accept of this Dedication, and to continue your favour to the Author, who is

