



MOre fragrant then the bruised Pomander,
Such is the savor of thy richer Name,
As it diffuseth from the broken frame
Most sweetness in thy Reliques and remainder.
'Tis of thine own we offer unto Thee,
The Incense fuming from thy Memory.


More fragrant then the Beds where Spices breed,
Which softest winds have gently fann'd and galed,
And temperate beams by little have exhaled,
Until the boundless sweetness do exceed.
'Tis not for us — Our Flowers to bring and strow,
But that our Garlands on thy Herse may grow.


More fragrant then the Ayr, that moves about
The Arabian Bird, as she does fan the flame
Which in the Spices from her clappings came,
And with perfumes into her Urn goes out.
What Balm, or Odours can we pour on thee
In whom our offerings must Embalmed be?



Yet we could lave the Fountains in our head,
And gush forth Rivers from our flowing eyes,
And spare some Streams of Blood for Eligies
To melt the World with this, My Lord is dead.
Nor would we think our Obsequies mis-spent,
But that they can't make up THY MONUMENT.


Some (hastned by officious Piety)
Have crown'd themselves by Crowning of thy Herse,
Melting their hearts to Elegeick Verse.
And others would for tears of duty vye:
But when they think of weeping, they grow dry,
Stunn'd with the Muse of such an Elegy.


'Tis easie grief, that hath a vent to break
Out into sorrow at, or that can weep;
Or Laws in Mourning can distinctly keep;
The Heart is eased when the Tongue can speak.
But solemn sorrow is both dumb and dry;
The heart weeps inward, and not by the eye.


They are the Vulgar Rites, and Obsequies
Of Common Funerals, To weep in Verse,
And talk of drilling tears upon an Herse;
Such pratling weepers make dry Elegies.
Give me that grief which does not wet, but burn
And parch the shrivil'd heart into an Urn.



I have no watry Goddess to implore,
Nor Ghosts of Poets to disturb from sleep
To teach me how my Stops and Tones to keep;
The boundless passions of our hearts are more.
(Yet we scarse feel the loss of such a Treasure)
Then can be taught to keep or Time or Measure.


If all those Artist-Mourners, who had skill
To make the streams of Hallow'd passion flow
From Stones and Marble, were in action still;
Yea, could I hire them, and imploy them now,
They could not swell the tides of passion higher
Then my Lords Merits and my own desire.


At once: 'Tis not because thy Herse — a Shrine,
Or thy Effigies wants a Coronet,
Or Funerals go without their Banners set;
Nor yet, because I think so well of mine:
But that a Servants Obsequie might rest
Upon his Masters Herse, of Masters best.


