




Worthy and Christian Friends,
TIme was when men of Anti-Magistratical, and Anti—Ministeriall
Principles were ve∣ry imposing, and imperious, being as sharp thorns in the tender eyes of those to whom set∣tlement and order in Church, and State were very dear: yet in Times of greatest Ataxie, Apostacy, Confusi∣on, the Lord-hath still had a remnant in this place, that have sighed in se∣cret for all the abo∣minations,
blasphe∣mies, and boisterous oppositions against the Truth that have been in the midst of us. Some of those melting mourners the Lord hath called home, and taken to himself, and for the briny brook, that they have drunk of in the way, hath given them to drink of the river of his pleasure.
Others have lived to see better
dayes, and are not without some bud∣ding hopes that it shall at length go well with Sion, which they have performed before their choicest com∣forts, and their chiefest joy. O how welcome is that hand of hea∣ven that begins to lift up the poor out of the dust, and to wipe away the teares from the
swolne eyes, and blubber'd cheeks of the Daughters of Jerusalem, giving unto them beauty for ashes, and the garment of praise for the spirit of heavi∣ness!
Your condition you looked upon as deplorably sad, whilest without power in your own hands to reform the abuses, and redress the evils you labou∣red
under. Provi∣dence hath resto∣red unto you your Charter, with your several Ornaments of honour, and Badges of authori∣ty, and hereby put you into a capaci∣ty of being Refor∣mers, Repairers of breaches, and Exe∣cutioners of justice; so that if you will but quit your selves like men, appear against the grow∣ing
and prevailing corruptions of the Times, and give a check to the inso∣lency of mens un∣ruly lusts, you may expect to be carri∣ed as on Eagles wings, to be pre∣served under the shadow of the mightiest grace, and to have the blessing of peace within your wals, and plenty within your pala∣ces.

Let not your present outward meanness in the world, and want of an incouraging Revenue to support your state, retard your motions, dis∣courage you in your duty, make you loth to inter∣meddle much in matters of Govern∣ment, and take you off from an Hero∣ick and Magnani∣mous managing of
that High Trust that is reposed in you. Do but lay out your selves wholly for God; be warm and vigo∣rous in the prose∣cution of those de∣signes that tend to his glory; execute justice impartial∣ly upon offending ones; that the mouth of iniquity may be stopped, the most daring transgressors daunted, and con∣strained
to hide themselves through fear and shame; and you shall find that the Lord will sweetly smile, and shine upon your Ta∣bernacles,
1 Sam. 2.30. and com∣passe you about with his loving kindness, as with a sheild.
2 Chron. 15.20. The Lord will honour those that honour him. The Lord will be with you, whilest you are with him. Besides,
I charitably hope, and am verily per∣swaded, did the State but hear of your renowned zeale, severe refor∣mation, and tho∣rough owning of the wayes of God, their hearts would be much drawn forth to mind your concernments, and to incourage you in the Lords work, by bestowing upon you some signal ex∣pression
of favour and respect; and the rather, because of your former, ne∣ver to be forgotten kindness in seaso∣nably opening your gates to receive and releive their Army harassed and worn out with wants and weakness.
A few words of wholsome advice I shall intreat you candidly to inter∣pret and accept.
You who are now incorporated into a Civil Society, la∣bour to be incor∣porated into Christ, and to be free De∣nisons of the new Jerusalem that is a∣bove.
John 8.36. If the Son make you free, you shall be free indeed. Purge your own Hearts, and reform your own Families, and hereby give a good example unto others to do the
like. Let your Houses be little Churches, in which God shall be duly worshipped, and his name dayly called upon. Live in sub∣jection to the Laws of Christs King∣dome, and call up∣on others to stoop with their neck to the same Yoke.
Your incorpora∣tion and conjuncti∣on cals loudly on you for union and
unanimity. Keepe therefore the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace.
Ephes. 4.3. Let your hearts be sea∣soned with the salt of grace, and be at peace among your selves. Beware of being divided in your consultations, and transactions. It was well observed by Nazianzen, That Dissolution is the Daughter of Dissen∣tion. As the con∣flict
of contrary hu∣mours causeth di∣seases and destru∣ctive distempers in the body naturall: so the clashings and contests of men, who are armed with contrary principles, and aime at diffe∣rent ends; and in stead of promoting the good of the Community, make it their business to advance the interest of a Faction, will
prove fatal, and of dangerous conse∣quence to the body politick.
Maintain a cor∣diall, close, and comfortable cor∣respondence with your Church-Guides, whom you see a clear Providence making your Over∣seers. Peoples ta∣king liberty to themselves to dis∣own and desert at pleasure their own
Pastours, and han∣kering after novel, both Preachers, and Opinions, hath turned the Church into a confused Chaos; discompo∣sed Christs mysti∣cal Body, and af∣flicted its members with distortions and dislocations.
Time was, when the breath of a Minister was ab∣horred, and would hardly be indured
in Corke, and his coming to the City as much dreaded as the Invasion of an enemy. Blessed be God that your eyes do again be∣hold your Teach∣ers; that the num∣ber of them in this County is increa∣sed, and they in∣couraged with the refreshing influence of Authority. You cannot be ignorant, how long you were
constrained to wait, and how many difficulties were wa∣ded through ere an Order could be procured for my establishment, and setling among you, by reason of the undermining sug∣gestions of some whispering Contra∣sentients.
For the space of six years I have been your unwor∣thy Teacher, and
preached the Go∣spel unto the Inha∣bitants of this City; I hope not altoge∣ther without suc∣cess. Though I must pofess, that I cannot but with grief take notice of the fewness of those sheaves that are gathered into Christs barn. How hard are mens hearts under the continual beating of the hammer!
How do they har∣den their hearts like the adamant against the clear convictions of the Word! How do men stand out a∣gainst Christ, when summoned to come in, and entertain his Message with perpetual quarrels, and endless contra∣dictions! This is a lamentation, and shall be for a lamen∣tation.

Let me passio∣nately beseech you in the bowels of Christ Jesus, your Lord, and mine, to be wise in this your day, and mind the things that do be∣long unto your peace.
Let the sound∣ing of the Silver Trumpet of the Gospel awaken you, and cause you to shake off that
unweldy frame of spirit that makes men dull and indis∣posed to the duties of Religion.
Let your hearts be upright with God, and be you faithfull to the Truth in giddy and declining Times. Buy the Truth at any rate;
Prov. 23.3. but part with it at no rate whatsoever. It will be your safety and
honour to retain and hold fast the form of wholesome words delivered to you, and to remain unshaken in your Principles, though stormy winds of temptation and per∣secution should a∣rise, and blow upon you with a formi∣dable and affright∣ing fury. Though all men should for∣sake Christ, yet do
not you forsake him. There are many windfals in Christs Orchard; be you like those few remaining ber∣ries in the top of the uppermost bough, abhorring disunion and de∣fection, and resol∣ving not to be rent (though with a vi∣olent hand) from your Renowned Root. Mortifie
throughly, and be∣times all itching desire after novel∣ty, lest it break forth into the sprea∣ding and crusty scab of Apostacy. Beg wisdome of God, whereby you may be able to di∣stinguish betwixt the voice of Christ, and the voice of a stranger. Be not taken with the flaring light of eve∣ry
blazing Comet, and ignis fatuus, that would slock you into by-wayes, and dangerous paths. Keep your heads and hearts from being fly∣blown with the unsavoury breath of every rotten∣hearted Preacher. Take heed of go∣ing forth, and dancing after their delusive pipe, who
(the better to de∣ceive, and draw you into the snare) pretend to rare and rich discoveries; lest you come home with a vertigo in your heads, and be troubled with the staggers in Religion ever af∣ter.
I shall conclude with pressing upon you that serious and savoury advice,
which his Excellen∣cy the Lord Depu∣ty, when at Corke in his late Progress, gave to the Chief of you, with some Justices of Peace of the Coun∣try that were then present. You may remember that you were commanded, and incouraged,
1. To put a stop to the overflowing flood of prophane∣ness,
by putting in execution the se∣verall wholesome Lawes that are in force against swear∣ing, drunkenness, uncleanness, and the like enormous pra∣ctises.
2. To provide for the sanctificati∣on of the Sabbath, by making use of that power that is put into your hands, in punishing and
suppressing its too frequent, and A∣theistical violation. Let it not lie as a reproach on Corke, that Ordinance-de∣spisers, and Sabbath∣breakers cannot be so secure from the stroke and dint of Justice in any place in Ireland as in this.
3. To make use of provided and proscribed means
for the conversion of the Popish Irish within your Juris∣diction. The work is desirable, and of grand concernment, conducing where∣unto among ma∣ny other are the following expedi∣ents.
1. The bringing of the Natives to the Puklick Wor∣ship. Compel them to come in, that Gods
house may be full. Bring them within the compass of the net, if ever you expect they should be caught. Let not their rooted and peevish loth∣ness to attend up∣on the Ordinances deterre you from doing your duty. They that now quarrel and con∣tend with you, as being too severe
and harsh, will in the day of visitati∣on glorifie God, and call you bles∣sed.
2. The remove∣ing and transplant∣ing of such as (to use his Excellencies own words) are stiffe and sullen in their way; and are not only possessed themselves with grinning prejudices against the Prote∣stant
Religion, but do likewise make it their design to create and continue the like prejudices in the rest of their Brethren, who pos∣sibly might other∣wise be reclaimed, and brought unto the knowledge of the truth.
Remember the Oath of God with which you are bound to act and
rule according to Law, and be you faithful unto your Trust. Yield O∣bedience to his Excellencies Com∣mands in the ex∣pressed instances, and buckle in good earnest to the busi∣ness of Religion and Reformation, that so we may at length become a∣mountain of holiness, an habitation of righ∣teousness,
in which the Lord will de∣light to dwel, which shall be promoted by the prayers and indevours of
From my Study in Corke Sept. 7. 1658.

