



My Dear Friends,
I Hope some of you need not much the help this little Book can af∣ford; and indeed it is a shame either for you or me, that any of you should need it, except Children. Yet I fear it is too needful, I pray God it may prove as useful to many of you. I have often told you, that neither an Ignorant, nor a
Carnal, nor a Worldly, nor a For∣mally Religious course of Life, can ever bring you to Heaven. I now ell it you again; and at you love your Souls, let me intreat you to be∣lieve me; except you become other men than some of you, yea than the most of you yet are, you cannot be saved. You have God's Word to read, you may hear Sermons when you will, you may be instructed privately when you will, you have many good Books to instruct you, you have so much sense as to know you are a dying, you have under∣standings to consider what's like to become of you, you have sure, the wit to know that all things here will have an end, and that nothing can concern you so much as the Salva∣tion of your Souls, to all Eternity. I am confident were you dying, you
would say so. Can it be any thing then, but a brutish inconsideration that keeps you in the state you are in? Awake, awake, and see here in short what you have to do. 'Tis short, that you may not plead you want time to read and learn it; 'Tis plain, that you may not plead 'tis above your capacity, 'tis cheap, it shall cost you nothing but the pains of reading it for your instru∣ction in the way of Life. You will in a little room see what it is to be a Christian. Practice then what here you read, and then dye in Peace. But if you slight these ea∣sie helps, and will go on your old way, I must leave you to God, and comfort my self in this, that I have not dealt deceitfully with you. The good God make us all wise unto Sal∣vation; Amen.


Consider seriously.
Learn industriously.
Pray devoutly.
Believe firmly.
Repent sincerely.
Love unfeignedly.
Resolve deliberately.
Practice constantly.
Hope Patiently.
Receive Thankfully,
And
Enjoy Eternally.

