



DEare and faithfull Brethren, Mr. Brightman fore-prophesied of a Church to arise, that should be the Woman clothed with the Sun, which should glitter on every side round about, with the most cleer light of the Scripture, of the Sun of righteousnesse, in the doctrine of justification (as you may see, on Rev. 19. 17. and chap. 12. 1.) with the cleer knowledge whereof, she being adorned, as it were, with a goodly garment, came forth abroad, and laid her self open to the view of the world. And Rest (saith hee) shall be the naturall daughter of the woman, clothed with the Sun, (meaning a spirituall rest) which are the most entire and chaste Congregation of all the rest, (yet no Sect) which above others shine with this glorious aray; And it seemeth, (saith he) that all the chief stresse and violence of the last battell in the West, shall be turned against that holy Congregation, which we said right now, to stand glittering in the Sun, which are the hill of precious fruits, and the mountain full of holy pleasures, of which God maketh more account thenSee 2 Esdr. 7. 26. 34, 35. See 2 Esdr. 6. 28. of all delight some things in the world. Now you white rayment Christians, are this woman, clothed with the Sun; for you all believe that you are clothed with the Sun of Righteousnesse, and stand in him before God: Here is an Ax for you; for the blessing of Joshua belongs to you, which he spake to the children of Joseph. Thou art a great people, and hast great power, therefore the mountain stall be thine, for it is a wood, and thou shalt cut it down, and the ends of it shall be thine, and thou shalt cast out the Canaanites, though they have iron Chariots, and though they be strong, Jsh 17. So here are moun∣tains of sins, errors and false religions, in England and Ireland, it is a wood of Sects, Schismes and Heresies, but thou hast cut them down, for thou art a great people, and hast great power (with the Lord in prayer) and England shall be thine, and thou shalt cast out the Canaanites of sin, Idolatry, and false Religi∣ons, though they have Ordnance of iron, and though they be strong, lay this Ax of the Law to the root of them; and shew them, that now also eve∣ry tree, i. Religion, Church, Sect, or man, that bringeth forth sin before God, (Isai. 1. 16.) is hewn down and cast into the fire of God wrath, for the wrath of God is now revealed from heaven against all unrighteousnesse of men, which withhold truth in unrighteousnesse (Rom. 1. 18) for the hour of temptation is come, to try them that are upon the face of the earth, Rev. 2. 10. in which friends shall fight with friends, as with enemies, and the earth shalll fear with

them, 2 Esdr. 6. 22. when there shall be seen an earth-quake in the world, and an upore of the people, that is, the time wherein the most High will begin toSee 2 Esdras 15 . 6. 14, 15, 16, 17, 8, 19. 22, 23, 24, 26, 26, 37. See 2 Esd 16. 10, 11. 14, 15. 19. 5. 33. 8. 46. visit the world which he made, 2 Esdra. 9. 4. & 3 hard it is for men to keep faith and a good conscience now, yea, the strongest faith shall finde it difficult. Would not you be glad to be delivered from this hour of temptation? and were it not labour worth the pains, to shew that you shall be delivered? And though all evill trees shall be cut down with the a of the Law; yet that you are good trees of righteousnesse, of his own planting, that God may be glo∣riied, and shall be saved? Isai. 61. . Come forth, come forth thou Kings daughter, all glorious within, all light in the Lord, the Sun of Righteousnesse, shew thy self to the world, thy garments are of broydered gold, Psal. 45. 13. that is, of the merits of Christ crucified, death and resurrection, given you freely in your Baptisme into Christs death, for remission of sins, Rom. 6. 3, 4, Acts 2. 38. and are made glorious in the Sun of Righteousnesse, that is risen upon you, Mal. 2. 4. shew your selves to the world, for the stress of the baell in the West (you heare) shall be against you, but you shall overcome by faith, 1 John 5 4. when the ax shall cut down the wicked, yet fear not; you are got into the Sun, and therefore are out of gun-shot for your souls, yet put on the whole armour of God, Eph. 6. 14. and gird up the loynes of your mindes, with the girdle of verity, and put on the brest-plate of Christs righteousnesse; and above all, take the shield of faith in your Baptisme, and in the blood of the Lamb, wherewith you may quench all the fiery darts of the wicked, and take the helmt of salvation in Christ, that you are in him that is true, 1 John 5. 20. and the sword of the Spirit, the Word of God; and your feet thod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace, that testiies of Jesus, that came by water▪ and blood, not by water only, but by water and blood; 'tis the Spirit that bea∣reth witnesse, and that Spirit is truth, and shall conquer. Therefore stand fast, and pray, with all manner of praer, and supplications, in the Spirit that testi∣fieth of the water and blood of Christ, for remission of your sins, and you shall overcome: For you have a strong city, (of the new Jerusalem) salvation shallAll that get into this city are safe. God set for wals and bulwarks, Isai. 26. 1. open ye the gates of it, Rev. 22. 14. that you the righteous nation, that keep the truth, ma enter in; for by an as∣sured purpose, will Christ preserve perfect peace for you, because you trusted in him vers. 3 O trust in the Lord Jesus for ever, for in the Lord (our righte∣ousnesse, Jer. 23. 6.) is strength for evermore, vers. 4. for he will bring down them that dwell on high, that fight against you, the high city (of Rome) will he abase even unto the ground, and bring it unto the dust, v. 5. that your fee shall tread it down, and all doctrine of infidelity. I call you White-rayment Christi∣ans; if any ask my reasons, they are these:
First, because you are the few names in Laodicca, of England, (as well as in Sardis) that have not defiled your garments, ( by a false faith, or raigning sin) therefore you shall walk with Christ in white. for you are worthy, Rev 3. 4.M. Mi. Con. M. Mi. Con.
Secondly, whosoever overcomes, shall be clohed with white rayment, saith Christ. Rev. 3. 5. but you have overcome, 1 John 4. 4. Ergo, you shall be clo∣thed with i, and therefore shall be white-rayment Christians: for whomsoever Christ saith shall be clothed with white rayment, I may truly call a white-rayment Christian; but you overcommers are they, that Chist saith shall be clothed with white rayment, Ego, I may truly call you white-rayment Christians.
Thirdly, whosoever have bought of Christ white rayment, that he may beMa. clothed, that the shame of his nakednesse may not appear, may be called a white-rayment Christian, because he hath bought it, Rev. . 18. But you areMi. Con. Ma. Mi. Con. Ma. they, Ergo. Again, whosoever watcheth, and keepeth Christs garments that are white, as (Rev 3. 18.) lest hee walk naked, and they see his shame, is a blessed white-rayment Christian, as Rev. 16. 15. But you are such, Ergo, you are blessed white-rayment Christians.
Also you are citizens of the new Jerusalem; for on whomsoever Christ will write upon, the name of the city of my God, the new Jerusalem, which cometh down from my God out of heaven, Rev. 3. 12. shall rightly be called a citizen of the new Jerusalem; but on you that have overcome, Christ will write theMi. Con. name of the new Jerusalem, Rev 3. 12. Ergo, you shall be called citizens of the new Jerusalem.
This was spoken to Philadelphia, not to us of Laodicea. I answer, whatsoeverObject. was spoken to any one of the seven Churches, runs into the last: for let him that hath an eare, heare what the Spirit saith to the Churches, Rev. 3. it saith it to you, overcommers in Laodicea, in England, for, what I say to you, I say to all, Marke 13. Now concerning the Philadelphians, that were admonished by Christ, to hold fast that they had, that no man take their crown, Rev. 3. 11. I gather the Philadelphians being admonished, to hold it fast, should lose it, for if man must hold fast a crown, he will lose it, and that the Lad ceans should take it from them; for the white-rayment Christians that have overcome, and taken Christs counsell, Rev. 3. 18. shall take their crown from them, to be called, first citizens of the new Jerusalem; And you shall take the crown from the Lutheranes▪ (because they defiled their garments, and their works were not per∣fect before God, Rev 3. 2, & 3.) and shall be called first White rayment Christians.
Secondly, whosoever is come to the celestiall Jerusalem, and to be citizensMa. Mi. with the Saints, and of the houshold of God, are citizens of the new Jerusa∣lem; but by the blood of Christ in Baptisme, and by faith, Eph. 2. 13. Rev. 1. 5. you are come to the celestiall Jerusalem, Heb 12. 22. and to be citizens with the Saints, and of the houshold of God, Ephes. 2. 19. Ergo, you are citizens ofCon. the mew Jerusalem; therefore call your selves no more the Church of England, or of the Luherans, or the like, for they are shaken, and shall be removed, Heb. 12. 27. but call your selves White-rayment Christians, and citizens of the new Jerusalem, for you see God calls you so. Now your city is of pure gold, like cleer glasse, Rev. 21. 18. for your city of the new Jerusalem, is built of pure gold, that Christ hath counselled you to buy of him, Rev 3. 18. which is the lively faith, in the merit of Christs death. in our baptisme, for remis∣sion of sins, (Acts 2. 38.) in the first love of Christ, (not of such as have taken a new baptisme, and so forsaken their first love of Christ, as the Church of Ephesus did, and therefore the candlestick of the Church was removed out of their place, Rev. 2. 5. because they tooke a second baptisme, and forsook their first, for which cause, the Councel of Nice made it an Article of their Creed (I believe one Baptisme, for the remission of sins) and it is like cleer glasse, because through this golden glasse of your baptisme, wherein you were washed, sanctified, and justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6. 1. you may see the face of God through it, what a reconciled,

mercifull, and loving Father he is to you, that hath sealed a new Covenant to you, to become your father, and you his children, and that your sins and ini∣quities shall be remembred no more, Heb. 8. 12. and you may see through thisHebr. 8. glasse of your baptisme, the face of Jesus, what a blessed, meek, and loving Sa∣viour he is to you, that hath loved you, and gave himself for you, (Gal. 2. 20.) and washed you from your sins, in his own blood, and made you Kings and Priests to God his Father, Ephes. 5. 25. Rev. 1. 5. and you may see as in a glasse, (1 Cor. 13. 12▪) what a blessed, holy, and sweet Comforter you have, that hath washed you in the new birth, and the renewing of the holy Ghost, Titus 3. 5. And the street of your city is of pure gold, like to transparent glasse, Rev. 21. 21. O walk in this golden street, for it is transparent, like perspective glasse; for, as he that hath a good perspective glasse may see far off, so may you, even your sins, set as far as the East is from the West, Psal. 103. 12. Peter com∣plaineth2 Pet. 1. 9. of many that are blind, and cannot see far off, because they have for∣gotten their baptisme, wherein they were washed from their old sins; they have forgotten this transparent glasse. But all you citizens of the new Jerusa∣lem, walk in this golden street of your baptisme, it is a perspective glasse; and as in a perspective glasse, men look through two glasses, so in this there are two glasses, the first is made of the pure river, of the water of life, cleer as Crystall, which is the pure water of baptisme, Heb. 10. 23. the second is the blood of theRev. 22. 1. Lamb; both these meet in one, look through them both together, and anoint your eyes with eye-salve of the Spirit, and you shall see far off, even into heaven, and behold Christ to be your wisdome, righteousnesse, sanctification and redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30. and your blessednesse, happinesse, holinesse, eter∣nall life, everlasting glory, immortality; yea, thou may see thy name written in heaven: through this golden cleer glasse of thy baptisme, which thou re∣ceivedst in thine Infancy, and now walk in this golden street by faith, you may be assured, and rejoyce, that your names are written in heaven, Luke 10. 20. Quest. How know you that? Answ. There be three which beare record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost, these three are one, and beare record in heaven, that he hath given you a new name, Rev. 2. 17. in baptisme, for all your names were Adam before, Gen. 5. 2. but they beare re∣cord, that he hath given you a new name and his own new name, Rev. 3. 12. And there be three which bear record in earth, the Spirit, and water, and blood, these three agree in one, that your names are written in heaven; for to whom∣soeverMa. Mi. Con. God hath given eternall life, which life is in his Son Jesus Christ, his name is written in heaven. But the three in heaven, and the three in earth, do bear witnesse, that he hath given you eternall life, 1 John 5. 7, 8. 11. Ergo, your names are written in heaven, that believe it on this ground, and you are let into Paradise again; for though Adam, and all his children, were shut out of it, and the Cherubim with a flaming sword, which turned every way, to keep the tree of life, Gen. 3. which signifieth this axe of the fiery Law, Deut. 33. 2▪See 2 Esdra 8. 52, 53, 54, to 63. given by Angels (Acts▪ 7. 53.) keepeth every man from the Paradise, of assu∣rance of salvation; for this axe of the Law cuts men off, and shuts them out, every way, for originall or actuall sins, mans merits, or humane righteousnesse; whosoever hath but one sin is cut down by the Law. But by your baptisme in∣to Christ, you are let into Paradise again, and have now right and title by

your baptisme, and by faith, to eat of all the trees in the garden, i. title to all things to be yours, and you are Christs, 1 Cor. 3. And you may eate of the tree of life in the midst of the Paradise of God, Rev. 2. 7. that is, of Christ in the Supper, and be more sure of eternall life, then the tree of life could have made Adam, and shall be kept in the Paradise of Gods protection: For thus saith the Lord, Because you have kept the word of my patience, I will deli∣ver thee from the hour of temptation, that is come upon all the world, to try them that are upon the face of the earth, Rev. 3. 10. Now, what is the word of Christs patience, but the faith of baptisme into Christ crucified, for the remission of our sins? for the word of Christs patience, is the faith in Christ crucified, which Paul desired only to know, 1 Cor. 2. Now what is a man the better, to1 Cor. 2. 2. say, I believe Christ was crucified, dead and buried, except he keep the faith of it for remission of his sins? for the devills believe so much. But the word of Christs patience, which you keep, is this, that you say, and believe, that I am in him that is true, in that his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 5. 20. in whom I am crucified, and dead, and buried, and risen again with Christ in my baptisme, into Christs death, for the remission of sins, and have put on Christ, Rom. 6. , 4 Col. 2. 12. Gal. 3. 27. That Church that keeps the word of Christs patience, i. faith in their baptisme into Christs death, for remission of sins (though they knew not what Christ did for them, when he washed them, as he told Peter, John 1. but know it afterward) shall be delivered from this houre of temptation; but all other religious plants, which my heavenly Fa∣ther hath not planted, shall be rooted out. The axe of the Law cuts them off, for one sin before God; but he that is holy, and true (saith) be that believeth and is baptized, shall be saved, Mark 16. 16. (that is, he that believeth one bap∣tisme into Christ, for remission of sins, shall be saved) but he that believeth not his one baptisme into Christ for remission of his sins, shall be damned, as Heathens, Turks, Jews, Witches and Apostates, that have denied it: For thisNicen Creed. Athanasius. is the Catholike faith, I believe one Baptisme for the remission of sins, which ex∣cept a man believe faithfully, he cannot be saved, the axe cut them off. Now when men have lost this Paradise, then they must go till the earth, full of false religions, all serve an angry God. The Heathen run to Jupiter, the Turks to Mahumet, the Jewes to Moses ceremonies, the Papists to Saints, to Pilgrimage, a wildernesse and Purgatory: Lo, here is Christ, say the Papists, in the Popes chaire, and pardon: Lo, here is Christ, say the Luberans, in consubstantiation; and lo, here is Christ, say the Anabaptists, in our new Jordan, and yet it carries them into the lake Asphaltes, mare mortuum, the dead sea, for he that de∣nieth his first baptisme, to take a second, it is a dead and damnable sin, as Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. and Heb 10. 29. 5. 38. Lo, there, say all sects, in our Church way, and yet never a one of them have assurance of salvation, because they have not faith in one baptisme, for remission of sins, for no man can have the knowledge of salvation, but by the remission of sins, as Luke 1. 77. Well, you see the houre of temptation is come, a flood of judgements flow upon earth for sin. Here is an axe for you, to cut down sin, and an ark for you white-rayment Chri∣stians, and citizens of the new Jerusalem, namely, the ark of our baptisme in∣to Christs death, for remission of sins. It hath been building in England about an hundred yeeres, you only have God seen righteous in this generation, an

end of all false religions is come, and God will destroy them with the earthly men: Enter you, your wives, and your children, into the faith of this Ark,Gen. 6. but leave not your children out of this Ark, nor take a new one; for that is cursed, Gal. 1. 8, 9. For, as the Ark saved Noah, so , the same Antitype which now saveth us, Baptisme, (the translators were to blame, to call it a figure, for there is as much difference between a figure and an anti∣type, as between the brazen Serpent and Christ, 1 Pet. 3. 21.) meaning of the inward Baptisme. Now, as you know many before the flood might come into the Ak, and look upon it, and yet, because they did not abide in it, they all perished: So now a lood of Gods judgements are come in this hour of tem∣ptation, and many people have seen baptisme, and been within it sacramentally, but all that do not stay in it by faith, shall perish. Therefore little children, abide in him (that were shut or graffed into him by one baptisme) that when he shall appeare, we may be bold, (1 Iohn 2 28.) for behold, Christ standeth at the dore, and knocks, in Laodicca in England (and he will not leave knock∣ing with judgements, till they take his counsell, Rev. 3. 18.) if any man will heare my voyce, (saith he) and open the dore, I will come in to him, and sup with him, and he with me. You see Christ raps loud with the sword and cannons, and he will knock with an earth-quake, and with pestilence, Luke 21. 11. In England and Scotland, where are Saints, with the sword and pestilence, but in Ireland, where are most Idolaters, with sword and famine: reasons I give in a book to come out, in Christs knock at the dores of England. Now, is it not good letting of Christ in to sup with us, and we with him, when hee knocks, and calls to us to take his counsel? to buy of him gold to make us rich, in the lively faith of the merits of Christs death, in baptisme, for a perfect re∣mission of sins, (for he likes not this lukewarm, lame remission of sins to halfes, which many professe) and white-rayment justification to cloath us, that the shame of our nakednesse may not appeare, and eye-salve of the Spi∣rit that takes of Jesus, water and blood, to witnesse to your spirits, you are the children of God, Rom. 8. 17. that thou mayst see, Rev. 3. 18. Christ will not leave rebuking, and chastising England, and knocking, till they heare, and let him in. Now therefore, let the loynes (of your minds) be girt about (with verity) and your lamps (of faith) burning, Luke 12. 35. and ye your selves, like men that wait for their Master, when he will return from the wedding; that when he cometh and knocketh, they may open unto him immediately: Blessed are those servants, whom the Lord, when he cometh, shall find wa∣king, i. in the wedding garment; Verily I say unto you, he will gird him∣self about, and will make them sit down at table, and will come forth, and serve them; and if he come at the second watch, or in the third watch, and find them so, blessed are those servants, vers. 36, 37. Now, you blessed White-rayment Christians, understand, that Christ our Master, is now return∣ing from the wedding; for I believe not any more Churches of the Gentiles, (before the marriage of the Lamb, to the Iews) shall be called, and the third watch is come, and the dawning of the day of the Iews is at hand, and our Master now knocketh, the dinner of the wedding of the Gentiles, hath lasted about 1623. for the marriage of the Gentiles, was called a dinner, Mat. 22. 4. and the marriage dinner was furnished with guests of good and bad, for all had

not a wedding garment, and therefore bad. Now, as noble Bridegrooms often times will bid a multitude to dinner, but none but his speciall friends are bid∣den to supper; So Christ, the most noble Bridegroom, hath bidden seven Churche of the Gentiles to the dinner of the marriage, and now he is return∣ing from the wedding of the Gentiles, and he knocks and calls, Rev. 3. 20.Rev. 3. 20. Blessed are you that let him in immediately, for he calls for you, his friends, the White rayment Christians, to come to supper. Give me leave to shew you, the friends of the Bridegroom, why Christ now knocks, and calls in England; it is to call you to supper, all that were bidden to the wedding-dinner: were not blessed: But now (he saith) write, Blessed are they that are bidden to the marriage supper of the Lamb; these are the true sayings of God, Rev. 19. 9. The wedding-dinner is past, and Christ is returning from the wedding, as Luke 12. 36. and behold, he standeth at the dore, and knocks in England, with the sword and pestilence, let him in; for it seems, some have not let him yet; say, it is the voyce of my well beloved that knocks, saying, Open to me, my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled, for mine head is full of dew, and my locks with the drops of the night, Cant. 5. 2. for men that are let in, use not to knock, but those that are shut out. Christ is about to marry his wife, of the Iewes, that shall make her self ready by baptisme and faith, and he will grant to her to be clothed in fine linen, bright and pure, , the justifications of the Saints, Rev. 19. 8. And now Christ knocks at the dore in England. to call his friends, to go with him to the marriage-supper, with his wife, and will begin his supper in England, he will sup with them, Rev. 3. 20. The most rarest junkets are kept for the marriage-supper. Now therefore heark; hee sayes, I will sup with him (that lets me in) and he with me; see how Esdras prophesied of you, 2 Esdras 2. 38. Arise and stand up, and behold the number of those that are sealed for the feast of the Lord, which are departed from the shadow of the world, and have received glorious garments of the Lord: Take thy number, O Sion, and shut up them that are clothed in white, which have fulfilled the Law of the Lord. Here you see, he prophesied of you White-rayment Christians, sealed for the feast, as Christ doth, Rev. 3. 4. & 18. & 16. 15. Now therefore all you, that have put on Christ in infant-baptisme, Gal. 3. 27. and made your long robes white in the blood of the Lamb, as my Sermon of the blood of the Lamb declares, pre∣pare a supper for Christ; the cheere must be prepared of hearts, My son, give me thy heart, and it must be broken, and contrite, for he loves no stones that will not break, for the sacrifices of God are a broken spirit, A brken and a centrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise, Psal. 51. 17. Secondly, these hearts must be served in at your supper, in gold, that he counselleth you to buy of him, Rev. 3. 18. which is the lively faith in the merits of Christs death, in one baptisme, for remission of sins; for thus Peter served in three thousand hearts that were pricked by the Law, in baptisme, in the name of the Lord Jesus, for the remission of sins, Acts 2. 38. Thirdly, you must serve it in, in the white-rayment justification, wherein no shame of nakednesse do appeare, for Christ cannot endure sin. Fourthly, you must buy eye-salve, of the Holy Ghost, to anoint your eyes, that you may▪ see, Rev. 3. 18. For Christ will not sup with blind sinners. Fifthly, the marriage-chamber must be paved with the

love of the daughters of Ierusalem, Cant. 3. 10. i. with love to all the citizens of the new Ierusalem, and now invite him, saying, Arise thou North-wind, and come thou South, and blow upon my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out; let my well beloved come into his garden, and eat of his pleasant fruits, Cant. 4. Now Christ hath prepared a supper for you; for thus he saith, I am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse, I have gathered my myrrbe, with my spice, I have eaten mine honey comb, with mine honey, I have drunk my wine, with my milke, eat, O friends, drink and make you merry, O well beloved, (Cant. 5. 1.) for the first dish that you shall have at my supper, saith Christ, is the tree of life; for, to him that vercometh, will I give to eat of the tree of life in the midst of the Paradise of God, Rev. 2. 7. Eat of Christ therefore, the tree of life, at supper, and drink his blood, and make you merry. Secondly, you that are faithfull, shall have a crown of life, and not be hurt of the second death, Rev 2. 10, 11. Thirdly; you shall have the hidden Manna, this is good cheere indeed, Eat, O friends, and make you merry, for you shall have a white stone, with a new name writ∣ten, that no man knoweth, save he that receiveth it, (yea, no man can under∣stand these things that I write, but he that hath the white stone,) Fourthly, you that are bidden to the marriage-supper, shall be a conquering people; for you shall have power over nations, and rule them with a rod of iron, and break them in pieces like a Potters vessell, and shall have the morning Star, which is Jesus, the root and the generation of David, to be your light, Rev. 22. 16. and Rev 2. 26. Fifthly, be merry, for you you shall be clothed with white-rayment, and he will not blot out your names out of the book of life, Rev. 3. 5. True faith in the White-rayment, is an argument, your names are written in the book of life. Sixthly, be merry in the Lord, for he will make you a pillar in the Temple of God, and you shall go no more out; and I will write upon you the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, which is the new Jerusalem, which cometh down from my God, out of heaven, and my new name, the new Christian, a new creature, Gal. 6. 16. Seventhly, be merry, for you shall fit with Christ in his Throne, as he overcame, and fit with the Father in his Throne, Rev 3. 21. Eat therefore, O friends, drink and make you merry, O well beloved, much good do it you at this supper. You see therefore, that all the promises of the seven Churches, run into the last, which is ours, and to the supper of the Lamb. Therefore you see, that the most conquering and raigning Church that ever arose in Christendome, is now arising in England; for you White∣rayment Christians, shall sit with Christ in his Throne, therefore you shall raigne: For Christ hath loved you, and washed you from your sins, in his own blood, and made you Kings and Priests, to God his Father, and you shall raign on earth, (Rev. 5. 10.) for Christ will be clothed in a garment dipt in blood shortly, if he be not already, and you the hosts of heaven, shall follow him on white horses, for you are clothed in ine linen, white and pure, Rev. 19. 13, 14. There be many religions now in England, and maay mse, which shall prevail; some say the Papists, some the Prelate, some the Anabaptists, some say the Brownists, and every sect now think to prevail; but I say the White∣rayment Christians are the Israel of God, that have not defiled their garments, and they shall walk with Christ in white, for they are worthy, Rev. 3. 4. Peace

be upon that Israel of God, Gal. 6. 16. for they shall fit with Christ in his Throne, Rev. 3. 21. And therefore, because you can sing the song of Moses, and of the Lamb, Rev. 15. 2. therefore I set Moses blessing upon you, Deut. 33. Blessed are thou, O Israel, who is like unto thee? O people, saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help, and the sword of thy glory; therefore thine ene∣mies shall be in subjection unto thee, and thou shalt tread upon their high places. Christ is now shaking the heavens of the Churches, and the earth of the Heathen now; and shaking of the Churches, sheweth the removing of those things that are shaken, that the things which are not shaken, may remain, Heb. 12. 26. But the Churches of the Lutherans and of England are now shaken, by a civill war, they are Churches divided against themselves, Ergo, they must not stand, but come to nought, as Christ saith, Mat. 12. 25. and Rome shall be shaken too, and come to destruction, Ergo, they shall be removed from be∣ing Churches, that the things which are not shaken may remain, and that is the Church of the White-rayment Christians, and citizens of the new Jerusalem, which shall remain; for we receive the Kingdome which cannot be shaken, Heb. 12. 28. and are the pillars in the Temple of God, Rev. 3. 12. Therefore leave your wrangling for a Discipline, and heare Christs voyce, for behold, he knocketh, and will never leave rapping, untill you take his counsell in Eng∣land, to buy gold, white-rayment and eye-salve: mark, he knocks to be let in for doctrine, for scarce one of a thousand have bought these three: say with the White-rayment Christians, Thou shalt guide me by thy counsell, and after re∣ceive me to a glorious Throne, Psal. 73. 24. and city, for they shall enter in∣to the gates of the city, and have right to the tree of life, Rv 22. 14. And now, deare friends, I have set before you in this Book, and in that of the blood of the Lamb, as it were, the two sides of Jacobs ladder, whose foot was on earth, but the top reached to Heaven, and the Angels of heaven ascended, and de∣scended upon it, Gen. 28. . The two sides of this ladder on earth, are Baptisme, and the blood of the Lamb, though the foot of it be on earth, 1 John 5. in visible signes, yet the top of it reacheth to heaven, for we are baptized into Christ in heaven, and by faith feed upon Christ, and are sprinkled with Christs blood in heaven: The Angels of heaven will ascend, and descend for your protection Heb. 1. You friends of the Bridegroom, and children of the marriage∣chamber, that are clothed in white-raiment; make much of this ladder, for though the foot of it be on earth, in water and blood, yet it reacheth unto heaven, unto Jesus that came by water and blood, to send Angels down to you upon it: they that have no faith in their baptisme into Christ, and in the blood of the Lamb, cannot tell, whether the Angels of God descend or ascend for their protection, as Heathens, Jews, Turks, Devils, Witches, Papists, and all unbe∣lievers. I have writ a little book of Good news for souldiers, or, the way to overcome the Devill, by the blood of the Lamb: I finde by Luke 21. 11. there isSee 2 Esdras 13. 31. an earthquake, pestilence and famine coming; for thus saith my Lord, and my God, When ye heare of wars, and seditions, that nation rise against nation, andMa. kingdome against kingdome, there shall be great earthquakes, , i. in, according to, or through those places, and famine, and pestilence, Luke 21. 11. Mark 13. 8. these are the beginnings of sorrows. But in England, Scot∣landMi.

and Ireland, we heare of wars and seditions, that nation rise against na∣tion, and kingdome against kingdome. Ergo, there shall be great earth-quakes,Con. , i. in, according to, or through those places, and famine and pesti∣lence, these are the beginnings of sorrows; of which I have writ more fully in the Counsell of Christ to England. Now, as Moses, when a pestilence was comming, counselled the Israelites a way to escape the destroying Angel, by sprinking the blood of a Lamb, upon the two dore-posts, and the upper dore∣post of their houses, that when God saw the blood, he said, he would passe over them, and the plague shall not be upon you, to destruction; so  counsell you, the Israel of God, buy one of them books, for every house, and sprinkle the faith of the blood of the Lamb upon your two dore-posts of your bodies and soules, and the upper dore-post of your spirits, that when the destroying pesti∣lence shall come, God may see the blood of the Lamb upon your consciences, he may cause it to passe over your houses, where the Israelite of a good con∣science is within; and whatsoever comes to your bodies, yet your souls shall be safe: for as the Angels of heaven went up and down on Jacobs ladder, so they shall ascend, and descend for your protection, that believe your bodies were washed with pure water in Baptisme, and your hearts sprinkled from an evill conscience, by the blood of the Lamb, you may keep your profession with∣out wavering, (of deliverance) Heb. 10. 22, 23. For he that dwelleth in this secret of the Lord, shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty, Psal. 91. 1. and he shall give his Angels a charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy wayes, to beare thee in their arms, that thou dash not thy foot against a stone, v. 11. and peace shall be upon them, that walk according to this rule (of a new crea∣ture) and upon the Israel of God, Gal 6. 16.

