



My Lord,
I purpose not, in this my Preliminary E∣pistle, to publish un∣to the World, the large Catalogue of your Charitable Works, and your other Christian Virtues,
 Et laudent eam in porta opera e∣jus: These without Flattery commend better than I am able. My design is, to express here, some small Testimony of my ma∣ny great Obligations for those large favours I have, and still do receive from your Bountiful and Generous Heart: This I presume, I can no way better perform, than by endeavouring to promote the eternal Well-fare of your Soul, that grand Duty you ought most to mind in this World, as being the only end of your Beeing therein.
For I am not of Cicero's opini∣nion, That we are born, partly for our Country, partly for our Pa∣rents, partly for our Friends; but rather, That we are All born for
 our selves; not but that we have many high Obligations besides, which in Conscience we are to dis∣charge; but that the End of all is, The good of our own Souls, in or∣der to eternal Salvation, which I conceive to be the meaning of that of the Apostle, Whither you Eat, or Drink, or whatsoever else ye do, let All be done to the Glory of God.
Wherefore, if you desire Riches, what greater can you have, than the Treasures of Heaven? of which, none can deprive you, without your own consent. If you Aspire to Honours, what higher can there be, than to be a Servant, a Friend, a Child of a most Glorious God? Nimis ho∣norati sunt amicitui Deus: And if you affect Pleasures, there are
 none so True, so Permanent, so Satisfying, as the joys of an up∣right Conscience; to drink of the indeficient Torrents of Pleasure, and to be inebriated with the ful∣ness of Gods House.
The greatest Plenty this World can afford to and earthly Heart, is extream Poverty, accor∣ding to St. Augustine, if it be without God; and what-ever Pleasures or Honours may be en∣joyed in this Life, will still end in Misery and Confusion, if they advance not the good of the Soul, in order to its endless bless∣ed Life with God in Heaven; Ʋbi salutis damnum, ibi luerum nulium, saith Eucherius; there is no gain to be valued, if there∣with our Salvation be endam∣maged;
 for, if this miscarries, all is lost, for an Eternity.
My Lord, Heavens Providence hath placed you in a very emi∣nent Condition amongst Men, as well by your Noble Extracti∣on, as by the propitious influen∣ces of a Gracious Princes Fa∣vours; That your High Rank of Nobility should powerfully bend your vast Soul to the per∣formance of such Heroick Acti∣ons of Virtue, as may befit a per∣son of your Illstrous Rise and Endowmen
God hath ed you by his grace, to be a mber of the Ho∣ly Catholick Church; this emi∣nent Prerogative amongst True Believers, should oblidge you to
 glorifie God in that saving Profession; that (as our Blessed Saviour adviseth) your Light may so shine before Men, that they seeing your good Works, may be moved thereby to give glory to your Heavenly Father, in the same Profession with you.
God hath moreover blessed you with a hopeful Issue; advance them by a Vertuous Education, and your own fore-running good Examples; for, the holy lives of Christian Parents are over the most powerful Attractives, where∣by Children are induced to compose theirs to the Love of God, and the Rules of Morality. Thus doing, you will pur∣chase to your self and Posterity, the blessings of this Li  the next, that which is aymed a  small Treatise, and shall ever be th rnest Petition of your dying Friend 
Right Honorable,

