



My Lord,
I Designed the subject of this Essay at Coleshil-Hall in Warwick-shire, whilst I attended there as a Physician: And therefore I humbly ap∣ply my self to your Lordship, for the Patro∣nage of it.
The great Favours I have received from your Honourable Family, oblige me to make this Dedi∣cation; but especially your Lordship's curiosity in reading the Philosophy of this Age, and your Inge∣nious Studies, which have given your Lordship the advantage of judging of a greater Subject.

 I am much obliged to many Gentlemen of your Country, who have Tasted many Plants with me; and I desire to make this Tract more acceptable to them, by this Dedication of it to your Lordship, whom they justly Honour and Esteem, for your Zealous concern, for the Preservation of our Church and State.
I will give your Lordship this short account of the design of this ensuing Book.
I shall assert, that Minerals, Animals, and Vege∣tables, have Water, Earth, Oyl, and Acids, for their Principles: Of these they are compounded, and in∣to these they are ultimately resolved: Generation being the mixture of Principles, and Corruption the separation of them.
This Opinion agrees with, and illustrates the Antient Hypothesis, That all Bodies are compounded of Moist, Dry, Hot, and Cool Principles.
The Humidity depends on the Water, the dry∣ness on the Earth, the Oyl is Inflammable, and the Matter of Fire in Vegetables: In Minerals, the Oyly Sulphur burns; in Animals, the Oyly Fat is Inflam∣mable: The Oyls, Fats, and Sulphurs are the same Oyly Principle, but they differ by their several States, Mixtures, and Digestions.
The Acid Principle produces Coldness in Animal Humors, according to Hippocrates's Observation, : And it is observable, that Nitre, which is Acid, tastes very Cool; and the Sulphureous Acid, which abounds in the Air, is esteemed the Principle of Cold.

 The Oyly Principle is the Hot Principle in Ani∣mals, as Hippocrates affirms, .
Because the Ancients observed these Qualities to abound in Earth, Water, Fire, and Air, they called these Elements, and supposed all Bodies to be com∣pounded of them. Those Constitutions they called Dry, in which Earth abounds; those Moist, in which Water prevails; the Oyl high digested makes the Constitution Hot, and a great Acidity renders the Constitution Cold.
Galen describes Choler as Bitter, Acrid, and Deter∣gent; Phlegm, as Crude, Slimy, and Cool. The Atra bilis is described as Acid, which Galen says, is evacuated into the Stomach, and there becomes Styptick. Hippocrates affirms the Atra bilis to be Viscid, , so that by Atra bilis the Ancient Physicians understood the Slimy Acid of the Spleen, which, when the Spleen is obstructed, is carried by the Arteries of the Stomach into its Cavity; where this Slime and Acidity abounding, produce the Flatus Hypochondriacus; and this Aci∣dity descending into the Guts, turns the Choler it there meets into a black Colour, from whence it has the name of Atra bilis.
From the taste of these Humors, Bitter, Acrid, Choler, Acid, Lympha, and Viscid Slime, the Famous Sylvius deduces his Notions of all Diseases, as the Ancients did from Choler, Phlegm, and Atra bilis. But I will, in this Treatise, present your Lordship
 with a larger Scheme of Animal Humors.
I shall endeavour, in this Tract, to explain the Virtues of Mineral and Animal Medicines by their Tastes and Smells, as I have done that of Vegeta∣bles: Though Galen did exactly describe the Tastes of Vegetables, yet he was wholly perplexed about Minerals; and the same is the general fault of the Chymists, who attribute wonderful Effects to their Gold Medicines, but observe no Taste, though the sweet Stypticity is evident in Tincture of Gold, from whence it has its Vertue.
That Vegetables, Minerals, and Animals have the same kind of Taste at first, may seem strange, but we must consider, that Vegetables receive their Juices from Minerals; (to prove this, I need only instance in Hepatica Terrestris, which smells of a Petroleum) and Minerals have their Acid, Sweet, Slimy, and Bitter Tastes: Out of these the Juices for Vegetables is prepared by Fermentation, and the dissolving Power of the Sulphur-Acid in the Air: If this Nourishment be ill prepared, it keeps its Mineral Nature, and petrefies Plants, hence Stoney parts are observed in Oaks, whilst growing; and Coral smells Earthy and Sulphureous, like a Flint, if two pieces be rubbed together.
I must farther observe, that Animals have their Sweet, Bitter, Salt, and Acrid Tastes from Vege∣tables, which, by Putrefaction acquire an Animal Nature, yielding Urinous Spirits; and all Vegeta∣bles become fit Nourishment for Animals, by their Fermentation in the Stomach.

 Many Marine Plants, such as Sponge, have a mid∣dle state of Principles betwixt Vegetables and Ani∣mals, and therefore yield a Volatile Salt, like Ani∣mals, and Fixt, like Vegetables.
I will give one Instance from the greatest of our English Physicians, Dr. Willis, to shew his O∣pinion of the usefulness of a Rational, from the taste of an Empyrical Medicine in the Chincough, from whence he framed his Methodical and Rati∣onal Cure of it. He examined the Virtue of Cup∣moss by the Taste, and says, Virtutis astrictoriae est, at{que} particulas nonnihil acres salis volatilis copi∣am redolentes in se continet, unde conjectari licebit usum ejus esse sanguinem figere, seri{que} fluxiones se∣dare, ac insuper succum nerveum volatilizando, dia∣thesin spasmodicam tollere.
The Virtues of Medicines were first known by the Tastes of our Diet, which vitiates the Humors of our Bodies, by its Bitter, Acrid, Salt, and Aro∣matick Tastes (the most natural Diet being of a Sweet Taste): And by these Tastes also, the preter∣natural Humors were observed to be rectified.
These Tastes were well known to Mankind, whilst they fed most on Vegetables; and this Age therefore knows less of them, because they are lit∣tle used in our Diet: For which reason, I believe, the Virtues of Plants have been esteemed occult Qualities, which were discovered by Experience, and not by our Senses. But this Tract will satisfie the Sceptical, in giving them a sensible Testimony
 of the nature of Animal Humors, and the operation of Medicines on them, by their suitableness to their Tastes, Principles, and Digestions.
This Design will thwart the Opinion of Astrolo∣gists, who fetch the Virtue of Plants from the Planets; and also the Opinion of the Helmontian Archeus, and the spirituality of occult Qualities in many Minerals and Stones; and all the sympathe∣tical Conjurations in Amulets, which have no sen∣sible Qualities.
My Lord, I have given you an Account of my Design, and hope you will accept it, as a Testi∣mony of my being,
My Lord,

