


Honoured Sir,
THAT this plaine Sermon casts it selfe, upon your Patronage; the Subject it handles, justly challengeth at my hands. For, (besides that I am a debtor to your selfe mainly, under God, for that ranke, whatso∣ever it be (though of the lowest Forme) which I have had in the Schooles, and now have in the Society of the Prophets;) it is an obligation to me, that I see you (among your many imployments of meerely publike importance) so cordially carefull of preserving unviolated this Interest of Interests, the maine Subject of these Meditations.
Sir, 'tis to me, and to all those whose glory 'tis indeed, (though it is now, in some mouthes, grown a name of Scorne) to be old Disciples, that is, tried Saints, a matter
 of praise to that good God that principles & prospers you, to behold the evenness of your spirit carryed out in all conditions to the prosecution of publike Inte∣rests with the same height of faithfulness & fervency. To instance only in a few particulars; seeing I know such a Discourse, (if enlarged as it might be) though it might be very welcome to all understanding, and well-affected Readers besides; yet, to you it would re∣lish ill, whose (in some sense) supererogatory piece of worth it is, to be willing to doe well, without being desi∣rous to be told of it. Sir, we remember how in the Mar∣tiall part of this Ages imployment, (notwithstanding continuall oppositions of the first Magnitude, both at home and abroad, the Lord blessed your small inconsi∣derable numbers of the worst furnished, and least pai'd souldiers of any, with successes, which the judgment of the late yeares thought somewhat bordering on mira∣cles; that you were the kingdomes Wall of Brasse (next our God) at Alton, Arundell, and Cheriton field: and (by Gods speciall, never-to-be-forgotten, goodnesse) a principall meanes of its preservation: that you cheer∣fully obeyed the call of the Houses, in a calme resigna∣tion of your Forces and Command, and sate downe one of the chief Self-denying Members, without capitula∣ting for pay, or giving any manner of encouragement to, or so much as accepting of the desires of the soul∣diery, easie enough to have been induced to follow ex∣ample, and to mutiny for a dispensation of the continu∣ance of your command, as the stirrings of many quieted by your wisedome, and the wet eyes of more abundantly drencht by their affection, did largely testifie at your departure. And we hope shall remember to Gods eter∣nall praise, & your perpetuall glory, that now in your
 meerely representative Capacity you keep steddy to your Principles of Conscience and Honour, voting and acting from an impulsive within your owne breast, without those Springs and Wires, and weights, that only keep many mens motions regular; that in these dayes great justles of severally ingaged Parties, you re∣taine still the same unbyassed, Covenant-spirit, and do not promote with a politick compliance, or act with a tumultuous precipitancy, the designes of Jesuiticall in∣cendiaries, whether of the line of Rome, or of Munster, who concur in an endeavour of setting a new fire on three kingdomes, ere the old be fully extinguished, for no other ends (that I know) but that (like that Mon∣ster Nero) they may sing , in the heat, &c. or see more new light in the flames of it.
But above all, that which renders you most precious in the eyes of all that hate Babel, is; your setled and constant affection to the Prophets of God (now the scorne of this (as * one well calls it) Christ-glutted, and Mr. Shepherd in his Sound Beleever. Gospel-glutted Age, and trampled upon on all hands, as the very off-scouring of all things) of which, you dayly give such ample testimony, that (I dare assure you,) you have a large share in Prophets Prayers, and I hope will one day have (Mat. 10. 41. according to the promise) a liberall portion of the Prophets reward.
And now, Sir, for the future, whatsoever discourage∣ments you meet withall in the same good way, remem∣ber him (I pray you) who endured the contradiction of sinners, and yet grew not weary of his worke, but car∣ryed it on to perfection in despight of all the powers of darknesse. Go you, and do likewise: Tell the humorous world, that (although its experienced ficklenesse gives you little reason to build much upon its constancy,
 yet) you will add one wonder more to its seven, to wit, that you are in this Lunatick age; the same man you were a yeare since. And I hope, when England hath recove∣red its wits againe, when its Platonick yeare comes a∣bout, and Errors Circle is run quite through, so that cast Truthes, like super-annuated factions, shall return. and become New-light again, (which I doubt not but it will be in time) it wil then see cause to acknowledge (to your honour, and theirs (who have with you) ob∣tained grace to be kept faithfull) that those who have stood to their places and Principles in all this change, have done far better then those fallen Angels among us, who have left their Stations, and run the ring of a∣pinions, and parties, so long, to returne at last, to the Point from whence they begun their irregular motion.
I have onely one word more, and that concerns this homely piece of mine. Sir, in this Dedication, I hope you wil look upon my desire to testifie to the world how far you have obliged me; and the maine motive that put me upon the thoughts of it; and accordingly accept it. Yet I must acknowledge that I have withall a plot upon your name, being perswaded, that (for its sake in the front of this Epistle) many transient Readers may be perhaps stayed and intreated to read beyond the Title-page, some of whom might else perchance lay it by for a Pamphlet sick of the extravagancies of this Age, it being owned by so obscure an Author as is,
SIR,

