



Christian Reader:
I Addresse my selfe to thee in the threshold of thit Treatise, with a twofold request, before thou spend thy censure upon it. The one is, that thou read, and the other is, that thou pray over this little Treatise. Whatever thy judgment be, I hope it will not deny me berein, did it concerne thee lesse, then (in my apprehension) this doth.
The reason why I desire the first of thee, is because I know many good books suffer under the unjust sentence of prejudice, and disaffection, before they are read. It being motive e∣nough to most engaged persons, on all hands, to condmne a booke; (that its Title page speakes not of their side:) And the second, I have this farther reason to beg at thy hands; because I know an Unpraying Spirit is very unfit to adven∣ture upon the study of any Practicall Subject whatsoever. Practicall Truths alwayes carry some thing in them which goes against the graine of an heart not taught of God, and managed by his holy Spirit
If I can but obtaine these two things of thee, I doubt not my successe in this weake attempt towards thy satisfaction and settlement, in the practise and improvemen of the Ordi∣nance herein treated of.
And next, (supposing that I have obtained my twofold re∣quest) I shall only adde a twofold advertisement to thee con∣cerning the following Treatise.
First, That I compose it in a Dialogue-way for two rea∣sons,
 (1.) That I might sute it to the capacities of such as are not able to make so profitable an use of books composed in a Method of Art, as of those that are framed in a Method of Discourse.
(2.) Because I see others who have gone before me in practicall discourses, have laboured in this way with abundant successe upon the ordinary sort of readers.
Secondly, that (the subject in the maine intent thereof being practicall) I have not beene soe precisely carefull of ex∣pressions, as in a close Controversie, I would have beene. And therefore if thou be one that (in point of censoriousnesse) wilt play at a small game rather then sit out, I have my plea ready. I intended to direct the Conscien∣tious, not to please the Criticall Reader. I am sure those that are of the true Eagle-breed of Christians, that flie highest in communion with God, and the increase of practi∣call godlinesse will not stoope to catch flyes.
The Lord blesse this poor labour of mine unto thee for good, that thou maist hence know what use to make of an Or∣dinance, which partly through Ignorance, and Partly through want of consideration, most Christians doe too much pro∣fane; and thereby have, and doe still provoke the Lord to suf∣fer it to be called in Question, and in divers places, laid a∣side altogether. It being just with God to continue Ordi∣nances no longer among a people, then they use them as Ordi∣nances.
And (lastly) if thou receive any confirmation, satisfaction, excitation, or any other kinde of holy improvement hereby, let me intreate thee to put up one prayer, for the improveing and sanctifying of the poor abilities of him, who is
From my Study in Reading, November 4. 1654.

