


BY the providence of the most high,
Isa 7. Acts 17.26. that hath appointed the tit es that are comming, and shall come, an e∣termined the bounds of each one hai∣tation, I am seated among you in this place,
Ps. 16.6. and I hope I shall have no other cause but that I may say with the Psalmist, the lines are fallen unto me in a good place:
I account not that so much a good place where there are good fields good corne, good pasture — But I account that a good place, where there is a good people, a people swift to hear, willing to be reformed ready to sub∣mit to the Scepter, and dominion of the Lord Jesus, and not crying ou like those Rebelli∣ous Jews—
Lu 7.19.14 we will not have this man reigne over us. I account such a place a good place, for it is not the fatnesse of the soile, but the fear of the Lord that maketh rich:
I blesse God I have received no discou∣ragment since I came amongst you; I have not
found you stubborne or perverse, froward, or refractory, or resisters of the word of truth, which hath been delivered to you, but I have found you rather humble and meek, and wil∣ling to imbrace the Gospel, which as it is your praise, so it is also my happinesse and joy;
For what is it that makes the life of a Minister of the Gospel comfortable? I tell you (if he be a man that truly fears God, and is faithfull to his master) it is not the greatnesse of his Living, the fulness of his barnes — But it is the obedience of his people to gospel-precepts, their growing in grace, their adding to faith vertue, and to vertue knowledge, and to know∣ledge temperance,
2. Pet. 1.5. and to temperance patience, and to patience godliness, and to godlinesse brotherly kindnesse, and to brotherly kindnesse charity; their willingnesse to be reformed, their readinesse to receive the truth with love, their not be∣ing barren nor unfruitfull in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ:
O! The blessing of God upon his labours in Spiritualizing his people, this refresheth him, when he seeth dead people quickned, enemies to Christ reconciled, children of wrath become children of grace, those that were afar off, now made nigh,
strangers from the covenant now in∣terested in the promise, there is no grea∣ter joy to a sincere minister of the Gospel than this.
This was St.
3 Ioh. 1.4. Johns greatest comfort — I have no greater joy than to hear that my children walke in the truth.
O what a rejoycing is this! when a Mi∣nister can say of his people, as St. Paul could of his Corinthians,
1 Cor. 6.11 —But ye are washed but ye are sanctified — and to the Ro∣mans to whom he preached— Ye were the Servants of sin, but ye have obeyed from the heart the forme of doctrine which was delivered unto you:
Ro. 6.17.
But ah! what woe is it to a faithfull mi∣nister, that when he hath spent himself, and his pains for many years, yet is forced to com∣plaine with the Prophet— Lord who hath beleeved our report?
Isa. 53.1. They were servants of sin, and they are so still, they have not obeyed from the heart the form of doctrine delivered to them:
They were thieves, covetuous, whore∣mongers, drunkards, Revilers, Scorners and they are so still, — they are not washed, they are not sanctified — an this is an heart-breaking to a sincere Mini∣ster of Jesus Christ, and many such there are
that with the Prophet,
Ier. 13.17. mourn in secret for this thing.
I must confesse. I have what respects I can desire from you in relation to things temporal, and my endeavours shall be to gratifie you with things that are spirituall, which are of the greatest concernment in the world.
Our main businesse in this world should be, to labor to make your calling and election sure— To be diligent that at the ap∣pearing of our Lord Jesus Christ to judg∣ment we may be found without spot and blameless: men indeed make other businesse then this, But alass! That so little regarded saying of our Lord Jesus Christ will be pro∣ved true one day —What will it pro∣fit a man to win the world and lose his soule?
While providence shall continue me among you in this place, my endeavour shall be (by Gods assistance) to set you in heaven-way, to be plaine, and faithfull to you in things of soul concernment;
To tell you that you are altogether such as ye ought to be, all reall christians, a vi∣sible Church, such as have a right to the sa∣crament, an interest in the promises — I dare not sow such pillows under your armes if I should, well might you suspect me of daub∣ing, I mean, with untempred morter.

But I shall endeavour to shew you out of the Scriptures, who are Christians indeed, not only by a change of name, but by a change of nature also; who are a true visible Church of Jesus Christ: what manner of persons they are and ought to be, to whom Seals and Promises are given, and if you be, or become such, then may I tell you without deceiving you, that you are Christians indeed, a Church indeed, have a right to the Seals and promises of the Go∣spel indeed.
If a Parish or People be altogether pro∣fane, atheisticall, dead in sins and trespasses, without any favour or taste of spirituall things— To tell such a people that they are good Christians, a visible Church, have a right to the Sacrament— is no other then to cheat them of the truth, harden them in their sins, and lead them blindfold to destru∣ction: A formall and generall Preacher that words, and phrases out his own wisdom, tickling the ears without touching the hearts or awaking the consciences of his hearers, he may have the praise and applause of men, but not the praise and peace of God; give me the latter, let who will take the for∣mer.

It will be worth all his pains and suffer∣ings, if a Minister drawing men to his latter end, and ready to give up an account of his stewardship, can appeale unto God and his Congregation, as once Samuel (ready to die) did unto the people in another case, 1 Sam. 12.— Whose Oxe or whose Ass have I taken? whom have I defrauded? So when a Minister, — what soul have I be∣guiled? What soul have I defrauded? What soul have I hardened in sin by covering, and not discovering the truth, and danger of its estate to it? What people have I deceived by telling them, they were Christians, when they were not? a Church, when they were not, had a right to the Kingdome of heaven, and the seals thereof when they had not? to be able to say thus, will be worth some∣thing one day; O that all that take upon them the Ministry of the Gospel would con∣sider this. If plain dealing have outward disturbance, yet it hath inward peace.
But indeed an ingenious people, whose reason and understanding is not quite lost, or infatuated, will in time make good that say∣ing of the wise mans; Pro. 28.23. That he that rebuketh a man afterward shall finde more favour, than he that flatter∣eth with his tongue.

My endeavour therefore shall be to cause you to know your miserable estate by nature, and the remedy thereof by grace; To cause you to look into that great mystery, the infi∣nite love of God in Jesus Christ, in that great work of your dedemption through him, that ye may know the Lord Jesus & the pow∣er of his Resurrection, and the fellow∣ship of his sufferings, being made con∣formable unto his death: That when I am called to give an account of my Steward∣ship amongst you, I may do it with joy, and not with griefe: Ministers of all men had need to look about them, for they must give account for more souls than their own; and if any be lost through their default,
Ezek. 3.18 that blood will be required at their bands:
I would not at the day of judgement be found in the condition of a negligent, idle, Pastor, that hath fleec'd, and not fed his flock, for ten thousand worlds: Not in his con∣dition,
1 Cor. 2.4 that daubs with untemperd mor∣ter, that speaks smooth things, that preacheth not in the demonstration of the spirit, and of power, but with the inticing words of mans wisdome.
For fearefull will be the end of such a man when Jesus Christ and he shall reckon
together; for so many sheep, lost through the earelesness of the shepheard.
It was the saying of one, That of all men that should be saved Ministers should be the fewest: Indeed they have the greatest charge, and are subject to the sorest tempta∣tions, and it is to be feared that many Mini∣sters, either for fear or love, or some other worldly respect may offend too much against their commission, which bids them cry a∣loud and spare not,
Isa. 58.1. lift up thy voice like a trumpet, shew my people their sinns, and the house of Israel their transgres∣sions; and so hazard themselves too neere the pickes of Gods eternall vengeance and displeasure; which thing of all other I most fear; and therefore through grace shall la∣bour to avoid; which I cannot do, unlesse I look strictly unto you over whom I set an O∣verseer; therefore blame me not if I be plain and earnest with you to press you for∣ward towards the mark of the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus;
Phil. 3: 14. If I should be negligent herein, your blood would be upon my head; The Lord pardon my neglects past.
I had rather disturbe my own peace (if it must be so) and trouble the water to stir you out of the lees of carnall security, than to
have you curse me, and accuse me before God at the day of judgement, for the decei∣ver and betrayer of your soules.
I blesse God I can say (through the grace given me) that my destre is (so farre as I know my own heart) not to seek yours but you; I had rather see you thrive in spiri∣tuals than my self in temporals; and my greatest encouragement among you will be, to see you walking in and obedient un∣to the truth.
If you will give up your names to Je∣sus Christ, if you will obey the Gospel, and not run with the wicked of the world into the same excess of riot, you must look for many oppositions, affronts, scornes, reproaches — but passe thorough all these with patience, looking unto the End, Jesus, the Au∣thor and Finisher of your Faith; who for the joy that was set before him, en∣dured the Cross, despising the shame,
Heb. 12.1. and is now set down at the right-hand of God; and there if you run with pa∣tience the race that is set before you, shall you sit down also; — For which things sake I shall alwayes bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that he would grant you,
according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might,
Ephes. 3.14. by his Spi∣rit in the inward man: That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, that ye being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and to know the love of Christ, which passeth know∣ledge. That ye might be filled with all the fulness of God.
Feb. 2. 1657.

