


MY LORD,
I Question not, but This Essay will be more kindly Recei∣ved, for having Your Name
 prefixt to It; since That is so much honour'd for Your great Services to the Publick, and signal Loy∣alty to His present Maje∣sty: And all Persons must needs therefore greatly esteem Your Merit, Cou∣rage, and Experience in Military Affairs; since the KING hath manifested His Approbation of Them, by the Great and Honoura∣ble Trusts conferr'd up∣on You.
My Lord, I will give You a few Instances of the De∣sign and Usefulness of these Papers; that I may
 obtain Your Protection a∣gainst those morose Men, who endeavour to oppose this New Ʋndertaking, tho' they cannot but acknow∣ledge, that they approve of It.
The Design of This Es∣say, is, To vindicate the Art of Curing Diseases, from the common Scan∣dal of being Conjectural, by Describing the Tastes and Odors of Medicines, and also of Animal Humours: For by These, Medicines were first discover'd, and the Humors of the Body examin'd; and from the
 Observation of the A∣greement and Contrarie∣ties betwixt the Taste of Humours in the Body, and the Medicine, it was easie for Physicians to infer, That by a Medicine of the same Taste, the Humours of the Body are Preserv'd; and by the contrary Taste in the Medicine, they are Al∣ter'd and Corrected.
These are the true Fun∣damental Rules of Phy∣sick, built on the Testi∣mony of our Senses, and not on the Whims of Chy∣mists, or the Fanaticisms of Occult Qualities; by
 which Medicines work, like Charms, insensibly.
Hence Quacks give to their Medicines very ma∣ny, and too unreasonable Commendations: They also pretend to an Expe∣rience of a particular Me∣dicine, as well as the best Physician. But 'tis only the Taste and Smell of the Me∣dicine, by which its Ver∣tue must be try'd betwixt the Physician, & the Quack: By these the true Physici∣an knoweth its Vertue, the Manner of its Preparation, the Suitableness of it to the Humour to be Corre∣cted,
 and to the Consti∣tution of the Patient: Of all which the Quack is ig∣norant.
When the several Com∣positions of Tastes, and some∣times Odors, in the same Plant, are well consider'd by those who shall read the Descriptions I have given of them, I questi∣on not, but that the Ar∣tificial Jumbles of many Medicines together, will be Rejected; and every Ingenuous Practicer will chiefly make use of Sim∣ple Medicines; by which his Patient will be more
 suddenly, safely, and plea∣santly Cured.
I have further propos'd some Notions about Tastes in general, for the easier discovering of the Nature of such Plants, as grow common in England. I have mention'd Those I have met with near Litchfield: And I have added Exo∣ticks; that by comparing the Tastes and Vertues of both, we might the bet∣ter understand Those of Our own. It is a great Shame to our Profession, that the Ignorant Indians should know more of
 Plants in their Native Coun∣try, and do greater Cures by Them, than our Artists can by Ours.
I thought it absurd to write a Latin Discourse a∣bout English Plants; which is design'd for the Use of English Men, who are fur∣ther to try and examine the Tastes and Vertues that I have mention'd. Hippo∣crates & Galen wrote their Physical Books in the Lan∣guage of the Country where they Practiced: And the Learn'd Mr. Boyl hath both Honour'd and Improv'd our Language,
 by his Physical Discourses in English. I have therefore wrote in English, that I might the more encou∣rage our Country-Men to enquire into the Vertue of our Native Plants; we be∣ing hitherto oblig'd to our Old English Herbals, for a Collection of the Vertues of many Plants from the Country-Men; to whose Sagacity & Experiments the greatest Physicians are hitherto obliged. And since there have been so many false Commedati∣ons given of Medicines, and mistaken Notions of
 Physick, I thought it rea∣sonable to give my Coun∣try-Men some Advertise∣ments of these Abuses, and to enable them to a bet∣ter Judgment of the right Nature of Physick.
By the Instances I have given, I hope I have con∣vinc'd Your Lordship of the great Usefulness of this Essay; and presume, All who have a generous Love for their Country, will pardon the Fault (if it be One) of Writing in Eng∣lish.
I here Present Your Lord∣ship with the first Fruits
 of my Studies, as an hum∣ble Acknowledgment of Your great Favors to Me; and that I might make this Publick Declaration of My being,
My LORD,

