



IT was your Husbands desire (when alive) that I should preach His Funerall, and 'tis yours, that I should Print it; Else (for ought I know) it had ne∣ver seen the light: For I count not any of my Grapes worth the Presse: Therefore since it is your plea∣sure to see this Sermon in a Printed dresse, I pray accept of it.
When your deare Husband was alive, Yee were Two pre∣cious Diamonds set in the Ring of Marriage; God hath ta∣ken him away to shine in another World, and hath left you to shine a while in this world; It is but a while, and therefore spread forth all your beams, before you set in the West of Death, and be seen here no more.
If we would shine with God in Heaven, we must shine for God on Earth: Let this Sermon of opportunities make you improve your opportunities: Shall the men of this world hugg their opportunities for the world, and shall not we Husband our opportunities for Heaven?
Society with Jesus Christ even on this side Heaven, is a kinde of Heaven; and those Christall streams of Joys which we might suck from God here, outid all the pleasures and braveries of this world; which made Bonaventure (when the Devil tempting him, told him, he was a Reprobate, andSi Non datur frui Deo et virtute post hanc vitam, fruamur eo in praesenti. therefore perswaded him to drinke in the present pleasures of this life, for (saith he) Thou art excluded from the future joyes with God in Heaven) Answer, No, not so, Satan, If I must not injoy God after this life, yet let me injoy him as much as I can in this life: Oh that drooping Soules would thus quench Satans suggestions! This were enough to re∣bound all his temptations back againe upon him. Fruition of God a far off in this life (though we should never injoy him in the next) is much better, then all the pleasures of the world below him: Ah! What then will our fruition of him in Heaven be? Joy in him here, and you shall enjoy him hereafter: Live to him here, and you shall live with him hereafter: And to this nd God gives you all your opportunities, to this high and happy end, that you may attaine him. That himselfe, and all that he
 is worth may be yours: And let me tel you, 1 That a Sermon of opportunities is almost as necessary to be preached, as to preach Christ himselfe: because the opportunity to receive Christ is (in its kinde) as necessary as Christ to be received: as Christ is called Salvation; so our opportunity is called the Day of Sal∣vation: Behold now is the accepted time, behold now is the day of Sal∣vation. We loose Salvation it selfe, if we loose the day of Salva∣tion; we loose Christ himselfe, if we let passe the day of Christ, If thou hadst knowne, in this thy day, the things which belong unto2 Cor. 2. 6. Luke 19. 42. thy peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes. A man that is to have a summe of money tendred him upon such a day, must be sure to watch and wait the day, if he would receive the money: He that hath a suite at Law, must observe the Terme-time; if he loose the Terme he will loose his suite: as Luther said, that Much of Religion consists in Adverbs: so say I, That much weight of our Salvation lyeth in circumstances, in the circumstance of time and opportunity: As the whole weight of our Salvation is laid upon Christ, so the whole weight of our getting Salva∣tion is layd upon our time, our opportunity: 2 Let Faith give you a presentiality of things to come, of Death to come, of your Account to come: Faith gives them a present Existence: set the Period of your Time neer unto you, behold it is at hand, when you shall live no longer, pray no longer, have the helpe of Ordinances no longer; We know not how few sands are left in our Glasse of opportunity, and when they are once spent, God will not turne the Glasse againe for us: 'Tis this that affects the heart: 'Twas this that awaked Niniveh to re∣pentance: Yet forty dayes, and Niniveh shall be destroyed: How did this Alarum stirre their Hearts! what (say they) but forty dayes? Are our dayes shut up into so narrow a roome? What are Forty dayes? How soon will they see an end? This fright∣ed them into a fit of Repentance: It is time for us (say they) to fast and pray, and rise out of sin, if our Sun be so neer setting: I am perswaded if God had sent Jonah with this message, Yet forty years and Niniveh shall be destroyed, it had made no worke at all upon them: it might have amazed them, but not started them up to such a present repentance: It is the neer approach of our end that drives the worke home in us: Tell a Scorner in his ruffe and jollity, that he must dye one day; He receives it carelesly, and makes nothing of it: but tell him, yet forty
 dayes, and you must be called to judgement, Nay Sir, but two or three dayes hence, and dye you must; This goes to the quick, at this news the proud Ruffler is sodainiy dismounted, and his courage degraded, he looses his blood in his cheeks, and shivers at the heart, like the leaves of the forrest that are shaken with the winde: Ah then, see death upon us: Look upon our end as standing by us; as neer as are the shadow and the sub∣stance, so neer are Life and Death; our life is but the sha∣dow, death brings substance with it, substantiall woes, or sub∣stantiall joyes in the bosome of it.
Cato Had oftentimes spoken in the Senate, that the City Car∣thage must be destroyed, being too neer a neighbour to the City of Rome: For a long time together he formed no Oration in the Senate, but he usherd in that still as the conclusion: yet he could not carry it, because Scipio Nasica being made up of a contrary opinion, alwayes pleaded on the other side, that it was for the good of the Romane Common-wealth that Carthage should stand: At last, Cato on a day brought a green Fig into the Senate a∣mong them, and told them, that this Fig was growing in Carthage but three dayes agoe: and thereby warned them that a Navy might within three dayes arrive from Carthage, and lay fiege to their City: When they heard this, The neernesse of the danger, made such impression on their thoughts, that where∣as before they could never be won upon to assent, now they voted not to give over till they leveld Carthage to the ground: And shall not eternity affect us? the neernesse of it write deep Characters of feare and care upon our hearts? Within three dayes, and death may lay siege to our City, to our Soul: beware of evill at hand, of death at hand, of Judgement at hand. Thou Fool (saith Christ) This night thy Soule shall be required of thee: ah then let us Act betimes, let not the night take us in a night, let not the night of Death take us in a night of sin and security, then we shall have a double night at once upon us.
3 Opportunities are very precious: Every one according to the objects they lay out for, value their opportunities: ther's no Prince or great person in the world, hath more Cli∣ents and attendants, then opportunity hath: All sorts Court her, and wait with humblest service on her: The Husbandman waits opportunity to plow, and sow, and reap: The Trades∣man
 attends opportunity to make his bargains at lowest rate, and sell off his wares at highest price: The Ambitious man stands at the door of opportunity to raise himselfe: All (but fools) according to their occasions runne out to meet, and bow the knee to opportunity, and shall not the dearest opportuni∣ties be precious to us? shall we not take the best opportunity by the hand? Opportunity to gaine the most precious things is the most precious opportunity; opportunity to get the best treasures is the best opportunity: Godlinesse is great gaine. Hea∣ven is the highest advancement, The Soule is the Crowne and Master-piece of man, surely then the opportunity to get and save these should be counted precious opportunity: All things here (that are of the world) are but nothings, but Idols and shadows of the best things (and an Idol is nothing.) Time is1 Cor. 8. 4. Tempus . but the Idol of Eternity, and things Temporall, but the Idol of things Eternall: Our estate and our dayes here are but an Idol: Ther's no divinity nor immortality in them: but God is an absolute and eternall Being, the spring of all Divine sa∣tisfactions, They that live in him, live at an high rate, and live for ever: How can he complaine to want light, that lives in the midst of the Sun? How can he complaine of Thirst, out of whose belly flow rivers of living water? Surely then opportuni∣ty to injoy God, is the most precious opportunity.John 7. 38.
Your Importunity hath setcht out this Sermon of Oppor∣tunity from me: and I have given you here more then I preach't, the time being too narrow to deliver all at once, and therefore I was faine to omit many things in the Pulpit, which I had in my papers: The Spirit of the Lord Preach it all over againe to our hearts: I commend you to the Lord,

Clunne Octob. 8. 1651.
