


RIGHT WORSHIPFUL,
THe usual Apologie which is made by those who are willing to ap∣pear in print, but would not be thought so; is either the impor∣tunity of Friends, or the com∣mands of Superiours. Nothing of all this was the cause of publishing this Sermon. I was neither importun'd to it by Friends, nor commanded by Superiours, nor was I desi∣rous to be seen in print. But there were other more weighty reason which moved me to it. When I was spoak to, presently af∣ter it was preached, by a very worthy and loyal person, to let it be printed, I rejected
 the motion, as being conscious of the mean∣nesse and carelesnesse of the dresse, and other defects which thô they might passe well enough in the delivery, yet were unfit to come abroad in the world. But when I consider'd the many virulent Libels that have bin lately scat∣ter'd abroad, and translated into several lan∣guages, that the poyson might have more room to diffuse its malignity to the dishonour of God, the scandal of Christianity, the defamation of the best of Kings, to the stirring up of re∣bellion, and to the subversion of all Govern∣ment, by men whose immoralities and offen∣ces against God, and whose Treasons against their Prince are of such a prodigious magnitude that they despair ever of obtaining pardon, ei∣ther from the one or the other, and whose cri∣mes of all sorts, they are perswaded them∣selves are so great alreadie, that they cannot be safe, but by attempting greater; I thought I could not do a more acceptable piece of service, at this juncture of time, to God, my Prince, and my native Country, than by publishing a dis∣course, how mean soever, concerning the di∣vine authority of Kings, the dignity and sa∣crednesse of their Persons, and the uncondi∣tional obedience due to them from their Sub∣jects;
 which three points (upon which the safe∣ty of all Government depends) are so clear∣ly proved and made so plain to every vulgar ca∣pacitie, that none can have any reason to doubt of the truth and certainty of what is here asser∣ted; and which I make no question, but will leave such an impression of duty and loyalty upon the minds of all unprejudiced persons, and who are not obstinately resolved to be de∣ceived to their own destruction, as will help to confirm all true Christians and good Sub∣jects in the honour and respect which they have for their Prince; and to recover it where it has bin debauched, or corrupted by impious and anarchical Principles and Doctrines of men, who by their frequent resisting the truth and the convictions of their own con∣sciences seem to be given over by God to strong delusions to believe a lie, and to a reprobate mind to do those things that are not conve∣nient, being filled with all unrighteousness, and who (it is to be feard) have involved themselves in the sin against the Holy Ghost.
There is only one thing more which I shall ad concerning the Original of Power, which is the first point that is handled in the en∣sueing discourse; that what ever right the
 People have in the choice of their own ruler, in an elective Kingdom, it can never be pro∣ved that they came justly by it, Cum Valenti∣nianus omnium suffragio eligere∣tur Im∣perator, & insig∣nia Im∣perii sas∣cepisset, vocife∣rantibus, militi∣bus, ut alte∣ram sibi Imperii Consor∣tem ad∣jungeret: Vestri quidem, inquit, Arbiteii fuit, Commi∣litones, ut me Impera∣torem vestrum eligeretis, sed posiea quàm elegistis, id quod petitis, mei ar∣bitrii est, non ve∣stri. Et vos quidem tanquam subditos quiescere decet: me verò utpote Imperatorem, quid agen∣dum sit spectare. Sozom. Hist. Eccles. lib. 6. cap. 6. or that they can resume it into their own hands when ever they have once parted with it; but it is most certain they can pretend to no such right where the Crown is hereditarie and derived by a long and regular succession for many Gene∣rations, and by immemorial prescription in any one Familie, which is the state of the English Monarchie.
Upon these considerations I have thought fit to publish this Sermon, and have prefixt your names before it, thereby to testifie to the vvorld your Eminent Loyaltie and Af∣fection which you have alwaies shovved to your Prince, and to encourage others to fol∣lovv your example: and to give some demon∣stration of my gratitude for the particular obli∣gations I have to your Societie, vvhich that it may at length be restored (by the favour and clemencie of our most Gracious Prince, (whom God long preserve) to its antient flou∣rishing condition, and may for ever continue in the same to the Glory of God, the Ho∣nour
 of the King, the Encrease of Trade, and the Renown of the English Nation, is the Prayer of,
RIGHT WORSHIPFUL,

