


Reverend and Worthy Sirs,
YOu well know that the Reformed Churches, have ever since they deserved that name, been militant on both hands; with the Papist on the one, and with the Brownist, Anabaptist, &c. on the other. Against whom their first and maine scope was, indeed, to defend themselves to be the Churches of Christ; yet, in pursuit of Argument, 'tis very evident they were still driven to contend for the very being and nature of the Church Rejicimus ca∣tharos, novatia∣nos, Pelagianos, & Anabaptistas qui peccatoribus nullum, ne invi∣sibili quidem ecclesia, locum Relinqunt. Alst Comp. Theae. par. 5. loc. 1 in general, chiefly as invisible against the Papist; and as visible against the Brownist &c.
The Brownist, I humbly conceive, assaulted the Re∣formed Churches, with these two Positions. 1. That a Church wherein there is a mixture of wicked persons, at least tolerated, cannot be a true Church. 2. That none
 but the Elect or the truely godly are members of the visi∣ble Church.
'Tis confest, this leaven was laid in the Church long a∣gon, Andiani popter hominum vitia, coetum Ortho∣doxae ecclesiae deseruit, quod donatistarum erroris postoa suit seminarium Dan. in Aug. de Her. p. 976 even in the time of Cyprian, as Augustine obser∣veth, and afterward kneaded in the lump by Donatus, and its sournesse diffused very farre by the heat of his followers; yet it was timely and effectually purged out by the learned and elaborate industry, and wonderful success of Augustine,
But this ulcer broke sadly out again upon the Refor∣mation, and notwithstanding as to hic and nunc, to time and place. The Church hath been hitherto competently healed of it, through the zealous, instant, and effectual endeavours of many of her champions; yet grievous ex∣perience hath still found that at other times, or in other places the botch hath risen and broke afresh with a more noisome stench, and a more spreading and infecting na∣ture, then ever it had done before; how evident and notorious is this in our calamitous Churches in England at this day? how doth this disease range, and its corrupti∣on spread over us, having gotten its throne in the very heart of the people.
Wherefore, I having also been formerly called forth, both to a vocal and Scriptural defence of our Churches a∣gainst A Sermon and dispute had at Wiviliscome in Somerset, and Printed: 1654 the first of these errours; and there being some special occasion, arising from some late scruples among my neighbouring brethren, inviting me to deal with this latter of them; this also being looked upon, not by my self alone, but by divers godly and Learned Divines, to be the very core and root of most of our Controversies, both about our Churches, Sacraments and Censures, I desire that this may be accepted to you, my Reverend Brethren, as all the publick Apology, I thought fit to set before this my great and bold, yet humble undertaking.

 However I shall crave your patience a little longer, while I shall labour to prevent mistake and unjust pre∣judices against the Treatise, by setting down my minde as clearly as I can in a few following particu∣lars.
1. And first, I am fully perswaded, that such as have for their scandal of the brethren been justly excommuni∣cated by the Church, ought not to be received into com∣munion again, without the evidence of such repent∣ance as is in the judgement of rational charity, saving for the end of the censure is, that the flesh (of the offen∣der) may be destroyed, and the spirit saved; and in rea∣son, the means should remain applied, till the cure be in likelihood done.
2. Againe, I fully consent with that Reverend man Master James Wood, that such as have notorious marks of impenitency or unregeneracy upon them, ought not, while such, notwithstanding the profession, to be ad∣mitted or received into the communion of the Church, at first; though, I dare not determine, what is the true and next reason of their repulsion. Mr. Wood saith, the rea∣son is not, because they appear unregenerate, but because a scandalous life is contrary to the very outward profession of the faith.
But may I have leave to demand, how contrary? certainly not so contrary to it, but that it is con∣sistent with it; otherwise a scandalous Professour of the faith, would be a contradiction, and the very ground of the question is gone. Indeed here is practice contrary to profession, but not profession contrary to pro∣fession; and practice contrary to profession may consist with profession, for they professe to know God, though in works they deny him.

 If it be replied, that a scandalous life is contrary to the faith professed, and so the profession appears coun∣terfeit; I crave leave to ask once more, whether faith here be taken objectivè, or subjectivè; if objectivè, for the doctrine professed, or the Will of God revealed to be beleeved; then it may still be affirmed that the profession of the Scripture, or an outward owning of the Will and Word of God is not inconsistent with a conversa∣tion contrary thereunto; then why may not such whose practice is contrary either to their profession, or to the Scripture, which they yet professe be received by the Church, if no other reason but this be assign∣able?
If it be said that a scandalous life is contrary to the faith, in sensu formali, vel subjectivo; and that a wick∣ed conversation declareth that the Professor doth not be∣lieve as he professeth, and is to be rejected therefore, as a counterfeit: Once more, I demand, whether this faith professed, be considered as saving, or as common? if as saving, then Mr. Wood his cause is yeelded, who is now opposing Reverend Master Baxter with this asserti∣on, that wicked men are not to be rejected formally, be∣cause their wickednesse is a signe of unregeneracy, but materially, because it is contrary to the profession of the faith; if as common, or as other historical or dogmatical; then, though I grant that all those whose wickednesse is such as cannot consist with a real, common, or histo∣rical faith, ought not to be admitted: yet▪ I deny the hypothesis, that all wickednesse is such as is inconsistent with such a real common faith; that common faith is in its kinde a true faith, and that this true common faith is consistent with a wicked heart and life; are two Propositions as little doubted by most Divines, as much confirmed by sad experience; and largely dis∣coursed
 in the Treatise following; Sunt in eo coetu (viz. ecclesiae visibilis) multi electi & alii non Sancti, sed ta∣men de verâ doctrinâ consentientes. Phil. Melanct. part. Sept. p. 33.
Others may have leave to think that such scandalous persons ought not to be admitted into the Church, be∣cause of the scandal that would come to Religion thereby; and because that in this sense scandal is contrary to the profession of the faith; the Church thus drawing a blot and disparagement upon her selfe, as if she was ready to open her bosome to any vile, unclean, unre∣formed persons; and truely, I humbly conceive there is very much in this; for if the Church ought to have a care that those already within, cause not the wayes of God to be evil spoken of, why ought she not to have the like care touching those, she is about to let in? or why should those be admitted into the commu∣nity, that now appear to be such as are presently to be cast out of communion? but I presume this is not all. For,
3. From the premises, it seemes at least probable to me that the Church is to have some kinde of re∣spect unto the saving condition of the person she is a∣bout to admit into communion; though I donbt not to assert with our brethren N. E. and Reverend Ma∣ster Baxter that a sober and humble profession of faith and repentance with a desire of Baptisme, is as much evidence of this saving condition as the Church is bound to expect; without any farther positive proofs of con∣version.
4. Yet, I humbly conceive, that more then a bare outward profession is requisite to give real interest in the visible Church, and the previledges thereof, before God; though no more is requisite to give visible interest be∣fore
 men; and that there is sufficient ground for the trite distinction of right, here, Coram Deo, & ecclsia; for the Churches judgement of mens right must passe with her administrations upon visible or appearing signes, by their outward profession; but Gods upon re∣al; for the visible Church is really a Church with God, as well as the invisible; though the Church is bound to believe a profession that is made upon designe, as the Jews at New Castle was; yet God knows his wicked∣nesse, and count him a dogg eating the childrens bread out of the hand of Church; deceived by his falsnesse, but not erring, because profession is her onely rule in the case.
If it be demanded, what is more required, besides profession to give real interest in the visible Church, I Multi enim sunt non renai vel hypocritae, consentientes, tamen de do∣ctrina & riti∣bus extcrnis, sen est coetus con∣sentientium de doctrina, habens multa membra mortua sen non regeneratos, Ma. 7. 21. Mat. 13. 24. par. in Urs. cat. 343. have at large answered in the Treatise, that in Adult persons about to be admitted a real, actual, and not fain∣ed consent; but in persons borne in the Church, and baptised in their Infancy, and now at the adult estate, a non-dissent, a not dissenting from, or a not rejecting of the truth, and wayes of the Lord, at least; for all that are of the visible Church must be one of these ways, either negatively or positively consentientes to true do∣ctrine, as Melancton before, as wel as outward professors of it.
4. Yet I must still hold my maine Proposition, till I see more reason to let it go, that unregenerate persons once received into the Church, are notwithstanding their unregeneracy or their want of evidences of saving grace, really or truely members of the visible Church, till they cut themselves off by Heresie, Schisme, or the perfection of both, Apostasie, or at least are cast out by Church-cen∣sure; what reasons, what authorities from the Scriptures and the Church, I shew for it, and what absurdities
 I alledge against the contrary opinion, must be left to your censure in the reading of the Treatise. Onely that it may passe here a little the more freely, I cannot but adde the remembrance of one or two late most eminent and full Testimonies; Mr. Hooker of New England saith Survey of Church disci∣pline. p. 36. that externally those are within the Covenant (and conse∣quently, the Church) who expressing their repentance with their profession of the truth, engage themselves to walk in the wayes of God, and the truth of his worship, though they have not for the present that sound work of faith in their hearts, and may be never shall have it wrought by Gods Spirit in them. Master Norton also a Minister of N. E. to this very question whether truth Against Apol. p. 3. of grace be required to visible Church-membership—answereth, one may be admitted into the Church-communion of the external (or visible) Church that is not endowed with the real inward holinesse of regeneration and justify∣ing faith in Christ; or that upon a strict examination shall not give signes of true faith, and inward holinesse, which may convince the conscience, touching the sincerity of their faith, &c.
Master Cobbet also of N. E. more plainly saith, that albeit a mans own personal faith uniteth to Christ, in re∣spect Hisbook of In∣fant baptism. p. 57. of saving and invisible union; yet the profession of faith before a visible Church, uniteth to Christ as Head of the visible Church, whether the party be sincere or not; and those that are so admitted being unregenerate or de∣stitute of saving grace continue so to be, viz. members of the visible Church, notwitstanding until they justly de∣prive Cottons holines of Church-members. p. 1. themselves of the priviledge of that fellowship, as Mr. Cotton affirmeth.
I know not why I may not here adde those peni∣tent words of our most Reverend and Learned Master Baxter, This, saith he, is the other cause of the Schis∣matical Disputations. p. 38, 39.
 inclination of some godly people, viz. the great mistake of too many, in confining all the fruits of Christs dead; and the mercies and graces of God to the Elect; and so not considering the difference that ever was and will be between the visible Church of Professors, and the invisible Church of true beleevers. Now if there be indeed a difference, the visible Church of Professors is larger then the invisible Church of true beleevers, and con∣sequently there are some in the visible, that are not in the invisible, i. e. the unregenerate, to whom those fruits of Christ, death, and the mercies and grace of God belong, that are not to be confined to the Elect.
5. Therefore it follows that to be truely regene∣rate is onely a necessary duty of Church-members, but Though we acknowledge such only to be sincere Christians who serve God with upright hearts yet those are not to be deni∣ed to be Chri∣stians, who make so much as a general profession of Christ. Mr. Ho. Catech. p. 75. Holinesse of members. p. 1. not a condition of their membership. I meane, visible; that is, all Church-members ought to be inwardly ho∣ly, but yet men may be, and doubtlesse thousands are, truely members of the visible Church, that are de∣stitute of such holinesse; this is so happily and fully expressed by Mr. Cotton, that I shall make bold to give you my full sense of it, in his most clear and excel∣lent words.
Christians (saith he) truely regenerete are the members of the invisible Church; it is the duty of the members of the visible Church to be truely regenerate; such—are members of the visible, that are destitute of spiritu∣al grace; plainly intending that to be regenerate is the condition without which men cannot be members of the Church in invisible. 2. To be regenerate is the duty of all the members of the visible Church also. 3. But to be regenerate is onely the duty and not the condition of visible Church-members, for they may be such with∣out it.

 And truely those that do affirme these two Propo∣sitions. 1. That we ought to expect a profession of saving faith in all we admit. 2. That the visible Church hath some hypocrites, that are its members; must needs allow the distinction, viz. that saving grace is the duty, because themselves require the pro∣fession of it; but not the necessary condition of vi∣sible membership, seeing they also acknowledge that persons may be members thereof without it.
6. Further, I affirme that no person being once Holiness of the Churches of N. E. p. 89 admitted, is to be ejected or cast out for any thing but scandal; for we (saith Master Cotton) proceed not to censure, but in case of known offence, and such offence as cannot be healed without censure. Yea, scandal, qua tale, or as it is of∣fence to others, and not as it is a signe of unregenera∣cy; therefore Ametius saith, proprium & adequatum ob∣jectum de consc. p. 252 hujus censurae est scandalum, viz. fratris; from Matth. 18. 15. Si peccaverit in te frater; 'tis the sinne that offends, not unregeneracy, 'tis the offence that is admonish'd for, and not unregeneracy; satisfaction is required for the offence and not for unregeneracy; the offence indulg'd is the leaven that would spread and sowre the lump of the Church; and lastly, 'tis the offence that is onely to be known and proved, and not the want of grace or unregeneracy; for, as Reve∣rend Master Baxter, 'Tis a matter of such exceeding diffi∣culty Disp. 3. 340, 341 to conclude another to be certainly gracelesse, that it is not one of the multitudes, nay, 'tis but few of the commonly scandalous grosse sinners that we should be a∣ble to prove it by. Yet, 1. We must censure all the scandalous; if scandal be the adequate object of cen∣sure. 2. We must censure for none but known and proved scandal, for the other is not properly or legally
 scandal. Known offence, as Master Cotton before. 3. Therefore we are not to censure for unregeneracy, which we can prove or know by, but very few of the scandalous and grossest sinners, as Master Baxter notes; for how unreasonable is it to punish men with so great and certain a penalty for an uncertain and presumed crime; or as the same Reverend man hath it, be so hea∣vily Disp p. 34, 35 punish'd before they be judg'd and heard. I shall put an end to this, in those apt and full words of Re∣verend Master Hooker of N. E. If any (saith he) Survey. p. 42. after they be received, shall be found not to be added of God, because they be not regenerated, yet we are not to cast them out for non-regeneration even known.
7. But with your favour, I must now needs note, that all that hath been said, hath not punctually ex∣pressed our own case, our common concernment in England, who generally come into the Church in our Infancy, and are not admitted thereinto upon our personal profession at yeares of discretion, as Hea∣thens are to be; and of which most of our contro∣versies about the way of admission, now are. For my part, I humbly conceive there are but two maine questions about Church-membership that need much trou∣ble us. 1. Whether the Infants of Church-mem∣bers are borne in the Church, and to be baptized? 2. What is that which unchurcheth them after∣terwards? It cannot but be heartily wish'd, that a∣ny heat that is or may be spent about the conditions of admitting Heathens into the Church, might be sa∣ved till a practical occasion requires it, viz. till such a Heathen shall sue for baptisme, whose profession or right is truely disputable. I must freely professe, I cannot like that way of reasoning [The parent, if he
 were not baptized should not be baptized himself, therefore his childe should not be baptized;] for in all cases that will keep out, that cannot cast out; whether Civil, Military, or Ecclesiastical. Positive consent is requi∣red upon admission, but a negative, (a non-rejecting the Gospel) is sufficient to retaine in the Church; distraction of one that was borne in the Church will not cast him out; yet who would admit a distra∣cted Heathen, while such, a person known to be un∣regenerate would hardly be received while such; yet known unregeneracy is not sufficient to cast a man out; As Mr. Hooker before. a scandalous person may be a Church-member, and is so doubtlesse, till he be excommunicate, and while so, he is in the Covenant within, and his child is born in the Church, and hath right to baptisme; but I shall crave leave to signifie my mind a little more clearly herein by a few steps further.
8. To draw a little neerer to our selves and our own common case, I therefore adde, that children borne of Church members, and baptized in infancy, are borne and baptized Church-members; and though our case require it not, yet, I doubt not to say, that the childes right in the Church and Baptisme, doth not necessarily depend upon a vocal profession (on pur∣pose) of its parents, who yet abide in the faith, and state of profession (as is hereafter largely discuss'd;) for in Infants, their being borne in the Church, is instead of an outward profession, as Bishop Usher af∣firmeth. His sum of re∣ligion about Baptisme.
Yet, I verily beleeve the childes actual possession of Baptisme (not of the Church, or Church-member∣ship) depends with the highest conveniency upon the parents claiming it, and expresse owning the faith in∣to which he desires his childe may be baptized, and
 his publick undertaking to bring it it up in the fear of the Lord according to that, now, most general and laudable custome of the Churches of Christ amongst us; which usage carrieth in my opinion, as cleare a tendency to Reformation and order, as any one practice not expresse in Scripture now exercised; and truely such as seemes to me a great deal liklier to prevail with our people to a publick owning their obligations to God, then any other course whereupon we haply fix greater expectations; as (to my observation) lesse obnoxious to the jealousies and murmurs of a disturbed distracted and discontented generation.
9. Againe, those that were borne in the Church and baptized in their infancy continue in their right and possession of Church-membership (as well as those admitted upon personal profession at the adult estate) until they are justly devested thereof by themselves or the Church as before; or (in Master Cottens plaine and pertinent words the suffrage of N. E.) Such as are borne of Christian parents, and baptized in their His holiness of members. p. 1 infancy, into the fellowship of the Church, are initi∣ated members of the same Church, though destitute of spiritual grace, until they justly deprive themselves of the priviledge of that fellowship; yea, that such are not to be censured, much lesse dismembred but His way of the Churches. p. 89 with p. 51. upon known scandal; and that they may claime the Supper also in the same Church wherein they were baptized, if no exception lie against them; which Learned Master Baxter hath sealed also, for, saith he, no Church member ought to be kept from Church-com∣munion, Disp. 3. p. 294 with p. 104. of his Rest. (much lesse cut off from the community,) but upon some just accusation of a crime which he was since guilty of, more then he was at his ad∣mittance.

 Consequently the children of these ought also to be reckoned members of the Church, and to be Bapti∣zed, to succeed in their parents profession, who live and die in a state of profession from one generation to another, without exacting any positive proofes or evidence of conversion, or saving grace in the parents; for they stand in possession, and 'tis not just for any to question their Title, much lesse to void it, without a positive disproving of it; which can by no way be done without the censure of the Church upon evidence of obstinacy in known scan∣dal; which I confirme and conclude with those ex∣cellent words of worthy Master Baxter. Those Disp. p. 34: 34. therefore that will any mans childe kept back from Baptisme for their parents unholinesse, or persons kept from the Supper, must not expect that men bring proof to them of their holinesse, beyond their profession of it, but must deale by them as by o∣ther notorious offenders, even admonish them of their unholy miscarriages; and he may not be so heavily punish'd before he be judged or heard.
10. Thus we are at length arrived at our very case (which I desire may be seriously considered;) who after our fathers, and our fathers fathers; time out of minde, did generally come into the Church, when we came into the world, being borne of Chri∣stian parents, and such as lived and died in a state of profession, and do continue the succession of the same unto this day, without rejecting the faith or the Church into which we were baptized, or yet be∣ing rejected or censured by the Church for obstinate continuing in any know scandal.

 Wherefore give me leave (my Worthy brethren) to intimate againe, that if any question yet remaine a∣bout our membership; 'tis not to be resolved by de∣bating what qualifications we ought to require in adult persons who desire admission or baptisme, a case that hardly happens once in an age; but what it is that nulls the membership of persons at age, that were borne Christians, and baptized in their infancy; as we generally were in England.
This is the center where all the lines drawn like swords about most of our controversies must point at last; a sound and effectual discussion of this would doubtlesse be a happy means of charming the great noise amongst us; according to the determination of this, most of our opini∣ons and practices would easily be enforced one way or o∣ther; thought, if without offence, I may so complain, this is the thing that is least thought on.
I have venture in the Treatise upon one great and most special question under this: whither, I conceive, we must needs be driven upon the debating of the means of unchurching, viz. whether the want of saving grace be inconsistent with visible Church-membership, and have afterwards, though more briefly considered, the general question, what doth not, and what doth un∣church more distinctly; as also what doth constitute and evidence visible Church-membership. Many other things are likewise occasionally discuss'd, some more briefly; and some more largely, according as I thought them more or lesse serviceable to my maine designe; and at last, have added a large application of the whole to our Church∣es, and to our administrations; wherein some haply may judge me too large, and others too strict measuring me (as most men are wont to do the books they read) by the model and idea of things that prepossesseth them;
 though (Reverend Sirs) I cannot but hope better of you, and do hereby cheerfully, (yet in true humility) first cast my self upon your candour, and then upon your censure and due admonition in any thing you shall find amisse.
In the mean while, truely this is a comfort to me, that though some, whose principles seem strictest, may suspect that mine may favour wickednesse, or not pro∣mote the reformation of the people; I am most fully perswaded, that there is no other lawful or possible way of a sound reformation, of shaming sinne, and encoura∣ging holinesse, but that which leads from these prin∣ciples, which I defend. I should humbly beseech some abler pen to make trial (if there be any doubt at all of it) whether, keeping to this maine principle [the truth of our Churches] he can possibly go in any other course, or further in the same course towards their ends, then I have done; the truth is I rather feare the exceptions of those who judge me too strict, then of those that cen∣sure me too large.
Onely one thing more I most earnestly begge, not for my own, but for Sions sake, I earnestly begge, though we cannot be in ever thing of one minde, yet let us have but one heart, and walk together in one way, untill we must needs part, resting upon the promise, Phil. 3. 15.
But (O my dear brethren) wherein so ver we must differ, what urging, crying, reason is there that we should unite as one man, to maintain our Churches in Eng∣land, that great dipositum put into our hands by our ance∣stors, our very Birth-right, and the greatest inheritance
 we can possibly leave our posterity after us! what heed is requisite to keep out all disputes as well as principles, that may but seeme to question them? how are they struck at on every side, how undermined? how doth division and Heresie dai∣ly moulder them? what a deluge of Popery is ready to overwhelme them?
The Sects which daily encrease and spread upon us (as a Learned man from beyond the Seas com∣plaines) Notum est quot Sectae in Europa a reformatione surrexerint & in dies surgunt, suis commentis pernitiosae, & sua variotate notabiles immo nec non alicubi suis ausibus formidabiles. Hot. tol. Christ. p. 119. Impossibile est ut vel per secu∣lum serventur, &c. p. 118 How pernitious are they in their Heresies, how notable in their variety, and how formidable in their attempts! The same Authour observes, that after the manner of mans judging, It is impossible that the Protestant Churches should be preserved one age longer against so great and so united a force, a∣gainst such depths of device and policy of the Sea of Rome, unlesse they grow wiser, and at length think more seriously of uniting among themselves; and who knows but that this force may fall, and the plot take first on England? yea, what fear should strike us, what trembling should take hold upon us, to think how we, e∣ven we in the Ministry, to whom the care of the Church is committed, stand guilty of provoking our God to give us up to the cruelty of such as have rent them∣selves from us, for our causing, affecting, indulging, or suffering parties for our own undiscerned, sehismati∣cal inclinations; or else to remove his Candlesticks from us who have had so little care of his Church; or to resigne us in wrath to the lust and tyranny of bloody Popery, who have almost lost our Protestantisme for a Reformation. As, my dear Brethren, should our neg∣lect of charity, unity, purity; should our vanity, oscitancy, or any other kinde of folly, indeed prevaile with God to
 let in a deluge of Popery upon England, and by England upon all the Reformation, should I say (which the God of truth for ever avert) the ruines of all Protestantism lie on us, how sad would the weight, yea, how dreadful may the thought thereof be? Quantum quaeso scanda∣lum? vae autem illi per quem evenit & per quem stat ut non tollatur.
The Lord humble us, the Lord awaken us, shew us our danger, strike us together, that as one man, of one head, one heart, one hand, we may at length think of saving our selves, our Gospel, our Churches from that immanent danger, which though every one speak of, yet how few feel, or lay to heart; anaeternum (as the Authour above admires) adeousque incauti per manebimus, ut videre, nec quidem sen∣tire possimus, illos prorsus irreconciliabiles adversarios ex aequo partis ruinam, per-utriusque schissuram a se invicem Me∣ditari?
But I fear least some may be apt to censure this my un∣dertaking, as likely to make more breaches and divisi∣ons amongst us, but the Lord knows how I have laboured to avoid any such thing; and that had I not thought that the way wherein I stand was a middle way, wherin I might easily shake hands with my brethren on both sides, and la∣bour to draw them neerer together, I had never been so publick upon this subject; this censure may haply be cast unjustly upon me by those that do not read me, it cannot be justly by such as do Yea, my Reverend Bre∣thren, let me conclude with this free and bold assertion, that one of the greatest motives, inducing me at first to study, and now to publish this discourse, was some good hopes, that if this point of the visible Church and its mem∣bership was but once laid in its just latitude, it might (through mercy) prove a happy means of bring us to see
 many of our errours and causelesse differences in the cir∣cumference, while we are agreed and meet in the cen∣ter, and to draw more direct and closer lines there∣from hereafter; the hearty, earnest, humble, desire, begging, and prayer of
Dearest Brethren, 
