


MADAM,
THE A. B. C. of the Infants lan∣guage, is Dad and Mam, that thus the first fruits of their lipps might acknowledge their Pa∣rents: And since most happy Providence hath brought me forth into so neer a relation to your Ladiship, to offer you this, the first fruit of my labour in this kind, seemes but my dutifull acknowledgement of you.

Madam,
I am most fully confident, that your advan∣tage gained, by the dew of Heaven, upon your Church, Family, and Closet meanes of knowledge, with the so many yeares influence of the most
 Learned and gracious, your head and (late de∣ceased) Husband; the fruit of all these made yet more sollid, by your exceeding great, though by you esteemed light afflictions, especially in these late Troubles, have bred within you an utter dislike to the receiving weighty Truths in∣to light and doubtfull Disputations.
1. Yet may you please to behold, that spirit al∣layd by the Charme of the Word, that moves their Disturbance.
2. Moreover, you may easily call to your re∣membrance, that God by the shaking of the House, did once, more strongly establish the Faith of his Saints; and doth not the Plant take deep∣er root, by too weak endeavours to pluck it up? And why may not Truth be more deeply rooted, more firmely established in our hearts, by the malicious, yet weak hand of Errour, though it put to all its strength, to shake and supplant it?
At the first (though but a superficiall) view, I may guesse a Castle to be strong, but when up∣on a doubt, I examine, and upon examination, finde the foundation sure, the Walls imbattera∣ble, and prove it well supplyed, with Men, Meat, Ammunition, Ordnance, and whatever else is requisite for to keep it invincible; then I may with how much more confidence, judge and re∣port it a strong Castle: Thus upon a superfi∣ciall receit of Truth, we may happily discerne it to be stronger then Errour; but when, urged by Errours impetious motion, we examine the Truth, When wee have walked about Truth, and gone round about her, and told the Towers thereof; Psal 48. 12. 13. when we have marked well her Bulwarks, and con∣sidered
 her Palaces, and have seen with our eyes the greatnesse of its strength, and the strength Heb. 2. 3. of its foundation, Viz. Christ and his Apostles: How may we then glory in our strength? How well fortified, how safe and secure may we boast our selves to be, in this our invincible Castle, Psal. 48. 11. with 13. Truth? With how much more courage shall we be able to repell malignant Errour in all its as∣saults? And say, Let mount Sion rejoyce, and the Daughters of Judah be glad, and tell it in triumph 1. Esdras 4. 38. 40. Nil tam certum quam quod ex dubio certum. unto the Generations following, that as for Truth it endureth and is alwayes strong, it liveth and con∣quereth for ever and ever; she is the strength, King∣dome, power, and maiesty of all ages: Blessed be the God of Truth.
3. It is empty Chaff, not sound Corne, that is car∣ryed away with the winde, and they are rotten Trees, which a storme overthrows: But the Sons and Daughters of Truth, are sound and stedfast, though the raine discend, the Floods come, and the Winds blow against them, they shall not fall, because they are founded upon a Rock: And Ma∣dam, I doubt not, but that the God of Truth will preserve you rooted and grounded in Truth, to the end, that when all the Gusts of Errour have done their utmost spite against you, you will be found to stand: The Devil may thus but winnow out your Chaff, but as for your Wheat that cannot be tossed up and down with every winde of Doctrine.
4. Yea, you will become more fit and ser∣viceable for your Masters use by winnowing: The fire burnes hottest when the weather is cold, and the Candle shines brightest when the ayre is dark: na∣ture teaching these inanimate Creatures, to re∣joyce as it were in danger, and to tryumph over
 oppression, and I make no question, but by the like heavenly Antiperistasin, the chilnesse and dark∣nesse of Errour, will brighten and heighten both your light and heat, your knowledge and zeale, e∣ven unto all the riches of full assurance of under∣standing, Col. 2. 2. and to the acknowledgement of the my∣stery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ.
For this most blessed end I presume, good Madam, to put this small Treatise into your hand; and now I beseech the Lord God of the holy Prophets, that he would be your light in the reading hereof; and by all meanes make your Path as the shining light, that shineth more and Pro. 4. 18. more unto the perfect day: This is the prayer of,
Madam,


