



My Lord,
NOt long before the death of that incom∣parable person, your Lordships Mother, that great example of piety and humi∣lity, the Lady Vis∣countesse of Falkland, she was pleased to commit to my hand that, which she be∣leeved, next her Children, the dearest pledge of her dead Lord some excellent Monuments of his Reason, Wit, and In∣dustry. in the search of that, which he would have as gladly found, as he hath
rationally rejected, an Infallible Iudge here on Earth in all our Controversies in point of Religion, of which the labour∣ing world seemeth at present to stand in so much need. I have considered often of that singular trust and friendship, in making me the depositarie of so rich a Jewell: And since she, from whose hands I received it, is gone thither, where she stands in no need of these discourses, I know no person living that hath more right to it then your Lord∣ship, or indeed to whom I would more willingly offer it. For though your Lordship be now out of my immediate charge and Tuition, yet as long as it shall please God to make me able to do, or point at any thing that may, though ne∣ver so little, helpe forward to perfect a good work in you, I shall never account my selfe disobliged. I must professe to all the World, that there is no Family now in being, to which I owe more true service, then to your Lordships: And shall to the utmost of my power, upon
all occasions make it good. I have no∣thing left me but a poor thankfull heart, which hath been my onely sure Compa∣nion, when all things else have forsaken me: That still remaines  and , being neither in the power of time nor persons to spoile me of that, which like a good Conscience to my self, must to my friends be the best feast I can make them.
My Lord, my design is not by this to in∣gage your Lordship in this Polemicall dis∣course, nor my self neither, having neither ability nor leasure for a business of that concern, and by reason of my busie im∣ployment, I had not been able to have pre∣sented it thus to your Lordship, without the assistance of Judicious Friends, that honour the work for the Authors sake, and the Author for his owne.
But, My Lord, I hope I shall have my end in it however, an end which no good man will envy me, namely, an occasion hereby to reminde your Lordship of the Gallant Author, your Noble Father, that
by proposing Him to you as your constant Coppy, you may do Him an honour be∣yond all his Friends: For while they praise, you may imitate him.
Indeed, it is one of the greatest com∣forts I have in this calamitous life, to re∣member, that I had the honour to be so: neare Him: And a reproach, which I cannot clear my self of, to have been at the same time so neare, and so farr off; so neare in Conversation, and yet so farr removed from him in those Excellencies, whereby he was the envy of this Age, and will be the wonder of the next.
His Religion, (for that I should begin with) was the more Eminent, because the more Early, at that age, when yong Gallants think least on it: When they, yong Candidates of Atheisme begin to dispute themselves out of a beleefe of a Deity, urging hard against that, which in∣deed is best for them that it should never be, a Iudgement to come; then, I say, that sal∣vation which these mention with a scoff or a Jeere, he began to work out with
fear and trembling, and effectually to re∣member, that is, to honour and serve his Creator in the daies of his youth.
In the next place, I may not forget his vast naturall parts: Dixit ex tempore saith Pliny of Isoeus, sed tanquam diu scripserit,, and I may truely apply it to him, his Answers were quick and suddain, but such, as might very well seem to have been meditated. In short, his abilities were such, as though he needed no supplies of industry, yet his indust∣ry such as though he had had no parts at all. How often have I heard him pitty those Hawking and Hunting Gentlemen, who if unseasonable weather for their sports had betrayed them to keep home, without a worse excercise within doores, could not have told how to have spent their time: And all because they were such strangers to such good Companions, with whom he was so familiar, such as neither cloy nor weary any, with whom they converse, such com∣pany as Erasmus, a person much esteemed by my Lord your Father, so much extolls in his 31, and 35, Epistle of his fourth
Book: Not friends of the Cellar, or the Kitchin; , in∣deed their owne friends rather then his who entertaineth them: But such, as being bidden, are ready, uninvited intrude not, that bite no mans meat or reputation, silent, not spoken to, spoken to, speak as we please, what we please, how long and how much we please: Candidly communicating themselves to us without betraying our secrets committed to them; that still tell us somewhat that may de∣light us for its Antiquitie, please us for its Novelty, or some way or other enrich our knowledge. While others studied the Heraldry of Horses, of Doggs, or at the best their owne: He, though not inferior to his Neighbours in Descent, and Honour, knowing well how much more glorious it is to be the first then the last of a Noble Family, (Blood without Vertue making Vice but more conspicuous) was so farr from relying upon that empty Title, that He seemed Ipse suos genuisse Parentes, to have begotten his Ancestors, and to have given
them a more Illustrious life, then he re∣cieved from them.
Though there were as much true worth closely treasured up in him, as well divided, had been able to have set up a hundred Pretenders, yet so much Modesty withall, that the hearing of any thing was more pleasing to him then one tittle of his owne praise.
This Vertue was indeed in a high degree in him, and shewed it selfe upon all occasions. If any thing, though never so little unhandsomely, had been spoken or done where he was, he was the greatest sufferer in the com∣pany, and much more out of coun∣tenance then he that made the offence. And surely he that was so tender of ano∣ther mans Civility, may very justly be presumed to have had a great regard to his owne. And so he had indeed. For though his Courage were as great as his Wit and his Learning, (and that is ex∣pression high enough) his Valour so un∣daunted and dreadlesse, as his great
fall witnest, , In that fatall Haile that made more Or∣phans then his Children: Yet to do an ill or an uncivill thing, he was an ar∣rant Coward: Though he was of Da∣vids Stature, of his Courage too, , and in this most like him, afraid of nothing but to of∣fend.
But what needs any body plead for his Civility more then this present Discourse, where he excels his Antagonist in that, as well as in reason, and shewes that a Gentleman writ with a Scholars Pen.
Before I shut up all, my Lord, one Vertue there is yet to be mentioned, which of all that ever had relation to his Lordship, I may not, I must not ever forget, and that was his Friendship. That is a Vertue, which by the unintermitted af∣fliction of my life, I have had more then ordinary occasion to make use of. And that I must needs say was it, which made all his other Graces and Excellen∣cies relish to me, He being the dearest
and the truest Friend, that through the whole course of my unhappy life I ever had the happinesse to meet with.
If it be a kind of pleasure to reade dis∣courses of Friends and Friendship, What is it to enjoy such a Friend in whom re∣ally was, what Excellencie either History can record, or almost Poëtry faine?
Nothing so hard in Lucians Toxaris, that he durst not do, and nothing so handsome in all Seneca's Lawes of Bene∣fits, that he knew not how to do, and to out-do for his Friend.
Let your Vertuous and dear Grand∣mother, my Lord, and all your Kindred yet alive, speak to this: And your blessed Mother were she now alive, would say, she had the best of Friends before the best of Husbands. This was it that made Tew so valued a Mansion to us: For as when we went from Oxford thither, we found our selves never out of the Universitie: So we thought our selves never absent from our own beloved home. But I dare say no more of this, it being
now a mellancholy thing, I am sure to me, to call back into my memory happi∣nesse never to be recalled, and to afflict my self anew with the consideration of what felicity I have out-lived.
Your Lordship is now the onely surviving pledge of that admired Father, of whom-when we his poor servants have said all we can, the Character will be farr too short. It is in you, and onely you, my Lord to set him out truely, and to re∣semble him to the life, and that will be by taking that Evangelicall Counsell, Tu autem fac similiter: Do like him, live like him, and pardon me if I add one thing more, like him, Love
My Lord, 
