



Honoured Sir,
TRuth, though above this sixteen hun∣dred years of age, and hath learned long since to stand alone; yet experience hath found, it doth ever goe the better into the world, when imboldened with the care and gracious protection of a nursing Father: and I need not dawb with untempered mortar to tell the world (what the whole West of England well nigh knows) that the potent influence, and pleasant shade of
 so noble a Tree, will better protect and secure those truths against all the heat of present opposition, then these poor contemptible following Leaves can do.
Now, Blessed be the God of Truth, that hath inclined your heart to own his truth, and (more particularly) to embrace an opportunity, wherein you may do his shaken Churches throughout the world so great ser∣vice; a bold expression, I must needs confesse, yet, Worthily Honoured Sir, give me leave to be bold, and I shall adde, That there is nothing more certain then this, that these mens principles we speak against, would at once strike down (I say, not the credit, but) being and truth of all the Churches, and Mini∣stery, and Ordinances of Christ, that are either now, or ever have been in the world since the Primi∣tive times; and (who is not affrighted!) from horrid principles?
But since the designe lies so deep, I beseech you Noble Sir, to consider a little who they are that un∣dertake it; and with what Engine they think to ef∣fect it.
First, Who, and what are the men of so great an adventure? Methinks Fame should carry them to be mightily skil'd in the Originall tongus, or deeply read in the History of the Church, whereby they had discovered something there, that was never found out before: or some Saints or Angels, or Christs sent down from heaven to open some truths, that had been lockt up, and kept secret from the Church for so many hun∣dred years: but alas! they pretend not to be any such: but what are they? even men of like infir∣mities
 with us, and in a word no betterthen the Apo∣stle describes unlearned, unstable, wresting the Scri∣ptures.
But surely they have some weighty Arguments, though the men be weak, they would never under∣take so great a design, as to overthrow all Churches, Ministers, Ordinances, and that ever since the Apostles times, unlesse their Engine were somewhat answera∣ble: O yes, they have allowed Infant-baptism; Mini∣sters that baptize infants are Anti-christian: Members that were baptized Infants are Anti-christian: and consequently Churches and Ordinances are all Antichri∣stian: Ah poor shift! and yet you have nothing else will hold an Argument but this: Let me now in the Name of God, and all the Churches, entreat these men to consider a few things, or answer a few brief questi∣ons touching Infant-baptism; and then they will see how desperate and unadvised they have been in a mat∣ter of so great moment.
1. Suppose we should grant the baptizing of In∣fants an Errour: May not the true Church erre? may not the whole Church erre? may it not erre in judge∣ment? and then, what doth hinder but it may erre in practice too, and yet be still a true Church? to affirm the contrary is rank Popery.
Again, If the Church may erre, it may erre in cir∣cumstance, without dispute; and what is the errour of Infant-baptism (if it be an errour) more then a cir∣cumstantiall errour? for have we not ever kept the sub∣stance of it? the matter water, and the form, In the Name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost? how then I pray you can the errour of Infant-baptism destroy our
 Churches, or nullifie our Ministers or her Ordi∣nances?
2. But alas! who told you that Infant-baptism was an errour, before the Anabaptists of Germany did? who told you when this errour came first into the Church? What Precept or Precedent have you against it in all the Scripture? or what command have you to shew for the baptizing beleevers only? alas poor men! who a∣mong you dare answer to any one of these questions? and how then wilt thou be able to answer them all? and much lesse can you warrant the desperate conclu∣sions you have built upon so weak, so tottering a foun∣dation.
But why do I trouble these poor men? alas! they are but the weapons and Organs of Jesuites, who play their game under these mens cloaks: Methinks I see them instilling their damnable doctrines into these mens ears, and venting them again at their mouths: how naturally do all the abominable errours of these our times (if you follow them a little) kinde∣ly saluting each other, and joyning in one stream) tend and flow to the Sea of Rome! the Seminaries are sowing their Tares among us, which indeed spring too fast all the Land over; and if they be not rooted up and stopt in time, the Pope it's to be feared will short∣ly reap too large a harvest among us in England, which Canterbury I remember warned us off (who know more of their plots and methods (perhaps) then he should, or we do) in his speech upon the Scaf∣fold. Honoured Sir, give me leave I beseech you to point a little at the Jesuites drift, as I conceive a∣mong us.

 His generall last end is to advance the Pope and bring in Popery, which hath been hatching many years. The means he makes use of for this great end, is to bring in a generall Toleration, and to put down the Ministers; in a generall Toleration (there being no hedge of Discipline to keep him out) he hopes to crowd in with the rest, and then trusts to his learning and parts to do well enough; especially can he but get his greatest enemy, the able Ministry, down: Which he attempts, by ren∣dring it odious to the people because of maintenance; and to the Parliament, by making them, what in them lies, to be enemies to the State: But doth not the Parliament very well know, that every Coun∣ty of the Land can produce divers Ministers that have been true to their Cause, ever since they first sate, to this very day? but I need not blaze the friendship of Jesuits, or indeed of our adversaries more immediate, to civill Authority, both in prin∣ciple and practice: and in this I am sure they agree, that the Christian Magistrate hath nothing to do with matter of Religion; which casts a greater blur up∣on Parliamentary proceedings of that nature, for these many years past, then the worst of the a∣ctions (I think I may say) that the Ministry hath done.
Honoured Sr, I am too bold and tedious: take this I beseech you as a pawn and pledg, of that honour and gratitude I owe to you: and the Lord inspire you with the spirit of discerning, to search into these things, more and more: discouraging error, and owning his truth, who hath said, those that honour me I will honour:
 to whose grace and glory I am bold to commend both you and yours, and subscribe my self, as indeed I am,
Most Honoured Sir, 
