


I Would you knew, most dearly beloved, how great conflict I have for you,
 though very many of you have not yet seen my face in the flesh.

REVEREND SIR,
I Need not mind you of what our Savior once preacht, and our sad and daily ex∣perience repeateth, that there shal arise false Christs and false Prophets, who if that it were possible, should even deceive the very Elect: and your dwelling is neer where Satans Seat is, and where his Ministers shine Mat. 24. 24. as Angels of light. Now though I doubt not in the least, but that your self are so strong∣ly rooted and built up in the faith of the Gospel, that the gates of Hel shal never be able to prevail against you, yet must I needs
 sympathize with you in that troble of heart that must needs be occasioned by that Godly Jealousy, wherewith you are jealous over your flock.
Ever since I left you, I have travelled for you, yet not for you, but yours, or if for you in yours, that I might bring forth this word of warning for them. Whreunto I have labored till now, as the other my manifold occasions left me opportunity, and ac∣cording to his working that worketh in me.
Sir, My Request to you is only this: that this poor Issue of my faithfull labours might have the honour and advantage of being delivered by your hand. For as that will be an honorable, so a certain convey, and gain it imbracement with better wel∣come at least, if not effect. This done, worthy Sir, I must take my leave of you, and turn to your people.
And I have but a few things for you, deer Christians, which if there be any consola∣tion in Christ, if any comfort of love, if a∣ny Pil. 2. 1. fellowship of the spirit, if any bowells and mercies, receive, and fulfill ye my joy therein.

 The great and main word of warning which I think may most seasonably be com∣mended to you, I finde in Coll. 2. 18. 19. Take heed of being so vainly puft up in your fleshly minde, as not to hold the head, from which all the body by joints and bands having nourishment ministred, and knit together, increaseth with the in∣crease of God. Hold, , here used comes from , Robur, strength: tis not only, barely to hold, but Firmiter teneo, hold fast, hold hard with all your might and strength, as if Satan and his Instruments were plucking and tugging at you to wrest you away from your head. So we finde it construed in Apo. 3. 11. Hold fast what you have, hold your hold in Christ. Secondly, Hold the head, hold Christ as a head; in sub∣ordination and union: (i.▪ Not as the Pope and too too many among us, also, that set up themselves Check by Jole with Christ their head, yea and exalt themselves above him: If the Body be not under, and subor∣dinate to the head, how can it receive influ∣ence from it? when the Body suffers not the head to be the head for eminence, it rejects the same as a head for influence. Secondly, Hold Christ as your head (i.) be united, keep
 neer and close to Christ, least his influences should loose their heat, or abate of their strength before they reach you. Take heed of not holding the head, in these re∣spects, if we once cut our selves off from Christ, we cut our selvs off from al growth Col. 1. 18, 19. Eph. 3. 19. and nourishment. It pleased the Father that in him (alone) should all fulnesse dwell, and he is the head of the body the Church. Do you ever think to be filled with all the fulnesse of God, and not through Christ? to increase with the increase of God, and not by keeping your selves subor∣dinately united to Christ? be not deceived, Col. 2. 9, 10. deer Christians, for in him dwelleth all the fulness of the God-head Bodily, and ye alone can be compleat in him.
2. Take heed of such a corrupt minde as 2 Tim. 3. 18. to be reprobate concerning the Faith, or as in the Margin of your Bibles, of no Judg∣ment concerning the Faith, of no judgment (i.) indifferently, inexpert, unsetled, igno∣rant, , Experience. Hetrodox in judgment, concerning the Faith. If you take Faith here in a strict and speciall sense, as one of those bands be∣twixt Christ and the Soul, the Instrument of its union with its head, surely not so light,
 slight, or indifferent a thing, as that we may be , concerning it, as our redemption Psa. 49. 8. 1 Pet 2. 7. 2 Pet. 1. 1. is precious, our Christ is precious, so is Faith precious also, herby we hold the head, & by holding the head we have nourishment ministred to make us increase with the in∣creasing of God. Therefore the Holy Ghost hath so honored Faith by ascribing unto it mighty acheivements: we are justified by Ro. 3. 28. faith, faith purifies the heart, yea by Grace we are saved, through faith. Secondly, Take Ephes. 2. 8 Faith in a larger sense, for the beleefe or profession of the Gospell, and Faith as it be∣leeves the word, receives the truth as taken in the place now quoted, surely Faith is no indifferent, but a most necessary thing. Take heed of holding the beleef of the Scriptures, a thing indifferent, as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so this also resists the truth; this is the fruit of the corruption of our Minde cheifly, and is of most dangerous consequence: If we hold Christ, we must hold his Word also, we beleeve in Christ a∣lone as in his word; we are knit to Christ the head by this Band his Word, alone. Therefore Christ is , the Word, the Joh. 1. 1. World hath in it, the , that that may be known of God, but the word a∣lone,
 , that that may be knowne of Christ. Therefore saith our Saviour, Search the Scriptures, for they testifie of me, yea they are they, which testifie of me: As if nothing else, but the Scriptures did witnesse to Christ: But the Scriptures are able to make us wise unto Salvation, 2 Tim. 3. 15. through Faith which is in Christ Je∣sus.
3. Despise not prophesyings. This is a∣nother Thes. 5. 20 speciall Band, whereby we receive nourishment and growth from Christ by his spirit. Therefore it is immediately prefixed, quench not the spirit (i.) by dispising pro∣phesyings , despise, comes from , Nihil, it is the vanity and folly of our age Pro nihilo Habere. to account the Ministry as nothing worth, a needless, fruitless thing. But the able Mini∣sters of the new Testament, are the Mini∣stration of the spirit, and in Effect, the Ministration of Righteousnesse and life: Now doth not this exceed in Glory? this 2 Cor 3. 6. 6. and 9. and 11 is the Ministry that remaineth, and shall remaine, for the word of the Ministry, the edifying of the Body of Christ, untill the top stone of this building is laid, without the help of these Builders (according to the
 revealed will) we shall never be built up to perfection. Therefore they must work in this house till we all come (not a few but till we all come) in the Unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the son of God unto a perfect man. Ephes. 4. 12, 13.
Therefore let a man so account of us as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Misteries of God, to dispence the miste∣ries and fulnesse of Christ to all his Mem∣bers: But though it be a very small matter to be judged of you, or mans judgment, 1 Cor. 4. 1 3, 5. yet judge nothing of the Ministry, much lesse condemn it before the time, untill the Lord come, and the ministeriall Kingdome be given up to the Father. As you prize the vertue and influence of Christ your head, de∣spise not prophesyings: And as you prize the fulnes of God despise not the vertue and influence of the head Christ. By Faith we are united to the head, and by holding the head we receive all spirituall nourishment and growth, and who is Paul, who Apollo, but Ministers by whom ye beleeve. By Faith Rom. 10. 17. 14. in Christ, we are justified, sanctified, saved, and Faith cometh by hearing, and how shall we hear without a Preacher.

 Be not deceived by any means whatever to sleight your Saviour and his salvation thus, by sleighting his Ministry, your Minister, who hath been and is in labours more a∣bundant among you.
Lastly, Pray evermore; in every thing 1 Thes. 5. 17. Eph. 4. 6. by prayer and supplication with thanksgi∣ving, let your Request be made known unto God. God hath indeed promised all things to his People: yet unto them as a praying People. Eze. 36. 37. Notwith∣standing, all the promises before mentioned, thus saith the Lord, I will yet for this be Joh. 1. 12. 16. Vers. compared inquired of by the house of Israel to do it for them. Faith indeed is that vitall spirit by which, but yet prayer is the Organ through which, we receive from the fulness of our head, and grace for grace. Faith is the Bucket, but prayer is the rope whereby we let down the Bucket of Faith and draw wa∣ter out of the wells of Salvation, whosoe∣ver shall call upon the name of the Lord Rom. 10. 13. shall be saved. In this verse both ends of a Golden Chain are lincked together. Here is Salvation promised to Prayer; but shall e∣very one that saith Lord, Lord, enter in? no verily, Salvation is promised to such a
 Prayer alone as proceeds from Faith; How shall they call on him on whom they have not beleeved? but as Salvation is promised to prayer, and all true prayer proceeds from Faith, so Faith comes by hearing: How shall they beleeve on him on whom they have not heard, and how shall they hear without a Preacher? Faith comes by hearing, by Faith comes prayer, and by prayer Salvati∣on. Cast away prayer and you have denied the Faith, refused your own mercies, yea neglected your own Salvation. And the heighth and depth, the length and bredth of this word (Salvation) the Epitomy, and Center of all and every mercy, the sum and all of every promise, Salvation. And yet, whosoever calls upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved.
You cannot loose the Benefit of Christ, but you loose Salvation, you cannot loose the use of Faith, but you loose the bene∣fit of Christ; and lastly, you cannot loose the use of the word and prayer, but ye loose the use of Faith. He that neglects Christ, Faith, Word, or Prayer, neglects Salvation. O then take heed, for how shall we escape Heb. 2. 3. if we neglect so great Salvation.

 But least my Porch should be too large for the Temple, I have but a word or two of caution more, by way of reflection for you, and I speedily conclude.
1. First, Then beware of such in generall as teach otherwise (that fight against teach∣ing, with teaching against ordinances with the use of Ordinances) and consent not to wholsome words, even the words of our Lord Iesus Christ, and to the Doctrine which is according to Godliness, such are proud, knowing nothing but doting about que∣stions and strifs of words, whereof come perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds destitute of the truth.
2. But especially take heed of such, who concerning the Faith have erred, saying, 2 Tim. 2. 18. that the resurrection is past already: take heed of such, because of their prevelancy and danger; for the first, Their word doth eat as doth a Canker. For the second, It over∣throws ver. 17. the faith of them that receiveth it, and seems not compttible with truth of ver. 18. grace, neverthelesse the foundation of God standeth sure, having the Seal, the Lord ver 19. knoweth them that are his.
Now for these great ends, dear Christi∣ans, I make bold to offer you this small
 means this little Treatise which indeed was compiled (though as in Publick it com∣mend it self to all) especially for your and your Neighbours sakes, you having occasi∣on to be acquainted, more then others, and I fear, then enough, with my Antagonist. Now the Lord manifest his strength in weakness and make this my small indeavour to be greatly effectuall at least for preventi∣on, if not the subversion of this errour a∣mong you. I therefore commend you to the Act 20. 32 ver. 29. word of his grace, which, notwithstanding all greivous wolves, which, spare not the flock, if you watch, is able to build you up ver. 31. and to give you an Inheritance among all them that are sanctified; and subscribe my my self, as truly I am, your Christian Bro∣ther,


