


I Dare not give you such high Epithites
as Master Saltmarsh bestoweth upon
the Assembly,Quid amplius praepotenti & immortali Deo tribuimus si quod eius pro∣prium est eripi∣mus? Bodin. de Repub. l. 1 c. ult to call you the MOST
SACRED. Be contented to be
Stiled the Two most Famous Vniversities; a Title,
which it is no Flattery to give you, but Injury
to deny you.
I have the Studies of some whole dayes to
spread before you. I am not ashamed to confesse
so much, but should be ashamed to present your
learned Considerations with lesse. And will ra∣ther
runne the hazard of other mens Censure,
to have studied so long to no purpose, then to

be guilty to my selfe of so much disrespect to
You, as to offer to your Patronage what cost me
but sleight studying.
Indeed I examined his Examinations of my
Sermon with the same pace that I read them.
But I could not confute his Errors so speedily as
I could discover them, nor could I so soon make
them appeare to others, as they appeared to
me; and the Evidencing of his Faults did cost
me some Paines, whereof I hope I shall never
have just Cause to Repent.
I am altogether out of hope that my Truth
should quickly overtake his Error, which had
the Advantage of me both at the Starting and
in the Speed; And yet I beleeve what I want in
the swiftnesse of my Feet, I shall have in the
Firmenesse of my footing. And when I overtake
it at last, as I am sure I shall, seeing untruths will
Tire (as being better at hand then at length) I
am confident by Gods Assistance, it will get
firme and quiet Possession in spight of opposi∣tion.
It is altogether Improper for mee to com∣pare
You being Two in number to the Palme
Tree under which the Prophetesse Deborah sate;

But the Analogie will, hold well, if I should re∣semble
You to the Two Olive Trees continually
dropping oyle in the Presence of God. And me∣thinks
Master Saltmarsh his Expression to the
Assembly, VNDER SVCH A SHADE AS
YOVR SELVES, making them in the Assem∣bly
but a Shadow, (and then what is the Sha∣dow
of a Shadow worth under which hee desi∣reth
to sit?) was but an undervaluing and di∣minutive
expressing of their worth.
I honour you as You Deserve, and Counting
You a Real and Lasting Substance, so I addresse
my Respects unto you:
Humbly requesting you to be pleased to Pa∣tronize
and defend this my defence: the rather
because what doctrines therein I deliver, not
long since I suckt from One of you, and in this
respect I beleive both Breasts give Milke alike;
And therefore as your Learning is most Able,
so your Goodnesse will bee willing to Protect
the same, not so much because I had them from
you, as because you had them from the Truth.
Some perchance may blame my Choice in
Choosing You for my Protection who in these
troublesome times are scarce able to defend

your selves▪ The Universities being now Degra∣ded,
at least suspended from the degree of their
former Honour. And I wonder, Men should
now talke of an Extraordinary great Light, when
the two Eyes of our Land (so you were ever ac∣compted)
are almost put out. However this
short Interruption of your Happinesse will but
adde the more to your Honour hereafter.
And here, as it were Store of Pride for me to
Counsell you, so it were want of duty not to
Comfort you. Know, the only Good Token of
these Times is, That they are so extreamely Bad
they can never last long. God give you a sancti∣fied
Impression of your Afflictions, neither to
sleight them nor sink under them; and so, for∣bearing
to be longer troublesome to your more
serious Employments, resteth

