


May it please your Majesty,
SUbjects without their Sovereign are but ; a Headless Trunk; and there∣fore a heedless peo∣ple. This hath been for
many years (ah, too many!) the Mayme and Malady of these Your Majesties distra∣cted Kingdomes; wherein through the Rage and Ty∣ranny of Faction,
1 Cor. 12.21. the hand said unto the eye (if I may invert the words of the A∣postle,) and the feet unto the head, we have no need of you: yea,
Ver. 23. and those members of the body which we know to be less honor∣able, on them the Errours of the times bestowed more abundant honor.
But it becometh not me to be one of Solomon's
Prov. 20 3. med∣dlers; or infandum renovare dolorem. Our long and sad Laments are now (even a∣bove hope) drowned in our Joys; and our Groanes and
Cryes are converted into Ho∣sanna's to that All-mighty King of Kings, who alone hath (even to the extasie of our Admiration) both pre∣served Your sacred Person; and restored You to Your People. This year is there∣fore most truly ANNUS LIBERTATIS AN∣GLIAE; The Year of your Subjects safest Liberty: For
—Anson. Nunquam-libertas gratior extat,
Quam sub rege pio. —
Heb. 12.3. The contradiction of sin∣ners, and the Romane FU∣GALIA, are turned into Acclamations of Christian Loyalty, and the Voice of Gladness. We, alas, slept out too many years in a dark and stupid Lethargy: and
yet now also, even in this unexpected
Psalm 126.1. turning of our Captivity, we are but like unto them that dream. The Lord awake us into a quick sense of our great Deliver∣ances; that the Glory may be his, and his onely,
Psalm 136.4. who alone doth great wonders; who alone doth
Psal. 65.7. still the noise of the Seas, the noise of their waves, and the tu∣mult of the people.
Every Loyal Subject some way or other testifieth his joy for the Miracle of Your Majesties Return: and ma∣ny express it by their Free∣will Offerings. I am there∣fore unwilling to appeare empty; although this little Honorary may be unworthy Your Majesties reception.
The Author thereof (my dearest Uncle) intended it for Your Royal Father; to whom both he, and mine unworthy self, were most obliged servants: but being denied that honour by the churlishness of the Times, he committed it to my trust, even at a time when (to preserve mine Allegiance) I was compelled to flie upon the wings of the winde.
But,
Diffugere nives, redeunt jam gramina campis. That Storm is turned into a Calm: Now therefore, even by the Command of Christ, QUAE CAESARIS CAESARI. This Book is due to Your Majesty,
both as you are the just and undoubted Heir of Your Glorious Father; and as to me a most gracious Master. Little it is; but the Iliades in a Nut-shell found accept∣ance. The subject matter (I suppose) is not unseasonable; it being Your Majesties pre∣sent Design to restore the true Reformed Protestant Church in these Your Dominions to her Purity, and pristine Glory: in the prosession of whose most holy Faith you have been so wonderfully preser∣ved.
You, GREAT SIR, are not onely Pater patriae, but also
Isa. 49.23. Nutritius Ecclesia; under the shadow of whose wings she findes protection. For even the Church it self is
enforced to take Sanctuary, to shun the subtilty and rage of
Nehem. 2 19. Sanballat and Tobiah; the Papists on the one side; and the Sectaries and Schisma∣ticks on the other. That hea∣venly grace, and Princely pie∣ty and prudence which con∣centre in Your Majesty; to∣gether with Your Royal and Just Title of DEFEN∣DER OF THE FAITH; assure us that you will ten∣derly cherish this
Cant. 2.2 Lilie a∣mong the thorns; and (if not retarded by our impati∣ence) hasten her Restaura∣tion. Sad, I confess, is the present condition of our Mo∣ther the Church; Jacob and Esaeu strugling in her womb: yet not the rash violence, but the patience and skill of her
Midwife must help to deli∣ver her. The tender issue of our younger Brother Benja∣min (who think they can
Judges 20.16 sling stones with their left hands at an haires breadth) might more highly advan∣tage (as I humbly conceive) the Work of Christ, if they would be more forward to approve of what the right hand doth. Certainly a mo∣derate Complyance, and a dis∣creet Condescension in things indifferent, even on both sides, will best savour of that Heavenly Wisdom, which is first pure, then peaceable, &c. It was the Dove, not the Ra∣ven, which brought the O∣live-leaf into Noahs Ark. That famous Speech of A∣bram to Lot is still canonical,

Gen. 13.8. Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee, and between my herdmen and thy herdmen; for we are bre∣thren. I suppose that the le∣gitimate and faithful sons of the Church, (remembring how lately they really suffer∣ed what the
Josh 9.4, 5 Gibeonitish Embassadors did but counter∣feit) will now rather
Ezra 3.12, 13. shout for joy that Your Majesty bath laid again the Founda∣tion of the house of the Lord; then weep in remembrance of the former glory. A tho∣row Reformation (not hypo∣critically pretended as of late, but really effected) will be a Work of time: and doubt∣less that God who hath brought to the birth, will in his owne due time give
strength to bring forth. Bro∣ken joynts may soon be well set; but the members must be content to recover strength by degrees. The Lord in mercy preserve your Maje∣sty; and make You a Glori∣ous and Lasting Instrument to repair all our breaches; and to build again the old waste places of his Church amongst us. Thus prayeth

