



My Lord,
HOw far the Great Antichrist, and degenerate Church of Rome have eclipsed, and thereby obscured the originall glory of true Christia∣nity, is best known to that rem∣nant of overcomming Christians in this Age, who are worthy in Christ his account, to walk with him in white. Assuredly Christendome (as it is called for distinction sake) is sunck into so low a degree of degeneracy, as that in respect of Idolatry and Prophannesse, of impiety and in∣iquity, the Catholicks and Protestants also, for the most part, do so walk, as if it were their stu∣died design, to render themselves utterly unlike to Iesus Christ; and unto this kind of Christi∣ans, he will profess at the last day. I never knew you, depart from me ye workers of iniquity! Oh therefore, how doth it concern the faithfull Disciples of Iesus Christ, to bring forth the Re∣gister of the Genealogie of the primitive Chri∣stians, to emblazon according to the rules of Gospel Heraldry, the native honour of this thrice noble Family, and that by an ornamental
carriage and Conversation. But alas! how few do make it their holy ambition, to display before the world the glorious Excellency of true Christi∣anity, by acting in the life and power of this New-Testament unction?
uc. 1.17. It was Prophesied of John the Baptist, that he should go before the Messiah in the power and spirit of Elias, but it is the honour of the Saints, now in these times of the Gospell, to go in and out, to do and to suffer in the power & spirit of the Messiah or Christ himself, & may the number of such Christians be multiplied exceedingly: & may the great num∣ber of those that act & walk in the power & Spi∣rit of Antichrist, of the Dragon, of the Beast, of the false-Prophet decrease abundantly;
Rev: 16.13: may the Generation of Renegadoes and Back-sliders, of self-condemned Hereticks, and Apostatized Professours, who put the Son of God to an open shame, that speak scornfully of the Word, the Spirit, the ways, the Ordnances of Iesus Christ, may they, every one, be snared and taken, pre∣vented and frustrated in al their un-Christian Ends, and means tending thereunto, may they never prosper in any of their Assemblies, Tea∣chings, Exhortations, which are of any tenden∣cy to the disparagement of the wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Iesus Christ,
1 Tim: 6:3, 4. and the doctrine which is according to Godlinesse, and let all the Disciples of Christ, all sincere Chri∣stians say, Amen.
My Lord, what thoughts of heart have been occasioned by your Honours Commandement, and mine engagement, for the printing of the
ensuing Sermon, is best known to the Author of so impersect and unpolished a Discourse upon such a weighty Theme. There was always an utter aversenesse in my naturall Genius, to ap∣pear on the Stage upon this account.
John 7.4. And I can say, through grace, I have never sought to he known openly, or to shew my self to the world, as being conscious to a great unsitnesse of Ingeny, and to the want of Spirituall Dexterity, for any work of this nature. But since it is your Lord∣ships pleasure, that this Sermon should be prea∣ched over again in this other form, behold, (af∣ter tedious attendance for dispatch, upon the proper instruments of this kind of publication) I humbly present it before your Honour, this se∣cond time; with some few convenient clauses, here and there superadded, beseeching God, (who hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and the weak things of the world to confound the things that are mighty,) to command a Blessing upon these weak endea∣vours, wherein I did, and do aim at the new-Christianizing of such nominal Christians, as are really without God, and without Christ, dead in trespasses and sins, and I would to God, that all that heard me that day, were both almost and altogether Christians, yea Christians upon the best account, so, as to be found unto great praise and honour and glory at the appearing of Iesus Christ.

