


My LORD,
IT is a sin as great to be insensible
of our mercies, as to turn them
into wantonness. The best of
Kings is the blessing of our Nati∣ons;
who (in imitation of the
Malach. 4. 2. Sun of Righteousness) is risen
unto us with healing in his wings.
The rebellious are indemnisied,
and their sins made venial by it: the Loyal and chari∣table
admire, and rejoyce in it. To that over-ruling
Providence therefore in the first and chiefest place be∣longs
the sacrifice of our praise, (who hathPsal. 13. 43. delive∣red
his Royal servant from the strivings of his people);
and in the next place to his instruments. Among these
how much your Lordship hath merited. by your constant.
Attendance, your faithful Counsels, and such un∣shaken

Allegiance, as hath neither been tainted with
Suspition, nor tyred by Calamities; is too great and
high for me to calculate. Next to that private brazen
wall of your serene Conscience; you have the publique
testimony of our most Gracious Soveraign, to witness
your Fidelity: and it is written in golden Characters,
both in and for your eternal Honour. He hath entrusted
you with the jewel of his Conscience, in relation to the
sharper Laws; knowing that you are Tam Marti quam
Mercurio. As you are JuvenalsSat. 8. Lawyer,
Qui juris nodos, & legum aenigmata solvis:
So you are his Majesties Champion, and have excellent
skill at the best of weapons, the pointless, edgeless sword
of Mercy. He hath entrusted you with the great Seal of
his Indulgencies and Pardons; to the astonishment of
the very Malefactors: that they may be surprised by his
gentleness even above hope, who had offended with∣out
fear or suspicion of this happy Revolution. He hath
enstrusted you with many encouragements and rewards
for the Loyaller and sounder Clergy: yea and with a
conquest of the erring, by the streams of his Munisi∣cence.
And who more fit to be entrusted with Con∣science,
Mercy, and Bounty, then a person Religious,
Gentle, and Noble? Your own Conscience is (accor∣ding
to the famousM. T. Cic. in Tusc. qu. l. 2. Oratour) the greatest Theatre of
Virtue: and your Liberality is Homer's Nepenthes,
which cheers up the drooping Clergy. It is not long
since the Orthodox (but despised) Divines, were al∣most
every where entertained by the Mushrome Ca∣cotopian
Lords, and others, but with that scorn which

Alexander threw upon the Cynick, when he sent him
Max. Serm. de benef. Discum ossibus refertum, a messe of Bare-bones. O
what a blessed change both in men, and manners, do
we now admire! For as all that are vested with a Legal
power, and (loathing the Idolatry of Avarice) sincerely
endeavour the Practice of Piety, do foster the Levites,
and pour Oyl into their wounds: so 'tis thought that
your Lordship more particularly doth strive to out-vye
even Alexander Severus; who quarrelled with every
virtuous person that either asked nothing, or but little
of him; and his challenge stands upon record in these
very words,Aelius Lam∣grid. Quid est quod nihil petis? An me tibi
vis fieri debitorem? You have learned of Elisha so to
favour the Sons of the Prophets, and their Relations;
as in stead of rendring them but a poor moyty of the
Tithe of their Tithes (which was the pia fraus, and re∣forming
sacriledge of our late Lay-preachers, and
Black-Saints); you make it much of your business to
fill their empty vessels with the Oyl of gladness.
The clear and winged fame of these your Noble Vir∣tues
encourageth me to Congratulate them in the De∣dication
of this little Book: and the rather, both because
the Author (my best of Uncles) was not (I presume)
unknown to your Lordship; and because my self had the
honour to be your Lordships Contemporanian in our
Renowned University of Oxford. Nor may I enter∣tain
the least diffidence of a Candid Acceptance; since
you so well know, thatPlut in apoph. Non est minus regium parvula
accipere, quam largiri magna. Artaxerxes disdained
not a pitcher of water presented by a Peasant. Here is,
my Lord, a little ewre filled with such precious water,
as hath virtue (I hope) to cleanse the stains of a sedu∣ced

Conscience; and to open the eyes of them that
were born, and have continued, blind. The Author
thereof penned it in a Prison: whose honour it was that
he wasSee his Life and dath in a bok entituled  . Plundred, Sequestred, Imprisoned, yea and
dyed, for his Religion and Loyalty. Full fifteen years
hath this Book continued a private and close mourner
for the death of the Author, and the Heresies of the
later times: and it had not yet appeared in the eye of
the world, but that I hope it will be sheltred under
your Lordships Pratronage. Mine it was, by the right
of an Executor: and Yours it is by the right of Dedi∣cation.
The merit of the work will be improved by your
acceptance: the judicious, and sober-minded will blesse
you for delivering it from the womb of Obscurity: and
I shall be obliged to subscribe my self,
My LORD,

London, Augst.
4. 1660.
