



ALl people every where, take head of going to wizards
for Counsell, now that you are forewarned, and the
mystery of it is to you in brief laid open and discovered,
as you may read in this ensuing treatise: And all you
that have gone to any wizards, in your life time past,
go to the market Crosses, and declare there openly against them,
and their Craft, that you may cast off the Guilt of the hainous sin,
least it remain upon you for ever, and you perish and dye in that
wickednesse, unrepented of, and so be cast into the Lake that burn∣eth
with fire and brimstone, prepared for sorcerers and wicked ones,
Isai. 30. 33. Mat. 25. 41. Rev. 21. 8. Rev. 20. 9, 10, 15.
And all you that have been to enquire at wizards, you are gone
out of the Counsell of God, and the way to turn in again is to de∣clare
against that craft openly, to be of the Devill, which wizards
live in, and utterly to abhorre it for ever; and if you do so: you cast
off the Guilt, which otherwaies you may be cast off from God, that
do not repent of it, and turn from it, and declare against it, that other,
may hear and fear, and take warning also, least you and they pe∣rish,
and go down into the pit: To the light of God in all your Con∣sciences,
I speak that which checks and reproves you in secret for
the evil of your doings, that with it your memories may be quicken∣ed,
and see if it did not question you secretly in your Conscience, be∣fore
you went to enquire at a wizard, and would not have had you
to have gone, and after any of you had been, for Counsell at a wiz∣ard,
The light of God in your Consciences would check and reprove
you in your Consciences afterwards for it, and tell you that you had
been from God, to take Counsell of the Devill in a wizard, and the
light in your Consciences will still accuse you for it, except you go,
and declare against it, and cast it off, you will be in danger to pe∣rish.
And all now that you are warned, take heed of sinning willful∣ly
against light or grace received, if you do read your Reward.
Heb. 10. 26, 27.

