


SIR
I could have pub∣lished this small treatise without any particuler dedication, but that the remembrance of the manyfold favours which I have from my
 childhood untill now receaved from your worp, and your worthy family, obligeth me to make some publike acknowledgment thereof, least I should be unthankfull: de∣sireing therein to imitate the example of the blessed 2 Tim. 1: 16. 17. 18. Apostle towards Onesiphorus; whom, I am commanded to 1 Cor. 11: 1. follow as he fol∣lowed Christ. Luke dedicated his Euangelicall historie to his noble Theophilus, Paul an epistle to his beloved fellow-labourer Phi∣lemon, and the Disciple whom Jesus loved a letter to Gajus his host; and why not I this homely piece (which is of publique con∣cernement) to you my noble land-lord, to w I owe (by the law of our la) both suite and service? Wch seing I am (by the calling wherein God hath set me) restrained from civile performance of, I can not but
 think my self bound to doe you service in that wch I have. Sir, I have bin the more earnestly provoked hereunto, by some in∣formation which I have lately re∣ceaved, of your being a member of that hoble house of Commons now assembled in Parliament, and intrusted with the care of our County, in helping to reform and settle the present enormities and distractions. I know that many invective speeches (whereof that honourable Court is not igno∣rant) have bin cast out since these troubles began; against the way Acts. 24: 14. wherein I worship the God of my fathers, believing all things which are written in the law and the pro∣phets, which is by manie accoun∣ted heresy and doctrine of Lue. 23: 2. re∣bellion; and men are prone by nature to follow the voice of the Ex. 23: 2. multitude, and very easily to
 be drawen to condemne that which Iude vers 10. they know not. To the end therfore that your worship and that ho: ble court with you may not (through misse-information) call Isa. 5: 20. light darknes, and condemne the innocent without cause; I have bin constrained out of 2 Cor. 5: 14. love to God, and for the honour of the truth, to cast my mite into the Lord's treasurie; and to give you a tast of the fidelity and loyaltie of those that doe truly professe sepe∣ration from Babylon (spiritually so called) to the higher powers. Who, if they shall neverthelesse be still condemned as evill-doers; yet, I hope, by their patient suf∣fering, and 1 Pet. 3: 16. good conversation, shall in the end make their ene∣myes ashamed, who falsely accuse them. The religious carriage wch I have in my youth alwayes noted in your wor:p, and your whole fa∣milie,
 & the redressing of the pub∣like profanation of the Lord's day and other profanenesse in the place where you have authority, at your first coming to the enioy∣ment of the estate of your decea∣sed father (like an other Nehem. 13: 15. 16. 17. &c. Nehe∣miah) wherin I hope you perse∣vere, maketh me to be confidently perswaded of many good things which the Lord hath wrought in you, and that you wilbe an instru∣ment in the hand of the Lord, to countenance and incourage such as walke in his feare. Worthy Sir, if this my indeavor may be ac∣ceptable to God and you, and pro¦fitable to anie, I have my reward. In the meane time though I am absent in the body, yet I shall not forget to commend you and your whole family, and the procee∣dings of that honourable Court wherof you are a member (if I be
 not misinformed) togither with the present calamities of my na∣tive country, unto Almightie God in my daylie prayers; and be ready to doe you and them any service in the Lord.

Amsterdam in Holland this 4th of the 5 moneth called May 1643.
