


TO THE Worshipfull my very loving Friends, Mr. John Wollaston (now Sir John Wol∣laston Kt. and Alderman of the City of London, and Master Thomas Parkes Esquire. Grace and peace from our Lord Jesus Christ.
THe will of man is more wilfull, then the understanding blinde; The Pro∣phet, speaking of the Learned Scribes and Doctors, saith, They have known the way of the Lord, but they have
 altogether broken the yoke, Jerem. 5. 5. more wil∣full, then blinde; yea, the very Pagans, When they knew God, they glorified him, not as God, Rom. 1. 21. Yea, They were haters of God, ver. 30. who know∣ing the Judgements of Chrys. God, that they which com∣mit such things are wor∣thy of death, not only doe the same, but have plea∣sure in them, and doe them, ver. 32. The reason why I say a wicked man sinnes more out of wilfulnesse, then blindnesse is, three fold; the first is taken à causâ, from the cause, because his wilfulnesse is the cause of his blindnesse: For fooles hate know∣ledge,
 Prov. 1. 22. or at least they regard not to know it, Prov. 29. 7. Nei∣ther is this only true of those people that have preaching, who actually refuse instruction, and will not learne amend∣ment of life, of whom the Psalmist speaks; They know not, neither will they un∣derstand, Psal. 82. 5. But it is true also of those blinde soules, that live under blinde Guides, they doe potentially, and innato habitu, reject the Doctrin of newnesse of life, of whom Salomon speakes; Speake not in the eares of a foole, for he will despise the wisdome of thy words, Prov. 23. 9. The second is taken ab effectis, from the
 effects, because the effect shews his wilfulnesse, more then his blindnesse; He knowes that drunkennesse, and company-keeping is a sinne, yet he will live in it; he knowes that in∣terloquutory swearing is a sinne, and yet he will continue in it; That worldlinesse, orVideo me∣liora pro∣bo{que} dete∣riora sequor. pleasure-hunting is a sinne, yet he will goe on in it; like Ovids Medea, that knew the good, and yet would not doe it; his sinne is not so much ig∣norance of the sinne, as hatred of good: The wicked shall be cast away for his malice, Prov. 14. 32. and therefore Moses calls the sinne of the wicked, A roote of Gall and Worm wood, Deut. 29. 18. they are sharpe and
 piquant against purity, and bitter against the power of godlinesse; they are said to walke after the stubbornnesse of their heart, vers. 19. all shewing, that they are more wilfull, then blinde. What wilt. thou say now, saith S. Chry∣sostome? thou knowest not what things are to be done? thou both knowest them, and willingly refusest to walke in them. The third is taken, ab experientiâ, from experi∣ence, experience tells us, that the wicked are more wilfull, then blind! wherefore else could Elias, that was a Prophet thir∣ty yeares, and Elisha, that was a Prophet in his roome sixty yeares, wherefore could they doe no more good upon
 the people? Wherefore does St.Hierom. & Nice∣phorus. John after his so many scores of yeares teaching, breake off with this speech? He that is filthy, let him be filthy still, Revel. 22. 11. The Drunkard heares us preach a∣gainst drunkennesse, and he will not obey; the Blasphemer heares us preach against blas∣phemy, and he will not be refor∣med; the Church-sleeper hath heard his Church-sleeping condemned, and yet he will not mend it. If Nero could not endure Vespasian, be∣cause he slept at his Musicke, how can God endure such as sleepe at his Word? yet no re∣stauration.
Whence we see, that the will is more corrupt by wilfulness,
 then the understanding by blindnesse; The heart is de∣ceitfull above all things, Jerem. 17. 9. Above all things; That is, the heart is corrupt above all things, namely, the will above all things else, and therefore a∣bove the understanding. The heart of the wicked is like an Oven, as hot as fire, Hos. 7. 6. That is▪ the will is like a red hot Oven, where all sins are baked with the heat of Concupiscense. And there∣fore wicked men are very oft said to walke after the stub∣bornness of their heart, Jer. 9. 14. Jer. 11. 8. Jer. 13. 10. Jer. 18. 12. Jer. 23. 17. Eccles. 11. 9. There be three reasons why the Will is
 more corrupt of the twaine:
1. Ratione Originis, be∣cause the Will was it that first rebelled against God, for the Serpent could not have decei∣ved the understanding of Eve, unlesse she would; the understanding as long as it was in innocency could not be deluded by the Devils guile, unlesse it would, for otherwise God had made the understan∣ding imperfect with a sinfull ignorance; the understanding it selfe like a naturall Agent, understands, and works, ad ul∣timum virium, as well as it can, and it suspends not its consideration it selfe; now it is the Will only that is essen∣tially free, and a free worker of its owne workes; and now
 freely itching to sinne by its privie influence into the un∣derstanding, suspends it, not to consider, and libertate participatâ, by a participa∣ted freedome, not to observe Satans policy. Thus Adam and Eve, willingly guld, ate the forbidden fruit, and first sinning willingly, they and we are most punished in the wil, most corrupted in wil. And therefore all sinne is devolved upon the heart, as the first inward cause thereof. The Atheism of the Atheist is cast upon the heart; The foole hath said in his heart there is no God, Psal. 14. 1. The mischiefe of the mischie∣vous is turned upon the heart, But mischiefe is in their
 hearts, Psal. 28. 3. the ini∣quity of the vaine man is truly fathered upon the heart; His heart gathereth ini∣quity to it selfe, Psal. 41. 6. Our Saviour Christ sets all corruption upon the hearts score; Out of the heart proceede evill thoughts, Murthers, Adulteries, For∣nications, Thefts, False Witnesses, Blasphemies, Matth. 15. 19. St. Chry∣sostome. &c addes more; Revi∣ling, touchy, teasty words, filthy talking, &c. And I may adde, Out of the heart proceeds drunkennesse, and company keeping, &c. That is, out of the wil, for the heart is commonly put for it.
2. Ratione reatus, be∣cause
 the will is it that indeed is guilty of all the evill in the soule, yea of all the said errors, and ignorance of the under∣standing. And therefore saith God of the wicked, They doe alwayes erre in their heart, Psal. 95. 10. Errour is not in the heart, but in the minde, and understanding; but sayes the Text, They doe erre in their heart, because they doe erre, and they would erre. They walked in the coun∣sels and imaginations of their evill heart, Jerem. 7. 24. Counsels and imagi∣nations are properly in the understanding and minde, and not in the heart; but sayes the Text They walke in the counsels and imaginations
 of their evill heart. For the understanding, as it sayes the sinne is delightfull, and gainfull to flesh and bloud; so it would say also, that it is forbidden by God, and punished with death; but the will gives eare to that word, the pleasingness and the profit of sinne, but will hear no more, or else bridles the understand∣ings that it consider, no further. And therfore these broken counsels, the imaginations by halves, as interrupted ones of the heart, are of the heart. Hereupon it comes to passe, that as the will is free by na∣tive disposition, and the under∣standing free by participa∣tion; so is the understanding blinde, and ignorant, and de∣ceived
 subjectively by innate errour, and the will by a cir∣cular communication. And seeing the will is guilty of all the evill in the soule, all the blame God layes upon the will, and plagues it with the sorest spiritual plagues, that it is most wilful.
3. Ratione ipsius, in re∣gard of it selfe, because the will was best while it wasCorruptid optimi pessima. good, now it becomes worst when it is bad. As a good King is the best of men, so a wicked Tyrant is the worst of men. A good heart is Gods; My son give mee thy heart, Pr. 23. 26. A wicked heart is the devils; Satan hath fil∣led thy heart, Act. 5. 3. Eve∣ry conceit of the understand∣ing
 is not evill; But every imagination and thought of the heart is onely evill continually, Gen. 6. 5. The heart is the fountaine, Jam. 3. And when God would curse all the rivers & streams, he curs'd the fountaine, the heart. Now as in a corrupt fountaine, the nearer ye come to the foun∣taine head, the more corrupt the water is, so the nearer the heart, the more corrupt. And therefore the outward actions being corrupt, the outward members are more corrupt; they being corrupt, the fancy is worse corrupt; that corrupt, the understanding is worse corrupt; that being corrupt, the affections are still worse and worse corrupt; and they
 being corrupt, the heart is worst of all corrupt; for that. Chrys. is the fountaine. Out of the abundance of the heart the minde thinketh, the sense re∣membreth, the fancie imagi∣neth, the mouth speaketh, the hand worketh, the foot walk∣eth, out of the abundance of the heart; so that that which is at all in the other faculties and members of the man, is in a∣bundance in the heart.
Whence againe we see that the will does not alwayes follow the understanding; for the Wise-man presupposeth that a mans understanding may be right, and yet the will not fol∣low it; and therefore he saith, Be ye wise, and refuse it not, Prov. 8. 33. Thus how
 many thousands, their owne knowledge, yea and their owne conscience haling them from, yet will runne upon sinne: The envious, revengeful, ma∣licious man, his owne know∣ledge testifies against this sin, and yet he will revenge; his owne conscience reproves him for this sinne, and yet hee will beare malice. The lukewarm∣ling, and the civilist, his own knowledge in the Scripture tels him, he must live holier and ferventlier, his owne con∣science checks him for not living better, and yet hee will not live better; Like the knowing Pharisees, Ye are of your father the devill, and the lusts of your father yee Will doe, Joh. 8. 44.
 Indeed its true, that the will must needs follow one dictate or other in the understanding, for it cannot see its object but by the understandings spe∣ctacles. Neverthelesse the un∣derstanding having nothing but a political or a suasive power over the will, it can but tender the dis-junction, and leave the assumption to the wils choice, for any imperative power that it hath. As for example, worldlinesse; true, it is a gainful sinne, you may be better to live to the eye of the world, that you may get by it: but then it is a dangerous—sayes the understanding. Let me have it, let me have it, sayes the will; I will cark, I will care for the world &c. This I
 will doe, I will pull downe my barnes, and I will build greater, and there will I bestow all my fruits, and my goods, Luke 12. 18. and then I will say to my soul, &c. v. 19. I grant likewise, that an inor∣dinate act of the will presup∣poseth an errour in the under∣standing too; I say, an er∣rour in the understanding, but not alwayes an erring un∣derstanding; it presupposeth errorem materialem, non semper formalem, in case the will immediately before this inordinate act were an incorrupt will, and the un∣derstanding an inlightened understanding, as the An∣gels, and Adam before their fall. It is a goodly Apple,
 faire to see to, sweetly likely to taste on, and the Serpent tels me I shall not dye, sayes the understanding: Well, I will put it to the hazard, I will eat it, sayes the Will. These were the seeds of an errour, but not an errour it self, till by the wils intervening itch, the under∣standing began to be darkned in a moment. Now that the will, will not follow the under∣standing alwayes, may appear by these reasons:
1. Because the blessed An∣gels, albeit extrinsecally they be confirmed in grace, and by the vertue of extrinsecal actu∣ating, are finally, and in∣fallibly, and intrinsecally setled in their wils upon grace, yet they have an inbred radical
 mutability of will possibly to depart from the grace re∣vealed.
2. Because, if the will must needs follow the under∣standing, then there could bee no sinne in the wil against knowledge, much lesse the distinct and illuminate know∣ledge, which is to be seene in the sin against the Holy Ghost, wherein the wilfulnesse of the wil, lifts up the heele a∣gainst the very face of more special knowledge. And al∣though there bee ignorance, yea the mysticallest and devil∣lishest ignorance of all igno∣rances admixt with that knowledge, yet that ignorance is not the cause, but a conco∣mitant of the wilfulnesse, espe∣cially
 quatenus, as it is a sin against the Holy Ghost.
3 Because the will is so far from following the Understan∣ding, that the more under∣standing, the understanding is in goodnesse, the stouter the Will is; as is evident by the wicked, who the more they grow learned, and Do∣ctorly, the further they are from the mastery of their cor∣rupt wils. Some of the deepest heads, that could answer all the objections in their braines by their extracted Science out of the Word of God, that any carnal man can bring to per∣swade them to live in any one sinne, and declare that they must live so and so, if they themselves meane to be saved;
 yea and in this particular, at this particular time, together with all the circumstances of presse knowledge, yet notwith∣standing have unsanctified hearts; and therefore Salo∣mon having charged us to be wise in understanding, hee chargeth us also to be wise in heart, Prov. 8. 5. yea, the good Saints of God, the more knowledge they have, the more their wils grow resty from zeale, or from the strength of zeale that they had before, notwithstanding that grace hath abated the violence of their reluctant wils, and gi∣ven it a mortiferous blow. I know that Learning and knowledge puffeth up, and casts a mist before the eyes of
 the understanding, yet this doth not hinder the truth of the position, That the heart is more wilfull, then the minde is blinde; be it that the minde is blinded, yet the wil∣fulnesse growing upon the knowledges stature, sheweth plainly, that it is the more wilfull of the two, the know∣ledge of Saving Grace being not so adverse to the flesh as the practise thereof, and there∣fore Salomon having bidden us get knowledge, he com∣mands us to love it with our heart; Get understanding, Prov. 4. 5. And love her, and she shall preserve thee, vers. 6.
4. Because the argument of them which hold the will
 must needs follow the last dictate of the understanding, may be retorted upon them∣selves; They say, it must and does, because the Sinner never sinnes a sinne, which his un∣derstanding knowes is a sin, and that a perilous sinne to his owne soule, and at this time too; but the Will goes further, and tells him, That it is a delightfull profitable sinne, and there is hope that God will not be so strict with him, as to damne him for it; O, Christ dyed for our sinnes, and God is merci∣ful, and at what time soever a sinner doth repent him, &c. and therefore I may doe the sinne; I say, this may be recoyled back upon them, be∣cause
 this is but a begg'd di∣ctate, which the wil would faine have, and therefore to gratifie its Lusts, the under∣standing like a partial Judge, and a fee'd Counsellour, and a crafty Lawyer, or else Jury, pleads, judges, and counsels, and gives Verdict according as the importunate Wil would have it.
For the Understanding and Will, are somewhiles like Si∣meon and Levi, brethren in evil, sworne brethren in wic∣kednesse. The Will will yeeld to the Understanding in some things, and the Understand∣ing to the Will in other things, for they are two wicked brats of a wicked parent soule. Other whiles the Understanding
 and the will are like two dis∣agreeing hounds in a collar, that neither the Understand∣ing will doe as the Will would, for sometimes its made to un∣derstand a thing against the will, or ere the Wil be aware of it, nor the Wil doe, as the Understanding prescribes it. Sometimes the Wil deales with the Understanding, as Nahash would with the Gi∣leadites, plucke out its right eye, or draw it some other way, or shut it selfe that it may not looke upon this or that lust, with Scripture looks, or Bible-glasses, but view it onely with the left eye, with respect to what gaine it wil bring in, what pleasure it will afford, what credit it wil
 yeeld, what conformity it hath to selfe love.
Thus the sinner wil minde the sinne, wil conceive the sinne, wil invent reasons to maintaine the sinne, why? he would faine commit the sinne: Thus the Will gives the Understanding its quue, and prompts it, what it would have said, and then follows the advice when it hath done. Lewd things are in his heart, hee imagineth evil at all times, Prov. 6. 14. He imagineth, how so? be∣cause lewd things were before in his heart. So that now we may see the desperate estate of the corrupt will: It is not onely stupens voluntas, a Wil in a swoon, but dead; shew
 all the light to a dead man, whats he the wiser? neither is it enough that the Will have a posse, a power of willing grace vouchsafed it, for the Will is more wilful, then impo∣tent. It is wel observed by S. Austine, The Apostle doth not say, it is God that worketh in you the posse, but the Will: It is not said, God worketh in you the power to wil, But it is God that worketh in you the will and the deed, Phil. 2. 3. It is not said, I will put my Spirit into you, and cause you to bee able to walke in my Sta∣tutes, but Ego faciam ut faciatis, saith the same Fa∣ther, I will make you to do it, Ezek. 36. 27. The will of
 it selfe, the more reason it hath to be turned, the more it is wilful, it hinches and winches, and snuffes against it: For sinne taking occasion by the [knowne] comande∣ment workes all manner of concupiscence, Rom. 7. 8. Nitimur in vetitum semper, cupimusque negata. Like the running torrent, that ha∣ving nothing to stay it, runs the slowlyer, at ab obice sae∣vior, but being hindred, runs the fiercelier.
Behold then here, what a secret the grace is, that con∣verts this profligat will, which I here present you with, and so much the rather you, Loving Sirs, because I would have you have a depositum
 of our Countries thankfulnesse unto you, & such as you are in that famous City, that have like so many Joseses, brought your money and laid it downe at the Apostles feet, to the plan∣tation of the Gospel in our ignorant coasts. The blessedest project that ever could come into any Christian heart; for as the people might goe to Gods house, when the word of the Lord came from Jerusa∣lem, Esa. 2. 3. so may our people heare it; For the word of the Lord is come forth of your Jerusalem, and prospers: Blessed be our Lumen Angliae, our Columna literarum, that stands in our Country as a Becon to all, by whom, as a worthy instrument, Deus no∣bis
 haec otia fecit. Accept of this poore mite, as a gratu∣latory Schedule, from my selfe in special to the one of you, and from the Countrey in ge∣neral to the other of you. And I pray God to move the hearts of more such as may helpe for∣ward the worke of the Lord,

Decemb. 29. 1626. from Willingsworth.
