


DEare brethren; the knowledge of myne owne ignoraunce and inability, hath enforced me hitherto to forbear to thrust my self forth to the view of men, in any thing, either by word, or writing; fearing lest the truth which I professe should receive anie wound, through my error, or insuffitiencie; from such as wait for occasion to carpe, or find fault, espetially at men infe∣riour to themselves, as it is the manner of cowards and dastardlie companions, to dominere over striplings, but with men of equall strength with themselves they dare not encounter; for the which cause I still tremble to doe it: yet con∣sidering
 that Mat. 5: 15. no man lighteth a candle & putteth it under a bushell but on a candlesticke, and God Al∣mighty giveth not his gifts to Math. 25: 25. 27. be hid in a napkin, but to be imployed for his use, in edifying his church and profitting others, and small gifts are to be 2 Sam. 1: 6 stir∣red up and increased: also wee find that the prophets of God did not only pronounce their prophesies unto the people, but many of them were also committed to writing, that they might be remembred, and often repeated; and the Apostles not only preached, but wrote epistles to the churches, to the end that others also might receive benefit by them, as wee see by our owne comfort∣able experience at this day, who have the same prophesies, and epistles, both for our planting, watering, and in∣creasing in grace; and it is a thing, both practised, and approved, in this age wherein we live, and hath bin time out of mynd, not onlie to preach, but
 also to publish in writing, such things as men think any wise benefitiall. I have therfore, with disire of Gods glo∣rie, and the good of all those that shall accept of my paines, but principally of you my loving brethren (to whom it is most of all due) recollected my medi∣tations upon some places of the holy scripture which heretofore I have hand∣led by God's helpe, and whereof you have bin hearers, in our publike exer∣cises in the church; Not in the least judging them, in respect of any excel∣lent expressions or methood, worthy of acceptaunce, (they being performed in all plainnesse) but cheiflie desireing thereby to put you in mynd of some thinges, which formerlie ye have heard, because I see both in my selfe, and others, too great a neglect of the things we heare, and manie times doctrine which should be earnestly minded by us, is no sooner delivered, but forgotten, according to the proverb, in at one
 eare, and out at another. To the end therefore, that ye maie examine your selves, whither you have bin carefull hearers of the word, and Iam. 1: 22. not only hearers but doers of the same, I doe present you with this remembraunce, as the first token of my love in this sort, which God hath hitherto inabled me to performe; desireing that the same may be acceptable to the saints. In which, though you shall find sometimes more and sometimes lesse than hath bin deli∣vered, yet take it (I pray) in good part, considering that men not relying punctually upon their meditations, may deliver more and other things than they before thought upon, and being prone to forgetfulnes, may omit some things which they had intended, or els time may not serve them to deliver all; but the spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophets. And if in this I shall find that I have don God anie service, I shall not cease my further endeauors
 as God shall give occasion, either in this, or any other kind. Nowe I be∣seech Almightie God who is Heb. 12: 2. the author and finisher of our faith, to stablish, confirme, and strengthen you in his truth, and make you to increase and grow in grace, and in the lively know∣ledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, to whom be glory both now and for ever more Amen. So prayeth your loving brother in the faith, and the Lord's unworthy servaunt.

