



RIGHT HONOƲRABLE,
THe Glorious God, who (as Elihu saith) accepteth not the persons of Princes, Jo. 4. 19 hath by your hand cast down the mighty from their seat: his next work (I trust) will be the exaltation of those of low degree, by the same hand; I mean, the redemption of this poor, afflicted, distracted, distressed, and long oppressed Nation, out of all her trou∣bles. I confes when I look upon the manifold & grand discouragements, which you still meet with from the unthankfulnesse of that Peo∣ple, with whose liberties, comforts, and well being in every kind your soul daily is in travail, I apprehend great cause of fear, lest your hands should hang down from the work, considering that the arm of omni∣potencie it self contracted an impotencie when time was, from the un∣worthinesse of those, for whose sake it was otherwise readie to have lift up it self gloriously. And he COƲLD (aith Mark, speaking of the Lord Christ, being now in his own countrey) there DO NO MIGHTY WORK: M 6. 5. the reason whereof is plainly expressed by another Evangelist, viz. because of their unbelief. Matth. 1. . . (by a metony∣mie of the effect put for the cause) because of the frowardnesse and great aversnesse of their spirits, either to inquire after, or to consider of, such things, which were proper and effectuall, being duly considered, to have raised a belief in them, that he indeed was their Messiah. He COƲLD DO NO mightie work for this People, .i. he had no mind, no desire (the want whereof is an impotencie, s to action) to gratife so unworthy a generation of men at so high a rate. Or else, He could do no mighty work, &c. . it was repugnant to the Law of that wisdom and righteousnesse, by which, as God, he governs the world, for him to do any matters of that sacred import for such men.
But he, who once by himself, could do no mighty work, for a carelesse, froward, and thanklesse People, at another time by Moses, his servant, was able and willing too, to bring water in abundance out of a rock for the preservation of the lives of such men, and their cattell, whom Moses himself thought it no wrong, to call Rebels. M . 1. 11. As the Devil (whether through want of will, or of power otherwise▪ i not so ae to determine) is not wont to work those mischiefs in the world immedi∣ately, or by himself, which he frequently worketh by the mediation of Witches and other Instruments anointed by him for his service: so neither is the glorious God pleased to act such matters of Grace for

the children of men with his arm unbared, which he is many times readie and willing to do for them, when he hath Agents at hand (taken from amongst mn) pleasing to him, and meet to make a covering for his arm in reference unto such actions, Thus, whilest he had Joshua, by whom to negotiate the affair (and so those Elders who had lived with Joshua, and out-lived him) he kept the people of Israel from Idolatry.Josh. 24. 31. Afterwards he did the like by the hand of those Judges, whom he was pleased (in a way more than ordinarie) to raise up, and set over them; whereas still, in the intervalls between Judge and Judge, which were sometimes larger, and sometimes lesser, he suffered this People to turn aside after Idols. In like manner, by the hand of the faithfull High-Priest ada, whilest he was in being, he steered the young King sh in wayes that were good; but his Instrument and Steers-man failing him by death, he suffered this King to ruin himself by groves and Idols. Esa 31 3. Examples in this kind are no arities in Scripture. The2 Chr. 24  18. hope I have that God hath fitted you for a covering of complacencie and delight to his own arm, in order to the lifting up of this poor Na∣tion from the gates of death, will not (I trust) make me ashamed.
I beseech you therefore know no discouragements after the flesh: Your enemies ar mn, and not God: and thi horses flsh, and not spi∣rit.* W the Lord shall stretch out his hand, both he that helpeth your opposers, and he that is holpen, shall fall down, and they shall all fail to∣gthr. There is but a stp between those mountains, which magnifie themselves against you, and their melting down into plains. You know who it is, that onely by touching the mountains, makes them to smoke. If you value your selves by your selves, and by your friends made of men, you estimate your hay and stubble, but forget your silver and gold. The strength of the Almightie becomes yours onely by-laying claim to it, and dependance on it. How came Chmosh to be the god of the Moa∣bts, or Ashtaroth, the god of the donians? Did these relations ac∣cue unto them upon any other account, than meerly their own choise of these abominations to serve and worship them as Gods? If you shall chuse out the God of Israel from amongst all the gods of the earth, to serve & honour for your God, you shall appropriate him to yout selves: he will not, he cannot denie himself to be yours. And they who are circumspect and carefull in the choise of their God, may be secure a∣bout their enemies. If you had all the world your enemies, yet had you but the dust in the balance, or the drop of the bucket to oppose you: the greatnesse of your God swallows up all consideration of your ene∣mies into ctorie, and makes them bread for you. Onely take heed that you profane not the excellencie of your strength, either by fear∣ing the faces of men, or by crouching to the God of this world for any of his morsels. The glory of the incorruptible God, is (as unto men) turn∣ed into the basest lye, into the similitude of a dumb and dead Idol, when they who pretend to his service, shall shew themselves either fearfull, or unjust. In either of these deportments (much more in both toge∣ther)

men blaspheme the name of that God, whom they serve (if in∣deed they serve any) either as defective in power, wherewith to help them, or in goodnesse, which should ingage this power for them, or in both. A well built Confidence, and Conscience answerable to it, are two noble Principles, absolutely necessarie for those, who desire to live in amitie, and friendship with God.
Be not troubled, that the Nation is departed from you; keep your hold fast upon God, and (with Jacob) let not him go, and he will blesse you: he will isse unto the Nation, and bring them back again in a moment unto you. Depend with your whole heart upon him, and you shall render him as unable to forsake you, as to denie himself. You know how soon the minds of the poor People of the Isle Melita were turned upside down within them, concerning Paul. He that was in their thoughts as this hour, a murtherer, a man whom Divine venge∣ance would not suffer to live, the next, became no lesse than a God. Acts 2. 46 I trust the weak and sinfull People of this Island have left you upon no worse an account, than Onsimus (as Paul hoped) sometimes for look his master Philemon: they have therefore departed for a season, that you should receive them for ever. Philem 1 Pertn b∣itas al▪ qu▪  n∣t. There is no evil, no frowardnesse so stubborn, but pertinacie in goodnesse will in time overcome. If your straits were so great, that you knew not otherwise what to do, Jehosa∣phats stratageme of casting your eyes upon God,2 Ch. 20. 18. is alwayes ready for ex∣ecution; and none more promising successe against enemies, than it. Nor can I much fear, but that that God, who stood by you, when the wickednesse of your Heads compassed you about, and gave them into your hand, will any more avour the iniquitie of your heels Psalm 4 5. against you, or suffer you to fall into their hands.
One thing by which you are losers (at present) in the judgementts and affections of manie men, makes you (most assuredly) great gainers in the favour of God; (your zeal, and faithfulnesse, I mean, in that most exemplary act of Justice upon the late King) and will (I question not) counter-work it self in the hearts of the same men, as the Gospel sometimes did in the conscience of Paul, when having first provoked him into persecution, afterwards it wrought him about to a zealous pre∣dication and propagation of it. In so much that the Saints said of him, He which persecuted us in times past, now preacheth the Faith, which once he destroyed.Gal 1 . The first apparitions of things new and strange, espe∣cially when the reasons and causes of them are unknown, most of all when there is place and opportunitie for the jealousies and fears of men to write their consequences and effects, sad, and bitter, are usually disturbing, and offensive to their apprehensions. But when a diligent inquirie hath satisfied them from whence they come, and a little experi∣ence, whither they go, and no evil found in the form, nor felt in the latter, that which was at the first offensive, soon ceaseth, and the things themselves become the delight and great contentment of men. When the Disciples at Sea, in the fourth watch of the night saw Christ walking

on the Sea towards them, they were troubled (saith the text) saying, it is a spirit, and they cried out for fear:M. 14. 26. but when he was come into the ship, and had reconciled the boistrons winds and Seas to their desires, he proved the joy, and great rejoycing of them all. The Scriptures af∣ford severall other instances in this kind. That that Royal Act of Justice we speak of, whereunto your hearts and hands were lifted up by God, should for a season exercise and trouble the sancies of many, is not to be numbered amongst things that are strange; considering, 1. how long the judgements and consciences of the generalitie of men in the world have been overshadowed with Prerogative Divinitie; 2. how un∣accustomed the present Age is to bear the weight of such Heroique transactions; 3. that neither were their Fathers able to report unto them any such thing as done in their dayes; 4. how generall onely, and therefore in many respects, unsatisfactorie, most of those accounts are, which have been drawn up for the Justification of the Action; 5. (and lastly) what latitude and scope there is for the jealousies and fears of men to play up and down in forming and fore-casting the events and consequences of the Action, almost to what dismall and formidable va∣rietie they please. But the two things alreadie hinted, 1. a distinct and clear apprehension of the justiftablenesse of the grounds, upon which the said Action stands fair, and without spot; 2. a competent experi∣ence, that in the consequence of it, it will onely blesse, and not at all curse, the Nation, will perfectly heal the offensivenesse of it, and bring back the hearts of men unto you, by the same way they went from you.
Out of an unfeigned and humble desire to set both your persons and Honourable proceedings (especially about the late King) right and straight in the minds and affections of the Nation, having withall dili∣gence and good conscience surveied that great Transaction of yours in all the circumstances of it, and all the Pleas relating to it, as well by way of opposition, as comport, (as far as my weak apprehension was able to discern any thing of such an import) I was willing to tax my self at so much time and pains (which I have now levied accordingly) as to draw up a Report in writing of what I found in that my survey. This I humbly present unto your Honourable House in the next ensu∣ing discourse, attended with the strength of my desires that it may (and with some aint hopes, that it will) accomplish that good thing on your behalf amongst men, whereunto it is consigned by the Authour. That God, who will blesse the righteous,Psal. 5. 12. compasse you about with his favour, as with a shield, and make you as Angels of God to discern the condoe∣ments of this poor Nation, and to quit your selves in all manner of worthy and prudent actions with all faithfulnesse, accordingly. This is the prayer, not in face, or words, but in heart and soul, of

From my Studie May 17. 1647.
