


My Lord,
THis plaine Pamphlet was written partly for your sake, and those under your Command, that you may at length consider what necessitie lies upon you, to secure your selves, and settle this Kingdom by an humble, honorable, and speedy reconcilement with His Majesty. Know this, that what I have written here, is written couragiously, and without respect of Persons: And because the truth of it is of so universall concernment, that it requires the per∣usall of all sores of men within the Kingdome, I have sent it abroad in a more homely stile than usuall, that it may find entertainment in the meanest capacities.
The reason that induced me to make this Addresse unto your Lordship is, because it aimes principally at your Inte∣rest, who are the Captaine of that Army, which hitherto hath lengthened our miseries by breach of Faith with the King, and Kingdom: And though I am apt to believe (as well as others) that you had the least share in that odious and abominable designe of imprisoning our Soveraigne; yet the world knowes you may (if you please) and is almost perswaded you will, become the happy instrument of his deliverance. It is the humor of our owne and other Nations to talke, as if the Military Affaires were swayed wholly by your Lievtenant-Generall. I cannot tell how farre he and his potent Party may have wrought upon you heretofore by specious Arguments, or presumed to act many Extrava∣gancies at such a time when you could not safely oppose them; but this I assuredly know, that they are all laid upon your score, and that now is the time wherein you may quit
scores, and become your selfe, who of your selfe (I am con∣fident) are indued with such excellent principles of honor, reason, and resolution, that you cannot but doe like your selfe, having so faire an oportunity.
Nor is it may opinion only, but the hope and perswasion of many gallant men, which yet retaine some thoughts of honor concerning you, for your bravery and civility in your Conquests. Oh, let not the memory of them (which may be applauded in after-times, though not for the Cause, yet for the gallant performance) be obliterated by sinister and prodigious undertakings! Remember that you stand in the rank of Nobility, and may transmit this honor with the ad∣dition of greater, unto your Posterity; acquit then your self nobly, and let not the fountain from whence you derived your honor, be thus prophaned, and vilified by the very filth of the people. Consider the miseries that must fall upon your Country, by an Army of hungry Strangers now ready to invade us: Imagine that the eyes of the Nation are up∣on you, as one that may prevent all, or at least shorten their abode here, by uniting with his Majestie. Banish that accursed Principle of not trusting an injured Prince, which becomes none but implacable and incorrigible Trai∣tors. See that such Terms be propounded unto him, that may not clash either with his Conscience or Honor, that it may appear unto all men, you desire Peace at his hands, who is the most peaceable, pious, gracious Prince living. But if you entertain other Counsells, know that you will be look'd on by the people, as the cause of all those desolations which shall befall them; and the time of Revenge will come, (from above) wherein you shall with sorrow, confesse your neglect of this honest Advice, given from a private hand, that would thinke it an honor to kisse yours, if your Lord∣ship please first to kisse Majestie's, upon just and honorable con∣ditions.
