



BELOVED, I speak it as in the§. 1. sight of God: I am in a great straite how to temper my speech for your best advantage, in this my solemn▪ address unto you. Very loth I am on the one hand to deal so unfaithfully or un-Christianly with you, as, upon such an opportunity, not to speak the truth unto you in such things, wherein I either certainly know, or else have weigh∣ty grounds to judge, that it most neerly concerns you to know and to consider it: and on the other hand, very unwilling I am also to speak any thing, for which, either weakness, or uncharitableness it self, shall be able to judg me your enemie. I well know it becomes me not to say of you, as Nabal' servant spake of his Master; He is so wicked that a man cannot speak to him. 1 Sam. 25. 17. [meaning, without offending, or pro∣voking him] yet my Experience importunes me to speak this, that some of you, yea some of those, whom I have cause to judge the strongest amongst you, are so weak, that words as innocent, as inoffen∣sive, as the greatest Christian tenderness, or caution,
 can lightly indite, have notwithstanding, been a bur∣then and offence unto them. I could readily instance in sundry particulars, as well of words, phrases, and passages of this harmless import, as of persons among you, who nevertheless have turned their innocencie into guilt, and made themselves agrieved at them; but that I fear lest this also should be an offence un∣to you.
I call God for a record upon my soul, that I have§. 2. not the least touch of any malignancie or froward∣ness of spirit against any of you, but can freely serve the meanest of you in love, yea, and stoop to loose the latcher of his shoe, who is the most jealous amongst you of the candor and simplicitie of my heart towards you. Yea I have upon occasion, and this more than once, given a very passeable ac∣count of my unpartiall respects unto all of your way and practise worthy the repute of godliness, by gird∣ing my self, and ministring with all my might to some particulars of you. But I know how hard a thing it is not to be offended with him, that shall touch the Apple of a mans eye, or that shall attempt to change the glorie and height of his confidence in∣to the shame of guilt and errour. And the truth is, that you have much obstructed the way of your re∣turn, and regainment unto the Truth, by an impor∣tune and undue magnifying of your errour. If you could have been content, in estimating your new Baptism, and the want or non-practise of it in others, to contain you selves within those bounds of Reason and Truth, which the Holy Ghost prescrib's in a like (or rather indeed in a far better) case, saying, That Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping the Commandments of God; 1 Cor. 7. 19. and again,
 In Jesus Christ, neither circumcision availeth any thing, nor uncircumcision, but Faith, which worketh by Love, Gal. 5. 6. and yet again, If the circumcision keep the righteousness of the Law, his un-circumcision shal be counted for cir∣cumcision; Rom. 2. 26. See these passages ar∣gued and o∣pened. Wa∣ter-Dipping, p. 78. 79. 80. &c. If, I say, you could look upon your Baptism as availing you nothing, without Faith working by Love, and keeping the Commandments of God; and again, upon the want of your Bap∣tism, as no wayes prejudiciall unto those, who under another Baptism beleeve unfeignedly in Jesus Christ, and walk holily and humbly with their God, this would be an effectual door of hope opened unto me, that you were yet within call, and might be redu∣ced and brought back again in your judgments unto the truth (as some of the best of those, who through humain frailty, and immaturity of consideration, had embraced your way, from time to time have done.)
What a man moderately or soberly valueth, may§. 3. be purchased of him at a reasonable rate. But whilst God's Nothing (yea that which is less then that No∣thing of his we now speak of) is your, All things; whilst you judge your tything of mint, anise, and cummin (or rather indeed of nettles, thistles, and unprofitable weeds) to be the practise of mercy and judgement, and the weighty things of the Law, your reconcilement with the Truth, though advancing in the front of my desires, yet keeps in the reer of my expectations. For when a man prizeth any thing he possesseth, at an unreasonable rate, he is so much the more like to keep possession of it still; unless (haply) the thief digs through the house, and vio∣lently takes it away. Some of your Churches esteem all others no better then Heathen and Publicans, who refuse to cast in their lot with them in their venturous
 practise of new Baptism Ad forum fcto concur∣cu, clamorem tollunt, & omnes non baptizatos jubent inter∣fici▪ tanquam paganos, & impios. Joh. Sleidan. de Anabaptistis Comment. lib. 10., refusing all Christian com∣munion with them, though otherwise they be the glory of Christ, and of the Gospel, when as many of themselves are the shame and reproach of both. And if my intelligence faileth me not, other of your Churches are lifting up their hearts to a like zealous exaltation of your way, as by proscribing or evacu∣ating all the Faith, Love, Zeal, Holiness, Meekness, Humility, Wisdom, and Knowledge, shining in the Christian world, which shall not approve themselves unto you, by falling down before the golden image which you have set up.
But in this your humour of making such sacred§ 4. treasure of your new Baptism, you declare your selves to be the true heirs and successors of those in all ages, who have unduly, and without cause, bro∣ken the bands of Unity, Love, and Peace, wherein they had somtimes been bound up in the same bun∣dle of Christianity with other Churches, to walk in some by-way of particular choyce by themselves, to the offence, grief, and reproach of those Churches from which they rent themselves, and renounced Communion with, upon such an account. It hath alwaies been the manner of persons of that character, to magnifie above measure that opinion, or practise, of what slender consequence, nay of what evil con∣sequence soever it was, wherein they dissented from, and for the non-profession, or non-practise whereof, they rejected the communion of other Churches. The History of the Church since the Apostles days affordeth us instances without number of that im∣port we speak of: some of these are presented to the Readers consideration in the ensuing discourse pag 8, 9, 10.. By these instances, and many more of like significa∣tion,
 which might readily have been added to them, it clearly appears, that when men make any defecti∣on, or rent, from the main body of sound Christians, in any thing, whether opinion, or practise, they are strongly tempted by the spirit of this separation, to speak, how extravagantly or causlesly soever, glori∣ous things of that, wherein they differ (be it opinion or practise) lest otherwise their departure from the houshold of Faith, should seem causless, and (so) highly censurable. And that men of your judge∣ment and practise have not been behind the Patrons of the Errors specified in the said page and section of the present Discourse, in crying Hosanna in the highest to your way, appears sufficiently from the best records that are extant, of those times, wherein this way first got footing in the Europoean parts of the Christian world. John Sleidan in his historical Commentaries, amongst many other sad relations of your Predecessors, reports of one, who ran up and down the City of Munster, as if he had been inspired from God, crying out, Repent, and be re-baptized; if ye will not, the wrath of God will presently overwhelm you. Here∣upon the common sort of people began to make a tumult: and whosoever was re-baptized, clamour'd out the same things which the other did, and after the same manner. Many, fearing the wrath of God, which these men so loudly boasted [would fall upon all those that would not be re-baptized] being through their simplicity circum∣vented (men otherwise not evil) did as they would have them [and were re-baptized] some also, that they might keep their estates. For the Anabaptists, having first contumeliously handled their adversaries, threw them out of possession of their estates, &c. Ex ipsis quidam ve∣lut afflatus numine, per Ʋrbem dis∣currit, & poenitentiam (inquit) agi∣te, & reba∣ptizamini: sin minus, jam ira Dei vos obrut. Hinc coeptum est vulgò tu∣multuari: & quicun{que} re∣baptizaren∣tur, eadem, quae ille, co∣dem{que} modo declama∣bant. Multi, quod iram Dei metue∣rent, quam i∣sti tantopere jactabant, simplicitate circumventi, homines alio∣qui non mali, iis morem ge∣rebant: alii etiam, quo suas fortunas conservarent: adversarios enim Anaba∣ptistae malè mulctatos, possessionibus dejiciebant. Joh. Sleid. Cm. l. 10 an. 1535. And there are at
 this day amongst us not a few of your judgement and way, who speak not much short of these Munster-Anabaptists, concerning the high necessity of your way of baptizing. This passage extant p. 18. of the Discourse examined in the ensuing Treatise, [That both Repentance, and the declaration of it by Baptism He mean∣eth only that kind of Ba∣ptism which himself own∣eth: other∣wise the pas∣sage relateth little to his purpose., is required on mans part, to interess him in remission of sins, and sanctification of the Spirit, the things cove∣nanted or promised on Gods part, is too evident to be de∣nied by any, but those that will not see, from Acts 2. 38, 39.] This passage (I say, which hath several other confederate with it in the Discourse) is of the same inspiration with the Munster-Divinity lately recited, exposing all those to the eternal wrath of God, who shall not be baptized, secundum modum Authoris, af∣ter the manner of the Authors own Baptisme. And if your Scribes and Wise-men speak thus gloriously of your way, can we think that your vulgar prose∣lytes are beneath them in their thoughts about it? But I look upon these high thoughts which you take unto your selves, as also those great words, wherein you express your selves unto others, concerning your way, like the men of Ephesus concerning their Diana, Great is Diana of the Ephesians; not as argu∣ments or grounds of any regular or rational convi∣ction upon your judgements and consciences, that there is any such either weight or worth in your way; but rather as studied and strained Apologies, to ex∣cuse your selves, as well unto your selves, and your own consciences, as unto others, for your otherwise inexcusable separation, and offence hereby given un∣to the Churches of Christ.
But what, or how high soever, or how occasioned§ 5. soever, your thoughts are concerning your Baptisme,
 I trust you retain so much savour of that anointing with the spirit of wisdom and meekness, which you received under that Baptisme (for so we judge of it, and as yet are not apprehensive of any sufficient ground to judge otherwise) wherewith you were ba∣ptized after the manner practised in other Churches, as not to stumble at that stone which the Apostle hath faithfully endeavoured to remove out of your way, by demanding thus of the Galathians, Am I therefore becom your enemy, because I tell you the truth? Gal. 4. 16. Doubtless this Apostle did not bewray the least touch or tincture of any enmity, either against the Church of the Philippians, or against the persons themselves of whom he spake, when he said; Many there are, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are enemies of the cross of Christ, &c. Phil. 3. 18.
And my hope is, at least concerning you whom I stile the sons and daughters of God, that what I shall out of an unfainedly compassionate soul towards you, with truth speak unto you, whether relating to your selves, or others of your judgement and way, only in order to your spiritual good, shall not be wrested or drawn aside by you to any sinister or hard Interpretation, as if I were a man, who rather sought your discredit and disparagement in the world, then your edification in the truth. I well un∣derstand that the dear interest of my comfort and peace standeth, not in the pulling down, but in the building up the comforts and peace of other men. Nor have I any Tower of Name or Reputation to build for my self in the world, that I should stand in need of the ruines, or demolished stones, either of yours, or any other mens, to advance my building.
 As I have none, so neither do I seek or desire any other honour, then that which cometh from God only. I have given sufficient hostages unto the world, that I shall never war upon it, or be trouble∣some unto it, for neglecting me, or laying my ho∣nour in the dust. He, who (it seems) believeth that I was tempted into a way of Schisme, by mens in∣temperate zeal against my Treatise of Justification, is a stranger unto me, and thinketh accordingly. But that which he calleth Schisme, is schisme only so cal∣led; unless to separate from iniquity, be schism. But however, the most intemperate zeal of men against me, Person, Name, or Books, is a temptation of a very faint influence upon me to turn me out of any way of Truth, yea, or to make me their enemy. Only when the Truth is offended, I confess I burn; and in case I find any strength in my hand to redress the injury done to it, I have no rest in my spirit un∣til I have attempted the Vindication. By Truth, I do not mean mine own opinion (as you seem frequently to understand the word, in reference unto yours) for as for that which is no more then so, I shall neither trouble my self much, nor any other man at al, about it. But by Truth I mean, such a doctrine or notion, one or more, which I certainly know that I am able to demonstrate either from the Scriptures, or from clear principles and grounds in Reason, or both, to be agreeable to the mind of God. And of this sort is the Doctrine concerning the subject of Baptisme, and the mode of the administration thereof, avouch∣ed in the Aphorisms, and vindicated in the An∣swer ensuing, against the most plausible Arguments (I believe) that have yet appeared on your side.
Some particulars there are, relating to your judg∣ment§. 6.
 and practise about Baptisme, which, as you de∣sire to be judged loyal and faithful unto Jesus Christ, true to the dear interest of your own comfort and peace, friends to the comforts and peace of the Churches of Christ throughout the world, I earnest∣ly desire you will please to take into your closest and most Christian consideration. As,
1. Whether, in your rejecting all children from the Baptisme of Christ, you do not forsake the du∣cture and guidance, as well of the fair and goodly stream of religious and learned Antiquity, as of the main current of the signal abilities, gifts, parts, judg∣ment, piety, zeal, practise of modern times, to turn into the by-notions, conceits, and ways of men, who are, and still have been, children in understanding, (at least comparatively) inexpert in the word of righ∣teousness, through the weakness of their sight not able to see things afar off, or to discern or discover the minde of Christ, if it be but spiritually expres∣sed; I mean, in such phrase or words, wherein the holy Ghost delighteth, and not put into terms and words of their prescription, and such as they judge meet it should have been, had he intended to con∣vey it unto men by the Scriptures? Or whether any one man, of any considerable note, or name, for might in the Scriptures, in all the golden Regiment of Reformed Divines, or amongst persons of any other capacity, since the Reformation, hath given the right hand of fellowship unto you in the way of your judgement (such only excepted, who upon se∣cond and better thoughts withdrew it again from you) yea or hath so much as at unawares, or in any traverse or debate of any other subject in Christian Religion, asserted any thing, or let fall a
 word, in countenance of that your judgement, of which I speak? Yea, whether they have not (gene∣rally) upon occasion, most solemnly and seriously declared against your opinion and practise, shewing and proving the inconveniences, and evil consequen∣ces of them; And whether, the affirmative in all their demands supposed, it doth not plainly argue, 1. That your opinion about Baptisme, is of a very ignoble and obscure race and parentage. 2. That it carrieth nothing at all in it, standeth upon no principles or grounds any ways necessary or useful, either for the proof, illustration, or clearing of any Doctrine in Christian Religion?
2. Whether Errors and Heresies have not their§ 7. certain seasons of growth and infection, as wherein they are with greater diligence and industry disper∣sed, and more readily learned and drunk in by the generality of people; even as some hurtful PlantsSee Patri∣mony of Christian Children, by M. Robert Clever, with the joynt con∣sent of M. John Dod (Printed an. 1624.) in the Preface to the Reader. have their set moneths for springing up, budding, blooming, seeding, whereas before they lay hid in the earth, and afterwards have their stalks dryed up and withered? Or whether mens minds are not in this case subject to be seduced, as their bodies are to be infected with contagious maladies, some yeers, and in some places, the small Pox raging, in others, the Pestilence, somtimes one disease being general, somtimes another? And whether the errors and he∣resies of the Nicholaitans, of Cerinthus, Manes, Ma∣cedonius, Arrius, Eutyches, and others both of for∣mer and of later times, have not prevailed (respe∣ctively) in those times and ages, for which the righ∣teous Providence of God judged them meet tryals and scourges for his Churches? And further, whe∣ther, as once the Christian world, was on a sudden,
 and to its own admiration, under a deluge of Arri∣anisme,Miratus est Orbis se fa∣ctum Arria∣num. which notwithstanding was, through the gracious Providence of God, not long after dryed up again; so it be not extremely probable, that the face of these parts of the Christian world, at present overspread and covered with a Land-flood of Ana∣baptisme, to the wonderment, not only of intelligent and considering men, but (I suppose) of the persons themselves also led aside with the error, will, not∣withstanding the great prevailing of these unwhol∣some waters hitherto, through the merciful Provi∣dence of God towards his Churches and Servants in this Nation, be discharged of them, and that he will cause them to return and fall back again into that Mare Mortuum, or lake from whence they, and all other waters of like danger and annoyance with them, issue forth into the world.
3. Whether the generality, or far greater part of§ 8. those, who take upon them to be guides and teach∣ers in your Congregations, and Assemblies, be not utterly incompetent and unmeet for such an under∣taking, as being deplorably ignorant of the mysterie of Christ, not able to divide the word aright, nor to wield and manage the Scriptures, especially where the deep things of God are treasured up, but with unspeakable detriment and loss to the Faith and Ho∣liness, and consequently to the solid peace and com∣fort, of those who depend upon them.
4. Whether the Doctrines, or at least the great∣est part of the Doctrines, that are handled and taught in your Congregations, be not rais'd upon mistaken senses, and perverted meanings of the Scriptures, unto which they pretend; yea, and ma∣naged upon weak, irrelative, and impertinent
 grounds, and either wholly mis-applyed, or else so weakly and loosely applyed, that they leave no weighty, no effectual or lively impression of their truth, or import, upon the spirits and consciences of the hearers?
5. Whether, the now-named deficiences, with§ 9. several other disorders too frequent amongst you, considered, there be any great presence of Jesus Christ at any time in your holy Assemblies, or such as is frequently manifest in the assemblies of other Churches, or whether you have any countenance from heaven, either in gifts, or graces, comparable to other Churches of the Saints? And whether the principal, if not the only cement and band, that keeps and holds your Churches and Congregations together, be not the simple conceit that you are, by means of your new Baptisme, gotten neerer to God, and deeper in his favour then other men, how holy or worthy soever otherwise above your selves?
6. Whether the bulk and main body of persons, whether men, or women (for I hope better things of some of you, and which accompany Christian sobri∣ety, and true mortification) but whether the genera∣lity or far greater part of persons of your judgement and practise, in the Nation, be not so far from that Christian sweetness, humility, and meekness of spirit which becometh those, who profess themselves ba∣ptized into the death of Christ, & buried with him in Baptism, towards all men, that they scarce retain the moral principles of common Civility; but are hea∣dy, rash, fierce, despisers of others (yea of good men) self-conceited, arrogant, quarrelsome, cla∣morous, captious, vain boasters, unjust defamers of men dissenting in judgement from them, still up∣on
 all disputes between men of their judgement, and others, about Baptisme, how weakly soever their cause hath been pleaded by her Patrons, and how potently and manifestly soever overthrown by her Adversaries, yet ringing the great Bell of Ephesus for joy of the victory, Great is Diana of the Ephesi∣ans, Great is the Doctrine of Ana-baptisme and prevaileth; Cum{que} passim isti [Anabapti∣stae] de victo∣riâ ab Oeco∣lampadio re∣portatâ gloriarentur, edidit ille Colloquii cum Anabaptistis habiti acta. Scultet. Annal. Dec. 1. An. 1625.
Ʋt primum Constantiam venit [Balthasar Anabaptista] apud ministros verbi sic nos calumniatus est, victoriam{que} suam de Catabaptismo jactavit, ut nesciam an nillos in odium nostri traxerit. Ibid.
In disputatione autem suprà modum erant vehementes, parati mori potius quàm cedere.
Balthazar quidam Anabaptista, literis ad Senatum. Tigurinensem polli∣cetur se Zuinglium suis Scripturis superaturum de Baptismo. Ibid. Anabaptisme (it seemeth) being more hardy, then God supposed the King of Tyre would be (Ezek. 28. 9.) and daring to say in the hands of him that slayeth her, I am God, I am a divine Truth?
7. Whether any person, man or woman, who§ 10. have turned Proselyte to your way, hath ever given, or at this day can give, any competent satisfaction unto men, by any sensible growth in grace, in knowledge, in faith, in love, in humility, in fruit∣fulness, &c. that their Proselytism in this kind hath added so much as one cubit, nay so much as one hairs bredth, to their spiritual stature, or that their souls have prospered to any degree, by means of their new Baptism? Nay,
8. Whether a very great number (at least) of those, who have done homage to your way, and have bowed down their judgements and consciences unto it, have not been spiritual losers by the change,
 sensibly declining and decaying in their graces, in those Christian and worthy principles and dispositi∣ons, which at first they brought with them unto your way, waxing much worse after their new Baptizing, then they were before; as if their new Baptisme had not been into Christ, or into his death, but ra∣ther into old Adam, and into his life? And whether you your selves, in several of your Congregations, are not experimentally sensible of such a frequent declining and putrifying of your Members, as this, casting out, and cutting off, great numbers of them from day to day? I was somwhat more particularly re-minded to put you upon consideration of these two particulars (last mentioned) by occasion of some of my acquaintance formerly, who since have stum∣bled in the dark into your way. These (I confess) are not many: only this I have observed concerning them (and must needs upon this occasion testifie) that not any one of them, as far as an estimate can be made by what is visible, or discernable in point of conversation, profecit hilum, hath gained so much as the making of one hair either black or white, by the exchange of his Baptisme: but sundry of them have lost many degrees of that sweet Christian sa∣vour, and love, wherewith they excellently adorn∣ed the Gospel before, I will not positively say, by, but upon, after, and since, the translation of their judgements into your way.
9. Whether amongst men and women, whose§ 11. Consciences have at any time been surprized with a conceit of more goodness in your way then in the contrary, and so have betaken themselves unto it, such who have been either the most Christianly meek and humble on the one hand, or the most judi∣cious,
 sober, learned, and best composed on the other hand, have not upon a little experience of your way, grown cool, and very indifferent in their thoughts about it; yea, and many repented of their weakness and surprisal, and forsaken your tents, as (about Luthers time) Oecolampadius, Johonnes Ga∣ster, Pfistermeierus, Johannes Denkius (persons of great learning, worth, and humility) with several others; and of late yeers, many of like character among our selves, whom, if I judged it convenient, I could name. Only I may be free (I presume) to mention that concerning Mr. Richard Baxter (a man as like as any man I know, to make a crooked generation streight, if it be possible) which himself hath published of himself, viz. that his foot was once very neer to be taken in this snare. Huldericus Zuinglius a man of most signal worth likewise in his times, maketh the like acknowledgement, in these words: Wherefore I my self (that I may ingenu∣ously confess the truth) some yeers ago, being deceived with this error, thought it better that childrens Baptisme should be delayed until they came to full age.
10. Whether since the first invention and practise of your way in later times, which according to Sculetus, who wrote the History of the Reformation of Christian Religion by Luther, and other his Assi∣stants (partakers of the same grace with him there∣in) was in the yeer 1521. Origo fa∣naticae na∣baptistarum sectae ic Anno deb∣tur. Scultet. Annal. Dec. 1. in Anno 1521. Nicolaus Ciconia, Marcus Stubnerus, Martinus Cell∣rius, Thomas Muntzerus primi hujus sectae nominantur Authores. Ibid. men of your judgement, wherever (almost they have come, have not obstru¦structed the course and proceedings of the Gospel, opposed, troubled, defamed, the most faithful and worthy Instruments of Christ, in the work of Re∣formation,
 and upon this account been complained of by them. Cursum Evangelii remorata sunt in Germaniâ, & extra Germaniam, bellum rusticanum & Sacramentarium: in Helvetiâ & Moraviâ, secta Ana∣baptistica. Scltet. Annal. Dec. 1. Anno 1525. Sangallensis Ecclesia va∣variè per Anabaptistas fuit excercita. Idem pag. 262, 263.
In Sueviâ, Ʋlmensibus & Augustanis vel maximè molesti erant Ana∣baptistae. Dolet mihi (ait Zuinglius) fideles à Cata-baptistis esse seductos. Et paulò pòst. Efficient [Anabaptistae] ut aliquandiu rem Christianam re∣morentur: at nihil solidi ad maturitatem perducent. Idem Annal. Dec. 2. p. 92. Vicessimo septimo Anno fervent Bella Anabaptisticum & Sacramenta∣rium, magno Ecclesiarum Evangelicarum malo. Idem in initio Anni 1528. Jhannes Leydensis, Anabaptista vehemens, privatim rga ex Evangelii Doctribus initio, cum in eorum sermn familiariter se insinuasst, num ar∣bitrtr pavuls rectè baptizari? Cum affirmaren, ill, qui totus erat dediu contrariae opinioni. coetire, & contemnere. Joh. Sleidan. Com∣ment lib. 10. Plopst. Snaus interea, priusquam è ss illi [Ana∣baptist] latibuldnuo prodient, onia tema cladit, uno solu aperto. Nam metus erat ne Anabatist, quorum ide aues cbat nuerus comi∣tati suis doctoribus. Evangelii praecones è templ extrbarnt. Jam nemini sobrio ambiguum sore arbitror, quàm temerè Ecclesiam Christi cnturbent, qui rixas ac contentiones movent ob paedo-baptismum. Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 16. §. 32. Hypocrisi veritas ac sinceritas Evangelicae pietatis insensiorem hostem non habet. Tria hominum genera sunt, in quibus hoc apparet; Pharisaei, Monachi, Anabaptistae. De nobis nots lquor. Musculus in Mat. c. 16. 6. Ita solent & hodie Adversarii veritatis, Papistae & Anabaptistae. Idem in Mat. c. 17. Anabaptistas aliquot punierunt nostri Principes, non quod ea dicerent quae sentirent, ne{que} ut vi cogerentur ad veram amplectan dum Reli∣gionem, sed quod totius humanae sccietatis vinculum abrumperent, quod per∣fidiosi essent Apostatae, quod verbum Dei manifestissime corrumperent, quod Ecclesiae Authoritatem haberent ludibrio, quod civium consensum factiose la∣cerarent. Beza de Haereticis a Magistratu puniendis. p. 163. Minime ergo Audiendi sunt Anabaptistae, quibus non satis est Ecclesiae ordinem turbasse, nisi Rempublicam quo{que} adorti, Magistratus omnes ex solis deturbent &c. Sunt hi, non solum Reipublicae & Magistratuum hostes, verum etiam pestes humani generis &c. Lavater. in Fsther. c. 10. 1, 2, &c. Meum ergo fuit (testor) con∣silium, pis omnes non satis adhuc excercitatos admonere, quàm lethale vene∣num sit dogma Cata-baptistarum, & adverss illud verbo Dei tanquam cer∣tissimo antidot eos praemunire, ne misere pereant. Calvin adversus Anaba∣ptistas in praefat. Nunc vero (ut jam dixi) sufficiet omns veritatis studisos, monuisse, quicquid miseri isti homines communi consensu pro inexpugnaili fun∣damento fidei suae habent lethalem imposturam esse, à quà, tanquam à pst, omnes cavere oportet. Ibid. Ex quibus omnibus manifestum est, impugnatio∣nem poedo-baptismi non esse leve erratum, sed impium dogma, verbo Dei & consolationi Ecclesiae adversum. Quo magis vitanda sunt haec & similia dli∣ria Sectae Ana-baptisticae, quae sine dubio à Diabolo est excitata, & monstrum est execraile, ex variis haeresibus & blasphemiis conflatum, Ʋrsin. Catech. Part. 2. Qu. 74. De poedobaptismo. These Quotations are (for the most part) englished in the fiftieth of the Considerations ensuing.
11. Whether those great enemies of the Prote∣stant§ 12. and pure Religion, and of the true Worship of God, the Papists, and many subtile Agents for the advancement of the Interest of the Romish Religion, have not from time to time, upon all oc∣casions, insinuated themselves into persons of your opinion and practise, secretly incouraging you in your way, in order to the sore disturbance, and, if possible, the utter ruine and subversion of the Prote∣stant Religion? Anaba∣ptistae, cum disputationi∣bus, nihil pro∣fici viderent, & non de es∣sent à quibus Evangelii Doctrinam prorsus ex∣terminatam volentibus, in furore suo confirmaren∣tur &c. Scultet. An∣nal. Dec. 1. p. 257. Yea have there not been of late in this Nation; nay, are there not at present, men of that character at work amongst you, who by the op∣portunity of that troublesome and fiery spirit, which haunteth your way, hope to create some mischief of distraction and confusion, either in the Religious, or in the Politique affairs thereof, or in both?
12. Whether it be not a matter of frequent obser∣vation and report amongst Protestant Writers of best authority and credit, that persons carried away with your error, about Baptism, have still embraced and been infected with several other erroneous opi∣nions, of a worse and more dangerous consequence then it? See proof made of the affirmative. Consider. 51. yea and whether this observation of former times be not attested by the experience of the pre∣sent?
13. Whether it can be proved out of any good Author, that there ever was a society of your way, which proved not wicked, and this within no long time, after their first knotting? See page 85. Yea, and whether any person of note, and active for the promoting of your way, unless he either repented hereof, or died very timously, ever went out of the world, without some visible character of Gods dis∣pleasure on him? Or if it can be proved, or found, that any such person died upon terms of more grace, then so, as I am glad for his sake, whoever he was, who obtained that mercy from God, so am I sorry for all those, if any such were, or now be, who have been confirmed and hardned in their way by such an example.
Brethren, (though many of you will not recipro∣cate§ 13. the salutation with me) I desire to shew all ten∣derness in Christian respects unto you; and, if it be possible, to relieve, without offending you. And therefore I most earnestly, and with an enlarged heart entreat you (for your own sake) that you will seriously ponder the particulars now presented unto you, until you find your judgements and conscien∣ces charged home with the just and full weight of them. Let not your confidence of the goodness of your way be a snare unto you. Paul, when a Phari∣see, THOUGHT VERILY within himself, that he ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth and did accordingly. Acts 26. 9. You also know, who they were, that demanded of the Lord Christ, ARE WE ALSO BLINDE? And who againd Jon, 9. 40. demanded, SAY WE NOT WELL, that thou art a Samaritan, and hast a Divel? Joh. 8, 48. And yet again who He was that demanded of the Prophet, Which way
 went the spirit of the Lord from me to speak unto thee? 2 Chro. 18. 23. You very well know likewise, of what sort of men he is, of whom the Apostle gives this Character, , rashly [or, con∣jecturally] puffed up by his fleshly mind. Col. 2. 18. Nor are you ignorant, that they were not the worst of men, to whom the Apostle said, your glorying is not good. 1 Cor 5 6. Truth is seldom, or never, forsaken, but upon a strong presumption and conceit, in those who for∣sake her, of being an error; nor is an errour at any time embraced, but upon a like presumption of be∣ing a Truth. Your keen pertinacy, and high re∣solvedness in your way, the grounds on which you build, duly considered, is neither in any Christian, nor in any rational construction, any argument that you are in the Truth, but rather of the contrary. For as the Apostle upon his experience of men, said, All men seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christs, Phil. 3. 21. so is it matter of daylie observation, that when men have notions and conceits of their own, they exalt these upon Thrones, and charge men with an high hand, to give homage and reverence unto them, as Divine Truths; and in the mean time suf∣fer the truths of God, and of Christ, to shift for themselves as well as they can in the world. Yea it were wel (comparatively) if they did not fight against the truths of God in the quarrel of their own fond opinions and conceits.
For my self, if my satisfaction touching the Do∣ctrine§ 14. and practise asserted in both parts of the en∣suing discourse, were not rich indeed, and built up∣on such foundations of evidence and Truth, which I certainly know cannot fail, either me, or any other, that shall build on them; yea if I did not see quite
 through and through all that yet you have shewed unto me for the support of your cause, I should much rather have chose my lodging in the Chambers of death, then to have touched it by way of opposition with the least of my fingers. To fight against truth, being interpreted, is little less then to fight against God: and a madness it is for any man to think that ever his soul should prosper by such wars. My God and my conscience, have deeply engaged me in a warfare very troublesome and costly, even to con∣tend (in a manner) with the whole Earth round about me, and to attempt the casting down of high things, and imaginations in men, which exalt themselves against the knowledge of God. And dayly expe∣rience sheweth, that mens imaginations, as well those which lift up themselves against the know∣ledge of God, as those of a better and more blessed import, are their darlings, and that he that toucheth them, toucheth the Apple of their eye, and appear∣eth, upon the account, in the shape or likeness of an enemy unto them. The truth is, that to bear the hatred and contradiction of the world, as God hath made it my portion to do, is no whit more pleasing unto me, then the drinking of that cup, which the Lord Christ prayed thrice unto his Father might pass from him, was unto him. Notwithstanding as that, which was (in it self) bitter and grievous un∣to him, in this respect was not grievous at all, but acceptable, viz. that by suffering it, he might open an effectual door of life, and salvation unto the world; so doth the vehemencie and zeal of desire, which possesseth my reins, heart and soul, of doing some service to the world, whilest I am a sojourner in it, in making some of the crooked things thereof,
 streight, and leaving it at my departure from it, up∣on somewhat better terms for the peace and comfort of it, then I found it at my coming to it, swallow up much of that offensiveness and monstrousness of tast, wherewith otherwise the most unreasonable and horrid measure, I receive from many in it, would affect and afflict my soul. But to bear the burthen of the hatred of men out of an affection of unfeigned love to them, is nothing more then what I know is my duty to do: and for his sake, who bear the burthen of my sins upon the Cross, out of an unfeigned love to me, and through his grace, I shall willingly do it.
I know not whither you will vouchsafe a perusal§ 15. of the papers here presented to you, or no. It is not long since I heard of some stirrings and mutterings of that perverse spirit amongst some of you, which about the time when your way first began to be oc∣cupied in Germany, tempted men to burn all their other books and writeings, but the Bible onely. Post hc Idem prophe∣ta [Johan∣nes, Marthe∣us, Anaba∣tista] man∣dbat, ne quis ullum deinceps li∣brum habe∣ret, aut sibi servaret, prae∣terquam sa∣cra Biblia: reliquos om∣nes in publi∣cum deferri jubet & a∣boleri: hoc se mandatum divinitùs ac∣cepisse dicebat. Ita{que} magno numero libri comportati, flammà fuerunt om∣nes absumpti. Joh. Sleidan, Comment. l. 10. If you be resolved to read no other book but the Bi∣ble, and judge your selves wiser then he, who be∣ing demanded whether he understood that which he read [in the Scriptures,] made answer, How can I, except some man guid me Act. 8. 31.: I confess that by such a resolution, you will make an escape from me, and convey your selves out of my reach. But if you willfully turn your back upon those means which God affordeth you, for the knowledge of the truth, take heed lest this turneth to a root of bitterness unto you in the end. They who measure themselves by
 themselves, (saith the Apostle) and compare them∣selves with themselves, are not wise 2 Cor. 10. 12.. Yet if you will make it matter of conscience to read the Scriptures with a single eye, and not bring your way with you, unto them, you will never find it here. Luther, Calvin, Beza, Bullinger, Musculus, Zuinglius, Me∣lancthon, Ursin, Zanchie, Perkins, Dod, with a thousand more of like diligence, faithfulness, and sharpness of discerning, who have search't the Scrip∣tures every whit as throughly, as narrowly as you have done, yet could never find your way here. The Consideration whereof (me thinks) should give you some stop in your carrier, and cause the greatest confidentiary amongst you, to turn himself about, and enquire of himself: Is there not a lye in my right hand Isa. 44. 20.. It will be no good account in the day of the Lord Jesus, to pretend, or say, we verily thought, we were highly confident, that we did both Thee, and thy Gospel, service, in opposing Infant-Baptism, in disturbing, rending and tearing thy Churches to promote our way of Rebaptizing in the world; especially considering that God sent so ma∣ny Scribes and wise men unto you, and this in a way of righteousness, to establish you against those puffs of new Doctrines, which notwithstanding have driv∣en you like unballassed vessels, quite off from the truth. Our Saviour foretelleth his Disciples of a generation of men, who when they should put them out of the Synagogues, yea, should kill them, would THINK that herein they did God good service Joh. 16. 2.. There is little question to be made, but that these men had as high thoughts of that wicked thought of theirs here mentioned, as you have of yours touching, Rebap∣tizing; yea and that they pretended the same divine
 Authority for the justification of it, which you pre∣tend for yours. You have no more express Scrip∣ture for your thought, then they had for theirs: and as it appears that they were not infallible in arguing or concluding from the Scriptures, so neither (I pre∣sume) will you assume to be. They miscarryed, because they hearkened not unto them, who plainly declared the truth unto them: Oh, stumble not you at this stone.
I have detained you with somewhat an over-long Epistle; but I trust there is nothing in it, except it be the length, that can offend you. My hope is the same concerning the treatises ensuing, drawn up with equal respects, to the regaining (at least of some) of you, from your errour, as for the establishing of others in that way of truth, wherein they stand. On∣ly I was willing to cast the honour of the Dedication (if there be any such thing as honor in it) appropri∣ately upon you. If you wil please to read them with a like candid and Christian minde, as that wherewith they were drawn up for your service, I little questi∣on but that through the blessing of God, they will recompence your time and labour bestowed on them. If their access to your judgements and con∣sciences be obstructed with prejudice and conceit, you will will have much more reason to complain of your selves, then of them, in case your reading turn to no account of satisfaction unto you. Disin∣genuity is the great partition wall, which at this day separates between a world of men, and a world of truth. That Mr. Baxter's book of plain Scripture Proof for Infant-Baptism, should have been so long extant in the world, and yet Anabaptism still alive, is to me a plain demonstration that the world is sadly
 defective in point of Christian ingenuity. Weakness of capacity, slowness of apprehension, darkness of understanding, aversness to consider, might be all (at least to a very great measure) redeemed by an ardent love unto the Truth. But it is the coming of Daniels 1335. days that will bring this blessedness upon the world. In the mean time, they who through the Grace of God are prevented with the great happi∣ness of an ingenuous spirit, and have an heart given them willing to lie large and free before the truth, must be content with patience to bear the heavie burthens of the importunity and waywardness of other men.
You are all heartily recommended to the Grace of that God, who is light, and in whom there is no darkness at all, to be made by him like unto him, ac∣cording to your capacities of so glorious a simili∣tude, by

Coleman-street, London, May▪ 29. 1655.
