



Reverend and much honoured and re∣spected in the Lord,
I Presume you have all taken speciall knowledge of a Booke not long since presented un∣to you by a Levi∣ticall hand, entitu∣led, Socinianisme Discovered and Confuted: What Quar∣ter the Divinitie of the said Discourse hath in your approbations, I doe not yet so well understand, as I desire I might; but for
the moralitie of it, I make no question but you have done justice upon it, aswell to mine, as to other mens satisfaction. .
2 Cor. 2.6. I doe not here offer unto you, any formall answere or confutation of that piece, be∣cause if I could doe the Truth, and my selfe right otherwise, I would willingly de∣cline all personall contention and contesta∣tion: I only lay downe more fully and at large, mine owne judgement, concerning those things, about which the question is still depending betweene my Antagonist and me, conceiving it a speciall duty lying upon me, as the case stands, to give an in∣genuous and faire account unto your selves especially; and from you, to all men, of what I hold therein, aswell by making knowne what Scriptures, and reasons and grounds otherwise, have commanded my judgement to that point, whereat it now stands, as wherefore I judge both those Scriptures and arguments impertinent and insufficient to prove the contrary, which have hitherto bin produced & insisted up∣on
for that purpose, either by my Adver∣saries in the mentioned Discourse, or any other I can meet with. Nor doe I make the least question, but that when you have diligently examined the particulars of my account, you will give me your quietus est, for the Totall. Or in case you shall deny me this, that you will give me in the stead thereof (that which will be of equal, or rather of superior consideration to me) better reasons and grounds for the contra∣rie opinion, then I here deliver for mine. It is of sweet and comfortable importance, to be accompanied in the way of a mans judgement, by those that are learned and religious: yet is it much more desirable of the two, to be turned a side out of a way of error by an high hand of evidence and truth.
Since God ingaged me in these and some other controversies, and the oppositions of men grew strong and thick upon me, I have bestowed some time and thoughts to finde out and possesse my selfe through∣ly of such considerations, which might
make me willing, yea & more then willing (if it might be) rejoycingly willing, to im∣brace such opportunities, wherein I may exchange error for truth. And if God hath not given me darknesse for a vision here∣in, I apprehend a marveilous bewtie, be∣nefit, and blessing in such a frame of spi∣rit, which makes a man able, and wil∣ling and joyfull, to cast away even long endeered and professed opinions, when once the light hath shone upon them, and discovered them to be but darknesse. I looke upon ignorance and error and all misprision in the things of God, and of the glorious Gospell of Jesus Christ, as that region in the soule, wherein only dolefull creatures, as Owles and Satyrs, and Dra∣gons, I meane feares and terrors and di∣stractions, spirituall tumults, and stormes and tempests are ingendred and begotten. If all were light and truth in the judgment, all would be peace and sweet∣nesse and joy in the heart and soule Ther∣fore to me it is no more grievous to aban∣don any opinion whatsoever, being once
cleerely detected, and substantially evicted for an error, then it is to be delivered out of the hand of an enemy, or to take hold of life and peace. But on the other hand, it argues childishnesse in understanding, and a bundle of weaknesse & folly bound up in the heart, to be baffled out of a mans judgment with every light and loose pre∣tence. The raine fell as sore, and the floods came with as great rage; and the winds blew with as much violence against the house that was built upon the rock, as up∣on that which was built upon the Sand: yet that fell not, as this did Mat. 7.25, 26, 27. In like manner many opinions that are built upon the Rock and Foundations of the Scriptures, being truths of very deere and precious importance, are capa∣ble of asmuch opposition and contradi∣ction from men, may have Forts and Bull∣warkes and Batteries of as much strength in apearance, raised up against them, as opinions that are loose, and lighter in the ballance then vanitie it selfe; yet are they not therefore to be forsaken. I presume
my keene Adversary himselfe, had his pa∣tience bin pleased to have awaited the sight and consideration of the whole bo∣dy and frame of my discourse, would have kept his Sword in his Scabberd, and not drawne upon me with that violence and extremity of passion which now he hath done.
However, I have presumed to follow him in the way of his Dedication: (fas est et ab hoste doceri) knowing none more able then your selves to comprimize a difference of this nature, according to e∣quitie and truth, and withal desiring none more indifferent and upright to give an a∣ward, then I hope to finde a competent number (at least) of you. I make no que∣stion but you all studie of conscience, and then you cannot make flesh your arm. I crave leave to be your remembrancer of this, that suspicion of falshood hath al∣waies bin a calamitie incident to truth. Nor can the integritie, zeale, faithfulnesse, parts, learning, diligence of a Minister of Jesus Christ, quit or expresse themselves
upon more honourable and worthy termes, then in vindicating and relieving a distressed truth, and breaking the staffe of the oppressors thereof, be they never so many in number, never so great in Au∣thority and power. The only art and method of raising an estate of honour and peace out of our errors, is by sacri∣ficing them upon the honour and ser∣vice of the truth. This is a way to cir∣cumvent the great circumventer the Divell, and to turne his weapons upon himselfe. He sends errors out of Hell, to curse the truth: but by this meanes you shall cause them to blesse her altogether. Truth never gets up into her throne with that advan∣tage, as when her enemy (the opposite error) is made her footestoole.
If we have built tymber, hay, or stub∣ble, upon the precious foundation Iesus Christ, instead of silver, gold, and preci∣ous stones, it is a point of the greatest wisdome under Heaven, to prevent the triall of the fire, by a serious and strict examination of our own, or from our
Errors, together with other loose and light materialls in our spirituall build∣ings, leave us salvation indeed, but upon the hardest and least desirable termes that it can be received by a creature.
1 Cor. 3.15. If any mans worke shall burne (saith the Apostle) he shall suffer losse: but he himselfe shall be saved, yet so as by fire. The laying of the right foundation, though it may keepe us from being consumed, yet will it not keepe us from being scorched with the fire of Gods displeasure, if we miscarie in the walls, and raise these quite besides the foundation: we must looke to abide a bitter blast of chiding from Heaven, if we be found remisse, and carelesse herein, and put in tymber gilded with the con∣sents and approbation of men, instead of beaten silver and gold.
But I reflect upon my error and bold∣nesse in representing things of this nature unto you, who have much more need to learne both these and many other things from you my selfe. And if you will please to communicate of your light unto me
when you meet me in the darke (which is a walke much frequented by mortali∣tie) I shall be as thankfull a Proselyte of yours, as you can lightly wish or desire.
The God of glory, whom you serve in the Gospell of his deere Sonne, double that anointing upon you which teacheth you all things, and shine in your hearts a∣bundantly, to give the light of his know∣ledge in the face of Iesus Christ, unto the world, and give you of the labour and tra∣vaile of your soules, in the spirituall pros∣peritie of your severall Flocks and charges, that at last you may shine like stars in the firmament of Heaven, for ever and ever.
This is none other but the hearty and affectuous prayer of,

From my Studie in Cole∣manstreet, Jan. 24. 1641.
