



SIRS,
MAy it please you, Saul that great Persecu∣tor
of the new beginning Church of
Christ, that enemy who breathed out
threatnings and slaughter against the di∣sciples
of the Lord, after he was cast down from his
horse, and his pride was quelled by the might and
power of Christ, he was by the Lords order com∣mitted
to the care of Ananias, Acts 9. 11. True it is,
Ananias answered the Lord, that he was jealous and
fearefull of Saul, because he had heard by many,
how much evill he had done to the Saints at Jerusa∣lem,
13. v. But the Lord replyed no more unto him,
but that he should not feare nor mistrust him, be∣cause
he had turned his heart, and made him a cho∣sen

vessell to beare his name before the Gentiles, and
Kings, and children of Israel, & that he would teach
him how great things he should suffer for his names
sake. Let it please your Honour and Worships to
behold here my own case deciphered; for if Saul per∣secuted
the Church of Christ; I my selfe have perse∣cuted
the same Church, by opposing the doctrin of
it, by preaching and teaching contrary to it, by pro∣curing
to seduce soules from it, by writing against
it. But now it hath pleased that mighty and power∣full
Lord; against whom there is no resistance, to
cast me down upon the ground, to quell my pride,
to lighten me round about with the beames and
light of his mercies, to make me know how hard a
thing it is to kicke against the will & calling of God,
and with trembling and feare to make me say, Lord
what wilt thou have me to do? If Saul was sent to Da∣mascus
to Ananias, a chiefe and zealous follower of
Christ, that by him he might be protected from the
Jews and enemies of the Lord, who doubtles hearing
of his change and conversion would have cruelly
torne and slaughtered him if they could have found
him. So I my selfe by a secret and inward order,
which I have found by God delivered to my Soule,
have judged it meet and fit to search out in this City
some zealous Ananias, some religious follower of
Christs pure doctrin, that I may be safely sheltered &

protected from the violent attēpts of the Lords ene∣mies
the Papists, who I know will endeavour to do
me all the mischief they can. Therfore let it please
your Honor and Wps. who are well known to be as
Ananias in Damascus, zealous and truly religious fol∣lowers
of Christs own doctrin, and favorers of the
pure Word of the Lord, to cast your eyes upon me a
new converted Saul, to shelter and protect me from
those that plot my mischief. O when surest they are
to hinder my perseverance in the truth, by plotting
and studying my destruction, let them find me hove∣ring
under the wings of your protection. O feare
not! nor say what Ananias said, I have heard by many
of this man, how much evill he hath done to thy Saints, but
praise the work of the Lord in me, who hath opened
now my eyes, who hath brought me now out of Ba∣bylon,
who hath made me confesse my sins and ini∣quities
with a sorrowfull and contrite heart. And as
it pleased the Lord to shew Saul, as soon as he was
converted how great things he should suffer for his
names sake; even so be you confident, as I my self am
that this my calling & conversion is purely & meer∣ly
from above and from the Lord; from whom I
have receiv'd this testimony, that he hath shewed me
already how great things I must suffer for his names
sake; for I must for him suffer many injuries and ca∣lumniations
from the Papists, I must suffer the losse

of all my kinred, I must suffer the losse of that main∣tenance,
which I was wont to receive from them, I
must suffer want and poverty. But for whom? For
the Lords sake; for the teaching and preaching the
precise rule of the Word of the Lord, for abjuring all
Popish errors, for renouncing all supertitions, for ab∣horring
all idolatries. Let these my sufferings serve
to your Honor and Worships for a true testimony of
my conversion; let these my sufferings remove from
you all feares and jealousies of my perseverance, that
thus with your favorable protectiō I may rejoyce in
my calling, I may freely teach the pure Word of the
Lord, I may oppose all Antichristian doctrin, and by
my example may draw many wandring soules to the
true Faith & Church of Christ. And I shall alwayes
pray to the Lord to keep your Honor and Worships
in grace, and that you may so rule & govern this Ci∣ty
by your conscionable and upright actions before
God and men, that you may truly here be called zelo∣tes
of the Honour of the Lord, and afterwards you
may have your seats above in the triumphant City
of Jerusalem.

