




MOST honoured friends; custom hath made the Dedication of Books almost as common as printing of them, and wisdome directs there to dedicate where we owe
 most respect, and doe con∣ceive they will be best ac∣cepted. I therefore owing my service to you both for some favours recei∣ved, and presuming upon your favourable accept∣ance, have made bold to prefixe your names to this ensuing Dialogue, which I hope holds forth a lit∣tle light to that way of Church-Discipline which you, Honoured Sir, have beene pleased much to countenance, by conde∣scending so farre below yourself (as some of your ranke would have estee∣med it) in accepting of the Office of a Ruling-El∣der when you were cho∣sen,
 in that Congregation whereof you have beene pleased to admit mee a member.
I have endeavoured to discover the exactnesse of the Presbyteriall way in the case of examination of Communicants, and how circumspect you are who you doe admit, that so our discenting brethren, see∣ing how neere you come to the golden rule, may bee moved thereby to come in amongst us, that we may be perfectly joyned together in the same minde and in the same judgement, and so knit together in love according to Gods owne minde, 1 Cor. 1. 10. Col. 2. 2.




 For as a gracious spiritDr. Sibs brused reed, p. 220. once breathed out, there can hardly be a discovery of any difference in opi∣nion without some e∣strangement of affection, so far as men are not of one minde they will hard∣ly be of one heart, except where grace and the peace of God beare great rule in the heart.
Wherefore if my work∣manship in the handling f this subject, were as od as my aimes and in∣ions are, I might boldly say, It were no disparagement to your names to afford it your patronage; yet will I not disparage it, for that may
 be thought to be a secret begging of commendati∣ons; onely I say, I having thus farre presumed, I be∣seech you both to connive at my boldnesse, and vouchsafe to favour these mine endeavours, that so by your acceptance they may be commended unto others, and so shall you further oblige me to re∣maine

