


Fathers and Brethren:
THe goodnesse of God, manifested of old to England (in causing the Sun of his Gospel to rise early up∣on this Nation, and to finde such entertainment in the hearts of the Supreame Power, that it was the first Nation that ever received the Gospell with the countenance of publick Authority, having the first Christian King that ever was) is knowne to the whole Christian world; his goodnesse in these latter dayes, since he tooke from our necks the Anti-christian yoke, hath been also won∣derfull, honouring the Ministers of his Gospel with such Holinesse, Learning. Ministeriall abilities, and successe in their labour in conver∣ting many, and setting up the power of godlinesse in this Nation, that he hath not honoured any Nation more; nay (without pride it may be spoken) his Free Grace hath not honoured any Nation so much in these respects, as this English Nation; but now in our dayes the Ministry, which God hath thus honoured, is as much dishonoured, and that by such, who cannot but acknowledge (their owne mouthes have spoken it) that what Spirituall good they have received, it was wrought by the Ministry; and now we finde scorning, deriding, separating from the Ministry, and many not so much as stepping over their thresholds,
to heare them, who were the first instruments of their good (if they have any, as some we hope have) and yet the Ministers are the same they were before; yea, some repenting, that ever they bestowed so much paines and time to follow the Minister, as one that lives but foure or five miles from Dedham hath said, He repented that he followed that eminent Servant of God, Mr. Rogers so much, to heare his prea∣ching. While I observed these things, and considered into what a sad condition we are fallen, and read over your Vindication, in which I saw a holy, meeke, and true Christian spirit breathing, calling upon the Congregationall men to joyne with you; certainly I thought that Booke deserved a courteous Christian answer from the ablest of our Congregationall men: what they have done towards it I know not, (being little acquainted with affaires abroad, being locked up in much sadnesse of spirit at home) but I thought with my selfe, that be∣ing I was numbred among the Independents (though I am the weakest, and most worthy the holy Lord should turne me out of his holy Work) laying other things together (which I have mentioned in the Epistle to the Reader) I resolved to improve the little Talent the Lord had gi∣ven me, in examining the grounds of these practices, and to stand up in the defence of such Ministers, who I saw were deare to Christ, and whom in holinesse, learning, and abilities, the Lord had honoured farre before my selfe. And now (my Fathers) the quarrell is not only with you, because you are Presbyteriall Ministers, the quarrell is with the whole Ministry, for this spirit hath infected even some in New Eng∣land, and I beleeve will cause more troubles there in those Churches, then ever the Bishops did, though they threatned them much. What are the practices of some, and what are the feares of the worthy Mini∣sters there, I understand by Letters. I doe not, I dare not censure the Congregationall Churches here, some of the Ministers I know to be ho∣ly, and reverent (I wish I had such grace) many Members no doubt are really godly; but had I not lived in New England, and seene the Churches there, by what I heare of divers, and what I know by some Churches here, I should have been convinced that Independent (as it is here called) Government, was never of Christs institution. I have observed few people that come once to stand up for Independency, but they grow very tender (as they call it) towards corrupt Opinions, if not leavened with them themselves, not allowing a Minister to speake against them; yea, and those, whom I tooke to be the soberest and best grounded Christians, have not stuck to Censure New England sharply, for being too strict against those which they call, Non-fundamentall Er∣rors;
and I wish that some Ministers were not sicke of that policie, to plead for Toleration of such Opinions, esteeming it a peice of true Christian wisdome to be silent, and not to meddle, but comply with all Opinionists, especially, if they conceive them to be not in the funda∣mentals, which are but a few.
Hierome thought it was Augustines honour,
Aug. Epist. 25. that he so strongly opposed the Heresies of his time, that all the Hereticks hated him; to oppose by Argument is good, yea and to discountenance the con∣tumacious is not amisse; but it is now an honour for a man to be si∣lent. For your parts (my Fathers) you and the godly Presbyterians of England, are esteemed the causes of all these troubles; yea, I observe by Letters, which my selfe and others have received from the Divines of New England, that some have informed them, as if you were the causes of the second Warre, when Duke Hamilton, and Lord Go∣ring, &c. arose. Also that you are so adverse to the Congregationall Churches here, that you had rather joyne with the Common Enemy, and hazzard your owne Liberties, then enjoy your Liberties with your Brethren, the Congregationall men; but you have I thinke sufficiently cleared your selves from these aspersions in your Vindication, yea, and so can the Congregationall men cleare you, I beleeve; there is one re∣port that goes for truth, and that amongst persons of note, and upon that ground I perceive, I meane some men here, they much satisfie themselves in this scorne cast upon you, viz. That the Assembly of Divines, when things were likely to settle on the Presbyterian side, should determine, That Congregationall Ministers should not be allowed any publicke place to preach in, nor should be allowed any publick maintenance. This is certainly beleeved by men of note, I wish the truth were cleared; I am not ignorant what provocation it was, to have your people taken from you, &c. but yet I can hardly beleeve the Assembly to be so hard to their Brethren.
Further (but that I am too meane to move, and know not whi∣ther my motion be good or no in your thoughts) I could heartily wish, you would please to declare,
Pag. 119, 120, 121. how farre you could yeeld to the Con∣gregationall Brethren: you have hinted some things in your Vindication, which imply much; but if it were thought meet to speake out a little more fully, then should our New England Divines clearly understand where the greatest cause of this dis-union lyes, against all false re∣ports that are sent to them.
And now (my reverend Fathers) I beseech you accept of this testi∣mony of the honour I owe you, having ventured after many resoluti∣ons
to the contrary (fearing my weaknesse) to dedicate this Treatise to you, it being the greatest desire of my heart to see the Kingdome of Christ, first exalted in my owne wretched heart, and then to see Classicall, and Congregationall men joyning together, with one shoul∣der to set up his visible Kingdome in England, opposing Errour and Schisme, and Christ riding in Triumph upon his white Horse, con∣quering soules by his poore Instruments, that once it may be said of England, The Lord blesse thee, O habitation of Justice, and moun∣taine of Holinesse.
Ier. 31.23.

Jan. 19. 1651.

