


Right Honourable;
IT is a memorable saying of an ancient Heathen; He is the bravest man, that knowes best how to be injured . Menan∣der.. The lightest working of the Spirit towards a revenge, though upon the sharpest provo∣cation, being discovered, suffereth not a man to be seen in his glory. In the mean time it is a crown of glory upon the head of men in place, and of Divine parallell, to suffer such men to be least injured, who best know how to suffer; that is, to suffer alone, and without the least damage or danger, of any other man. The Anointed ones of God, especially his Prophets, know how to suf∣fer far above the rate, either of the wisdome or patience, of other men: and yet, of all others these must not be touch'd, or put to suffer: Touch not mine Anointed, and doe my Prophets no harm Psal. 105. 15..
This my most humble addresse unto you, rejoyceth in this; that it is altogether ignorant, at least in point of affection, of any wrong done to the Authour: and yet presenteth you witb an opportunity of being seen in the best of your glory. For upon a late conjunction of the Providence of God, with the improvidence of men, there hath issu∣ed from the Pulpit (as I hear from many hands) an undue repre∣sentation of me and my pen, into your ears, and that upon the day of your late solemn humiliation for the prevailing of Heresies and Bla∣sphemies in the Land, (besides what of this ill air I have cause in abundance to suspect, hath been breathed upon many of you at other times.)
To me (I speak the Truth, and lie not to your Honours) it is more easie to suffer, then complain: and had not my desire to make all
 your apprehensions (with other mens) thoughts of Honour and Truth, as farre as lieth in me, been stronger, then either of any re∣parations for my self, or of any disparaging reflection upon the offen∣dours, I had not lift up so much as a thought towards this Apo∣logie, or explication rather of my self. Yea so tender am I of the reputations of those who have mistaken me (to qualifie an hard action with a soft expression) that I am scarce free in my self to desire of your Honours so much as a perusall of the ensuing Explication, lst hereby they also may possibly suffer. Only herein (I must confesse) sorrow fills my heart, and I look upon the thing as little lesse then requiring another day of humiliation by way of atonement; viz. that in a day of so solemn a fast amongst professed Christians, Barrabbas should again be released, and Christ crucified; I mean, that many Er∣rours and heresies, which really are such, and reign to the great da∣mage and danger of the Truth, (yea and some of them to the distur∣bance of the peace) amongst us, should be dissembled, and passed by; sound assertions, and harmlesse expressions being in the mean time spread and arraigned before God, and men, and your Honours par∣ticularly, as the great Incentives of the displeasure of God against the Nation, and so destructive to the peace and happinesse of it.
I am not conscious to my self of the least wrong I have ever done, either to man, woman, or childe, in word or deed; nor of any re∣fusall of subjection to any just Law or imposition of men: if either my memory, or conscience, herein deceiveth me, I here stand forth, and humbly offer my self before your Honours, and all the world, to make satisfaction with the best of my substance, or otherwise, as farre as I am, or ever shall be able, upon any reasonable evidence or convi∣ction of the fact. If I have, either in any of my writings, or Sermons, or Discourses otherwise, uttered or asserted any thing erroneous and unsound; I here offer and submit my self in like manner, to sit at the feet of those, whom either of your Honourable Houses shall appoint to instruct me in the truth; being a thousand times more willing to offer sacrifice to the Truth, then to be a servant to any supposition un∣der Heaven .. For I know that it is Truth which sanctifieth Joh. 17 7., whereas errour defileth Nec quis er∣ror turpitudi∣ne caret. Aug. Labi autem, errare, nescire decipi & tur∣pe, & inhone∣stum ducimus: Ci. Offic.. Only I crave leave to make it my humble request unto you, that I may not be compelled to seek the living among the dead, Truth (I mean) amongst the presumptions, and infirm suppositions of men; but in the Scriptures, which are living, and
 where others say they both seek, and finde it. Strong Conclusions coming forth into the world leaning upon weak premises, have in all ages bereav'd the world of the use and benefit of the one halfe (at least) of that reason and understanding, which God with a liberall hand bestowed upon it for its own advancement in happinesse and peace. I call God for a record upon my soul 2 Cor. 1. 23., that I have not the least touch of a desire to be wise (in the things of God) either above, or besides, what is written [in the book of God] nor have I the least hope of rising up in wisdom to the due height of what is written herein, whilest the incumbrance of flesh and bloud hangeth on me: only my desires are, that in my conscientious endeavours to ascend this mountain, I may neither be thrust down by those that are above me, nor pull'd backward by those that are beneath. It would be (I conceive) an entrance in abundance into a better world, if men generally could be content to possesse their souls in patience, when they meet with others either weaker, or wiser, then themselves. Au∣gustin speaking of the sense of a difficult place of Scripture, saith thus: It may seem one thing to me, and another to another: but neither doe I impose upon him what I shall say upon it, for the better sence; nor he upon me Potest mihi aliquid videri, alteri aliud. Sed ne{que} ego quod dixero, praescribo al∣teri ad melio∣rem intelle∣ctum, ne{que} ille mihi. Aug in Euar. Psal. 36.. Scultetus also reports it for a saying much esteemed by Luther, and which he professeth that he first heard from Judocus (sometimes his Master.) Solis Canoni∣cis libris deberi fidem; caeteris omnibus judicium. i. that present belief is a debt due only to the Canonicall books of Scripture, but judgement or consideration, to all others.
I make no question but that your Honours know, that not only mens manners, but their Judgements and Doctrines also are apt in time, to warp, and to degenerate, unlesse God should ever and anon be stirring up some, who by dealing faithfully with them, should ne∣cessitate them to a recollection and survey of themselves in both. When the Priests complain'd of Luther to the Emperour Charles the fift; he plainly told them, that if they had been good, they should have stood in no need of such a Censor, or Corrector of manners, as Luther was Vita Religio∣sorum ita fae∣tebat ad vul∣gus, ut Carolus V. Imperator, Ecclesiasticis de Luthero con∣querentibus in Comitijs Augustanis re∣sponderit: Si vos sacrificuli pij ssetis, non indiguissetis Censore, & morum Corre∣ctore Luthero. Scultet. An∣nal Dec. 1. p. 15.. And it was the ingenious confession of an Abbot living in these times, that if Luther had not come amongst them, they should have perswaded the people to have fed upon hey Jam supersti∣tionibus ita e∣rant omnia oppleta, ut ce∣lebris Mona∣sterij Neuhu∣sani in Vangi∣onibus Abbas dixerit (vera narro) Si Lu∣therus non ve∣nisset, se per∣suasuros fuisse populo, ut foe∣no latrantem stomachum placassent. Ibid.. I wish the observation taken up long since by Minutius Felix, received not so large a testimony as it doth, from our present times:
 Many (saith he) out of a loathnesse to weary themselves in seek∣ing out the Truth, turn in to the errours next at hand. For my self, my love is such to the precious souls of men, that I cannot knowingly suffer any suspicious Doctrine, or loose opinion in the things of God, to passe thorow the world neer unto me, unexamined, especially when any Multi taedio investiganae veritatis, ad proximus ∣verunt . considerable numbers of men are like to suffer: which, though it be a thanklesse ingagement, and very obnoxious to those, who love either ease, or honour, more then cleannesse of judgement, and purenesse of minde and understanding; yet is it a proper and effectuall course to preserve the Doctrine of the Gospel, if not absolutely free from all, yet from that intermixture of errour, which commonly issueth from between the feet of a supine incogitancy and sloth in those, who are intrusted with the ministry of it.
But I reverence the Great concernments of the Kingdom in your hands: wherein, as from the beginning I have served you with all faithfullnesse and simplicity of heart hitherto, so am I unwilling now to make my self a Trespasser, so much as by an impertinent diversion of your Honours from your attendance thereon. The great and blessed God, whose is the Kingdom, power, and glory, fill your Assemblies from day to day with the presence of his glory; by keep∣ing your judgements in a due distance of precedencie to your affections; and both judgements and affections in a due proximitie and neernesse to himself, that so the whole Nation may yet rise up before you as one man, and call you blessed, and your Name be, The repairers of the great breach, and the restorers of paths to dwell in Isa. 58. 12., thorough many generations. Such is the prayer of
Martij 26. 1647.

