



Dear Christian Brethren,
THE daies of mine abiding with you in the flesh, neither you, nor my self can expect should be many. The Law of morta∣lity established in Heaven, and daily put in vigorous execution on Earth, cutteth off this hope and expectance, both from you and me. But the comfort is, the hole of this pit is not onely levelled and fill'd up, but a mount also rai∣sed upon it, by the Law of life which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. If our forlorn of ministeriall accommo∣dations be scattered and defeated, by the hand of death, or otherwise, our reserve in Heaven will ad∣vance, and bring us off from the world with honour and peace howsoever. The great and precious pro∣mises
 of life and salvation unto those who beleeve, for the making good whereof Jesus Christ himself with all his glory, are given in pawn and pledge unto the world, are not suspended upon the presence of a mor∣tall man, one or other, but glory in the truth, faithfull∣nesse, and power, of him who hath made them, and are ready to swallow up into victory, whatsoever shall threaten, or oppose their performance.
Not withstanding, as the great Apostle, though (as he saith) he know how to be hungry, as well as to be full, and to suffer want as well as to abound, yet ac∣knowledged to his Philippians, that they had done well in communicating with his affliction Phil. 4. 12, 14.. In like manner however the great and glorious God, knows as well how to want, as to abound, in respect of ministeriall dispensations, and is able without his earthen vessels, to convey his vessels of honour, into their blessednesse and glory, yet there is little question to be made, but that he graciously, accepteth the diligent and faithfull service even of these his earthen vessels, in making one shoulder with him to advance and carry on this great and blessed design. And for you though I am upon grounds of sobernesse and truth abundantly confident (at least of many of you) that your anointing is such, that you stand in as little need of any mans teaching 1 Joh. 2. 27., as any other people, yet I know also, that no people whatsoever will more thankfully rellish and accept of the labour and travell of any mans soul, either for their edification, or establishment, then you.
Upon these two considerations in conjunction with the great and longing desire of my soul, that your whole spirit and soul, and body, may be preserved blame∣lesse,
 unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ 1 Thes. 5. 23.. I shall endeavour, whilst I yet remain with you, to prevent as much as may be, any supposed or feared inexpedi∣ency in my departure from you. And this (I judge) I shall attempt upon the best terms of likelyhood of successe, by seeking to leave as much of my spirit with you, as I know how, when my bodily presence shall be disposed of otherwise. In order hereunto, not knowing how near the laying aside of this earthly tabernacle may be at hand, I have thought it meet not only to leave the ensuing treatise, for your perusall after that generall manner, wherein it is left for other men, but to incorporate with it, the expresse mention, and that dear remembrance of you, which I have in my soul; that so in one and the same monument, the whole and intire spirit of your Pastor, as well for morals, as intellectuals, may be preserved for your converse, and to make company for your mindes and spirits, when you please.
You are my present joy; and will be (I hope) my future crown: for neither hath your faith hitherto, through any bewitchings of the flesh, presumed to as∣cend into Heaven, to bring downsome other Jesus, be∣sides him whom Paul preached, nor have you suffered your mindes to be corrupted from the simplicity of the Gospel: nor your selves to be baptized into any other spirit, then that which speaketh , i. expresly in the Scriptures. You have neither presumed to be wise above, nor yet been satisfied to be ignorant beneath, what is written. Whilst many professours have compassed themselves with sparks of their own kindling, you have warmed your hearts with faith and love at that fire, which Jesus
 Christ himself came from Heaven to kindle on the earth Luk 12. 49., and so have kept your selves out of the dint of the sore judgement of God, which the Scripture calls a delivering up unto an injudicious minde.
Thus I recommend you to God, and to that word of his grace which he speaketh in the Scriptures, both unto you, and to the world, and which is able (so you pervert it not with mysticall and forged interpretations, thus making it to become your own, in stead of his) to build you up and to give you an inheritance among them which are sanctified, and implore with all humble and unfained ardency of soul, that great Shepheard of the Sheep, so to prosper you in the hand of that poor under-Shepheard whom he hath set over you, that you may be found of him at the great day.

From my Study in Coleman street, Dec 9. 1647.
