



My Noble LORD,
'TWill be no Compliment, in any Sense, to tell Your Lordship, that, as You did not easily perswade me into the Pulpit; so, nothing less than Your Commands, should (at this time) have forced me to the Press.
I am here a Stranger, under all the disad∣vantages that may be, for Study; and not only
 so, but my Thoughts at present, more ruffled and disturb'd than ever.
As 'twas my misfortune to have but very few Friends here, so, 'twas my happiness, that they were the Best and greatest that England could afford: Her late MAJESTY of Bles∣sed Memory; and His Grace, the Late Lord Arch-Bishop of CANTERBURY.
The Affair I came to manage, being a Service to the Church, an endeavour to remove a most Perfidious incroachment on her Rights; recom∣mended me to Their Favour; and the Design ap∣peared to be so Just, and so much for the Pub∣lick Good; that, as his Grace, upon the first no∣tice, was pleased heartily to espouse it: So, when it was (in His MAJESTIES absence) proposed to the QUEEN; it gained Her approbation so far; that with a great, but Sweet Condiscension, She was pleased to say, She would become my So∣licitress Her self. But, Alas! All this now, serves only to agravate my sorrow, and heighten
 my loss, which is more than ordinary, and every way great, not only in Common, as a Subject, not only in a more particular Relation, as a Church-man (tho' the meanest of all) but, in my, Yet more private Circumstances; having at a great expence of time and Charge, brought this Matter to be fit for a Royal Decision, and, all of a sudden, deprived of Those, who were gra∣ciously pleased to Patronize both me and it. And tho' I have this Comfort; that, as that God, who hath called Her MAJESTY to an Incor∣ruptible Crown, hath left us her other Self (whom God long continue to us, and over us) from whom I may hope for all due Encourage∣ment: So, his Grace is Succeeded by that Person, of the Age, who is most Eminent for such Services.
But Yet, notwithstanding these Abatements, I cannot easily extricate my self, from the Sur∣prize and Amazement that so justly seized me; and 'tis well, if the effects thereof, do not too visibly appear in the following Discourse.

But I know 'twas not Your Lordships Appro∣bation of my performance, but Your Zeal for the Subject, together with the joynt desires of Some, whose importunity I resisted, that made You resolve (against all that I could offer to the contrary) to have it Published. You re∣membred, it had given You some faint Idea's of Your Dear, tho' Dead Mistriss; and contain'd some Motives (the best I could think of, with relation to the subject, and as Many as the time would allow) to promote the Service of Your Royal Master, wherein (I can bear Your Lordship witness) You would think the last drop of Your Blood well spent.
May Your Loyal Example have its due in∣fluence upon others, and convince, even those un∣reasonable (shall I call them?) Men among us, who are so strangely insatuated, as to act every way, as much against their Interest, as their Duty. And if any thing I have said here, to which (tho' I now find it swelled beyond the
 ordinary bulk of a Sermon) I have not added a Syllable, but omitted much of what I deli∣vered, may contribute to the same end. I shall have all I desire, and all I design, be∣sides the satisfaction of giving Your Lordship a full proof of my Obedience, and thereby mani∣festing, how much, I am, in all Sincerity,
My LORD,

