



Right Honorable,
AS the goodnesse of God, that hitherto hath afforded a miraculous preserva∣tion to the Parliament of England, and hath never failed to give in mer∣cifull Deliverances in time of need, and to make many admirable returnes of Prayer, doth manifest that God is with you in your pious endeavours for the settling of Truth and Peace: So is it evident that our sinnes do with-hold good things from us, that notwith∣standing the Balm that is in Gilead, and the Physitians there, yet we are not healed.
The Sword is not sheathed, the Pestilence not ceased, and Famine a Plague worse then these, begins to threaten

us. Ignorance, Prophanesse, Heresies, get ground in many places of the Land; and hence such as are enemies to Peace and Reformation, encourage themselves with hope to see the time when they shall cause your work to cease, and bring us back again to Egypt.
It therefore highly concernes all of all conditions, to examine what their iniquities are, that put a stop to the current of Gods Mercies towards us; and when they have stoned the Achans in their owne bosome, to mourn for the sinnes of others, and to wrestle with God for pardon, and such a spirit of repentance as may fit the Land for those high and excellent Mercies, both for soul and bo∣dy, which hitherto have been the object both of our pray∣ers and hopes.
Now as no meanes of cure are successefull further then Gods owne power and blessing have a concurrence with them; so the onely way to procure Gods assistance, is, to make such application to him as may most strong∣ly engage him to be with you in all your endeavours. And seeing God doth all things for his owne glorie, to advance such waies as will make the name of God most glorious in the Land, must needs be the greatest engage∣ment you can make of God.
Some few directions for this purpose by your Lord∣ships command I presented to your eares; and now by the same command present them to your eyes. The chief whereof was this, the advancement of Gospel-truth, and the power of godlinesse.
The Psalmist tels us. In Jury is God well known, his name is great in Israel: Where God is best known, he is most glo∣rified; God is rightly made known only by his own truth revealed in his Word▪ and as this is more or lesse defen∣ded, propagated, and obedience thereunto yeelded; so is▪

God more or lesse honoured by any Nation, and their spiri∣tuall and temporall priviledges more or lesse enlarged.
Basill and Ambrose say of the Echineis or Remora a little fish, that if it joyn it self to a Ship under sayle, it will make it stand still and quiet, though driven with the greatest tem∣pests. Like this Echineis to a Ship, is Religion to a State, which while your Lordships have endeavoured to reforme and establish, you have been preserved in safety, while so many dreadfull stormes have blown from one end of the Land unto another. God therefore having trusted you in a speciall manner with the guarding of his Truth and Ordi∣nances, let it be your greatest care to preserve and propa∣gate these in their power and purity; And then you may commit both your own and the Kingdoms safetie with con∣fidence unto Gods keeping. And whatsoever storms shall be raised against you, and such as be with you in the Cause of God, he will quiet them in his appointed time, and give a prevailing command to all your enemies, saying, Destroy not the Cluster, for there is a blessing in it, Isaiah 65. 8.
Thus may your Honours not only be Physitians to heal our Land, but make plentifull provisions for your own hap∣pinesse to eternity: whereas otherwise those great talents of honour, authority and wealth, which God hath entrusted you with, will be but the improvement of your everlasting misery. Alcibiades bragging of his great possessions, So∣crates to abate his pride, fetched him a Map of the World, and desired him to show him where his possessions lay, but there he could not find them; All Athens in that being but a point. Remember, that what ever possessions great men have here, yet Not many wise, not many rich, not many migh∣ty, shall have inheritances in heaven.
As therefore God hath done great things for you, so do you great things for God. Let your authority be the

bulwark of the innocent, the axe to cut downe propha∣nesse, injustice and oppression in the Land: Let Ireland be releived, and such at home as the Publike service hath made Widows or Orphants, or necessitous, be succoured. Let those little Sisters that have no breasts, be provided for all the Kingdom over; Let grace and holinesse be seen in their own colours in your lives and examples, that your copies which are seen and read of all men, may make them in love with godlinesse, that, when God shall divest you of your great possessions here, he may invest you with a glo∣rious inheritance among the Saints in his own Kingdom for ever, which that he may do, is the prayer of

