



Fathers and Brethren,
EIther we have dealt hypocritically with God and man, or else the Divisions in these poore Churches have lain upon the hearts of the godly in England as an afflicting evil. The Civil Power have seemed to be so sensible of this evil, that more then once it hath been numbred amongst the causes in their Orders for our Solemn and Publike Humiliati∣ons; if our Fast-days, Prayers, Sermons, Books, &c. may be believed, then the breaches in our Churches have broken our comforts. For my part I have cause to take shame, and to ask pardon of God that this sin which hath wrought so much evil, and brought such dishonour to Christ, have no more affected me; it is for them whose hearts are most divided from self, and united to God, to be indeed affected and afflicted with Divisions in the Church. I look on it as an act of a grown Christian, whose Interest in Christ is well cleared, and his heart walking close with God, to be really taken up with the publike Interest of Christ. I will not measure other mens hearts by my own, but I must say for my self, the good Lord pardon my hypo∣crisie in this point, for to be affected as become Chri∣stians for Divisions among Christians, I find it a hard matter, whatever words seem to affirm.
Could I joy in my self, I should be glad that I lived to see the day when the Lord put it into two or three of your hearts to try what might be done for the healing
of our breaches, and thereupon to call some of your Brethren together to see if we could agree so far that we might Associate together, as some of our Brethren in other Countries have done: and let me leave this upon record, so long as this poor Script shall last, for the honour of the Presbyterial Brethren, as they were the first movers for peace, so they have bidden fair for peace; had our Congregational Brethren [whose per∣sons, gifts, and graces I desire to honour and love] been but answerable, we might have had cause to have joyned together in praises for our healing, as we have had, and still have cause to mourn for our breaches.
It is not to be forgotten how the good hand of God went along with us; for though we were men of diffe∣rent principles who were chosen to draw up the agree∣ment, and we met neer twenty times before we could finish, yet no unbrotherly clashing was heard amongst us; but so soon as we saw each others principles to be fixed, presently we were called off from Disputing, and the next words were, Come, let us see how we can Accommodate; let the blessing of Matth. 5.9. fall upon such hearts.
Were it true that uniting with our Brethren in this Association, were a dividing of our hearts from God, as one of our Congregational Brethren did intimate in a Sermon of his upon Hos. 10.2. then I wonder not though he so soon deserted us, and that others stand off from us. For this he said was one note of the heart di∣vided from God, when the heart did not fully come up to God: and under this head brought in such who did fashion and mould themselves in State and Church according to the Mode of the Times, though contrary to their own principles and light, cross to [or laying by] the Institutions of Christ, when as
the Text saith, Jer. 15.19. If thou separate the pre∣cious from the vile, &c. our Brothers aim was under∣stood by divers in the Congregation, and unto him I shall return this answer.
If he means I have gone contrary to my own prin∣ciples and light, he is mistaken extreamly. If he meant he and other Congregational men must do so if they Associate, how can this possibly be, when it was one of our foundations we laid for agreement, and it was pro∣fessed again and again, that we went not about to take any man off from his Principles? I wish our Bro∣ther had instanced what Institution of Christ we crossed or laid by.
For the Scripture he alledged, let us see how this suits our case; the Presbyterial Brethren do not indeed sepa∣rate as do he and others, but doth he therefore upon this Text stand off? I finde five several expositions of the words, and very few who take the word Precious for to relate to Persons. But I will give my Brother that sense, Let it be meant of Persons,
The Ara∣bick word which the Transla∣tor ren∣der Hone∣stus Golius renders generosus, nobilis. And the other (Dalilon) abjectus, vllis con∣temptus. as Piscator thinks it most proper, because  alibi de persona tantùm dicitur. And so the Interlineary gloss. Now the que∣stion is, 1. Who are meant by Precious? 2. How Jere∣miah was to separate these Precious from the Vile.
For the first, those who do Interpret it of Persons do all understand real Saints; and here standing so in opposition to others it must needs be meant so. Obj. If he will say, that doth not follow; for all Israel were called holy, and that in as high a word as precious. I answer, The Lord speaks of these who were called holy, and yet here commands the separation of the Precious from the Vile; therefore it must be meant of real Saints. I could say more but spare.
2. For the second, How did he separate, either by
Doctrine, or Discipline. Not by Discipline [which must serve my Brothers purpose.] For
First, To separate real Saints from vile by Discipline is a hard work indeed, and such a task as the Lord never put his Ministers to; who knew mens hearts? then the Congregational Brethren must look to it that all their members are real Saints.
1. But if my Brother saith, by precious real Saints are not meant but visible, though not so really. [Be∣sides that all were called holy.] This my Brother must prove, and then tell us what he means by a visible Saint. But however separation by Discipline cannot be meant. For
2. Jeremiah then had a strange task, for he had no particular Church as we; and for him to separate all visible Saints from the vile in the Jewish Church by Discipline were a strange and impossible work.
3. Jeremiah a single Priest could not do it; as all that know the Jewish governments will confess.
4. But put case it were so, yet this hinders not his Associating with our Brethren, who desire him but to Associate, where they do separate the precious from the vile by Discipline.
Since then this separation was Doctrinal, as all Divines upon the Text acknowledge, then whether the Prebyterial Brethren [very many of them at least] do not separate as well as himself, I desire my Brother to consider. For the last words which he also used, Let them return to thee, but return not thou unto them. Doth my Brother indeed parallel our Associated Bre∣thren with those who are meant by them? Let the Presbyterial Brethren return to the Congregational, not they to them: I should not have dared to have made such a parallel.

I shall only put this Brother in mind what he then said against those who dare depart from standing Commandments, and desire him to consider whether he never read of a standing (to use his own words). Commandment, repeated again and again, that we should follow the things which make for peace, and whether he, with our Brethren who stand off, have an∣swered that Commandment, sober Congregational men shall judge.
Let me leave with our Brethren a few lines which I received a few weaks since from that learned and godly Divine Mr. Norton, [Teacher of the Church in Boston in N. England] in a Letter to me. The Association you mention amongst the Ministers we much rejoyce in, I never thought it better then human, but often∣times worse, that the Presbyterian and Congre∣gational men cannot close together in Brotherly Communion. The power of godliness interest us in the affections of the godly, above the notions of either of them considered apart therefrom. I believe the Congregational way to be the truth: yet I think better of many Presbyterians then of many Congre∣gational men. 'Tis no wonder if Independents are unruly, for I distinguish between Independents and Congregational men; or rather such [call themselves as they please] that will not acknowledge the rule of the Presbytery, and the order of Councils Thus far this reverend and great Divine. I am sure our Association reaches no higher then a Council.
As for our Brethren who will not Associate till they see the Civil Magistrate set his stamp of Authority upon this way of Association, whatever the late Instru∣ment made by the Parliament allows us, though they see Anabaptists and Congregational Churches, and
other Associated Counties to exercise Discipline without any scruple, though they would quarrel with an Era∣stian Magistrate, that should deny any such power to belong to Churches, yea, though some of these can su∣spend from the Lord's Supper whom they please, we must leave these to their own wisedom, and desire them to convince the Magistrate so that he may be able to see clearly that the government of the Church is either Episcopal, Classical, or Congregational, and so stablish one; or if the Magistrate be not so clear in either, but yet willing to favour any of these, the persons be∣ing godly and peaceable, [as he doth] then let these Brethren consider whether the want of Church-Dis∣cipline be a fault to be charged most upon the Magi∣strate or upon themselves.
To return to you then [Fathers and Brethren] in a few words. Hitherto God hath brought us; the worke we have engaged in is to most [if not all of us] new, and such a work as many of those who have been exercised in it, have so often miscarried in, that the Ordinance of Discipline hath suffered much disho∣nour: and that which adds to the difficulty, we set to it in such times wherein the Ministry is so much reviled by Sectaries, and as to this work much con∣temned by the Gentry, and our Episcopal Divines; one of which [and whom I honour] said to me, That we were no more fit to manage the government of the Church of England then David Saul's Armour. We boast not of our fitness, but for the government of the Church by such Bishops [though I highly reve∣rence some of them] they have no such cause to boast, as witness the Churches they have left us miserably overgrown with ignorance and profanness; had we so many hundreds [or thousands] of pounds per annum,
such honour and regal power to stick to us as had they, I hope the Churches might be governed as well as they were before, and be purged a little from that igno∣rance and profaneness which now we find them in.
But we must go to our work without Saul's Ar∣mour. I am sensible how much wisedom and prudence this work calls for; all my comfort is, Christ of God is made to us wisedom, &c. 1 Cor. 1. I take care for nothing but for Faith, Humility, and Prayer, to fetch this wisedom from our King and Head, and leave the success to him who did institute this Ordinance.

Shalford 2. of the 2. Month, 1658.
