



Right Honorable and Right Worshipful,
BY your high Approbation of a Sermon preached at Paul's before you in May last by one Mr John Pawson (as the Press nameth him) testified by your Order in Court of June the 15. following, about the printing of the said Sermon, I can∣not, with the salvage of your Honors, but judg that you are Masters (at least in your own sence and apprehen∣sions) of those noble Controversies now on foot a∣mongst us, concerning Election, Reprobation, the Death of Christ, the Grace of God, the Perseverance of the Saints, &c. being the principal, if not the only, Points discoursed in that Sermon. Nor would I willingly but
 presume, that, had you not been very studiously and con∣scientiously versed in these great Questions, you would not so publiquely have appeared in the habit of a Facul∣tas Theologica, nor gone so near to the giving a definitive sentence in matters of such profound disputation, as your said Order (printed) even candidly interpreted, amount∣eth unto.
It is one of the soveraign and high contentments of my Soul to understand and find, that Magistrates, and Judges of the Earth, are willing to lift up their hearts to the acquainting of themselves with the counsels and mind of God, and will find time to search throughly in∣to those worthy Mysteries, which the Blessed Angels (those great Princes of Heaven) judg it no ways beneath them, but rather an advance of Blessedness unto them, to pry into. When they who are Gods by Institution, shall narrowly and with delight contemplate the real excellency of his Glory, who is a God by Nature, they must needs be transformed into his likeness, and this more and more, according to that most observable pas∣sage of the Great Apostle: But we all with open face, be∣holding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord2 Co. 3.18.. And when the Gods on Earth shall be changed into the same Image with the God of Heaven, no doubt Blessedness is coming with an high hand upon the world.
But of this I must crave leave to inform your Christi∣an minds, that as a narrow and intense beholding of the face of God in a true glass, and which representeth him uniformly like unto himself, is an unquestionable means of that blessed Transformation I speak of; so on the contrary, to feed upon a false or undue representation of him, with a strong conceit that such a representation is
 according to Truth, and that God is really such, as by the false light of this representation he is exhibited and appeareth unto us, is (especially as the misrepresentation may be) of most dangerous consequence, and apt to transform men into the likeness of the Devil, or at least to harden and confirm men in such a transformation. The Prophet David personateth God speaking thus to the wicked: Thou thoughtst that I was altogether such an one as thy selfPsal. 50.21.. When men are unjust, unmerciful, in∣ordinate lovers of themselves, partial, hollow and loose in their promises, full of dissimulation, or the like, if under these most hateful and horrid impressions upon their Souls, they shall be brought by men of learning, parts, and of supposed Godliness, into this Hellish Para∣dise, (whether it be in expressness of words, or in preg∣nant and near-hand consequence, it is much the same: the flesh will smell a consequence afar off, that sympa∣thizeth with her,) that the like things are found in the Glorious God himself, and that He acts and moves in his way, as the Sons of such abominations are wont to move in their way, this must needs be as oyl cast upon the raging flames, a teaching of wickedness to be more confidently wicked, then otherwise (in all likelyhood) she durst presume to be. It is like that the Prophets of Jerusalem in Jeremy's days, built up the Inhabitants thereof, great and small, unto ruine, by such Doctrines as these. For the Lord complains of them in these words: I have seen also in the Prophets of Jerusalem an horrible thing: they commit adultery, [i. e.Vidi horrenda hominum adul∣terantium veri∣tatem. they adulterate the truth, as Grotius interpreteth,] and walk in lyes, [i. e. teach the people day after day things which are false,] they strengthen also the hands of evil doers, that none doth return from his wickednessJe. 23.14.. He that shall put it into the heart and conscience of an evil doer, that God is like unto him
 in the way of his evil doing, makes it next to an impossi∣bility for such a man to relinquish the evil of his way. For who will not with his whole heart and Soul desire and delight to walk in such ways, being otherwise pleas∣ing to the flesh, wherein he verily beleeveth that he shall be like unto God? Now that you may be unjust, un∣merciful, cruel, partial, haters without cause of the great∣est part under your Government, full of dissimulation, Indulgers of all manner of sin and wickedness, and yet be like, yea very like unto such a God, as Mr Pawson pourtrayeth out unto you for the true God, the God of your hope and Salvation, in his Sermon (lately mention∣ed,) although I have demonstratively and with preg∣nant evidence proved as much already in some of my WritingsRedemption Redemed, p. 509 510, 513, 514 &c. 499, 489 490 477, &c. 470 471, &c. Agreement and Distance of Brethren, p. 8 9, 25, 17. (besides several other places., yet if you shall please at any time to lay the command of your Honorable Court upon me to per∣form the same service again with more particular refer∣ence to the said Sermon, I here engage my self, testibus coelo & terrâ, before God, Angels, and men, God sparing me life and health, to do it.
Besides, evident it is, by what hath been offered by me and others to publique consideration, that the entire systeme or frame of that Doctrine, wherein Mr Pawson endeavors to build you up in his Sermon, is not accord∣ing unto godliness, but exactly calculated for the meridian of the flesh, having a palpable and broad tendency in it to revive the old man where he is a dying, and to render him vigorous and active, without care, or fear. Yea if the God of this world had a mind and opportunity to petition the Grandees or Pillars of Christian Religion, met in an Oecumenical Council, that they would take some pity on him, and establish or allow of some few Doctrines amongst them, such as he should nominate unto them, for the relief and support of his tottering
 and sinking Kingdom, the Doctrines of this his nominati∣on (to speak that, which is very probable) would be those, wherewith Mr Pawson hath prevented him, and labored in the very fire to plant and propagate in the world.
But whereas he pretends in his Dedication unto you, that the Doctrines delivered in his Sermon, conceived by him (as he saith, and perhaps truly) to be Truths, were once and again delivered to the Saints, and own'd through successive generations by the choycest of Saints; 1. (As to the latter) If he had read my Book of Redemption through, at which he nibbles here and there in his Ser∣mon, he might have seen the contrary hereunto face to face, here being a cloud of such Witnesses as he speaks of (I mean, of the choycest Saints) drawn together, who plainly, and without parable, testifie, that in their succes∣sive and respective generations, not the Doctrines which he maintains, but those diametrally opposite thereunto, were the more generally-received Divinity and Faith of the choycest Saints. To the former: If the Doctrines he speaks of were once and again delivered unto the Saints, it is a clear case that they are no Gospel Doctrines: for these were but once delivered unto the Saints (as Jude speaketh.)
Men, Fathers and Brethren, are you able to endure sound Doctrine? I know that you are able: and that you had much rather cut off your right hands, and pluck out your right eyes, and enter into life either maimed, or with one eye, then having two hands, or two eyes, to be cast into everlasting fire. The Apostle Peter gives this important aviso to the Christians of his times, that many (speaking of such Teachers as were like to come a∣mongst them) through covetousness should with feigned words [or rather, with words formed, or fashioned,. for the purpose] make merchandise of them2 Pet. 2.3.; i. e. make carnal
 benefit and advantage of them, as Merchants do of their merchandise; clearly implying, that such Teachers, who have any worldly design upon those that hear them, have hereby a strong temptation upon them to dawb with untempered mortar, and to preach Doctrines plausible to the flesh, and consequently destructive to the spirit, and so most dangerously-pernicious to the Soul. For though for a Minister of the Gospel to build up men in the false and lying imaginations of their hearts, be none other then the casting of a snare of death and eternal ruine upon them, yet is there scarce any work or service, for which they are (more generally) so willing to give large wages, as for this. Now give me leave, for your precious Souls sake, freely to tell you, that there is no sort of men under Heaven so obnoxious to be mer∣chandised, or sold for carnal advantage by their Teachers, as men in places of Power and Authority, and where Silver and Gold have their Throne; and this in more respects, then one.
1. Such men as these, in respect of the many oppor∣tunities, which they visibly have in their hand to gratifie those, that love this present world, are in the eye of such Teachers, as the wine, when it giveth its colour, and moveth it self right-up in the glass (as Solomon speaketh) is in the eye of him, that is inordinately addicted to it. The very sight and beholding of them, awakens, yea in∣flames the carnal spirits of such men to prepare their nets, and spread them in the way of those, if they can come at it, whom they design for their prey. It was to good purpose observed by the Poet:
Non facilè esuriens positâ retinebere mensâ;
Et multùm saliens incitat unda sitim. i. e.
Set meat before an hungry man,
He hardly will refrain:

And waters springing pleasantly
Do thirst inflame amain.
2. The Tenents and Opinions of great men in mat∣ters of Religion, and things appertaining unto God, are (commonly) the unexamined and presumed notions of the State, and times, wherein they live; and so are like to be, not of God, but of the world, and to have a face, but no heart, or substance, of Truth in them. For as Christ pronounceth a wo to such persons, of whom all men speak well; Wo unto you, when all men shall speak well of you: for so did your Fathers to the false Prophets, (Luk. 6.26.) in like manner, and upon the same grounds, it is much to be feared, that a wo belongs unto such Doc∣trines, which the generality of a Nation shall accept of, can digest and applaud. In this respect also men great in wealth and power, are very opportune to become a prey and spoyl to the covetousness of their Teachers, in as much as they may accommodate and comport with them in their Judgments and Consciences, and yet gra∣tifie the flesh: which is a service of soveraign accepta∣tion (for the most part) with such men.
3. The great men of the world, I speak of, as they value themselves above the ordinary and meaner rank of men, so do they their principles and imaginations al∣so (especially in matters of Religion) above the rate, at which inferior persons estimate theirs: and consequent∣ly, as on the one hand, they count it the greater dispa∣ragement to have them chastised, or put to rebuke by any man; so on the other hand, they are apt to judg such men worthy a double reward, who shall justifie and give testimony unto them. Upon this account also such men are in much more danger then others, to be bought and sold by such Teachers, who mind or savour the things of this world; because these Teachers, observing
 this strain or humour in such men, are hereby tempted and provoked to work upon it, which must be by per∣verting the streight ways and counsels of God in the Gospel so, that they may appear every ways conform, and no ways cross to their apprehensions.
4. (And lastly) The great danger I speak of threa∣tens the Sons of the Glory and Greatness of this World, more then other men, at this turn also; because they, partly by reason of their places, and partly of the unruly greatness of their estates, are full of the cares, distracti∣ons, business and employments of the world: and be∣sides, have the opportunity (of which the flesh makes a necessity) of following and enjoying many pleasures, and outward contentments (possibly in themselves, not unlawful,) which persons of meaner condition have not. Now what between the one, and the other, their time is wholly drunk up: by reason whereof they want leasure, and so freedom and composedness of mind and understanding, substantially to examine and try the Doctrines of their Teachers. This want being under∣stood and resented by them, strengtheneth their hand to be the more venturous and daring in preaching such Doctrines unto them, which as on the one hand they know to be pleasing enough to their present judgments and thoughts, so on the other hand, they are without much fear of being ever detected, or challenged, by their great Masters, for unsoundness or untruth in them. As for any detection in this kind by meaner men who hear them, they ballance the fear hereof, partly with the know∣ledg which they have of the inabilities (in conjunction with the carelessness and neglect about matters of this nature) in the greatest part of them, and partly with this apprehension or hope, that (however) the countenance and approbation of the Great ones will swallow up
 the disallowings of a few meaner ones, into victory.
These Disadvantages (with many others of a like, or worse nature) being (as far as is discernable) redeemed by so few of the first-rate persons of the world, (I mean those, whom wealth and power make a generation of men by themselves,) the consideration of it fills me, not with admiration of their persons for advantage sake, but with commiseration to their persons for that danger sake of perishing eternally, whereunto they are much more exposed, then other men. Jerom might have gone lower down, when he professed that he should wonder,Miror, si aliquis Rex salvabitur. if any King were ever saved. And if the Lord Christ knew such im∣minency of danger in riches only, as to assert, that a rich man shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; and again, that it is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of GodMat. 19.23, 24; how threatening above measure must the danger needs be in this kind, when Riches and Power meet together in conjunction; Power having every whit as hard, as ma∣lignant an influence upon Soul-Interest, as wealth or riches themselves?
Do I speak these things unto you, because I love you not, because I honour you not, because I own you not in your capacities of Magistracy and Civil Power? God knoweth: yea God knoweth, that you have not a friend made of flesh and blood more Christianly real or cordi∣al unto you, either in the things of your present honour in a worthy discharge of your Magistratical Trust and Dignity, or in the things of your future and eternal Peace, then I. If God himself, in respect of your Of∣fice, and as you are Governors of the same world (in part) with him, judgeth it meet to stile you GodsPsal. 82.6.; far be it from me, and from every other man, either to speak, or think of you, beneath the honour of so high an appel∣lation,
 upon the same account. The zeal of my loyalty unto, and approbation of Magistracy and Government, hath been abundantly testified by the frequent contests and liftings up of my pen against all the prophanations and pollutions of the glory of them, whether injustice, tyranny, oppression, partiality, pride, unfaithfulness, neg∣ligence, &c. in those called unto them; or whether anar∣chical, disloyal, tumultuous, seditious streins, either in word, or deed, in those, a good part of whose calling is obedience and subjection unto them.
I trust your patience hath endured me hitherto with∣out offence. I am not like to speak again unto you, until the Heavens be no more. Give me leave therefore, not so much for the satisfying of mine own mind, as consci∣ence, nor at all to trouble or offend you, but to help you in the great and most important affairs of your Souls, to say this one thing further unto you; that such Teachers are never like to be cordial or faithful to the dear Inte∣rest of your Souls, nor to make you Great in the saving knowledg of God, who either on the one hand cannot willingly bear your frowns, neglects, or contradictions for the Truths sake, or on the other hand, care not to offend you for an humors sake, or thing of nought. They are the men for your service in the Gospel, who are most sollicitous and intent to please you, and withall most fearless and regardless of displeasing you, for your good.
If you please to find leasure, diligence, and a judg∣ment unprejudiced, to peruse the ensuing Exposition (which I humbly put into your hand) I doubt not, but through his blessing, who giveth to every seed its own body, you shall reap from it increase of knowledg and sound understanding in things of highest concernment to you. I call God for a record upon my Soul, that I have no design upon you in this Dedication, unless it be
 to make you in all Christian worth and honour as much greater then other men, as you are above the most in wealth and dignity: and to perswade and beseech you with all affectionateness, with all earnestness of Soul and spirit, that as you desire to be found at the right hand of the Great Judg in that his Day, so in this your day to re∣member and consider, that Magistracy and power of Government are no Institutions of God, either to fill the purses, or to furnish the tables, or to lift up the minds, or in any kind to gratifie the flesh of those, in whom they are vested; but rather to serve, to accommodate and bless the Societies and Communities of men on Earth (unto which they relate respectively,) according to that worthy Item, which the Queen of Sheba gave unto Solo∣mon: Because the Lord loved Israel for ever, therefore made He thee King to do judgment and justice1 King. 10, 9..
The same Lord and mighty God, so overshadow you with his Power and good Spirit, that the conceptions of your hearts may be Holiness unto him, wealth, and peace, and gladness of heart to the Inhabitants of this Great and famous City, the Government whereof is en∣trusted with you; to your selves, honour, and safety, and length of days, with the peace and joy of a good Conscience, on Earth, and a far more exceeding eternal weight of Glory in the Heavens. So prayeth (and is willing yet to pray a greater prayer for you then so, did he know any greater)

From my Study in Coleman-street, Febr. 7. 1652.
