


I Could have drawne many strong argu∣ments from mine owne weakenes against the publishing of this Sermon, had not your desire deprived mee of my free∣dome. It is enough to me, and I hope it will be so to others, that what I doe herein, is an act of obedience to your Commands. The doctrine I have herein pressed upon others is, that they ought to be serviceable to the Publique, which I durst not confute by concealing my poore and weake labours, after they received the stamp of your iudgement upon them to bee in the least measure usefull for the Publique good. In this Discourse I now present you with, I have labour∣ed chiefly to discover those Rockes of self-shipwrack which lie hidden in the waves of Publique employments, that in your steering of the Publique Ship, you might not dash your soules against them, and so sinke the comforts that out of all your worthy labours might eternally redound unto your soules. If you seeke Gods honour, God hath secured your honour by his owne promise. You must not exspect alwayes to be paid1 Sam. 2. 30. in good coyne by men, who reap the benefit of your hazards

for their security. Many will deale with you, as beasts do with trees, they get under their shadow in time of a storme, and when that is over browse and crop the boughes thereof: But in re∣ference to God, you may safely conclude, as Marcus Antonius did, Hoc habeo quodcun{que} dedi. You know what Christ will say to his Church-Samaritans, Matth. 21. 40. In as much as yee have done it to the least of these, yee have done it unto me. I have often sadly wondred, what was the meaning of that Ballancing providence of our most wise God, who hath often made the scales even betwixt us and our enemies, in this civill War, nor can I finde it out, unlesse it be this; because the wheels of our Reformation drive so heavily. It is Gods Great mercy, and your great honour, that so many unprofitable Thornes are already stubbed up which choaked the libertie of the Gospel, yet if now the Churches field should lye halfe tilled, wee must ex∣pect abundance of weeds. The sooner you can accomplish the planting of a good Ministery, and the giving of iust encourage∣ment to those that labour in the Vineyard, and that a Govern∣ment with Scripture warrant may be fully executed, the soon∣er you may expect to bring the Ship of the Common-wealth in∣to the harbour of a happy Peace.
That you may so manage all your employments in the Pub∣lique service, as may be most for Gods glory, the speedy redresse of our present miseries, and the comfort of your own soules; is and shall be the earnest and constant prayer of

