


SIR,
IF my boldnesse may reach so far upon your patience, I
shall briefly touch what Iohn in the fift chap. of his
Gospell writeth of a poole which was in Ierusalem
called Bethesda: About this poole were wont to lye a
great multitude of impotent folke, blind, lame, and
withered, waiting for the moving of the water, which was done by
an Angel, who went down at a certain time into the poole and trou∣bled
the water, and then whosoever stepped in, was cured of what∣soever
disease he had. But one lying there 38 years, who in all this
time could never be cured, because being of himselfe impotent (as he
answered to our Saviour) he had no man, when the water was trou∣bled,
to help him or to put him into the poole. I will not stand to mo∣ralise
this holy story unto you at large, least you might justly say that
I abuse to much your patience, by confounding the stile of an Epistle,
which ought to be brief, with the division, parts and order of a Ser∣mon.
Only I beg your patience so far as to peruse this my ensuing

Sermon, and in it you shall find an impotent man, not only blind, but
deafe and dumbe, and truelly beaten by Satan, and by him expulsed
out of the Church of Christ, and as I may truly say) lying in this
misery neare 3 years. The discourse of my ensuing Sermon will in∣forme
You that I my selfe have been this impotent man. Many times
my Conscience hath been moved and troubled from above with good
and heavenly inspirations (which God hath been pleased to send in∣to
my soule) by my considered aberration from the true Church, for
which the waters of my teares and inward sobs from my heart have
been also moved with the troubles of my soule. So that I would many
times full faine have stepped and entred into the true Church of
England, where all diseases of the soule are most surely healed. But
alas! mine own impotency and weaknesse joyned with my long blind∣nesse,
hindred the execution of my good resolutions; temporall re∣spects
and feares kept back my steps. Many times I feared I should
want a man and a friend (as the cripple at Bethesda did) to helpe
me, to encourage me, and to further my good desires. I feared the
high Assembly of Parliament would rather mistrust him, that so
many years hath been an enemy to the State of this Kingdome, than
now in these times approve his penitency and contrition, which
might rather have seemed unto them a fained hypocrisie. All these
feares kept back for a time the forwardnesse of my will and heart.
Untill at last I resolved to disclose and discover unto Your Worship,
these troubles of my heart, these diseases of my soule, even the want
of a man to help me. God whom I sought too pleased, with my
request; I found that assistance from you, that I so earnestly desired,
for, I found a man, I found a friend, I found a comforter, I found an
Advocate to plead for my pardon before that high Court now assem∣bled.
For by Your meanes I have been quietly brought into the
Church; by Your meanes also, I hope, I shall be henceforth prote∣cted
against all slanderers, who will whet their tongues against me
and seeke to trouble me, and grudge at my good, as the Jews ex∣cepted
against the Cripple and impotent man, who was cured by our
Saviour. I shall always be ready to render due thankes to God, and

next to You, for Your blessed help towards my Conversion, and first
fruits of my Vocation, which in this humble. Work of mine, I have
endeavoured to make knowne to the World, remitting my further
expressions to better occasions. And in the meane time praying to
God, that he will be pleased with his powerfull hand to supply to You,
and Yours what my heart can wish, but never will be able to perform
according to the full measure of so glorious a Worke, which truely
next to God the beginner and Author of all goodnesse, by Your
meanes hath been accomplished.

