



Greatly Honoured,
THis imperfect Piece, and al∣most
born out of due time, puts
it self forth into the world by
your Command, but like Za∣rah
giving out the hand, the body to
which that appertained remaining still
in the womb. For this Sermon is but one
member; (and indeed, not so much the
Hand, as the Foot, that is, the latter part)
of a larger Bulk or Body of Sermons,
preached just afore elswhere upon those

foregoing Verses of this Chapter. My
real purpose (after your Order for this
one) was, To have presented the whole
entire Discourse unto YOV: & I found
not time, so much as leisure, and spirits
failing me in the performance. I have
therefore done as the Midwife for that
Childe did (in the same Gen. 38. 28.)
bound upon this foot (for by your force,
and in obedience to you, it comes wrong
and backward) this Scarlet thred of
Dedication, saying (as she) This is come
forth first: That if hereafter the rest
may see the light, You may know (if
You will vouchsafe it) how to own and
appropriate them all as Yours, as being
thus consecrated to You by these (in re∣spect
of the publication) the first-fruits
of that whole Lump.
And now, what is my earnest desire
and prayer for you? but according to

the tendency of the matter, it might be
blessed to be an Helper to your Faith,
against the Time of your being unclo∣thed
of your flesh, your going into an∣other
world: where you all profess to
look for another, and better CITY, that
is, an Heavenly, whose Maker and Buil∣der
is God, who hath or must work Us
for the self-same thing, or we perish
everlastingly.
And, my Lord,
I have particularly directed it to wait
on your Honour in the contemplation of
this very Aim, as a Signall whereof, Pro∣vidence,
and not my Design, having see∣med
to give forth this semblance in that
it allotted no other season (for it could
not come forth one day sooner) for
its attendance on you, but the very DAY
of your being VNCLOTHED of your
office (which are little civil deaths) and

going out of this your transitory Go∣vernment
over this great CITY (the best,
and best governed in the world.) But the
honour of this performed amongst us,
you still remain clothed with, and will
ever wear, yea, and be clothed upon to a
glory for it at the latter day.
Those things even now said unto
you all, being the brief Collect of this en∣suing
Sermon, I turne into a Prayer for
you all, who am
 Mag. Coll. Oxon.
Oct. 23. 1657.
