



Most worthy Patriots,
THE Wise-man among his ma∣ny
approved Proverbes,Prov 25 11.  Iuxta modus suos. Merc. Quibus modia dici debet Vt. Tempore, suo. .
hath this choyce one, A
word spoaken upon his
wheeles (so runnes the
Originall, or set upon his
measures, that is, as our English not unfit∣ly
hath translated it, fitly spoken) A word
fitly spoken, is the like Apples of Gold in pi∣cutres

of silver; pretious and pleasant. Pre∣tious,
as golden Apples: pleasant as yel∣low
Gold curiously wrought and artificially wre∣thed
in white Silver.
This Proverbe turned my minde to thinke
of some seasonable Theame, after notice was
given me, that by your Order, which to mee
is a Law, I was deputed to preach before
your Honourable Assembly. And I thinke I
have hit upon a fit Subject, were I fit and able
to handle it as it is meet to be handled in such an As∣sembly.
It is the Patterne of a good Patriot.
A point pertinent in Generall and Particu∣lar.
In Generall, a Patterne or Example regi∣stred
and approoved in Sacred Scripture,
shews
1. What is the good and acceptable will of God.
2.Si inveniun∣tur exempla quae nos per re∣ctan ducunt viam, sequen. da sunt. Hier. ad celant. What in like case others are bound to doe.
3.Excitamur in ipem, qua nos e∣tiam ita posse vivere, qui ho∣mines sum ex eo quod aliqui homines ita vixerunt, mi∣nimè despera∣mus. Aug de Trin. l. 8. c. 9. What may be done by such as will thorowly
set themselves to it.
4. VVhat, when it is so done, may be pleaded
in an humble-self-denying manner before God.

In Particular this Example of Nehemiah
shewes,
1. VVho is a good Patriot.
2. How he ought to behave himselfe.
3. Plut de Lib instit. VVhat difficulties and dangers attend him.
4. VVhat opposition and contradiction hee is
like to meet with.
5. VVhat resolutions become him.
6. On whom his confidence is to be placed.
Our times are in many things not much unlike to
the time wherein Nehemiah came to Jerusalem.
Grievances in State.
Corruptions in Church.
He did as much as in him lay (and that indeed
was very much) for redressing of the one, and re∣moving
of the other.
His patterne is not onely an Instruction, to
teach what is to be done: or an Incitation to stir
up such as know what is to be done: but also a Iu∣stification
and Approbation of such as doe as
he did.
And they may looke for such an end, &c. Ioseph Aniq. Iul. l. 11. c. 5. as Iose∣phus
testifies that Nehemiah had. His testimo∣ny
is this, When Nehemiah had done most

magnificently many good things worthy of
praise, being an old man he died, and lest
behind him the name of a gracious, just and
bountifull man toward his owne Nation.
The Lord encline our great Kings heart to you, as
he did the heart of Nehemiahs King to him, and
so worke by you, as he did by him: that every of
you may with such confidence say to your God, as he
did to his, Thinke on me, my GOD for good,
according to all that I have done for this Peo∣ple.
This is, this shall be, the prayer of

