



Courteous Reader,
I Crave thy favour, or at least to forbear thy censure, as con∣cerning the Subject-Matter of this Book (which

discoursing the HISTORY and MYSTERY of DREAMES) some men may imagine useless, Si enim igno∣remus quid sit infonium quot & quae eorum causae & quae e∣orum genera. Quaestiones poni solent, quae bene explicari non poterunt. Zanch. Tm. 8. Tractat. de Divine. judging both mine and o∣ther mens Study of this present Point to be paines to no pur∣pose, &c.
But be not discouraged (dear Christian) from a diligent en∣deavour to get a due understand∣ing in the state of Dreames, for

As this hath been very Com∣mendable,
So this may be still very profi∣table.

1. Commendable it hath been in antient times to attain knowledg in Dreames, as may plainly and plentifully appear

From Sacred Scriptures, &
From other Authors.

1. The Holy Scriptures do much

commend two worthy Men for their wise discernings in Dreames:

As Joseph Patriarchae diviuatur in tres classes—Inter Patri∣arch as tertiae classis enume∣ratur. Joseph. Alsted. Chronol. Gen. 40. 12, 13. vers. Gen. 41. 15, 25, 26. a Patriarch,
And Daniel a Prophet.

1. The Patriarch Joseph, who not Ironically, but Deservedly might be called a Captain-Dreamer▪ for he had not only an admi∣rable Transact in imagining Dreames, but a marvellous insight for the interpreting of Dreames. Some to diminish the due praise of this precious Man in this Matter, have said, that his skill in inter∣preting Phaarohs Dream, Genes. 4. was meerly out of his observati∣on of the River Nlus, &c. But by some of late, the most Learned in Divinity and Philosophy Interpretati smnii Pharonis de pimguibus & mar is e Nilo asnentibus Josephus non hasi ex consi∣deratione natu∣ae Nili. Wen∣deli contemp. Phys. et. 28. cap. 8., hath this been fully confured. Paraeus and other approved Expositors keeping up his praise, conclude

he had not only an humane and low, but a more sublime and Di∣vine knowledg in Dreames.
2. The Prophet Daniel anno. 7. exilii Babilo∣nici putatur in∣terpretatus esse somnium Nebu∣buchadneze∣is. Vixit enim in captivitate Babilonica sub Nebuchadne∣e & succes∣soribus ejus—Alsted. Chro∣l. Propheta∣rum. 154. Daniel who lived in the time of the Babilonian captivity, and about the seventh year thereof, was raised for his rare Dilucidation of Dreames. And among other things herein, that the Scripture reports to his praise: That express passage is much to be pondered, Chap. 1. Vers. 17. As for these four Children, God gave them knowledg and skill in all Learning and Wisdom, and Daniel had understanding in all Dreames and Visions.
Out of which saying we consider concerning Daniel,

Lege Luther . comm. de o Theologi∣ & aliarum artium. What is asserted of him with the rest, &
What is ascribed to him above the rest.

1. 'Tis said of Daniel and his Asso∣ciates, Hananiah, Michael, and Azariah, three captive Children of the Jews, They all had knowledg and skill in all learning and wisdom. And as Theodoret upon the place well observeth 'tis said, God gave them this knowledg Non tantum Chaldaeorum institutio eos in∣telligentes fecit; sed Gratia Di∣vina dedit. Theod. in lo∣cum.
For as God instructs the Hus∣bandman in the wise disposing of his Seed and Soyl Si ita eruditi & instructi sunt agricolae in re∣bus tam mini∣mis, quid de Doctoribus sen∣tiendum est? Et quid, &c. Calvi in lo∣cum. Etiam hoc asse∣rit Aristocles. lib. 6. Ethic. cap. 7., Esa. 18. 26. So God much more does assist the Scholar in his Studies of humane Arts and Sciences, by whose bene∣diction knowledg herein is attain∣ed. This was the common gift of God to Daniel and his other cap∣tive-Companions.
2. Daniel above his fellowes is preferred, in that he had a special understanding in all Dreames and Visions. For the compassing of

which, no question (as he was a learned man) he had much help from humane wisdom, with which God had greatly endowed Daniel: So Ex hac scien∣tia, & natu∣rali, & acqui∣sita, & revela∣ta, sequitur laus Danilis. 1. Na∣turalem scien∣tiam literarum disciplinarum∣que humanio∣rum non a piis negligi sed co∣li oprtere.—2. Etsi haec non tam Naturae beneficio cm∣paratur a idli∣bus quam singu∣lari Dei gratia lucem mentibus ad res etiam naturales perci∣piendas.—Jun. Lectiones in Dan. as a most Godly man, he had more used other religious meanes, as Meditation, and Prayer and a more diligent Study of Divine Matters, in which God had raised and increased his knowledg be∣yond others in all Dreames and Visions. And as this was the praise of Daniel, so the same would make for the commendation of any other men, as Junius upon the place in divers Documents laies down.
2. See besides Scriptures, other Authors, who do much commend two sorts of men in former times, for their usefull knowledg of Dreames.


As Philosophers
And Physicians.

1. The antient Philosophers Cicero hac de re prolixe dispu∣tat. lib. 1. De Divinat. De in∣somniis igitur dicam non qui∣dem omnia quae ab Aristotele & aliis praecla∣rissimis Phi∣losophis copiose traduntur. Zanch. De Divinat., as Aristotle, Cicero, and severall o∣thers of the greatest repute, this is reported to their praise, they saw so much as enabled them to write largely and learnedly of the Nature of Dreames▪ So Zan∣chy presents them praise worthy.
2. Those famous Physicians, as Galen Galenus lib. de praesa∣giis ex somniis Ex inte∣riori dispositione corporis ormatur motus in Phan∣tasia—homini in quo a∣bundant frigidi humores occurrunt in Somniis quod sit in aqua—Et propter hoc Medici di cunt esse in∣tendendum Somniis ad cognoscendum interiores dispositiones.—Aquin. 22ae Quest. 95. Magir. in Physiol. suam. lib. 6. cap. 15. Zanch. Tractat. De Divination.▪ Hypocrates, they to their high praise, proved and improved their excel∣lent knowledg in Dreames, thereby discerning the Sym∣ptomes of severall diseases, and so perceived what pro∣per Meanes to propose to their Patients▪ for their more quick recovery. A∣quinas and others, give out evi∣dent

Instances of such admirable advantages, by which was raised the ame of Physicians in former times; And if it were laudable in them, to look into Dreames to learn out the state of mens bodies, may it not be commendable in o∣thers, thereby to discover the case of mens souls?
2. Profitable: this may plainly be proved by what

Hath been proposed, &
May be produced.

1. Proposed: much hath been by godly In Somnis Deus consola∣tur Jacobum, cohibet Abime∣lechum, admonet Laba∣nem, ortatu Solomonem, &c. Lege Illyricum clav. Scrip. Sac. and learned men in lat∣ter times, though little in our Eng∣lish Language lies extant, yet in Latin both Polemicall and Practicall Discourses much of use in this case is Discover∣ed.
For Writings Polemicall, read

Luther Vide prolix∣am & erudi∣tam disputatio∣nem de somniis & quid sit illis tribuendum. Luth. Ex tmo in Genesin. cap. 40. Luth. . com. ae classis cap. 22., who hath large and learned Disputations and Diluci∣dations of Dreames, discussing how they may be discrimi∣nated, and what to them may be appropriated.
For Practicall Writings, read Polanus Polan. Syn∣tag. Theol. lib. 5. cap. 30. De anim. and others; Such like, who in their learned Systemes of Divinity, have laid down divers usefull Divisions and Determina∣tions as referring to Dreame▪ be∣sides what other Eminent Men have excellently done, as occa∣sioned upon their Commentaries of Scripture, all which might well have been forborn, had not knowledg herein been a benefit to men, yea usefull to the best of Saints.
2. Produced: much may be for the fruitfull profit of all such per∣sons

by plain perception, and due discerning of Dreames.

Both to assist necessary Know∣ledg,
And to incite necessary pra∣ctice.

And let me here take notice of Dreames in a double sense:

As large and extended Somniorum duo sunt gene∣ra necessario cognoscenda.—
1. Quibus alii a Deo fuerunt in structi.
2. Quibus alii a Diabolo de∣structi fuerunt.
,
As strict and limited.

1. Dreames largely taken for all of all sorts, to endeavour their due understanding is need∣full, that such knowledg may be promoted, and such practice in∣cited, as is (to be sure) exceed∣ing necessary.
1. Knowledg necessary both herein and hereby, may be much for our benefit.
1. Knowledg in Dreames we have need, and may be much

for our good Observe

Our Activity in them, &
The Obscurity of them.

1. We Active: They Ʋnus idem∣que homo dor∣mit & somniat; somnus & som∣nium sunt acti∣ones ejusdem. Vide Magir. Comment. in Phys. lib. 6. are such motions as wherein we actually concurre. Now as Christ said to his Disciples of Christian duties, If ye know these things, happy are ye if you do them: So may I say to Christians concerning Dreames, If ye do these things, necessary it is you should know them.
2. They Obscure. Dreames go much in the dark, as they usually be in the dark night, so of a darke nature: so vailed and covered, as they commonly require an Inter∣preter. A Dream is a Somnium est figuris tectum & sine Interprete intelligi non po∣test. August. de spiritu & anima cap. 5. close covered Dish brought in by night for the Soul to feed on; And is it not meet for a man, after to uncover the Dish, to see and know upon what

Meat he hath eaten? that he may not like Isaac, abide beguiled with Kid for Venison, Gen. 28, 32.
2. This Knowledg, viz. of Dreames as in a more generall sense they are considered, may educe a double profitable know∣ledg, viz.

Certain, &
Conjecturall.

1. A certain Knowledg may hereby be brought in about the Reasonable soul of man.

In its Positive Being, &
In its Putative Working.

1. In dormiendo aliquis habet usum rationis quia saepe in somnis ratioci∣natur & praee∣ligit unum alteri consentiens vel dissentiens. Aquin. 22ae Quest. 154. A. 5. The reasonable soul in its reall Being, may hereby be readily known. 'Tis sure in some Dreams men are meerly sensitive, sensuall, and bruitish but let a man Dream as a man, and a superiour principle will soon appear.
3. The rationall soul in its Thought-working, hereby comes to be discovered. The Philoso∣pherVid. Aristot. lib. de Insom. cap. 2. & 3. & lib. de som. & Vigil. cap. 3. & de Gen. ani. cap. 1. de Hist. anim. cap. 10. who disputes to what part or power of the soul Dreames appertain, though he determines rather to the Sensitive than the Intellective, yet so as the soul is therein set a work in a way of Ima∣ginations and Cogitations▪ some of which may transcend sense▪ Yea, the most sound do assert that oftentimes Et observan∣dum est quod sepe contingit ea i sm nos vi∣dere quae run∣uam suerunt in sensu Parae∣us. comment. in Genes. that which hath not place in the sensitive part, either antecedent or concomitant, may yet be found in the working thoughts of a Dream. So that by the Knowledg of Dreames, much of mans rationall soul may be cer∣tainly known.
2. A Conjecturall knowledg a bout the serious concernments of

man, or matters wherein man may be much concerned. Though from Dreames so considered, a man may make no certain Theses, or infallable conclusions, yet a man may gather probabilities, and may give a great guessEx iis somniis & si nihil certi statuere pssu∣mus conjectare tamen—Qua∣lia fuerant Syllae & Lu∣culli somnia—Item qualia multa fuerunt quae apud Ci∣cer. lib. 1. De Divi. leguntur—Zanch. Tractat de Div.. Men may imagine when awake, from many motions and suggesti∣ons in sleep, what may be their advantages. I shall forbear In∣stances, which Learned Zanchy and some others declare in the Case.
2. Such Knowledg may profit persons in point of practice:

By examining of Dreames that tend to act, &
By determining to act beyond Dreames.

1. Men are moved to examine Dreames that does dispose them

to action. Dreames may be Somnium Monicae ambigu∣um de filio Au∣gustino—Lu∣ther. Tom. 2. in Genesin. ambigious, and to deed them may be dangerous; Or on the other side▪ proceeding from Dreames to deeds, may be a duty. And therefore though Dream-impres∣sions may make strong propen∣sions, and cause Concedit Ari∣stotales somnia saee esse causas nostrarum acti∣onum ut cum somno soluti ad ales nos actio∣nes accommo∣dmus quarum simulachris mens in somno percita suerit—Paraeus Tem. in Genes. Inclinations to act, yet a man wise and well in∣structed, will weigh all in Gods balance before, by suitable act∣ings he seeks to fulfill the same.
2. Men are moved to deter∣mine, actings at other times, beyond all Dreames▪ Some Dreames there are of waking men, yet sleeping sinners. About things of two sorts:

Terrestriall and Secular,
Caelestiall and Spirituall.

1. Nihil squi∣dem differt a sni vanitate rrum praesenti∣ fiura, sive sts, e pro∣sperae. &c. Am∣bros. de juga seculi. cap. 5. Dreames about and upon the pleasures and honours of the

world. Mens promotions, raise such imaginations, as wherein their minds make Dreames▪ As a Dream when one awaketh, so, O Lord, when thou awakest, thou shalt despise their Image, Psal. 3. 20. Comparat Pro∣pheta omnem mundi splend∣rem somio quo aliuando fru∣sta se quis ob∣leat—De rebus cadu∣cis somnians mag a concipit. Mollerus upon the place concludeth, That wicked mens earthly dignities, are but as idle Dreames, their splended braveries, but lucid phantasies, &c. Thus we find the Apostle expressing Agrip∣pas pomp: He came  Act. 25. 3. His glittering glory was but as a Dreaming phantasie, vain and vanishing, though much mind pleasing, &c.
2. Dreames upon and about better things. Luther observing some, saies, Somniant se habere singula∣rem sanctita∣tem modestiam patientiam & Doctrinam—Somniant se, &c. Luther. 5. classis. cap. 8. De anaticis. They imagine spiritu∣all Immunities, singular excellencies, that they have marvellous abilities in

ood for God, farre thoe their Bre∣thren, which be but Dreames. Their apprehensions of present good, and expectations of good to come, be but Dreames. Now a knowing hristian strives to be above a Dream, to rise unto Re∣alitie in Religion, that his hopes of Heavenly felicity, may be more then an imaginary fancy, his apprehensions more then ap∣paritions: that though he Dreames in sleep, and sleepes in Dreames, yet awake, he may work and live above Dreames, being in all things, serious, solid, and well setled.
2. Consider Dreames more strict∣ly taken, viz. as Divided

Into Evil from Satan,
And Good from God.

1. For evil Dreames, wherein

the Devil hath his industrious dealing for mens monstruous de∣filing and deluding.

Such have been, &
Such yet may be.

1. By such Diabolicall delu∣sions, have severall in daies past been seduced, and drawn upon such actions, as have proved their destructions. Historians re∣port of that great Prsian Lege Hero∣dot. lib. 7. in Xerxe. De quo etiam Atba∣nus. Quoniam Daemonius in∣stinctus est & Graecos clades quaedam (ut vi∣detur) missa Divinitus ma∣net ego quoque caedo & senten∣tiam muto—Alsted. Cronol. 294. Prince Xerxes, how by a delusive Dream he was instigated to go into Greece with his numerous Army, consisting of above 1000000 valiant men, where by a few Greeks, he had a fearfull foil.
1. Such Dreames may endure in our Daies. Let not any think (saies Luther) the Diseas humi∣liter sapere sci∣ens certo & ve∣rissimè Satha∣nam non esse mortuum, &c. Devil is now dead, no nor yet asleep: As he that keepeth Israel, so he that hateth

Israel never slumbereth or sleepeth. And while he hates, he is readiest to hurt, and may occasion many harmes by evil Dreames.
Yea, (saies Luther) We are day and Semper sumus obscessi & cir∣cumfusi undi∣que multis mi∣libus Daemonum qui evomunt contraos totum infernum & maxime exerci∣tibus nos adori∣untur—Luth. loc. Com. Quint. class. cap. 1. De Diab. night beset with Millions of Devils, when we walk abroad, sit at our board, lie on our bed, Legions of Devils are round about, ready to fling whole hell into our hearts.
Now to know and believe our lyableness to such deluding and polluting Dreames, as soon as others in preceding times Multis tempo∣ribus somniis fallaibus ho∣homines in magnos mittun∣tur errores, &c. Aug de cura pro mortuis. cap. 10., may much promote

Our needfull Knowledg, &
Our usefull Practice.

1. Our Knowledg may be here∣by furthered, both concerning Sinne Peccatum in sanctis non so∣lum est sed agit, non solum vivit sed vigilat. Luth. loc. 40. and Satan, our foes, and and the friends and fathers of fil∣thy Dreames.
1. A necessary knowledg of sin, may be by this very Meanes,

More Generall, &
More Speciall.

1. Sin in Generall, men may hereby discerning as concerning them∣selves, its certain excellency, close adherency, continuall Peccatum ori∣ginale & si non sit peccatum actuale est ta∣men peccatum atuosum Aqui. activity, &c. What is said of mans soul, the same may be said of mans sin; Age does Anima non dormiseit, non seneseit. Scalig. de subtill. not enfeeble it, nor sleep surprize it, but 'tis alway vigorous and vigi∣lant, even in the night time it puts forth in evil Dreames: So that by this we may learn the condition of mans sinne, and mans sinfull condition. Did but a sinfull man observe himself, as he is in the time of sleep, and he might soon see his soul through sin Docent Philo∣sophi-justum somniare ho∣nesta & tran∣quilla scelera∣tum in honesta & turbulenta in carnalibus & impiis som∣nus est cogilati∣onum mare, in∣auinationum fluctus—Aristo. lib. 1. Ethic. Plutarch. lib. 2. Nictas in orat. 3. Nazianz. to be as the troubled Sea, whose waters cast up mire and dirt, Esa. 57. 20.
. Sinn in Speciall, that which some call peccatm in delicijs, a mans delightfull and beloved sin, a mans most prevalent and prae∣dominantsinne, to which he is most prone, may hereby ap∣pear.
Concerning this are three things considerable.

1. That there is such a sinne.
2. That this sinne may be known. &
3. That its knowledg may be by this Meanes.

1. That such a Principall and Prince▪ like sinne certainly is, thatPsal. 18. 23. Ezek. 7. 16. swayes the Scepter in mans soul, and sits chief in the heart: That saies to every other sinne, as Pha∣raoh to Joseph; In the Throne will IGen. 41. 40. be greater then thou.
2. This chief-ruling sin in man,

may be known. Tis true, this sinne may most subtilly seek to conceal it self: and as is reported of the Persian Kings Apud Persas. Persona Regis sub specie ma∣gestatis occuli tur. Just. lib. 1. to be seldome seen in the day. During the day it may suspend its visible acts, and not come into any open view.
3. In the night time, and in the midst of mans sleep may this sin a∣rise and run out in his Dreams. That's a mans wel-beloved, which lieth at night betwixt his breasts, Cant. 1. 1. That's a mans Dalilah-lust, which leaneth upon his lap in his sleep, Judg. 16. 19.
2. Much of Satan in his subtill designes may hereby come to be discovered. Ignorance of the Devils artifice, is not fit for Chri∣stians. We are not ignorant of his devices, saies the Apostle,

2 Cor. 2. 11▪ [ Hanc artem Satanaepluribus explicatam. Vide apud Au∣gustinum li∣bro. 30. contra Epistolam Par∣meniani. cap. primo & secun∣do.] His thought▪ works, or the workings he hath in his thoughts, whether men be asleep or awake: Satans subtill injections into the minds of men, as Tertullian renders the Apostles word. 'Tis in the plurall, signifi∣ing Satan hath severall of this sort. How divers the Devil▪ devices are, Austin excellently opens, having had experimentall knowledg of many: And that good man Lege Au∣gusti. Confessi. lib. 10. cap. 30. a∣mong others, does much bemoan what mischief he suffered from Sa∣tan in sinfull Dreames.
2. By such knowledg of evil Dreames, things practicall are pro∣moted,

For repenting of what is past, &
For preventing of what may fol∣low.

First, Of such evils past, men through this knowledg are pro∣voked to repent, to humble them∣selves for these night-sinnes, with which very few are affected, and upon which scarse any reflect, un∣less with delight. Indeed, the Recordation of Dreames have sadly distressed some of Gods Saints. What amazements of mind? What terrible troubles of consci∣ence have come upon some men by this meanes? there be that can bear witness in the world. Some in their sleep have had a supposed burden, dreaming such a load lay Ex somnio mentem Nebu∣chadnezaris fuisse graviter affectam, sed gravtore somnio excussam fuisse recordationem somnii.—Jun. lectiones in Dan. Ʋt si quis somniet se ab aliquo premi. Quod in somni∣um Ephialtes appellatur. Fit cum crassus hu∣mor in Thorace Vel cerebro ex∣istens.—Zan∣chius. upon them, as though they strove they could not stirre. And such there are, who after sleep, and when awake, have sorely felt a reall burden, being pressed down with sorrow in the remembrance

of their sinfull Dreames.
Dream-sinnes the most are ig∣norant of, and so insensible under, and sorrowless after. Though 'tis certain mens sin∣full usts have no allowance from Gods Law in time of sleep. Perhaps some think of the Law of God; What Serbidious Jus civile Scriptum est vigilantibus non dormitantibus, &c. Scevo∣la said of the Civil Law: It was not at all written to restrain sleepers but wakers. But both waking and sleeping, man hath his bounds set, which to trans∣gress is sinne; even in a foolish thought, Prov▪ 24. 9. Of all which, a right knowledg much helps re∣pentance.
Secondly, Against such future Evils, hereby man is moved to arm himself, by the use of Scrip∣ture, Meditation, and Prayer.

Luther finding many Multi fanati∣ci spiritus me adorti sunt quo∣rum alius▪ som∣nia alius visio∣nes alius reve∣lationes jacta∣bat. Sed respon∣di me non expe∣tere ejusmodi—& si oerentur meiis non habi∣turum idem.—Et ideo arden∣tibus votis pre∣catus sum ut daret mihi Deus certum sensum Scripturae—Si enim verbum habeo sio me non facile fll aut errare pose¦sed recta via ingredi—Luth. loc. com. ae. classis. fantick spi∣rits (as he termes them) who boaing of their Dreames, sought to seduce him: This mae me, (saith he) earnestly pray to God, that he would give me the true understanding of his holy Word, that I might never be drawn away by such dangerous deviations in Dreames.
And did but men, indeed know the dangerous errors and evils of evil Dreames, with holy fear and care would they draw out the day, and lie down at night, lodg∣ing themselves in Christ, that Satan may not find them out. Necessary Necessarium est verbum ru∣minare & orare sive cum surgi∣mus sive cumbi∣tum imus, ne nos vacuos & im∣paratos hostis inveiat. Luth. primae classis. cap. 23. is it (saies Luther) that whether we rise up, or lie down, we should pray and ruminate upon the Word of God▪ that our ene∣my may never find us empty or un∣prepared.

And (saies another Ille igitur proprie tranquillus est qui carnem omni corruptionis labe purgavit, mentem supra creaturam omnem elevans, om∣nes illi subjicit sensus & vul∣tui Domini animam sistens, su∣pra virium suarum modum in Deum se semper extendens, &c. Climacus. Gradu. 26. &c. 29. Corn. Lapid. com. in Prov. Sol. cap. 4. Aquin. 22ae. quest. 154. art. 5. pag. 316. Siquidem ut equi jugales recta currere in∣structi non deserunt viam dor∣miente aurigâ: Ita bruti af∣fectus domiti nec in somnis fa∣cile recalcitant. Corn. La∣pid. com. in Pro. Auctor cat. Graes. cap. 3. v. 29. Author) he that would secure himself from such deceiving Dreames, as are Daemonum ludibria, must be daily subduing his sinfull and sensitive part, purging out pre∣sent pollutions, and ele∣vating his mind above creature-vanities, stri∣ving beyond his own strength to setle his soul in the sight of God, acquainting his soul with the good will of God, that therein he may go right to∣wards God, when his body lies asleep in his Bed.
Now a considerable Meanes to incite men to daily diligence in these good duties, is to instruct them in the evil of Dreames;

For who will so soon use the Me∣dicine, as he that best knows the Malady.
. Good Dreames, whereof God is the Authour Negat Aristo∣toles somnia unquam  contra illud Homeri∣cum ex , &c., ought to be known: For

1. Such have been, &
2. Such may yet be.

1. Dreames Divine have for∣merly been, in the minds of men. Calvin Non dubito quin multa som∣nia fuerint fa∣bulosa—Tamen satis constat quaedam somni∣a non fictitia esse—Sicut som∣nium calphurniae uxoris Julii Cae∣sais quia ante∣quam occidere∣tur—ita illa somnia verat—Idem dici potest de Medico Au∣gusti qui jusse∣rat eum exire è tabernaculo suo quo die pug∣natum fuit in pharsalia—Sta∣tim capta fue∣runt castra Au∣gusti. in his Commentaries up∣on Daniel, though he grants di∣vers Dreames have been so fa∣lacious and frivolous, as did evi∣dence much of the Devil; yet some Dreames have been so pon∣derous and serious, as might signi∣fie something of God: And he gives some nstances out of Anti∣ent Authors, as the Dream of Ju∣lius Caesar's Wife, admonishing her about her Husbands death:

And the Dream of Augustus his Physician, who thereupon com∣manded the Emprour in his bed, to be carried out of his ent, and so escaped the cruell enemies hand. In such Dreames, we may imagine some moving hand of Almighty God. Bu plain proofs we have from holy Scripture of Gods undoubted hand in divers Dreames: Gen 20. 3. Gen. 0. 5▪ Gen 4. 7. Judg. 7. 13.  King. 3. 5. Dan. . . Dan. 7. 1. Math. 2. 19, &c.
2. Dreames Divine may yet remain. From God may come (yea shall come) good Dreams in these latter times▪ And it shall come to pass in the last daies, I will pour out my Spirit—and your Sonnes shall Dream Dreames—Acts 2. 7. That ex∣cellent Expositor Paraeus Accipienda sunt somnia non solum metapho∣rice de illustri patefactione Dei & Doctrina sa∣lutis sub regno Christi sed pro∣priè de Divinis somniis est di∣ctum quae nunc sanè negligenda non sunt. in his

Commentaries upon Genesis af∣firms in that place: Dreames are not only to be taken in a Meta∣phoricall sense, for those famous Patefactions under Gospel Ad∣ministrations; but also for Dreames properly so taken, wherein God, under the Kingdom of Christ, may make known his mercifull mind unto the sonnes of men. [] &c. Filij vestri somnia somniabunt. Your sons shall Dream Dreames.
Memorable is that of B.Read the life and death of William Cow∣per B. of Gal∣loway in Scot∣land. Cowper, who in the passages of his life reports a Dream he had from God, guilding him to the place of his publick Ministry most remarkeably: And that the ever liv∣ing Lord, who sleepeth not, may thus in these latter times, warn the Souls of his Servants, when their Bodies be

a sleep, none  trust (saies he) wil deny the same, &c.
'Tis credibly told, of a Native Turk in London, lately Baptized into the Christian Faith, how by a Dream he was thereunto muchLege Augusti∣num lib. Conf. 8. cap. ult. drawn. As Austin had his Tolle-Lege: So he is said to have his Surge Recipe, whence without the receit of the Baptismall Sacrament he could not be satisfied. Others by such Dreams may be incited.
So that to seek a due un∣derstanding of Divine Dreams, is an undoubted Duty in Gospel∣daies: This will further

Profitable Knowledg, &
Sutable Practice.

1. Requisite Knowledg may much be promoted by that Com∣munion a good man may thus have, both with God and himself,

during the darkest seasons of the night. My reines Renes interi∣ora viscera—occultissima de∣notant—cor in∣telligit, &c. instruct me in the night seasons, (saies David) Psal. 16. 7. Even in the seasons of the night, the most retired motions of David's mind, the most hidden thoughts of his Nonnulli in∣terpretantur quod nocturno tempore multa dedicisse & proficisse Pro∣phta in agniti∣one Dei in fide, &c. Mollerus in locum. heart, did read him, as one calls it, a Curtein Lecture; by which he learned much of himself to∣wards God, and much of God to¦wards himself; his Faith, his Love, and such like Graces were so comfortably discovered, that he blessed God for it. I will bless the Lord that hath given me coun∣sell; my reines also instrust me in the night season. In the time of the night, when good men are a∣wake; yea, and when asleep al∣so, by these secret waies, they may certainly discern much con∣cerning


The God of grace, &
The grace of God.

1. Much of God may by this means be manifest, as not only the cer∣tainty of his being, that he is, but the transcendancy of his being; what and how great he is, in his power, prudence, providence, vigilance, omniscience, goodness, &c. are even from these admirable actings evident. Aristotle that great Philosopher Et quamquam Aristotles li∣benter reiceret omnem semsum Divinitats ut fuit maligus in hac parte cum scilict ad captum ingnii vellet Di na∣turam exgere ut omnem rape∣ret a acue suum—Nega∣vit somnia esse Divina—Con∣cessit tame D∣vination esse in quiusam somniis. Calv., that he might lift up humane Nature, and dash down all Notions of Deity, deny∣ed any Dreames to be Divine; yet to some Dreames he would grant Divination, which may soon seem a contradiction. A free concession to, and due cog∣nition of Divine Dreames, may draw out much of the manifold Knowledg of God.
2. Much of Gods sanctifying grace in men, may through this be known: That near access, and close converse, that ready re∣course, and refreshing intercourse which certainly sometims is be∣tween a glorious God and a graci∣ous soul, in time of sleep, does testifie much in man of the grace of God. This discovers Gods grace in its true Impress, Progress, Efficiency, Proficiency. Plu∣tarch Quomodo quis suos in virtute profectus sentire possit inter alia signa dat som∣nium si quis non turpia sed: ho∣nesta somniet. sets down this as a manifest sign of mans stature in Virtue; that his Dreames are not of filthy, but of honest things. So that as to necessary Knowledg, there is good use of a due understanding of Divine Dreames.
2. As to the effectual further∣ance of pious Practice, the same is also of singular use.
This puts on to divers good Duties, as relating to Dreames Divine:

For procuring and encreasing them, &
For improving and pursuing them.

1. To procure and encrease good Dreames: A knowing Christian herein, becomes diligent here∣upon, and takes paines in Prayer, preparing all day for Gods visits in the night. Psal. 17. , 2, 3. Hear O Lord, and attend to my Prayer.—Thu hast visited me in the night, thou hast proved my heart, and shalt find nothing. That is (saies Mollerus) Nocte me pro∣basti sed non deprehend sti ai uam perfi∣diam ufalla∣ciam in me sed recte & sircere egi cum in cae∣teris tum in hac causa. nothing perfidious, fallacious, but as at other seasons, and in o∣ther cases, so in this; my soul hath sincerely complyed with God, and readily met him in the visits of

the night: And for this purpose the Prophet was full of Prayer in the day. Luther Semper rogas∣se Dominum ne mihi vel somnia vel visiones mitteret, pactum feci cum Domi∣no Deo meo ne vel visiones vel somnia mihi mittat. Luther. reports, that he on the other side, often prayed to God, that God would not speak any thing to him in Dreames: And that he covenanted with God, that in Dreames God would not send to him any of his mind, &c.
But thus might this good man do, upon a double occasion:

To oppose the waies of men, &
To advance the Word of God.

1. To oppose the practice ofConsule Luthe∣rum 5ae class. cap. 8. De H∣reticorum & Fanaticorum versutia astu, virulentia vio∣lentia & ca∣lumniis maliti∣aque memen∣dabili, &c. men, who in his daies pretended divers things from God in Dreams full of fallacies and falsities; therein many were Deluders, and many deluded; with which he was much affected, and oft sore assaulted.
2. To advance the Praescripts of

God in his written word, I am content (saies Luther) that I Contentus sum hoc dono, quod habeo Scriptu∣ram sanctam quae abunde do∣cet & suppedi∣tat omnia quae. Sunt necessa∣ria cum ad hanc tum ad futurum vitam have the holy Scripture, which teaches me so abundantly and evidently, that herein I acquiesce. And to Gods setled Word (saies Huic credo & acquiesco ac certus sum me non pse salli. Luth. Torn. 4. in Genesin. he) while I adhere, I am certain not to be decei∣ved, &c. But if they be indeed Dreames from God, they sute un∣to his Word, and will not deceive us. And therefore for such Dreames, we ought to pray, and to prepare good Matter for them, to implore the Spirit poured out, to ponder Scripture; to hide Gods Word in our hearts; to store up the Precepts and precious Promises thereof in our remem∣bring minds; and with the word to make meet Animadversions up∣on Gods marvellous works; to hearken to God, and to walk

with God while we are awake, that he may the more meet us in out sleep. And why might not the minds of men move and be moved in holy and heavenly, as well as in idle and foolish Dreames, were diligence used, and duties discharged? I doubt not but divers of Gods dear Atque saepe per somnium me pu∣t esse in infer∣no & saepe in Caelo Luth. Saints in these secret workings of their sanctified souls, have many sweet caelestial sights, when the eyes of their bodies be close shut upon their sleeping beds, and see not.
2. To improve and pursue such Dreames is a duty. As soon as we are up, to begin good deeds in the day, that may occomplish the good God gave in the night. 'Tis said of Jonah his Guord, that God made to spring in the night,

That when the morning arose, a worm smote the Guord, and it wither∣ed. When we have a sweet Dream, and come out of a good sleep in the night, there is (saies an Author Este Daemonibus unus qui praecursor dicitur qui nos è bono somno surgen∣tes protinus excipit & nostrum cogita∣tum inquinare nititur—Da Domine primitias dici tuae—Ab ipso matutino tempore cursum meum totius dici scio—Cave ne pullulant vanae & in∣utiles cogitationes—Si munda corde astiterimus ante Deum—Orantes oc∣culum cordis nostri in ipsum dirigre & adhuc videre invisibilem mente non corpore—Magnus ille Joannes Abbas apud Ruffinum in viis Patr. cap. 1. haec suis dabat documenta.) one a∣mong the evil Spirits that out-runnes the rest, and in the morn∣ing, as soon as we a∣wake, endeavours to dash good thoughts, to divert and to de∣file, to prevent all pious practises and prosecutions, But much care is required in this case: We ought not only to pre∣serve, but to improve good Dreames, by a practicall putting forward of our selves in holy Du∣ties, all the daies of our lives.
Now a right knowledg of these

Dreames, may much incite to such pious practises, and profit Gods people, both asleep and a∣wake. Excuse me then, Gentle Reader, for the attaining these Ends I have intended this Trea∣tise, and trust it may thereto be a good Means, through Gods Mercy. Amen, Amen.
Decem. 28. 1657.

