



AFter how Miraculous a manner God is Com∣ing in mercy to his, in vengeance to E∣vil-doers, this Book, made up of truth and good affection (as the

Author ought to be for his Countries Good) will tell you, which being sent as an Herald to declare the Coming of God. It doth not Crave, but Command protection; And though I may not dedicate it, to any other then to whom God Al∣mighty hath directed the matter of it; Primarily to you of this so sinful City London, subsequent∣ly to all the people of the three Na∣tions and Christian World, yet is it good manners fairly to intreat of you, Oliver Cromwell Pro∣tector, that it suffer not by any prohibition of yours, in sale or o∣therwise.
Indeed I do not doubt of that from your Lordship which I be∣seech from all, its good acceptance. Especially if you did know or do re∣member,

those two so Considera∣ble passages, both which not long since fel out at White-Hall.
A person well known to your Lordship, E. C. gives to one near you, (but purposely for your peru∣sal) A paper, of which you were to take Cognisance. That paper he or they Burnt; Now to let you or them see clearly Gods dislike of that wicked act, his Fire of dis∣pleasure not long after flamed out of the Chimney, twas near you; its rage frighted some, it was visi∣ble to very many: in vision was it said to the party that gave the Pa∣per, they have burnt thy Paper, but go forth, and thou shalt see their Chimney on Fire: the party did so, and saw it so on Fire.
At another time, the same party

endevours to set a Paper on the Chap∣pel doors of White-Hall; White-Hall still, the matter of that was, (as much of this Book is) what God would have speedily done, for his in∣jured King, and despised Church: of all which your self, Chaplaines and others under that roof, were to take special notice, and conforme un∣to. The Chappel Officer would needs hinder the setting up of that Paper, for some time he did so; in fine he boldly said, if ever it was set up, he would pull it down. He was then forewarned and charged not to do so, lest God took ven∣geance on him; he slighted the coun∣sel, and when it was set up, not fearing God but men, he puls it down. The next news heard and seen of him is, that very right

hand of his, so misimployed as to pull it down, is suddenly bound up, becomes unuseful, and withers, a very few dayes after, some 15. or 20. himself dyes. These things are true, I can prove them. My Lord, it is very seasonable here to remind you of what so sadly befall Mr. Whaley Mayor of North∣hampton in the very year of his Majoralty, on Tuesday Easter next it is but two since, marke it well I beseech you, for these things are clearly of God, yea clearly so.
That Presbyter Whaley, an Early Complyer with the worst times, most falsly and shamefully belyes me, he traduceth and En∣deavours to suppress the so Mira∣culous proceedings of God Al∣mighty afforded in that Town of

Northampton, on behalf of his own prophecy, my unworthy self, and what past the very night of my en∣largement from prison there. Af∣ter I had wrote to him, and followed him close to know his grounds or reasons of those his ugly practices, but could never receive any from him: at last I wrote to his fel∣low-Iugler, and brother Presby∣ter Ball Minister in that Town, Charged him that he should let Whaley know, if I received not speedily from him in writing, he should from me in print, yea both of them should; On Goodfriday I finished what I intended to print against them: The Tuesday fol∣lovving God takes the business in∣to his own hand, Whaley sinks down and dyes suddenly in his

Clothes. Indeed I was unalterably resolved not to endure them or any to belye, endeavour to suppress, or op∣pose the proceedings of my God, and his Prophecy (for so this is) if I could help it: and because I could not, God did it for me.
The Manuscript which your Lordship had of mine declaring their bad practises against Gods so wonderful proceedings in that place of Northampton, because I could not get Printed, I left it in the University Library of Ox∣ford; My Lord, it is worthy your Remembrance for ever; I shall one day get most of it Printed, the world must know whats in it. For Ball his minister he is now become a Pul∣pit-defender in Print, (the World hath too many such) not long known

to be so; but he sees early and comes round with the first: I have desired him, Ball, by word of mouth, that his repentance be sincere, early, and publick, the rather because his aber∣rations were publick and with the first. Oh Presbytery, Presby∣tery! Thou hast not hitherto done Gods Church and this kingdom many good offices, mend for shame Presbytery.
Reader, I must therefore Print these Precedents of truth, that they may deter all Presbyters or others, from belying, or impeding, the Revealed Decrees of Hea∣ven, in favour of Gods King and true Church; which decrees he is pleased now to have made publick, and by all are to be conformed unto.
But why complain I of ill offices

done to me or others in these three Kingdoms, seeing I know very well (yea this Book tells you truly as much) that to remedy all this and more, God is coming? Whose Almighty fire sent out up on the Eight of April, is gone before him, Commissioned to begin at this so sinful City London, Converting or Consuming the Ene∣mies of his King and Church. Believe it Reader, our appeal is heard in Heaven, and we shall shortly have a Court on Earth to remedy whats amiss: For God hath revealed from between the Cherubins, where he is said to dwell, That the Restoration of our King is of God: and then all those lesser devils, wait∣ing upon this Kingdom of darkness

will suddenly become invisible.
To conclude, why should I in a Preface tell thee what I have therefore made so very short in the book, on purpose, that it should be Read, be Believed, and practi∣sed by all? all are infinitely con∣cerned to do so; Certainly, happines will be had thereby.
Reader, distrust me not, there is a storm and change at hand, a greater, or any like it since our Saviors time, I firmly and warrantably believe hath not been on Earth: After which will ensue Golden times and dayes. A Church more con∣spicuously glorious then ever: for the defence and Protection of which, God will afford his Nur∣sing Kings and Queens, as promi∣sed of Old, but in his wisdom re∣served

for the fittest time.
In Good Earnest I do pray for all men, duty binds me to it; yet can I not but fear A very Ge∣neral Confusion of the most. This is what I must faithfully let you all know, and stand to when I have done. So help me O God, as I ever own, in all times and places, thy Prophecy I formerly printed, and this book I now pub∣lish to the world, being both of thee; Witnessed and sealed unto by me VValter Gostelo dwelling in Broad-street London, at which Church officiated as our pa∣stor, The so deservedly beloved Doctor Oldsworth. Men and Brethren, Divines learned, Good, and of holy life like him, ever taught their Auditors, to be peace∣able

sons of the true Church, so is faithfully to serve you of this City and his Country,

