



Friends, Christian and Beloved;
IT was signified unto me by some of you, as the desire of many more, that what should be preached at the Inter∣ment of your dear Friend and mine, Mr Daniel Taylor, might be commend∣ed unto the Press, that so the memory of his exemplary and Christian life, might live upon the better terms amongst you, and be the readier at hand for your Christian service, upon all occasions▪ The Sermon, I confess, rather intimateth, and this

very sparingly, then discourseth, the particulars of his worth: Upon my entrance hereinto, I declared my self under a solemn resolution (not much short of a vow) not to offend the weakest of the living, by commending, no not the strongest of the dead, espe∣cially not in the Pulpit, not at such a time, when their highest concernments are in hand, and they most sa∣credly engaged to attend them with all their might and strength. Only the principal subject of the Ser∣mon, Mercy, was indeed not the least of his commen∣dations. His example herein will bless you, if you follow it, but will rise up in judgement against you, if you turn your backs upon it. His other endow∣ments, as well moral as intellectual, were very excel∣lent, both for kind, and degree. He was Religious, not of custome, or of course, but of conscience, nobly disdaining to prostitute his judgement to any circumforaneous, or vulgar opinion in matters ap∣pertaining unto God, simply upon the credit, or re∣commendation, of other mens Faith; and withal studiously scrupulous and tender of receiving any Notion or Tenent whatsoever, into his Belief, until he had caused it to pass through the fire of a district examination and enquiry, and found that it would not burn. Whilst the health and strength of his body was able to bear the weight of exercises of Devotion, he maintained a constant and close trade of communion with God: and in the time of his last weakness, a few weeks before his change, amongst other savoury Discourse, he bemoaned himself, that since the prevailing of his distemper upon him, he was deprived of his heart-breaking opportunities with God. His heart was up very high in desires af∣ter knowledge of the Truth, and this in the most pro∣found

Questions controverted between men of great∣est judgements in these days. Books of Divinity that were any thing judiciously or accurately written, his delight was, at his spare hours.

Nocturnâ versare manu, versare diurnà;
By night to read; and not to spare by day.

He put no difference between persons, either for their concurrence with him, or dissent from him, in mat∣ters of opinion, or form of worship. But that which commended any person unto him, was his own opini∣on of his integrity, and goodness of heart towards God. Some to whom his heart stood very close in affection, whilst they were yet sound in the Faith touching Infant-Baptism, found no change in his re∣spects towards them, after their judgements had warp'd the contrary way, no not after they had dis∣claimed all Christian communion with him in a Church way. His signal Integrity, Justness, and Clearness in dealings, as well in the administration of the Trust committed unto him, as in his private occa∣sions, are freely testified by all that had to do with him in either kind, with a nemine contradicene, (as far as I have heard.) The Greatness (which some call Goodness) of his Estate, made no breach at all upon the goodness of his disposition in his conversation: He observed no distance, made between himself, and the meanest of his Brethren, by his abundance; Per∣sons even of lowest degree, by the mediation of his affableness and humility, found access unto him upon all their occasions; and few, if any, came from him discontented. His carriage was composed and grave, yet without affectation: His Discourse, seasonable

and savoury, without offence. His native temper seemed to incline him to much reservedness: but by judgement and conscience he reduced that which was less desireable, or less useful, in this inclination. His Habit and Garb every ways comly, sutable rather to his profession, then estate. Whatever savoured of ostentation or vanity, he left to be taken up by per∣sons of looser and lighter spirits. The full cup, which God gave unto him, he carried with an even and stea∣dy hand, without spilling: yet freely gave to every man that was a thirst, and came in his way, to drink.
His intellectual endowments were given him by the largest measure, which God in these days is wont to mete unto men. What Ethan, or Heman, Chalcol, or Darda, 1 King. 4. 31. were in their generation, the like, or not much unlike, was he in his. His understanding was large, and very comprehensive: His apprehension quick and piercing: his judgement solid and mature, his memory, fast and faithful; his elocution, or speech, distinct and clear, elegant, and fluent enough, yet not luxuriant or pedantick. He was more then of ordinary abilities to argue the most thorny and ab∣struse points in Divinity; ready of Discerning, where the quick of any controversie, or matter in debate lay: very expert he was in the word of Righteous∣ness, able to draw waters of life out of such Wells of salvation, from whence many men of good under∣standing, and parts of Learning, had not wherewith to draw, because of the depth of them. He had a sin∣gular dexterity to make the rough things of business, smooth, to turn the insides of matters, outward, to untie knots, and dis-intangle intricacies, in all manner of affairs that were brought to him. I scarce know

any man amongst those he hath left behind him, of like felicity with him of giving counsel and advice, in cases of difficulty, and doubtful consideration.
In sum, as well for parts of Nature, as of Grace, he was an highly accomplisht man, adorned and set forth by God, for a pattern, as for others, so for you (more neerly related to him) more especially. I trust his life though he be dead, shall speak unto you, whilst yours continues, and help to form and fashion you into the same image of Christian worth and desireableness with him. The best way to make your selves as little losers as may be by his death, is to live by the pattern of his life, and to preserve the memory of all that was exemplary in him, not so much for story, or discourse, as for a spur to a conscientious imitation. Your day is coming, as his is lately past: yet a little while, and you will all overtake him in the dust. If in the mean time your hearts through the Grace of God, will serve you so to live, as that you may be counted wor∣thy to stand at the same hand of Jesus Christ with him in the great day, you and he shall never part com∣pany more.
The God of all Grace shall mightily incline your hearts to desire part and fellowship with him in this blessedness, or else deny (which I confidently hope he will not) the fervent Prayer, of
From my Study in Swan Alley Colemanstreet, May 15. 1655.

