



RIGHT HONOURABLE,
AS in sundry other ages and places, so
in this age and place wherein we now
live, hath my Text been verified:
and that within the compasse of these
last five years; in every of which
God hath done better unto us
then at our beginnings: and we have great and just
cause to hope that he will yet continue to doe better and
better.
It was an especial evidence of Gods good providence,
that the great Counsel of England was called at that
time, that it was called.
The State of Church and Common-wealth was so farre
out of order, and the disorder in both so backed, as, with∣out
a Parliament, it would not, it could not (in mans
apprehensions) have been redressed.
The Reformation that was then intended by that

Parliament, being by some envious eyes espied, a dissolu∣tion
thereof was procured.
But that, and other former dissolutions of Parlia∣ments
(necessity forcing another Parliament soon after
to be called) occasioned an Act to prevent inconve∣niencies,
which may happen by the untimely Ad∣journing,
Proroguing, or dissolving of this present
Parliament.
What better thing (rebus sic stantibus ut tunc &
nunc) could have happened to this State? The good
consequencies, that have happened thereupon, are evident
demonstrations of Gods minde, still to do better and bet∣ter
for us.
It would exceed the proportion of a Dedicatory E∣pistle,
to reckon up the particular instances of the Divine
Providence, encreasing time after time for the better un∣to
us, and that by vertue of this present Parliament:
they are so clear and evident, as none, but such as take
notice of nothing, can be ignorant of them: and none,
but envious and malignant spirits, can conceal or pervert
them.
When might the good Providence of God have been
better discerned, in protecting the persons, upholding the
spirits, directing the counsels, and prospering the endea∣vours
of such as were assembled in a Parliament, then
in this? When might the like Providence of God have

been better discerned in stirring up mens mindes, encou∣raging
their spirits, enabling their bodies, and preserving
their persons for maintaining a cause, then in this cause
that is now maintained by the Parliament? Of them
who with a single eye behold the footsteps of the Lord in
the Counsels of our Parliament, it may justly be said,
They have seen thy goings, O God, the goings
of my God,Psal. 68: 24. my King.
Have not our Armies had successe beyond expectati∣on,
even to admiration?
What a stop hath been set to Superstition? How
good a progresse hath been made in Reformation? And
may we not yet hope that God will doe better unto us
then at our beginnings? Gods promise is the ground
of hope: and my Text sheweth that God hath promised
as much.
Goe on, Right Honourable, and put forth your ut∣most
endeavours,Cum aliqua spes subest, vehementiores vi∣res apparere assolent. Aug. de quant. ani∣mae. c. 22. Spes ad majora audenda sese erigit. Greg. M in Iob 4 l. 5 c. 29. for bringing on those better things
that yet remain. Where their is Hope, there endea∣vours
use to be most earnest: For Hope stirreth up
mens spirits to set upon great things.
Though the full accomplishment of the remaining bet∣ter
things should be reserved to a future age, yet it be∣comes
us, to be as earnest in prosecuting them, accord∣ing
to the ability and opportunity that God doth give
us, as if we our selves were sure, while we live, to have

the fruition of them. Experience sheweth that to be
true, which of old was said of the provident husband∣man,
that he planteth trees which may be usefull in an
other age. But I hope that God will let you see and enjoy
the fruit of your Counsels, and of our desires. This shall
be the continuall prayer of

