



I make no question but your EXCELLENCY,
and Honourable Councell; have, without putting
any stumbling-block of iniquity before your faces, con∣sulted
all Oracles of Conscience & Honour, about your
present, and late procedings, before you lifted up an
hand unto them. The cleernesse and integritie of your
hearts herein, cannot (I presume) but laugh to scorne
all the hard sayings, and clamorous imputations of men, whoot the
knowledge of Truth,Facundum sa∣ciebat amor. but love to themselves; makes eloquent i diclaim∣ing
against you. The import of your actions standing in full conjuncti¦on
with that great and publique Interest of the Kingdome, must needes
carry in it an opposition to the irregular and by interests of such men,
who feare that they must scatter, if the Kingdom once begins to gather.
And it need not seem at all strange to you, that men of wit and parts
otherwise, having the advance of such an antiperistasis, as the tenour of
your proceedings accommodates them with,Grande dolo∣ris ingenium est. should be able to misfigure the
liberall and ingenous face of your actions into an absolute deformity.
There is no heart of Oake, or other timber, though never so sound, but
that a cunning Painter, especially under some particular elevation of
fancy for such a worke, will put into a colour of rottennesse, and make it
looke as if it were stark naught. That the glorious worke of casting

out Devils by the finger of God, was represented unto the people under
the notion of as vile and hatefull an action, as lightly can be imagined;
no better, then a working by Belzebub the cheife of the Devils. But the
best is, that they that speake evil of worthy actions, double their reward
in heaven.
Hearing and observing the tongues of your enemies hard at worke on
every side, in making your sweet things, bitter, your smooth things, rough,
and your streight things, crooked, in the imaginations of men, I betooke
my selfe to my Pen to Counter-worke them, what I may, by resolving
your actions into their proper and cleere principles of righteousnesse and
honour. If I had onely the reasons and judgments of men to encounter,
I should not question a conquest by satisfaction; but when mens judge∣ments
are steel'd with interest and affection, force of reason and dint of
argument, prove (for the most part) but like arrowes shot against a wall
of brasse. The Holy Ghost takes speciall notice, that the Pharisees, be∣ing
covetous,Lu. 16. 14. derided our Saviour, notwithstanding his most heavenly
and convincing Doctrine and discourse against that sin.
I make bold with your Names for countenance to these papers, and
humbly present them unto your hand, not to informe you of the righteous∣nesse
of your Actions (wherein I doubt not but you were satisfied from
Heaven, before they were in being) but partly to obtaine the safer conduct
for them to passe abroad, and partly to account with you for those respects
of honour which are, and have bin long due unto you from

From my Study Jan. 1.
1648.
