



Gentlemen,
AS the most high God hath set you up to be su∣preame persons in the places of your aboade: so he hath been pleased to put precious oppor∣tunities into your hands for the honour∣ing of him as Christian Magistrates. Now among the many things requisite for Religious Magistrates that they may honour the most high God, menti∣on I shall onely make
Of Knowledge, and Courage.

Knowledge to examine and state things right;
Courage to determine and act right things.
Knowledge as the eye seeing what is just to be done; Courage as the hand doing what is seen to be just. If cou∣rage be without knowledge, the eye of justice is blind: If knowledge be with∣out courage, the sword of justice is blunt. Though your knowledge I do not question: yet your courage I would quicken. And therefore I hum∣bly beseech you to consider, In what cases, And for what causes, courage is comely in every Christian Magistrate. The cases that require courage, are either Civil or Religious. Civil cases that tend to the good of the body Poli∣tick. Religious cases hat tend to the good of the body Ecclesiastick. These ca∣ses last are not the least. Yea, as the Church is more excellent then the Common-Wealth, so a Christian Ma∣gistrate is more to mind the affairs of Gods Church, then the concernments of
 any civil State.Magis miror Davidem sallantem quam pug∣ntem. Hence Gregory pro∣fessed, he did more commend David dancing before the Ark, then fight∣ing with the Philistines. All his courage in conquering enemies, was not like his zeal for Religion, and the holy worship of God. Moses having brought Israel out of Egypt,Romae qu∣tie scunque Senatus co∣gbaur, nulla de re prius qu de religone agebat. Varro. lib. 14. cap. 17. before he settled the Common-Wealth, he prescribed the way of Gods worship. Our dear Lord little looked after Civil Judicature, but much laboured the purging of the Temple. Tis Religion as Lactan∣tius oft teacheth that maintains humane Societies, civil Subordinati∣ons,Lact. de vera sepi∣ent lib 4. cap. 4. which otherwise could not sub∣sist, but savage cruelties and sensual impieties would pull all in pieces. Yea, there is no State, City, or Town, but it prospers in temporals, according as Religion and things that relate to God are nourished, and do flourish.Dilexi vi∣rum, qui cum corpor solveretur, magis de statu Eccle∣siarum quam de propriis pe∣riculis an∣gbtur. Ambros. in vit. Theo∣dosii. See Hag. 1. God bids some consider whe∣ther they did not thrive, according as they promoted the building of the Tem∣ple. How well went it with the Com∣mon-Wealth
 of Israel when Josiah and Jehoshaphat bestirred them in a Reli∣gious reformation? And how was So∣lomons and Rehoboams Kingdome shaken when they did not regard Reli∣gion, but corrupted the worship of God, leaving the things of God to lie naked and open to enemies and evils. The Gold, blue silk, and purple would ne∣ver have been so safe, or shined so well within the Tabernacle had not the outside been covered with red skins and Goats hair. Such a shelter ought Magistracy to be to Gods Church and all the things of Religion therein, whereby they may the better, and the brighter shine. And as the care and courage of Magistrates ought to be most in the matters of God: So among them their zeal ought to be most earnest in the matter of the Sabbath. The Sabbath observed, is the Compendium and Epitome of the whole practice of Piety. As the transgression of the Sabbath is the violation of the whole Law of God. When the people of Israel went to ga∣ther
 Manna on the day of the Sabbath, God makes his complaint to Moses their Magistrate, saying, Exod. 16.18. How long will they refuse to keep my Commandements, and to obey my Lawes? Lawes and Comman∣dements, in the plural: In that they broke the Command of the Sabbath God accounts it as a breach of all his Commandements, and a sin against all his concernments: This Moses is to be affected with. And therefore all that are in office under God, ought to be most burning in zeal against Sabbath-sins & sinners, and for due observing the day of the Sabbath. Such was the zeal of the first and best reformers, as we find in Scripture,Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 10. Socrat. lib. 5. Russin. Ecc. bi. lib. 2. Gen. 3.24. The Magi∣strates duty in this point. See Pag. 132, 133, 134. and in the Histories of all ages. In this case therefore of the Lords day in the Lords Name, let me call upon you who about us bear the ci∣vil sword to be towards this Gospel Sab∣bath (as the Cherubims with their flaming sword towards that tree in Paradise) preserving the way thereof, and observing the work therein, &c.
 SIRS, so far as possibly you can draw out your care, and lift up your courage so as to be a wall of fire for this dayes defence, that on this day the visible parts of Gods worship be performed, and therefore that the places of Gods wor∣ship be diligently frequented. As I would beseech your zeal against the principal places of Satans service, I mean Rotten Alehouses the Suburbs & Seminaries of Hell, the Nurceries of sin, and Synagogues of sinners: so for the places (within your precincts) of Gods publick worship. The worship of God in publick upon the Lords day by your personal presence, and by your Magisteriall power expresse how much you prize. No marvel David had such a desire to build a house to God, when he cryes out, Psal. 84. How ami∣able are thy Tabernacles, O Lord! Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, &c. How you highly esteeme the publick Ordinances of God declared by your close endeavours to support both the DAY, and the place of their publick use.

The causes that may encourage zeal in these cases, mount your minds and raise your spirits for God and all that is Gods, His Sabbaths and service. I beseech you observe,
How hereto you are bound, and
How herein you are backed.
You are bound that about these things above all you burn in zeal. Hath not God bound you? And have not you bound your selves? God hath bound you not onely as men, but as Magistrates by his holy commands to mind the matters of Religion before all other things in the world, Deut. 16.17, 18. We see what Injunctions are set upon the Supreame Magistrate in this regard, and there∣fore Magistrates subordinate are chiefly to see to such things, above all to look that the dayes and duties of Gods wor∣ship be carefully kept up, by all within the Gates, as of their Domestick, so of their Civil Jurisdiction, Exod. 20.10. Yea, you kave bound your selves by so∣lemn oathes. Though civil things are principally expressed, yet all is in order
 to a higher end and greater good. True, some Magistrates, as Jehu, and Jero∣boam, have made the matters of God subordinate to their own interests and the outward peace of their kingdoms, but it hath ever proved the fatal mis∣carriage of such misplacing Governours. State-ends must all be subordinate, the chief and uppermost end of all in power is to preserve the things of God. The main end therefore of all your engage∣ments, is to maintain Gods worship, his holy Sabbaths, and whatever serves for his honour. As an oath hath a Divine Ground, so it is for ends Divine. And though many simple men that be brought before you discern God no more in oaths, then Christ in Sacraments, and therefore can take, yea, and break oaths (as Sampson his Withs) at their wills; Yet what a solemn and sacred thing an oath is you well know. Hereby you are bound, as to do just things be∣twixt man and man, so to do things just for God much more. And as you are bound, so you are backed, and backed
 so, as may well work up your warmest courage in the cause of God, for the WAYES and DAYES of God. You are backed with good Lawes against all open offenders, and seen-Sabbath-sin∣ners: Evil doers upon the Lords day. You are backed with the prayers of all Gods precious people, who pour out their hearts to God to preserve, blesse, and prosper all pious Magistrates by whose means Godlinesse may be promoted a∣mongst men, 1 Tim. 2.1, 2. You are backed with the promises of God, the presence of God; God is with you, be valiant: Be valiant, for God is with you. The Lord is with thee, thou mighty man of valour, sayes the An∣gel to Gideon, Judg. 6.12. Be strong and of a good courage, ayes God to Joshua, I will be with thee, I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee: One∣ly be thou strong and very couragi∣ous, Chap. 1. vers. 5, 6, 7.
And therefore, worthy SIRS, I be∣seech you against all encounters cloath your selves with courage. You are to
 encourage others, (inferiour Officers are by your language, carriage, countenance, counsel, commands, to become couragi∣ous) and therefore be you your selves full of fiery courage. The Audacious∣nesse of men to sin, even Sabbath-sins; And the dulnesse of men even to Gods Sabbath-service, calls loud for courage in Christian Magistrates. Our Savi∣our had his scourge or whip, with which he drove men out of the Temple with their sheep and oxen from their buying and selling: Magistrates had need have their whips, penal Lawes in force to drive men into publick places of Gods pure worship with their children and ser∣vants to hearing Gods holy Word and other duties upon the Lords day. Good SIRS, so far as you can put on with en∣kindled courage. Such must not be soft wood, but heart of Oak, that are in the place of civil pillars; not men of easie, facil, flexible, timorous natures; but men of unbended, unbiassed dispositions, resolutions, full of fortitude, valour, magnanimity, and of Masculine spirits,
 &c. Theodoret hath a good observa∣tion upon that in Leviticus,Levit. 4.22.27. , &c. where the Ruler for his sin is enjoyned to offer an he-Goat, the private man a she-Goat; for though the female may fit the ruled, yet the male most suites such as rule. Some think that hence Constantine was termed, Revel. 12. the Churches Male or man-child, because of his manly zeal for Gods Church, the Lords day, and all the affairs of the Gospel.
Gentlemen, I hope you bear with me, I conceive I am not excentrick, but move within my own sphere while I seek to incite you with courage to set to it for God.Num. 10. Joshua 6.20. When of old the Armies of Israel were to go out in Battel, the Priests were to blow the trumpets. Tis meet for us that are Gospel Ministers to be as Gods Trumpetters, or Drum∣mers, to draw up the spirits, & raise the courage of all that are to engage on Gods side for Sabbaths, and all his sacred con∣cernments against sinful men, among hich Magistrates, and men in office
 must have a main stroke. If I may by these expressions, and by this present Dedication more hearten you up for God, and more heighten your zeal for the beating down of sin, and well-being with us of Gods blessed Sabbath: I have my design,

Watford, July 20. 1654.
