



TO Dedicate this Book to
any other than to whom
God Almighty hath dire∣cted
it, I dare not, it is first to all you
Christian Kings and Princess, more
especialy our own, Charls Stuart, and
therein it shews you. That when you
govern best and most pleasing to the
will of the Almighty, whose Vice-Royes
you are. And of him made rulers
on Earth for the general good, you
then live in a general Peace, into
which happy condition he hath now

put you, that his Temples may be re∣builded,
his Worship and his Ministers
restored, with what hath been stollen
from both, also your Subjects, Gods
people, well educated in his houses by
his Ministers, sent in the wayes of Ju∣stice,
Peace, and Holiness, without
which no man shall ever see the face of
God to his comfort: next it shews you
that the so antiently beloved Seed of
faithfull Abraham, the Jews are now
in his best times remembred, and
brought into the Faith of Christ our
Lord, the onely Son of God, whom
they Crucified, the fulness of the
Gentiles coming in with them also
to the knowledge of his Gospel,
[his] that is the onely Shilo, the onely

Messia, by the Heathen not yet heard
of, by the Jews hoped for, he, I say,
comes to both, making himself known,
in such a manner as they expect not,
most strange & wonderfully affording▪
them his Vice-Roy Charls Stuart for
their Defence & Protection, he profes∣sing
that Gospel now to be Preached to
the whole World, against whose rule
and Gospel none shall ever prosper that
Rebels, Disobeyeth, or Schismatically
riseth up, therefore is the Church of
Rome at this time sentenced to cer∣tain
down-fall. The Church of Rome
shall fall.
The poor Irish▪ whom wicked men
would have transplanted upon the
same principles, as obdurate Pharoah

would not let the children of Israel go,
covetuousness and hard-hartedness,
God doth continue in their own Land,
yea, under his, and their own Kingly
Government also, to the joy of their
hearts. That Nation being neither
such a Bear, as we misapprehended
them, nor their skin fit to be sold by
us that did it, before warrant is given
from God to deliver it: they shall not
be transplanted.
God now shews us, That wicked Re∣bellion
was the design, & contrive of a
few in that bloudy, and ever Rebellious
Church of Rome, not the allowance
of the Nation: this also God shewed
unto our now happy, and glorious King
in Heaven, whilest good on Earth, it

is proved to you in his Letters taken
at Naseby, written to her Majesty.
My Heart, you will finde the Irish with
you Knaves, (they might deceive the
one, they could not deceive the other,)
And since that, how hath God fully
cleared their Majesties, as now the Na∣tion,
from any allowance of that hide∣ous
Rebellion. Own it Church of Rome,
it will match well with the Gun-powder
Treason, thou didst both, as many o∣thers,
Thy Nuntio was in Ireland, yet
thou shalt fall. Hath not God made
his late Majesties abominating that
wicked act, clear as the day, to be none
of his ollowance? you know, or may,
That Sr. Phillemon O'neal, upon his
Trial at Dublin, though pusillanimous

and timed in all other things, yet
when he was to give an account
from whence he had his Commission,
God sent him a courage, gave him abi∣lities
to speak boldly and truely to Gods
glorie, the honour of the Protestant
Religion, and the Kings just Vindica∣tion,
he took Heaven and Earth to
witness, he had neither Commission
from King or Queen for that Rebel∣lion:
he affirmed that himself, with o∣thers
of the Roman stamp made them,
that he might play the best of his own
Game; it further appears, in that Oath
imposed on those he subdued to his own
obedience. These are things I have had
from very good hands, when my self at
Dublin, but that Traitor was executed

a little before I came thither. Now
see what God doth, who is the searcher
of all hearts, the King is in Heaven,
the Queen declared for Heaven, the
Nation not to be transplanted, the con∣trivers
and aspersers of both gone to
their own home, or truely discovered
to us by the Lord, who now throws
down that wicked Church.
Well, you shall now see we must all
live together in brotherly love under
Kingly Government also: but you
will say how can these things be, con∣sidering
what manner of Persons we
have been? this book will shew you.
It proceeds onely from the good plea∣sure
and mercifull loving kindness of
the Almighty. The Lord hath made

our Salvation, not our destruction, his
glory, when all we, thy people, O God,
had sinned beyond any help, then, O
Lord, thou sayest, lo, I come. But af∣ter
how wonderfull a manner, and how
certain our deliverance is, read and
know. Actions, salved up with a free
forgiveness, are as not done, and as a
bone once broken is much stronger af∣ter
well setting, so is love after re∣concilement:
God forgives us our ini∣quities,
and in mercy restores us our
King again, who deals with us, be∣ing
guided of God, as Joseph did with
his brethren, when onely of God made
ruler in Egypt, and had power to pu∣nish
according to their demerit, then
he treats them kindly, following the

example of our Lord. He forgives all
past injuries, he loades them with good
things, he weeps over them, when he
tells them he is Joseph, least they, not
seeing his heart, might doubt of their
forgiveness, he drops Tears as Bloud
from pitying eyes and heart; they
well knew what themselves had been
to him, unfaithfull brethren, and
its not improbable when they saw
themselves by God cast under his
power, and dispose, they might fear,
tremble, and expect the reward of so
high demerit, for the affronts they
had put upon Joseph. But least such
fears should too much sadden their un∣quiet
Souls, he weeps over them more
abundantly, imbraceth them afresh,

gives them all they stood in need of,
and doth not so much as once remem∣ber
them of the evil measure they had
dealt him, so allows them no ground
at all to suspect their safety, whose in∣juries
he had fully forgiven; Most hap∣py
Re-union & meeting, that sweetens
more in its return, than it imbitered
in its absence▪ Protection my book com∣mands,
not craves under Oliver
Cromwel Protector, also his confor∣mity
thereunto, yet I beseech both, God
hath now declared him to be beloved,
first in Heaven as you shall read, then
of his King, CHARLS STUART,
and all good men on Earth, the Al∣mighty
both deputed him to be highly
instrumental for the bringing of great

and strange things to pass in this
Kingdom and Christian World, which
God will make marvelous in our eyes.
As the promote of the Protestant Reli∣gion,
and Honour of his King.
I may not detain you longer, nay, I
dare not, from Gods word of Prophesie
in this Book, agreeable to his own, in
nothing contrary, Proclaim it I must
to all concerned, and so I do, though
the unworthiest of my Lords servants,
a faithfull Communicator of his mer∣cifull,
loving kindness I am com∣manded
to be unto all the Sons and
Subjects of the Protestant Church, and
Gods Vice-Roy on Earth, CHARLS
STUART. To the Church of Rome,
and the Rebellious faithfull will I al∣so

shew my self, that Church shall fall,
and no Rebellion ever prosper, God hath
said it, and if it come not to pass, put
me to Death: I may not for fear, or fa∣vour
be unfaithfull to my trust, that is
a sacriledge of the highest nature, and
therefore in spite of the Devil, or dan∣ger,
I tell you wickedness shall not lon∣ger
prosper on Earth: Did not the
ground open and swallow quick those
first Rebels and Schismaticks, Corah,
Dathan, and Abyram? and did not
Absolons Mule in the midst, whilst he
was acting of his Rebellion, go from
under him, leaving him hanging by
the head? Such shall no more prosper
than their Church of Rome, which
shall fall, good men shall be Honou∣rable,
and rule, but for the ungodly,
whilest I pray for their conversion, I
fear their confusion.

