


Right Honourable,
THE Occasion of your appointing
this Sermon to be preached,The weighti∣nesse of this work is decla∣red in the Ser∣mon following pag. 32, 34. was a
Matter of no small moment. It is
thus expressed in Your own Order:
A day appointed to be observed
by both Houses of PARLIA∣MENT,
for publike Humiliation,
and to seek God earnestly for a Blessing upon the
Treaty.
The End of this Treaty, is to close up and heal the
breaches of this Land.
A pious End!
So great is the Breach, as it giveth great and just
cause of deep Humiliation, I may in this case apply

the Prophets lamentation for Jerusalem (Lament. 2.
13.) unto England. What thing shall I take to wit∣nesse
for thee? What thing shall I liken to thee,
O England? For thy Breach is great, like the
Sea.
Not without cause therefore have You set apart this day for
publike Humiliation.The grounds of this difficul∣ty are set down, p. 34, 35 Virg. AEn. lib. 6.
To make up this Breach is a matter of great diffi∣culty.
Hic labor, hoc opus est—
It is beyond the wit and power of man to do it.
Good reason therefore there was to appoint the day of Hu∣milation
to be a day also to seek God earnestly for a bles∣sing
upon the Treaty.
If the breach be not stopped by a Treaty, by what may it
be stopped?
Can it be hoped that it should be done by sword? The Law
is dumb while the Sword is drawn.Silent leges in¦ter arma. Cic pre Milon.
Will Conquerours yeeld to an Accommodation? Ha∣ving
the staff in their own hands, Will they not stand upon their
own terms?
By force men may for a time be kept in awe.Malus est custs diuturnitatis, metus. Cic. Offic l. 2. But that
AWE is no good keeper of a lasting peace.
Right Honourable, It will be Your Wisdome and
Glory,Hominis gratia Numinis reve∣rentia non est violenda. to help on this Treaty, Usque ad aras: so farre
as may stand with piety and verity: with safety and security
of Church and State.
That under GOD, Ye may be happy instruments here∣of,
two things are requisite, both on Your own be∣halfe
and also on the behalfe of all the People of this
Land, whom a good issue of the Treaty doth con∣cern.

1. Sound Repentance.
2. Hearty Praier.
Our sinnes, our sinnes have made the breach. Our
Repentance must make to the repairing of the breach. The
people repented them for Benjamin, because the
LORD had made a breach in the tribes of Israel,
Judg. 21. 15.
Their Cause was just,De victoria sibi non tantum gro∣tulantur, quam de clade tribus Israeleticae con∣queruntur. yet they repented when they saw
how great the breach was. They did not so much glorie
in their victory, as grieve for the destruction of a Tribe
in Israel.
And is not the breach made among us a great breach?Wolph. Serm. 91. in Judg. 21.
Surely it is great like the Sea. Who can heal thee, O
England?
He,Quise opponit irae Dei saevien∣ti. Hier. Com. in Esa. 58. and He only, who may most properly be called, The
repairer of the breach. To him therefore let us pray
and say, O GOD, thou hast cast us off: thou hast scat∣tered
us:Frustra opera∣rius omnia mo∣liretur extrinse∣cus, nisi Creator intrinsecus la∣tenter operare∣tur, &c. thou hast been displeased: O turn thy self to
us again. Thou hast made the earth to tremble: Thou
hast broken it. Heal the breaches thereof, for it sha∣keth.
All outward endeavours of workmen will be in vain, unless
the Creatour doe also inwardly work.Noveritis vos plus proficere o∣rationibus quam exhortationibus. Aug de Bon. vid. c. 18. Know for certain, that
more may be done by praiers to GOD, then by perswasions
with men.
My Lords, It concerneth You most of all to take care
of this Matter: for the LORD hath made You, together
with the Honourable House of Commons, Pillars to sup∣port
this State.
Mention is made of two Pillars which Salomon made in
the Temple: sunt propria nomina Alterū derivatur  persecit Inde  rectum. The one whereof he called  Jachin: and the
other  Boaz.

Those two words are used as proper names. The former im∣porteth,
straitnes. The later, strength.
If Pillars whereon Edifices doe rest be not as Jachin and
Boaz,Alterum à  obfirmavit. Inde  robur. streight and strong, they cannot be serviceable.
If they be not streight, but crooked, the building resting on
them, may sway aside. If they be not strong, but weak, and
the burden resting on them, heavy, they may fail, and the build∣ing
fall.
Integrity and magnanimity will do much for quieting our
present distractions.
The LORD pour upon you the spirit of Counsel and
Courage.
My Lords, I am

Blackfriers London
19. Sept. 1648.
