



Right Honourable;
DAniels Prophecie concernes the JewesDan. 1. 1. Thy people. in Hypothesi, the whole Church of God in Thesi, for no Scripture is of private interpretation, saith2 Pet. 1. 20. 1 Cor. 10. 11. . S. Peter, and These things hapned to them as ensamples, saith S. Paul.
To them it speaketh two things;
1. Their Calamities under the foure great Mo∣narchies now almost at an end.
2. Their Consolation afterwards, and now ap∣proaching.
To us it speaketh two things more;
1. Our Hope, living in dayes of trouble, but withall, of delivery; it is not a Tympany, butDan. 1. 1. a Child, that the Churches of the Saints goe with∣all, if they stick long in the place of birth, itHose. 1▪ 

is because they are foolish; but at length a safe deliverance is promised, the man-child of Refor∣mation shall be borne, and Heaven and earth shall cry grace grace unto it.Zech. 4. 7.
2. Our Help, (for hope deferred maketh theProv. 1. 12. heart sick,) in this booke two ways it is afforded.
First, From the History of it, See here how the Church, though it be a little and but a despised flock, yet is it of that esteeme with God, that for the Churches sake he wheeles about all the Monarchies of the world; the Persian shall dash in peeces theDan. 2. & 7. Babylonian, the Greekes the Persian, the Romanes the Grecian, and the God of Hea∣ven the Romane Empire and them all, and set up the Kingdome of Iesus Christ, that stone cut cut without hands, which shall become a great mountaine and fill the whole earth.
Secondly, From the Prophesie of it, not Hu∣mane, but Divine, that sacred Calendar, and great Almanack of Prophesie: the foure Kingdomes of Daniel, are not only, an Historicall, but a Prophe∣ticall Chronologie of times, measured from the begin∣ning of the Jewes captivity till all the Kingdomes of the world should become the Kingdome ofRev. 11. 15. our Lord and his Christ; a course of time, du∣ring which, the Church and Nation of the Iewes

should carry the veile upon their hearts, but after∣wards should turne to God, and be raised up from the death of sinne; are turne so strange, a delivery soDan. 12. 2. Rom. 11. 15. great, that it is resembled to a resurrection from the grave.
To this great Calendar of times the Apostles in the new Testament relate, when they call the times of the fourth Kingdome, the last times, and the latter times of that Kingdome, the latter times; (viz.) the latter part of that last Kingdome (as saith a learned Interpreter:) Goe we then to thisMr Mede Apost. of latter times, p. 64, 65, 66. Propheticall Calendar, we have the Romane Mo∣narchy almost at an end, and concerning the Iewes, (whose comming in succeedeth their going out) two things foretold.
The finall end of the Turkish Empire (as lear∣ned1. men conceive) the only obstacle to those Kings ofM. Brightman, and many o∣thers. Rev. 16. 12. the East as the Iewes are call'd, and the last defence of the Beast; whose beginning, was about the yeare 1300. and the addition of 350. (which is the time,Dan. 12. 7. M. Brightman, in locum. times, halfe a time) doth bring that Turkish tyranny to an end, in the yeare 1650.
The beginning of their gratious delivery, this2. shall be after a two-fold epoche.
1. The taking away of the daily sacrifice,Dan. 12. 11. which was wickedly done by Antiochus, long before,

but de jure by our Lord Iesus Christ his death, de∣stroyingDan. 8. 10. 11, 24. 25. all other sacrifices by the sacrifice of himselfe, the fulnesse of all their shadowes, and defacto by Ti∣tusIoseph Antiq. Vespasian, who tooke away the place of sacri∣ficing, when he destroyed the Temple.
2. The setting up of the abhomination of desolation, (or which maketh desolate) this was wickedly attempted by the Iewes in the dayes of Iu∣lian the Apostate; he in contempt of Christ gave li∣cence to the Iewes to build their Temple, and renew their Iewish worship, hereupon they tooke up everyTripart. Hist. stone of the old foundation, but before they laid any new one, they were dispersed by a speciall hand of God. A fearfull earthquake in the night destroyed all their work, a sudden fire consumed all their tooles, and themselves so dispersed that from that time the Iew∣ish superstitions did for ever cease. Cyril Bishop of Ierusalem, who admonished them of this Prophesie of Daniel, but after no disswasion could prevaile, he openly professed, that now the time was come which our Lord fore-told, that there should not be left one stone upon another.Mt. 24. 2.
Now understand we this to be the epoche, Iu∣lians reign fell out in the yeare 360. to which adde 1290. they make up 1650. the very time formerly designed for the finishing of the Iewes dispersion.
These things being so, I knew not (Right Honou∣rable) a Text speaking more to

You,
Vs,
Our times,
 
then what I preached on, and by your Authority have exposed now to more publike view.
To you it speakes by way of Caution, that no1. spot, nor blot, nor shrinking back be found amongst you, that are repairers of our breaches, and resto∣rers of pathes to dwell in.
To us it speakes by way of Crisis, it discovers the2. temper of the sick body of both Church and State under you our great and (under God) only Phisitian, your physick stirs the humours; makes some better, some worse.
To our times it speakes by way of comfort, they3. are troublesome, but trying times, and after triall, there shall be delivery to those that are purified, made white, and tried, but destruction to those that doe and will doe wickedly, true wisedome and un∣derstanding is hid from them, and reveal'd to the godly wise. Let then a bloody crew fight on, and fill up their measure, and let a foolish people refuse to assist you as they ought, the Lord himself hath said the word, to you as to Cyrus. He is my shepheard, andIsa. 44. 28. shall performe all my pleasure, even saying to Ierusalem, Thou shalt be built, and of the Tem∣ple,

Thy foundation shall be laid: and to them, the Lord will throw downe his haile upon them thatRev. 16. stand against Reformation, and rend their hearts with indignation and blasphemy; he will goe an end with his worke, though they sweare and storme, till he have utterly consumed them from the face of the earth. Perfect is the work of God, and (as the LordDeut. 32. 4. spake concerning Eli) when he begins, he will also1 Sam. 3. 12. make an end.
Thus craving your pardon, and (which is more) your acceptance, as you have my faith, so shall you have my prayers, that what Caesar once said of Rome, He found it brick, but left it marble,Romam lateri∣ciam inveni, marmorea re∣linquo. may much more Honourably be said of you, you found our Church and State Atheisticall, Prela∣ticall, you leave the beames of our house Cedar,Cant. 1. 17. Plin. l. 43. c. 5 & 16. c. 41. and our galleries firre; famous for durablenesse, ac∣ceptable for sweetnesse; by laying in the walls of the Church such solid and eternall truths of God as may hold out instead of Socinianisme, Arminianisme, and many moe; and by setting up such Worship, and Discipline, and Governement, as may keepe off wind and weather, that Gods people may walke hand in hand together, as in galleries of firre.

