



THe infinite and onely wise GOD, hath annexed to the Ministery, Conversion, Acts 26 18. Regenera∣tion, 1 Cor. 4.15. the addition of sinners to the Church, and to himself, Act. 2.41.47. Chap. 11.24. faith, Rom. 10.14. 1 Cor. 3.5. the perfecting of the Saints and edification of the body of Christ, Eph. 4.12. Collation of the Spirit, Gal. 3.2. Act. 10.44. yea salvation, Act. 11.14. 1 Cor. 1.21. 1 Tim 4.16. Now notwithstanding the Ministery be the great Medium and Appointment of God to effect and ac∣complish such needfull and glorious things: yet some there be that thrust hard at it, and endeavour to throw it downe. But were it remov'd, and the pernicious desires of men fulfild herein, a sadder
 judgement could not befall the Nation. Salomon the first-borne of Wisdome saith; Where there is no Vision, the people perish, Prov. 29.18. Where the Word of God is not expounded, preached, and applyed to the severall conditions of the people, there they perish. Feriabitur populus, saith Montanus, they will be idle, keep holy-day, cease from doing the work of the Lord, and doe the works of the flesh and darknesse. Piscator reads it, nudatur populus, the people is made naked; They are like men without cloathing, without armour, exposed to wind and wea∣ther, to spirituall stormes and temptations, having nothing to defend themselves. The Vulgar is, dis∣sipabitur populus, lay aside preaching and expound∣ing the Scriptures, the people will be scattred, run into errors, wander up and downe as sheep with∣out a Shepheard. Pagnine hath it, rebellis erit, the people will be rebellious, they will not be kept in order, obedience, and subjection to authoritie; for where means of knowledge are wanting, there must be ignorance, and ignorance is the mother of rebellion.
When Queen Elizabeth, whose memory is pre∣cious, was instigated by some ill-affected to the Mini∣sterie, to abridge the number of Preachers, E.G. Arch∣bishop of Canterburie was much troubled at it, and
 wrote her a learn'd and serious Letter about it, out of which having the Manuscript by mee, I have thought fit to transcribe and commend unto you what followes.
I cannot marvell enough, how this strange opinion should once enter into your minde, that it should be good for the Church to have few Preachers? Alas Madame, is the Scrip∣ture more plain in any one thing, then that the Gospel of Christ should be plentifully produced? and that plenty of Labourers should be sent into the Lords harvest, which being great and large, standeth in need of not a few but many workmen. There were appointed to the building of Solomons materiall Tem∣ple an hundred and fifteene thousand artificers and labourers, besides three hundred and thirty Overseers, and shall we think that a few Preachers may suffice to build and edifie the spiri∣tuall Temple of Christ, which is the Church. Christ when he sendeth forth his Apostles, saith unto them; Ite praedicate Euangelium omni creaturae. But all Gods creatures cannot be instructed in the Gospel, unlesse all possible means be used to have a multitude of Preachers and Teachers to preach unto them. Habitet sermo Christi in vobis opulenter, saith Paul, Col. 3. And to Timothy, Praedica sermonem, in∣sta tempestive, intempestive, argue, increpa, exhortare, which thing cannot be done without often and much preaching. To this agreeth the practise of Christs Apostles; Qui consti∣tuebant per singulas Ecclesias presbyteros, Act. 14. Paul likewise to Titus writeth; Hujus rei gratia reliqui te in Creta, ut quae desunt pergas corrigere & constituas oppidatim presbyteros: and afterward describeth how the Presbyterie should be qualified, not such as we are compelled to admit, by meere necessitie, unlesse we should leave a great num∣ber
 of Churches utterly desolate, but such indeed as were able to exhort Per sanam doctrinam & contradicentes convince∣re. And in this place I beseech your Majesty, to note one thing necessary to be noted, which is this. If the Holy Ghost prescribe expresly that Preachers should be placed oppidatim, how can it well be thought that two or three Preachers may suffice for a Shire. Publike and continuall preaching of Gods Word is the ordinary means and instrument of the salvation of mankinde. St Paul calls it The ministerie of reconciliation of man unto God. By the preaching of Gods Word, the glory of God is inlarged, faith nourished, and charity increased, by it igno∣rance is instructed, the negligent exhorted and incited, the stubborne rebuked, the weake comforted, and to all those that sin of malicious wickedness, the wrath of God is threatned. By preaching also, due obedience to Christian Princes and Magi∣strates is planted in the hearts of Subjects: For obedience pro∣ceedeth of conscience, conscience is grounded upon the Word of God, and the Word of God worketh this effect by preaching, so as generally where preaching is neglected, obedience faileth. No Prince ever had more lively experience herof then your Maje∣stie hath had in your time, and may have daily. If your Maje∣stie come to the Citie of London never so often, what great gratulation, what joy, what concourse of people is there to be seene, yea what acclamations and prayers to God for your long life, and other manifest significations of inward and unfeined love joyn'd with most humble and heartie obedience, are there to be heard? Whereof cometh this Madame, but of the continuall preaching of Gods Word in the Citie, whereby that people hath been plenteously instructed in their dutie towards God, and towards your Majestie. On the contrary, what bred the Rebellion in the North? Was it not Papistrie, and the igno∣rance of Gods holy Word through want of preaching? And in the time of that Rebellion, were not all men of all estates that
 made profession of the Gospel, most ready to offer their lives for your defence? in so much that one poore Parish in Yorke∣shire, which by continuall preaching had been better instructed then the rest, Halifax, I meane was ready to bring three or foure thousand able men into the field, to serve you against the said rebells. How can your Majestie have a more lively tryall and experience of the contrary effects of much preaching, and little or no preaching, the one working most unnaturall dis∣obedience and rebellion, the other most faithfull obedience.
By this part of the Letter, you see, how firme the Archbishop was for preaching, and that he hath fully confirm'd that sense of the words; Where there is no vision or preaching the people will rebell, and if he would not yeeld to the abridging of preachers, why should any desire the abolishing of them? and so make way for the people to be idle, naked, scattred, rebellious, yea for their perishing. It was one of the saddest times that ever Israel had, when Israel was without a teaching Priest, 2 Chron. 15.3. then they had no peace within nor without, but great vexations were upon all the inhabitants of the Countries, even all the ten Tribes. This being without a Teaching Priest was such an affliction, as that the Lord promised his people afterwards, that what affliction soever befell them, this should not, Isa. 30.20. Though the Lord give you the bread of adversitie, and water of affliction, yet shall not thy
 Teachers be removed into a corner any more: but thine eyes shall see thy Teachers. This is a gratious promise for the continuance of the Ministerie. They had the law, and should have Teachers to instruct them therein. Wee have the Gospel, and Teachers to instruct us therein. The Church and Ministerie may be hid, Rev. 12.6. but not extinct. Christ is a King, the government is upon his shoulder, he has a Kingdome, and it knowes no end, Isa. 9.6, 7. Luk. 1.32, 33. his Throne is for ever, Heb. 1.8. He there∣fore hath promised to be with his Church, and the Ministerie thereof unto the end of the world, Mat. 28.20.. Not to the end of that age, but of the world; for so the word  signifies, Math. 13.39, 40. the harvest is the end of the world; and so shall it be in the end of the world. Christs Kingdome and Officers of it were not only for the Apostolicall and primitive times, but for all times and ages, Eph. 3.21. 4 Chap. 11, 12. Rev. 7.14, 15:11.19. otherwise what hope were there for Jewes or Gentiles. If one should leave the Jewish Synagogue, and th'other Heathenisme, whether should they come, if Christ have no true Church, no visible Kingdome. Herein himself hath satisfied us, Joh. 10.16. Other sheepe I have which are not of this fold, them also I must bring, and they shall heare my voice, and there shall be one fold
 and one Shepheard. The fold was the Church, the sheepe to be brought in, the Gentiles, who were not brought in in Christs dayes, nor all in the Apostles dayes, or Primitive times; some are yet to be brought in, and therefore there is yet a fold, and Ministers to cause them to heare the voyce of Christ, that they may come into this fold. For whom he predestinates he calls, Rom. 8.30. and his calling is not immediate, but by the Ministerie of the Word. And though the Ministerie now be not infallible, as the Apostles were, but fallible; yet their fallibilitie doth not make voyde their cal∣ling, nor cause the Churches to be reputed false, as not having the Word of God taught in them infalliblie. For those holy men who were Prophets and Apostles, you may finde sometimes fayling. Nathan faild when he bid David goe and build the house of the Lord, 2 Sam. 7.3. David was out, when he said, he was cut off from before the Lords eyes, Psal. 31.22. and when he said, All men were lyars, Psal. 116.11. Jeremie spake like a man, when he said, I will not make mention of him, nor speake no more in his name; and espe∣cially when he cursed the day of his nativitie, and the man brought tydings thereof, Chap. 20.9.14, 15, 16. Jonas spake from himselfe, not from God,
 when he said, Take my life from me; for its bet∣ter for me to die then to live; and I doe well to be angry unto death, Jon. 4.3.9. And Paul professes he had no Commandement of the Lord concern∣ing Virgins, but gave his judgement as one that had obteind mercy of the LORD to be faithfull, 1 Cor. 7.25. Now though these men had such fai∣lings, spake from their own spirits, yet were neither the Churches falsified hereby, nor their callings fru∣strated. That which was needfull to be the Rule and Standard, was given out by an infallible Spi∣rit. The Spirit of truth tooke of Christs, shew'd it to them, and led them into all truth. And while the Ministers now doe bring that truth unto you they are infallible. If in their constructions, inter∣pretations, and expositions of the same, they varie or be out, you ought to try the spirits, 1 Joh. 4.1. and to hold fast what is good, 1 Thess. 5.21. not despising prophecyings, least you quench the Spi∣rit. Its ill when any destroy commands of God to maintaine their opinions. Some would have the Word onely read, and that there should be no preaching, or xpounding of it. It was not the Eu∣nuches reading, but Philips preaching that wrought faith in him, Act. 8. The spices of the Scripture send forth the strongest and sweetest smells, when
 they are bruised and broken. The fire of the San∣ctuary yeelds most heat and light when stirr'd up and blowne. Its neither fleshly, devillish, nor tea∣son to the Father, to make constructions upon the Prophets and Apostles, and expound their mean∣ing. If so, then Ezra and others who read the Law and gave the sense of it, Nehem. 8.8. sinned, were fleshly, devillish, and traytors to the Father. Then Paul gave ill counsell to Timothie, to divide the word of truth aright, 2 Tim. 2.15. How children should have their milke, young men their bread, old men their wine, and that onely by reading, I see not. If that could be surely Christ needed not have appointed a wise and faithfull servant over his houshold, to give them meat in due season, Mat. 24.45. If wee may not expound the Word because we are fallible, then why should any tran∣slate the Word out of the Originall Tongue into others, seeing they are fallible, and may, yea have mistaken therein, as well as others in expounding and preaching: and because it is so, some little re∣gard the Scriptures,Vid Hn∣  A∣ pro Ecl . expecting Euangelium spiritus sancti & tertium Testamentum. The Jewes looke for Messias, the Papists looke for Henoch and Elias, but without warrant, and so doe these men for ano∣ther Gospel, Gal. 1.8, 9. and extraorinary men,
 who may raise up Churches, and declare what is truth. I beseech you, be content with, and thank∣full for those precious, glorious truths the Lord hath given you in the Law and Gospel, studying to know them more fully, and endeavour to yeeld unto the Author of them the obedience of faith; acknowledg∣ing it an unspeakeable gift, that you have them, with Preachers and Expositors amongst you, to further you in the knowledge and practise of them. If this ensuing Worke shall contribute ought that way, I shall be abundantly satisfied therein. In hopes whereof I commend both it and you to the bles∣sing of the Lord, subscribing my selfe
Septemb. 28. 1649.

