



Right Reverend Father in God,
YOVR Lordship hath often times call'd upon me to goe out and shew the people their Transgressions, and the House of Iacob their sinnes.
Next to my owne consci∣ence I confesse my selfe bound to give your Lordship satisfaction.

To fall foule upon the degenerous and in∣tractable nature of this people cannot answer you, for it doth not me.
I doe not say I am not eloquent, and there∣fore that you would send by the hand of Him whom you should send. When I am indeed able for these things, I doubt not to have Him with my mouth, because I meane to leave all my selfe out. There was never more provocations for all men to speake then now, when all the mis∣cheife that other ages did but imagine are pra∣cticed by a Law, and in the meane time the dumbe Asses are taught to forbid the madnesse of the Prophets.
The Harvest is confessedly Great, but then the Labourers are not few. And if while so many are thus excellently imployed about the rest of the Building, some one or other doe as well as he can towards the making good of the Ground worke, I thinke he may be let a∣lone at least. The hopes of the Superstruction¦ly from the assurance of the Foundation I shall give them leave to be Pillars: This I am sure is the Corner-stone, and I need not tell you how re∣jected, I meane it not of all, but of the Common Builders.

If the Church be an Arke he that hath ne∣ver so little to doe with the Compasse, though he sit still in his place, yet does as much or more then all the other necessary Noise in the Ship The Comparison is quit of arrogance, for it holdeth in the designe, it is not meant of the performance.
The course I have runne here is Labour too, and in the same Vineyard. And I trust my selfe for this, that my accounts will be as well pass't above, if I reckon upon these paines, the pre∣tence whereof though not so popular, yet is as substantially proficient towards the maine Aedification.
I have principally endeavoured to redeeme my Reader from that slavery, by which I have so long sate downe my selfe, in not printing (so neare as I could I have not) the same things over againe.
I am sure I have set downe nothing but what I beleive, if more sometimes then I well understood, I have company enough, and the acknowledgement of an errour is more ease to me, then the committing of it was.
Why I should make these Addresses to your

Lordship there is all the reason in the world; what have I but what I have received from you? and that which is, would be Nothing of it selfe. Rayes of incidency contract no warmth upon the Earth, unlesse reflected backe upon their originall Sun.
My Lord, As once the Sonnes of the Pro∣phets said unto the Man of God, Behold now the place where we dwell is too streight for us. We are humbly expecting the last course of that Iudge∣ment which began at the House of God. What shall be done to the dry Tree, or where the sinner will appeare, is to be left to him to whom venge∣ance belongeth.
The Great Genius of this Place must now burne a while like those Subterraneous Olibian Lampes under the Earth. VVe shall see it but Bernardin. Scarde∣nius de Priscis ci∣vibus Patavin. Lib. 1.not now, we shall behold it but not nigh.
Have, salve, sit tibi terra Levis.
Abite hinc pessimi fures, Quid vostris vultis cum oculis Emissitiis.

