



HIgh and most honoured ever renowned Senators, the Lord of his free grace and love having about some two or three yeers since cast my thoughts and meditations upon that great vision shewed unto his servants & Prophets Daniel and John concerning the time of the raign and the ruine of these five grand enemies of the Church, set forth by the Spirit of God to Daniel to be one Image, and to John to be but one Beast,
all in league together to persecute the Saints of God, (by comparing the Words of God and the Acts of Gods providence) one with the other, I finde that these ene∣mies destruction is nigh at hand, and Gods peoples finall deliverance neere; yea, the worke is begun already and will not be long before the Lord will consummate it. With∣all, I humbly conceive, that You are those two great Wit∣nesses which the Spirit of Christ foretold long since should be raised up to Heaven the high place of Justice and Ju∣dicature, though all the people and Saints of God from the yeer of Christ 375. unto 1639. be reckoned for his Witnesses, and so looked upon by Christ, because they all bore witnesse unto those Truths of Christ which that man of sinne denied; yet You in a more especiall manner at this time, because You are not onely to protest against Antichrist and his grand lie, who said, That the power of Churches and States belonged to him. But You are that Judgement which should sit and take his Kingdome and Dominion from him,Dan. 7.26. raised up to Heaven by the power of Christs Spirit for the same end.Dan. 2.34, 45. And by that little stone cut out of the Mountaine without hands even by the Spi∣rit of God the day You ascended up into Heaven, by this little stone shall you destroy all those enemies; and when You have taken all powers from them,As will fur∣ther appeare in the fol∣lowing Trea∣tise. Psal. 149.6. the Civill power will remaine in Your hands as You are Christs civill Magistrates, and all the exercise of the Ecclesiasticall pow∣er of Churches shall You give unto the people of God, (which are the Body of Christ, whereof You being Mem∣bers) and sitting with the rest of Your Brethren in Gods House,Rev. 21.2, 10. shall exercise that spirituall Sword; and by Your leave and Authority the Saints of God are to build that holy City new Jerusalem,Psal. 149.6. where God and the Lambe will have his Throne.Rev. 22.1.

He who is the meanest and lowest Instrument that ever the Lord Christ made use of for so great a worke, doth humbly crave leave to conceale his name, and to present these his Labours to Your Honours, that the whole world may see and know what great things Christ will by You doe for his Church and people.
The Lord make good his great and gracious promise unto You,Isa. 28.6. who hath promised to be a Spirit of Judge∣ment to You that sit in Judgement, and Strength to You that have turned the battell to the gate, and for a Crowne of glory, and for a Diadem of beauty unto the residue of his people.
