



WEE read in holy writ of many Cities, which for their structures, situations, fortifications, trading, accommodations, and Epithites, were famous; as populous No Nahum. 3. 8. Nineveh the great Jonah 1.2. Tarsus in Cilicia Act. 21.39. Golden Babylon Isa. 14.4. Renowned Tyrus Ezek. 26.17. Righteous and faith∣ful Jerusalem Isa. 1.26. which exceeded them all: for as Canaan was the glory of all lands, flowing with milk and hony; so Jerusalem had its milk and honey, and was the glo∣ry of all Cities: There was the Lords Presence, his worship, his Oracles, his Ordinances, and his Prophets, which made it the glory of the World, and perfection of beauty. Had other Cities strong Towers? Jerusalem had them, and the Temple also. Had they gods of gold, silver, stones and sticks in them? Jerusalem had Jehovah the true and living God in her. Had they wise Counsellors in them? Jerusa∣lem had the Sanedrim. Had they humane Laws which were good? Jerusalem had Divine Laws, such as no City or People ever had Deut. 4.8. Had they temporal Excel∣lencies and Priviledges? Jerusalem had spiritual. Had they the glory of the World, Art, and Nature? Jerusa∣lem had the glory of Heaven. There God shined, Psal. 50.2. But what now is become of these Cities, and Je∣rusalem it self? are they not all laid waste, made heapes,
 dead and buried in the wombe of the earth? Cities have their periods as well as men: Babylon had a time to bee borne Gen. 11.4. and a time to dye Isa. 14.4. Nineveh had her day to get up Gen. 10.11. and her day to fall Nahum 3.7. Tyrus had her day of rising, and her day of ruining, and shee is descended into the pit with others Ezek. 26.18, 20. Jerusalem had her day for building, and her day for burning Jerem. 52.12, 13. This is matter of la∣mentation, that such Cities, especially Jerusalem, should have such an end. The Cause of such dismal ends, upon search wee shall finde to bee SIN, which is of so malignant a Nature, that it destroies Nations, and pulls down the strongest Cities. Cruelty, falsehood, and robbery, with many other, were the sins laid Nineveh waste Nahum 3. Pride, fulnesse of bread, abundance of idlenesse, with neglect of the poor, were the sins made the Lord take Sodome away Ezek. 16.49, 50. Pride, Violence, unmercifulnesse, vain-confidence, and Treachery, were the sins rent Babylon in peices Isa. 47. Jer. 50. what sins destroied Ammon, Moab, Edom, Philistia, with their Cities; and what sunk Tyrus into the sea Ezekiel tells you chap. 25. & 26. A large Catalogue of those sins which kindled the fire in Jerusalem, and turned her into ashes, you have in the 22. of Ezekiel, and other chapters; most of which I fear are to be found in this City. Are there not in her those set light by Father and Mother? are there not those do vex the Fatherlesse and Widdow? are there not those despise the holy things of God, and pro∣phane his Sabbaths? are there not those take usury, and increase, are greedy of gain, and live by dishonest gain? Ezek. 22.18. Are there not those that devise mischief, and give wicked counsel? Are there not those carry tales to shed bloud? Are there not those exercise robbery, vex the poor, the needy, and oppresse the stranger? Are
 not her professors as dross, even the dross of silver? may not the Lord say of this City as hee did of Jerusalem. Thou hast been to mee a provocation of mine anger,Jer. 32.31 and of my fu∣ry, from the day that they built thee, even unto this day, that I should remove thee from before my face. Thou art the City, I have been purging, but art not purged,Eze. 24.13 Thou shalt not bee purged from thy filthinesse, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee. Surely LONDON deserves not better at the hands of the Lord than other Cities did, especially Jerusalem, and having her sins, may fear her end. Be instructed therefore O LONDON, lest the Lords soul depart from thee, and thou bee made Desolate; For the Lord hath a Day to reckon with sinfull Lands and Cities Isa. 17.4. In that day the glory of Jacob shall bee made thin, and the fatnesse of his flesh shall wax lean. The Princes, Counsellors, Souldiers, Prophets, Priests, with their Cities, the rarities and riches of them, were the glory and fatnesse of Jacob; These God had a day to take away, and so made Jacob thin and lean. God had a day for Tyre,Isa. 23.15 and interrupted her great merchandising for seventy years, by laying her in the deep. If it bee demanded how came Tyrus so strong and stately, so fat and full, to so deplorable an end. The spirit of God tells you, when it saith,Eze. 26.27. thy Rowers have brought thee into great waters; that is, the Princes and Rulers, by their Pride, Policy, and Prophaneness, caused such storms as sunk the Ship. Tyrus had as much to secure her as any City in the world, shee was built upon a rock, her borders were in the midst of the Seas, shee had walls, and an Army to watch them; shee had Towers and Gammadims to keep them; shee wanted not for ships, Pilots, Marriners, for Souldiers, sheilds, and Helmets, she had Coun∣sellors, Merchants, and plentie of all things, so that shee seemed invincible; but all these did not preserve her station, or make her impregnable; for though shee indured a fredge of thir∣teen years by Nebuchadrezzar and his forces,Eze. 27.2 yet at last shee fell into the midst of the Sea, in the day of her ruine. Jerusalem
 was so well fortified by nature and art,Psal. 125.2. Psal. 48.12, 13. Lam. 4.12 being compassed about with mountaines, having walls, bulwarks, and Towers, that it, was thought incredible, and impossible, for an enemy to have entered her gates: but sin being found in her, and God a∣gainst her, nothing secured her. She was oft warned by the Pro∣phets,Isa. 37. Amos 4. and judiciary providences of God, to repent and reforme. Shee was as a pot over the fire, when besiedged by Senacherib, when famine and Plague devoured her inhabitants, but her scum went not out, and that was her ruine. Let none think the poor to bee the scum of the City,Prov. 22.2 the Lord made the poor as well as the rich, and despises not the work of his own hands. Its the sin of Rich and Poor, its their wickednesse which is the scum. Great Cities have much sin in them, and so much scum; scum∣mie Opinions, scummie Counsells, scummy fashions, and scummie practices.Isa. 1.5 Thus was it with Jerusalem and her scum boiled in, shee was the worse for corrections and judgements, her scum being aegritudo & venenum ollae, caused the cracking & bursting of the pot. These things the book of God holds forth for our instruction, upon whom the ends of the world are come. Let our great City and Citizens look to it, there is scum in the City, and not a little: is it gone out, or boiled in? was not the Sword lately at your gates? was there not yesterday great sickli∣ness, within your walls? is not trading diminished? have there not been strange murthers amongst you? Have not many sad fires been kindled, broke out and consumed your habitations? was there not a Plot (which hath cost some their lives) to fire your City? God hath been warning you by these judiciary dispensations, and are you bettered by them? hath all you have seen, feared, or felt, caused your scum to depart from you, if so, its well; well will it be with you, well with your City, and well with your undertakings, and well with your posterity; but if it be boiled in, and you are the worse for all the boiling judgements and providences you have been in, and under, know that soe dreadful calamitie, if not destruction it selfe hastens and will certainly take hold of you
 and your City, without speedy repentance: Hitherto you have had sparing mercy, and gentle corrections, if these lead not to re∣pentance, severity abides for you,Jer. 19.11.31, 32 and God will say from the first to the last, I have been provoked by this City, I will break this people, and this City. How sad would it be, should the Lord lay your City waste! Its not the strong structures, great treasures, militarie or Naval forces, wise Counsels, which can protect you, if scumme be found amongst you; if you are careful that the filth of the streets bee carried out, will you not much more see that the filth of your hearts and houses be purged out? will not London bee made clean, when shall it once be? let this be the time; least the Plague, which hath been much feared, enter your borders, and cause sad cryes in your streets and families. Now wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings, and learn to do well, seek judgement, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, and plead for the Widdow; now let holiness of life, execution of justice, speaking truth, doing righteousness, shew∣ing mercy, and promoting the good of one another in love, take place, and they will not onely secure you and the City, but make you and it glorious, and perfect in beauty, so that the Lord will take pleasure therein, and say of it and you, This is the City of righ∣teousness, the faithful City, and her Citizens are like her self righteous and faithful. Now her Brass is become Gold, her Iron Sil∣ver, her Officers peace, and her Exactors righteousness; there∣fore now her walls shall be salvation, and her gates praise; now shall she be my habitation, and her people my glory, and I will be to them a defence for evermore. That this may be the portion of this City, and your selves, and that a blessing may go with this work, is the hearty prayer of him who is,

The 30th. of the 5th. month. 1658.
