



May it please your Highnesse;
SOLOMON, the wisest of Princes, counsels us to remember our Crea∣tor in the dayes of our youth; it's a great Ver∣tue to be mindfull of God timely: Timothy from a childe knew the holy Scriptures: 2 Chro. 34.3. Josiah that good Prince, while he was yet young, or tender, (as the Hebrew bears it) be∣gan to seek after the Lord, hee did
 that which was right in his sight, he walked in the wayes of David, hee turned not aside, King. 22.2 to the right hand or left. The Lord takes speciall notice when young ones are mindfull of him: the childrens crying Hosanna, is recorded in the Gospel;Mat. 21.15. children walking in the truth, is observed by John,Epist. 2.4. 1 King. 14.13. and the Lord minded the good was found in the child of Jeroboam: doubtlesse Gods eye is upon your Highnesse, for that good is found in you in these your tender yeers, and is well pleased, that your sweetness of nature, and choiceness of wit are joyn'd with desire to know him, with love to his Worship, affection to the godly, and delight in such sen∣tences as these are, viz.
.
Deus meus & omnia.
La mia Grandezza dal Eccelso.

All which with these pretious speeches of yours, I had rather be a begger here, then not go to heaven, and how shall I be sure to go to heaven? are acceptable to the High∣est, and mke strong impressions upon us inferiors: Your desire to know the o∣riginall tongues, that you may under∣stand the Scripture the better, your re∣solution to write them out with your own Princely hand, and to come to the perfect knowledge of them, breed in us hopes that you will exceed all of your Sex, and be without equall in Europe, as Drusius said of his son, who at five years learned Hebrew, and at twelve writ it ex tempore, both in prose and verse. Incou∣raging instances your own Sex will af∣ford, Eustochium profited so much in the Latine, Hebrew, and Greek, that in her time shee was called the wonder of the world. Istrina Queen of the Scythi∣ans
 so excelled in Greek, that she taught her sonnes the Greek tongue. Zenobia Queen of the Palmirenians, was skild in the Latine, Egyptian & Greek tongues, she read the Roman Story in Greek, a∣bridged the Alexandrian, and all the O∣rientall histories. Politian hath an Epi∣stle to Cassandra, a Venetian maid, whom he calls the glory of Italy, her delight was not in wooll, but books, not in the spindle, or needle, but in the pen, not in paint, but in ink; she writ Epistles and Orations to admiration, she exceld in Logick and Philosophy, and had such perfections, as caused the learned to ad∣mire, if not adore her. Queene Eliza∣beth was so learned, that she read every Author in the originall, and answered Ambassadors of most Nations in their own language, she went twice to Oxford, and once to Cambridge purposely to hear
 the learned Academicall disputations, where her selfe made Latine Orations; she translated Salust, and writ a Century of Sentences; she set apart some houres daily to read, or hear others read to her; she so exceld in learning and wisdome, that her teachers rather learned of her, then brought learning to her. Your Highness seems to aim at all the excel∣lencies in the prementioned: for your writing out the Lords prayer in Greek, some texts of Scripture in Hebrew, your endevour after the exact know∣ledge of those holy tongues, with other languages & learned accomplishments, your diligent hearing of the word, care∣full noting of Sermons, understanding answers at the catechising, and frequent questioning about holy things, do pro∣mise great matters from you. If the har∣vest be answerable to the spring, your
 Highness will be the wonder of the lear∣ned, and glory of the godly. It is my un∣happiness that I cannot be sufficiently adjuvant to such Princely begin∣nings; yet because this following Treatise is an exposition of Scrip∣ture, I take the boldnesse to present it to your Highness, and shall conti∣nue to pray to him who is All, & able to give All, that hee would preserve your Royal person, blesse your hopeful endevours, fill you with all divine perfections, make you a chiefe praise in Israel, and fit you for an eternal weight of glory.

