



THere is not any more inriching act of the Soule,
Medita∣tio men∣tis dista∣tio. or of greater prevalencie to provoke unto du∣ty, then the Soules reflection upon it selfe by meditation, if serious: nor any more work∣ing this way, then the distinct considerati∣on of what God hath bin to us, what wee to God; what our receivings from him, what our returns unto him. David in one psalm calleth up his soule to this duty,
Psa. 103.2. Blesse the Lord ô my soule, and forget not all his benefits; in another consults with him selfe, how he may doe it,
116, 12. what shall I ren∣der unto the Lord, for all his benefits towards mee? We have the Creatures
leading us  the way unto this duty. First, by what they are mutually to each other; what water the earth receiveth from the sea in small springs, it returneth in great ri∣vers; what vapours and exhalations the ce∣lestiall bodies draw up from the earth, they send down (though sometimes in storms) yet ordinarily in refreshing deaws & fruit∣full showres. Secondly, By what they are to man;
1 Cor. 9.7. doth not the Vineyard we plant, yeeld us fruit? The flocke wee feede afford us milke?
Isa. 55.10. the ground we manure and till, give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater? Thirdly, By what they are to God;
Psal. 19.1. Doe not the hea∣vens declare the glory of God? doth not that which may seem most unruly,
1, 8, 8. stor∣my wind fulfill his word? It was a di∣vine saying of that heathenish Philosopher Epictetus,
Alsted. Theol. nat. admiring the singing of birds, si luscinia essem, &c If I had bin made a Nightingale, I should have sung like a
Nightingale; now that I am made a man, a reasonable creature, shall J not praise and serve God in that station wherin he hath set me? Origen conceiveth, that one of the foulest and shamfulest things that the crea∣tures shall lay to mans charge at the day of judgment, is, that all other creatures from the Creation have beene obedient to God without the least digression; only man (for whose service all else made) hath failed in his service, and proved rebellious. To quicken us unto that service, which God in our places requireth, was the principall drift of my weake meditations, so unwor∣thy your eare, as J know not how they may endure your eye; wherof though I may say, as is reported of Malcotius a governour of the Turks under Mahomet the great (as it was also of Augustus) that the majesty of his countenance, with the resplendent beames issuing from his eyes, was of such piercing brightnesse, that no man was able
with an immoved and fixed eye long to be∣hold the same: yet that benign aspect & fa∣vourable acceptance which those find whom you call out to your service, your present commands also requiring it, give incourag∣ment to tender my poore endeavours to the publicke view; wherby if any the more pro∣voked to render unto God, according to all that good they have received from God, let all the glory bee the Lords, who worketh when, and where, and by whom he pleaseth; for whose mercifull assistance, direction and blessing in and upon your pious consul∣tations and resolutions, are and shall be the constant and continued prayers of

