



My Lord,
YOu being now, in your tender years, to think of erecting the building of an holy and religious life; may your Grace vouchsafe me leave to present you with one stone towards the foundati∣on thereof. Which stone (to speake without glory or ostentation, in my own handy-worke) is not much un∣like the Sun, endued with these two
properties, of Light, and Heat; with the one, to illuminate your under∣standing in the nature of Gods house; with the other, to warm you affecti∣on, and inflame your devotion there∣unto. If you shall be carefull of ta∣king this stone into your foundati∣on, the structure, with all the orna∣ments thereto belonging, will the more happily proceed; for God, whose house you love,
Psal. 20.2 will sond you helpe from his Sanctuary, and strengthen you out of Sion, where by you shall be able unto, and succesfull in every good work. I cannot, but Joresee, and therefore take the boldness to forewarn you, that in this distracted age wherein you are fallen, you may meet with many Architects, who will quarrel with this stone, as offensive and scandalous, and so propound o∣ther models unto you; But, My Lord, the wisest, and most religious Master-builders have gone this way, making the house of God a principal part of their religion, seek∣ing to Gods Oracles there, and thir∣sting after the waters,
Chap. 47.1. which (like those in Ezekiel) issue forth from
thence, they have been refreshed, and strengthened in the progress of an holy life.
The presumption of Dedicating this poor Treatise to your tender hand, is, in some measure, to testifie my obligations to your most Noble Parents; in whose debt, being as deeply engaged, as Philemon was in St. Pauls,
Phil. 19. to owe them even my own selfe, for their vouchsafing me an harbour, when I was well nigh sunk by the common tempest; I could do no less, then offer as a weak testimony of my due thankefulnesse unto them, in you their Sonne, and hopefull heire, as of their Estate, so of their Vertues. Your favour therefore, My Lord; I humbly crave in the acceptance, diligence in the perusall, and observance of what is thus presented; And this. upon an humble assurance given, that what shall be wanting on my part, in this, or any other actuall endeavours to serve you, shall be sup∣plyed by my daily prayers for you, (that, as God hath dignified you with the title of worldly Grace, so he
would be pleased to sanctifie you with his Grace which is heavenly, adding to your shining in wordly ho∣nour, ability to shine in an holy life, that hereafter you may shine in eter∣nall glory) as, My Lord,

