



Right Worshipful,
AS Satan was never so busie as now, knowing his time is short; so like∣wise are his Emissaries, those locusts that came forth out of the bottom∣lesse pit under their King Abaddon, (Rev. 9.) and these croaking frogs spoken of, Rev. 16. seeking by all means to uphold their tottering Babel, which notwithstanding is so neer to her final ruine, that it will be found true which is spoken of her, Rev. 14. Babylon is fallen, is fallen, and as the Prophet speaks, (Jer. 51.33.) the time of her threshing being already come, and yet a little while, and the time of her harvest shall come. And though that Mystical Whore lives, as it were secure, and sayes in her heart, (as Rev. 18.7.) I sit as a Queen, and am no widow, and shall see no
 sorrow, yet shall her plagues come in one day, death, and mourning, and famine, and she shall be utterly burnt with fire, for strong is the Lord who Judges her, (a reason given from Gods mouth to stop the mouths of all such who looking upon her present estate and grandure, counts it improbable, if not impossible.)
If these Emissaries then of Satan and of that Scar∣let Whore drunk with the blood of the Saints (who are therefore said to come out of the mouth of the Dragon, Beast and false Prophet, Rev. 16.13.) be so busie with all deceitfulnesse of unrighteous∣ness, and sedulity of seduction, to uphold the tottering Throne of the Beast, and to obtrude to Gods people the golden cup full of abominati∣ons and filthinesse of the Whores fornications, pre∣tending that mother of harlots to be the Mother Church of Christ, and that Beast to be his Vicar, because he is horned like the Lamb, though he speaks like the Dragon, how much more busie should the Lords servants be, for a better Master, and in a bet∣ter cause, who are the proclaimers of that everlast∣ing Gospel, (Rev. 14.6.) to forewarne Gods peo∣ple to come out of Babel, to discover her filthi∣nesse, and to denounce her ruine; and now in the time of so clear a light of the Gospel to declare, If any man will yet worship the beast, and his image, and receive his mark in his forehead and hand, that the same shall drink of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the cup of his indignation, and shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the pre∣sence of the holy Angels, and of the Lamb (Revel. 14.9.)
For detection therefore of this mystery of iniqui∣ty
 to all, whose eyes are not judicially blinded, and for discovery of the Lords work, even his strange work, which he has on the wheel of his providence, for purging his Temple, Dagons downfal and Ba∣bylons destruction, and of the enlargement of Christs Kingdom, his victory over the Beast, and his Saints rejoycing, (Rev. 18.20.) I have labour∣ed to search into that rich mine of Evangelical prophecy forbidden to be sealed up, because the time is at hand, (Rev. 22.10.) but given to Gods servants, and whereof both sanctified Readers and Hearers are pronounced blessed, (Rev. 1.3.) and as Sampsons riddle was found out by plowing with his heifer, I have endeavoured by conferring Scripture with Scripture; and by the impletion of what is past, to consider what is to come, and by tracing the footsteps of a revealed way, to shew who is that grand Antichrist fore-prophecied in Scripture, whom many poor seduced souls do yet follow, (like those who followed Absolon in the simplicity of their heart) and that his seat is that great City situate on seven hills, which in Johns dayes did reign over the Kings of the earth, the waters whereof (which are Peoples, and Multitudes, and Nations, and Tongues) are in a great measure dryed up, and his Kingdome lost its former lustre & credit, being full of darkness, which makes them gnaw their tongues for pain, (Rev. 16.12.10.) and that the time is at hand, when (as Jermy speaks, 50.38.) her dust shall be scraped from her, and she shall be made like the top of a bare rock, or as the Angel speaks, (Rev. 18.21.) like a great milstone cast into the sea, with such violence she shall be thrown down, and shall be found no more.
Which pains taken by me herein, (Right Wor∣thy
 Sir of all due respect) I have dedicated to your Worship, who is the honour of your Countrey, the ornament of your art, the joy of your friends, the love of strangers, and a most profitable instrument by your famous skil both of lives preservation, and healths recovery to many both rich and poor, of the last sort of which I may say in Jobs words, (c. 29.13.) the blessing of him that was ready to perish has come upon you, and you have caused the heart of the diseased, cured and comforted by you, to sing for joy, his blessing who is the Sovereign Physician of soul and body accompanying your skill here, and his rich reward of mercy abiding you at last in the day of your account hereafter, which, with the ap∣precation of all happinesse here and hence shall be the constant and hearty wish of,

