



My Lord,
THe Auditors of this Ser∣mon have passed their verdict that the Com∣plection thereof is strong enough to come abroad, and to endure the publique Aire.
Their diffusive charity procured the meanes of communicating it to more eares, and eyes then their owne: But I am resolved it shall flye no further then your Lordship shall please to adde wings to it. The conscience of gratitude promptes me to acknow∣ledge that I have ripened, and growne to maturity by the warme beames of your noble favour, and so encourageth me to crave the same indulgent influ∣ence upon this later issue of my braine. The Dialect discovers that it is not of a different extraction from my for∣mer Labours. For freely, and sincere∣ly it speaks out the Dictates of a heart sound, and true to the King, and Country. This supports me to walke as it were upon the ridge of a house, with such a steady pace, that securely I overlooke all dangers, which might
ensue by lapsing on the dexter, or si∣nister side. The smart of some like a Sea-mark hath warned me to decline those Rockes, and Shelves, whereon incautelously they have split. And yet lest the medicine here prescribed should turne to a wound, I have atti∣red Truth with an in offensive dresse, and tempered it with modera∣tion; well knowing that gentle lan∣guage hath oft beene prevalent, where the boystrous sword could not. To expunge misconstructions, and to cleare all scruples, I have anatomi∣zed, and laid open my whole inward man touching some Doctrinals, and Circumstantials now much agitated, and wherein I might be mistaken; hoping thereby to stand upright in the Judgement of Knowing Men, whom alone I care to satisfie.

My Lord,
The drift of the Discourse is to ce∣ment together affectionate obedience in the People, and cheerefull prote∣ction in the Soveraigne. The one be∣ing the highest felicity of the King, and the other the greatest blessing of the Subject. The compleating of which happinesse, is Your Honors day∣ly practise; and shall still be the stu∣dy, and prayer of

