



DEar and well beloved Brethren, to whose consideration and pious since∣rity I chiefly desire to present this small Treatise, touching falling from Grace, as a token of my bounden love and respects unto you, whom I judge com∣petent judges between truth and errour. I ther∣fore seek not the patronage of any one in esteem of the world; no courting Lord,Rev. 1.6. 1 Pet. 2.5. Chap. 1 4. Rom. 8.17. Luke 12.32. Rom. 3.11. 1 Cor. 9.25. nor mincing La∣dy: knowing none that are of greater birth or more nobly descended then you, who are Kings and high priests of the most high God, born unto an inheritance that fadeth not away, who are aires unto a Kingdome, unto a Crown, not a corruptible, but an incorruptible one▪ &c.
The reason of my appearing in this matter so publikely is onely and alone the glory of God, the love I bear to Religion, and the benifit of the Church of Christ.
That which occasioned my setting upon this work, was partly the importunity of some friends,

who greatly desired it, together with an ingage∣ment that lay upon me to do it, for the satisfact∣ion (in this point) of some friends in your Coun∣try.
But the first and primary occasion did arise as followeth; you may remember that I was provi∣dentially cast amongst you at Cranbrook at your generall Assembling there July 21. 1652. where you did appoint me with some others, to endea∣vour to give satisfaction touching some points in Religion that were questioned by some; to which end and purpose we did meet on the six and twen∣tieth of the same moneth at Yalding about the mat∣ter, which when we were assembled, amongst o∣ther things, this fell in as the matter most in dif∣ference, viz. falling from Grace: whereupon there was two Positions stated, the one by me, and the other by the other party: the position stated by me was, That Believers in Christ may fall away. The position stated by them was, That Justified persons cannot fall totally nor finally from the grace of union with the Lord Jesus: the proof was taken on their part in order to their affirmation: they framed thirteen Arguments, eight of which were answer∣ed at the same time, but night coming on we brake up, with this conclusion, that I should answer them in writing and give the reasons of my conclusion: which I have endeavoured to do in this following Treatise, to the end that it might extend to the satisfaction of all who are doubtfull in it, and for the confirmation of those who have already re∣ceived it: let it therefore intreat your loving en∣tertainment

and serious perusall, weigh it in the ballance of the Sanctuarie, if it prove weighty and satisfactory give God the glory. I had not been so forward but for these two reasons, first, because I see few write touching this point. Secondly, because I judge it is a point very usefull for Belie∣vers to be acquainted with, that they may know by what they stand viz. faith, and what need they have, especially in these perilous times, to keep close unto God, in that way that he hath taught by his Son, sure it is, that God doth re∣quire we should so doe: we see daily how many there are that do turn their backs upon the way of God, yea and tread his Son under foot, and hath counted the bloud of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and hath done des∣pite unto the Spirit of grace. What may be the rea∣son that many so do, is it not as much in this as any one thing, that they suppose they cannot fall? and by that means grow carelesse and secure, high minded and the like, being puffed up with conceitednesse touching their own parts, strength and opinions, and so grow heedlesse, and slight the means, denying Ordinances, the word, yea, and Christ himself at last, as too too many have done in this age, I believe some not unknown to you: for I cannot see but that the doctrine of im∣possibility to fall doth lead to the taking away of the very power of Religion, and godlinesse, yea and Church-government and discipline: for what shall we need any more religion then to get into Christ, if nothing, when we are once in

him, can seperate us from him, no not sin, as is af∣firmed; what shall we need to walk under the strict rule of Discipline if that doctrine be true?
But I hope you have otherwise learned Christ: therefore my dear Brethren be steadfast, unmova∣ble, alwaies abounding in the work of the Lord, for your labour is not in vain in the Lord, hold fast that you have, that no man take your crown: now the God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepheard of the sheep, though the blood of the everlasting Covenant, make you perfit in every good work to doe his will, working in you that which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever, amen.
Which is the hearty desire of your brother in the faith of our dear and precious Lord, who sub∣cribeth himself willing to serve you and all the Churches of Christ, in all services of love,

