



Sirs,
AS this Mother City is our Jerusa∣lem, and you are the free Deni∣zens of the same, who (by Gods blessing) have hitherto lived in Peace and Plenty; So, by all kinde of rights, this Sermon touching the Peace of Jerusalem, ought to be dedi∣cated to you; as being prepared for you, and preach∣ed to you, and that by one of you; for I received my life at first (as being born) and my livelyhood ever since (as being beneficed) among you. And there∣fore, as in Reason, you cannot but conceive that I wish you as well as my self (seeing my well-fare de∣pends
 upon yours) So in Religion, you cannot but receive this patheticall perswasion to pray for the publike Peace; seeing it is pressed upon you by that man according to Gods own heart,1 Sam 3.14. David himself: the plain Song is his, mine is but the descant: The words are his; mine but his Eccho: and being such, you can expect from me but broken and imperfect repetitions, and expressions, yet true, as the Eccho alwayes doth.
The great States-man (Tacitus) confesseth that it is a most miserable thing to fall into such times, in which men must both speak what they think not, and also do what they approve not: and it appears by many mens words and actions, that this is such a time as he complained of: But however others may temporize,Psal. 7 9. yet I ingenuously professe, and he that is the searcher of the heart can bear me witnesse, That in what I now present unto you, I have no si∣nister ends. Neither hope of preferment, nor fear of punishment, shall force me to speak or do any thing against the conviction of mine own conscience; which I shall ever labour to keep rightly informed; as knowing (and I could wish it were generally be∣lieved) That it is not enough to have conscience lead us, unlesse truth lead our conscience.
Galat 4.78I gladly grant that many of you are zealously af∣fected,
 and it were well if some of you were not a little infected by certain creatures of your own setting up (I mean Lay-Levites, if I may so call them) who stretch your purses, and straiten your consciences against the Doctrine, and Discipline established by Law among us, by sowing the seeds of schism in the Church,Iude 8.1 Ioh. 4 1. and sedition in the Common∣wealth, under pretence of (I know not what) extra∣ordinary Illumination, and Revelations which those Dreamers dream of. But it is S. John's advice, Believe not every spirit, but trie the spirits whe∣ther they are of God. And if you bring them to the Touch-stone of Gods Word for tryall, you will finde some of them whom you took for currant, to be but counterfeit: and like so many Glow-worms, which though in the dark they sparkle like a Dia∣mond, yet in truth they are but Vermine.
It is hard to say, as the case now stands, whether some by their factious activity, or others by their unseasonable taciturnity, do most mischief. Let Politicians (having learnt of Paterculus, That Benè facere odium est, malè facere gratià, nihil facere tutum est) count it good sleeping in a whole skin; yet we that are Pastors, and to give an account for our flocks, must cry aloud, and spare not, telling Judah of her sins,Heb 13.17. Isa. 58.1. and Israel of her transgressions,

Ezek. 3.or God will require the blood of them that perish through our default, at our hands. And for my particular, I professe my self ready (with the great Doctor of the Gentiles) both to spend,2 Cor. 12.15. and to be spent for the Cause of Christ, and the peace of my Country, rather then I will betray either, by conni∣ving for company.
I need not tell you that some there be which kin∣dle the coles of dissention among us, and more make it all their work to blow them, being so unhappily kindled: and it is much to be feared, That these kindle-coles will never give over, untill they have set all in a combustion, and consumed us, and them∣selves in their own flame; which is a consideration worthy our prayers, and our tears, if not our blood, to quench it. Every man in this case, should lend an helping hand, and be as cordially forward to cure our distractions, as the devill, and his Incendiaries have been to cause them. You do well in time of peace to provide for War, so your provision be but for prevention: which Machiavil calls is the life of Policy; yet it is so in us no further then it will stand with piety. They onely are safe and sure,Eph 6.11. in cases doubtfull, and times of danger, that put on the whole Armour of God, having his Word for their Warrant in all their undertakings. Remem∣ber
 you are Citizens properly, and not souldiers: Then take heed lest (if you put off your Gowns, to take up Arms) you scatter in War, what in peace you gathered. God knows that my solitary aim in this Sermon, is to direct you both in your prayers, and practice; how to salve up our sores, and to heal our wounds: and if in any thing that serves to so good an end, I seem too bold, or bitter, let your grave experience make this Apologie for me, viz. That a mortall wound must be thorowly searched, ere it can be soundly healed; and that no purgative Medicine can bring health without some bitternes.
I would not wittingly give any man any manner of offence; and yet if (in the faithfull discharge of my duty) I should, I hope that they among you which are moderate, will confesse, That wholesome meat must not be altogether debarred the table, though by accident it may possibly disgust some agu∣ish Palate.
I will conclude with that of S. Paul to the Ro∣manes:Ro. 16.17. Now I beseech you brethren, mark them which cause divisions, contrary to the Doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them. For they that are such, serve not our LORD JESUS CHRIST, but their own belly; and by good words, and fair speeches,
 they deceive the hearts of the simple. For your obedience is come abroad unto all men; I am glad therefore on your behalf: But yet I would have you wise unto that which is good, and harmlesse concerning evill. And the God of Peace shall bruise Satan under you feet short∣ly. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.
So sayeth, and so prayeth

