



My Dear Friends,
SOlomon saith, The desire of a man is his kinde∣nesse, and a poor man is better then a liar, Prov. 19.22. If you be of his minde, I dare promise these Notes, (which I here de∣vote to your service) a kinde acceptance at your hands. You will finde me to be the poor man, by the mite I present you with; but the hearty desire of your e∣ternal happinesse from which it comes, will (I hope) clear me from being the liar. I never could be so serviceable to you, as many Ministers are to their people, having been with you in much weaknesse, and still it is the good plea∣sure of God, I should be staked down to a short tedder of strength and other abilities; I have reason therefore, (that I may, though not recompence that want, yet ex∣presse my deep sense thereof) to croud the more love into the little I can do for you. And truly my heart is enlar∣ged to you, and to God for you. If any thing makes me loath to be gone into another world, (which my drop∣ping house bids me above many prepare for) it is not the least, to think I shall leave no more of you walking in the way to eternal life, and you who are on your way thither, in no closer Gospel-order for your mutual help and com∣fort in your journey: yea, while I am among you, little do

you think how much of your poor Ministers life lies at your mercy. If I should measure my life by the joy of it, (as indeed who doth not?) Then in some uprightnesse I can say with Paul, I live as I see any of you stand fast in the Lord, and die as I see others stand fast in their sins, not to be moved with all the entreaties of the Gospel which have wooed you. And why (my dear friends) should not the life of your soules be much more precious in your own sight then mine? But I forbear, I would not willingly be thought, as some husbands are, to be kinder to you abroad before strangers, then I am at home.
What I present you with in this Treatise, is a dish from your own table, and so (I hope) will go down the better. You cannot despise it (though the fare be mean) except you will blame your selves who chose the Cook. I can∣not be earnest with others, to bestow so much time as to read over these plain Sermons, lest it should be to their losse; it were but to call them from gathering sheaves in the more fruitful labours of others, to glean a few eares, and those but thin also in mine; yet with you, my people, I may be a little bold. Physicians say, the mothers milk though not so weighty as anothers, if no noxious humour be tasted in it, because natural, is more proper for the childe then a strangers. And, I think, it would not be an errour, if I should say it held in the milk which the Minister gives to his flock. A people conscienciously lying at the breasts of their own Minister, (if the milk he gives be whole∣some) may expect the blessing of God for their nourish∣ment, though it has not so much lusciousnesse to please the curious taster as some others. Well, whatever these Ser∣mons were, some of those few spirits which you found in hearing, will be missing in the reading of them. It is as easie to paint fire with the heat, as with pen and ink to

commit that to paper, which occurres in preaching. There is as much difference between a Sermon in the Pulpit, and printed in a book, as between milk in the warme breast, and in a sucking bottle, yet what it loseth in the lively taste, is recompenced by the convenience of it. The book may be at hand when the Preacher cannot; and tru∣ly, that's the chief end of printing, that as the bottle and spoon is used when the mother is sick or out of the way; so the book, to quiet the Christian and stay his stomack in the absence of the Ordinance. He that readeth Sermons and good bookes at home to save his paines of going to hear, is a thief to his soul in a religious habit: he consults for his ease, but not for his profit; he eats cold meat when he may have hot: He hazards the losing the benefit of both by contemning of one. If the Spouse could have had her belo∣ved at home, she needed not to have coursed the streets and waited on the publick. O what need we offer sacriledge for sacrifice, rob God of one duty to pay him another? He hath laid our work in better order, one wheele would not interfere with another, if we did more regularly. A chief part of Davids Arithmetick of numbring our dayes, lies in that which we call division, as to cast the ac∣count of this our short life so, as to divide the little whole summe thereof into the several portions of time due for the performing of every duty in. An Instrument is not in tune, except it have all the strings, and those will not make good musick, if the Musician hath not wisdome to cause every string to speak in its due time; The Christi∣an is not in tune, except he takes in all the duties of his place and calling, neither will the performance of them be harmonious in Gods eare, if every one be not done in its proper season. O my friends, labour not only to do the duty of your place, but that duty in its own place also.

Heare when you should hear. Know your rime for closet, and time for shop: and when your retiring houre comes, a few minutes now and then spent in taking a repetition of what formerly you heard, shall not (I hope) another day be reckoned with your lost time. The Subject of the Treatise is solemn, A War between the Saint and Satan, and that so bloody a one, that the cruellest which ever was fought by men, will be found but sport and childes play to this. Alas, what is the killing of bodies to destroying of soules? 'Tis a sad meditation indeed, to think how many thousands have been sent to the grave in a few late yeares among us by the sword of man; But far more astonish∣ing, to consider how many of those may be sent to hell by the sword of Gods wrath. 'Tis a spiritual war you shall reade of, and that not a history of what was fought many ages past and is now over; but of what now is doing, the Tragedy is at present acting, and that not at the furthest end of the world, but what concernes thee and every one that reades it. The stage whereon this war is fought, is e∣very mans own soul. Here is no Neuter in this war, the whole world is engaged in the quarrel, either for God a∣gainst Satan, or for Satan against God. It was a great question some yeares past, Who are you for? The not giving a good account to which hath cost many a life. O my dear friends, think solemnly what answer you meane to give to God and conscience, when they in a dying houre shall ask every one of you, Who art thou for? 'Tis an incomparable mercy, that you are yet where you may choose your side: It will not be ever so, may be not a day to an end. If once in another world, you must then stand to your colours, yet you may run from the Devils quarters, and be taken into Christs pay. The Drum beats in the Gospel for Voluntiers. O, the Lord make you

willing in the day of his power. I know you all would be on the surest side. O what can you be sure of, while under the devils Ensigne, but damnation? The curse of God cleavs to him and all that takes part with him O let not the little plunder & spoil of sinful pleasures and pelf, bewitch you still to follow his Camp. What is that souldier bet∣ter for his booty he gets in a fight, who before he can get off with it, is himself slain upon the place? (so many have been served in these wars, if reports be true.) 'Tis that thou must certainly look for. The piece is charg'd, and aime taken at thy breast, which will be thy eternal death if thou persistest. Gods threatenings will go off at last and then where art thou? where, but in hell, where thy wedge of gold and Babylonish garment, thy wages of un∣righteousnesse will do thee little stead? O Neighbours, I am loath to leave you in the way where Gods bullets flie; but I must have a word for you, my Christian friends, who have espoused Christs quarrel, and are in the field against Satan. My heart is towards you, who have thus willingly offered your selves among the Lords peo∣ple to his help against the mighty. He can destroy him without you, but he takes your love as kindly as if he could not. God hath sent me (as Jesse did David) with this little present to you and the rest of my Brethren that are in his Camp. May it be but to the strengthening of your hearts and hands in fighting the Lords battels, and I shall blesse God that put it into my heart thus to visit you. O hold on, dear friends, in your Christian warfare, let none take the crown from you. Whet your courage at the throne of grace, from whence all your recruits of soule-strength come. Send faith oft up the hill of the Promise, to see and bring you the certain newes of Christs coming to you, yea, for you, and assured victory with him. Reade the exploits, which Christs Worthies by faith have done,

and in their Conquests reade your own, for in them he spake with us, as the Prophet of Jacob. Be thankful for every victory you get, and let not the houling wildernesse, yet before you, put the song of your praises for temptati∣ons past out of tune, yet rejoyce with trembling, as those who are still in your enemies countrey, and must keep by the sword what you get by the sword: Be sure you stand in close order amongst your selves; These times give us too many sad examples of such, who first fell from communi∣on with their Brethren, and then into the devourers hand; straglers are soon snap't; you will finde you are safest in a body. Take heed of a private spirit; let not on∣ly your particular safety, but of the whole Army of Saints be in your eye and care, especially that company in which you march, (Congregation I mean;) that souldier which can see an enemy in fight with his brethren, and not help them, he makes t but the more easie for the enemy to slay himself at last; Say not therefore, Am I my brothers Keep∣er? God would not keep him that cared not to keep his brother. Watch over one another, not to play the Cri∣ticks on your brothers failings, and triumph when he halts, but to help him up if he falls, or if possible, to keep him from falling by a timely rescue, as Abishai came to Davids succour. Keep your rank and file. We see what ad∣vantage Satan hath got in these loose times, since we have learnt to fight him out of order, and the private souldier, (Christian I mean) hath taken the officers work out of his hands. Harden your selves against the scandals, which the cowardize and treachery of false brethren hath given you. He is the right souldier that is not discouraged by those that run from, or that are slain in the battel; but still presseth on to victory, though he goes to it over the backs of others that are killed upon the place. In a word, Disintangle your hearts what you can from the love of, and distracting

cares for this present world. No man that warreth intangleth himself with the affaires of this life,2 Tim. 2.4 that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a souldier, 2 Tim. 2.4. If it be∣hoves any to have their Will ready made, and their worldly interests set at some stay, then surely the souldier: if any souldier, then the Christian. Get but once your hearts mortified to the world, and care rolled upon God, for name, estate, and relations here, and then you are fit to march whereever Christ will lead you. The want of this hath made many run home to save their own private stake there, when they should have been in the field for Christ. And now, my Christian friends, march on, not in the con∣fidence of your Armour, but in the power of his might, who hath promised shortly to subdue Satan under your feet. I have done, only I must crave pardon of you, for rending this part of the Treatise from the other, which nei∣ther my little strength or leisure would suffer me to grasp at once.
But this having first put forth its hand in preaching, can make no great breach upon that, though it get the start a little in printing. Let me therefore, dear friends, (if God shall make this imperfect birth any way serviceable to your faith,) humbly desire, that you would as continue to strive at the throne of grace for a blessing on my poor Ministery among you, so also lift up a prayer, that strength may be given, to bring forth what of this yet is undeliver'd. I do not send you thither where I intend not to meet you, but shall desire grace to be found faithful in striving with you, and for you, that amongst those who finde any spiritual ad∣vantage from my weak labours, you to whom they are chiefly devoted may not receive the least.
Lavenham,
Jan. 1, 1655.

