


HAving endeavored (Ho∣norable and worthy Gentlemen) if not to adorn, yet at least to do some right to the memory of the reverend and renow∣ued Bishop Brounrig, by those (justa Parentalia) praises which are most due to his accomplished worth, for his holy obedience to the Word of God, for his conformity to his blessed Saviour, for his loyalty to Soveraign power, for his love to his Country, for his compas∣sion to the Church, for his zeal to the Reformed Religion, for those sighs,
prayers and tears, by which he encou∣tred the sins and miseries of this Na∣tion; for his exemplary merits to all that were or would be good: and lastly, for his particular favour to∣wards me (of which I am ambitious to express a most grateful sense:) Yet I finde still something of further duty and discretion incumbent on me, which must be discharged by this Preface or Epistle, to which your name is inscri∣bed; wherein first, I am to justifie my own so large and liberal commenda∣tion of the Bishop. Secondly, I am to give an account of your particular me∣rit, as to this Dedication. Thirdly, I am to crave your patrociny for my vindication.
§. For the first, My own Veraci∣ty, as to what I have wrote, (,) without en∣vy, flattery or partiality of this excel∣lent Bishop, I believe I have the at∣testation of all good men, who either personally knew, or have been fully informed of his worth; if they have eyes able to behold and bear the re∣splendency of all moral vertues in an excellent man; of all intellectual a∣bilites,
in an excellent Schollar; of all sound Divinity in an excellent Divine; of well chosen, well handled, well applied and well practised Texts in an excellent Preacher; of all gra∣vity, prudence, circumspectness and candor in an excellent Gover∣nour; of sincere and operative gra∣ces in an excellent Christian; Lastly, of all these concurrent, compleated and cumulated in an excellent Bishop; who was indeed () in in all points of humane and divine perfections, such as he should be.
§. All ingenious persons who are not overgrown with the Antiepisco∣pal Jaundise (who have not envious, odious, jealous and implacable eyes against all Bishops, and most against the best;) will readily subscribe to what I have written; Yea I know, there is such a cloud of witnesses, as forbids me solicitously to avow my own integrity and truth on either side.
§. First, For my self, I am as much an enemy to flattery, as a friend to civility. Parasitisme differs as much from just and comely praise, as Divels
do from good Angels; The first is black as hel, the second beautiful as Heaven. I fear nothing (whatever I do, or say, or write,) more then that base fear, which either prosti∣tutes to servile adulation of vice: or is overawed from just commenda∣tion of vertue, even in Bishops; I do profess (with Greg. Naz. commending St. Cyprian, ; I have spo∣ken and written as to the verity, and eminency of the patern; nothing to any compliance or partiality, I was not to dress up an Ulyssis with Homer; or an Aeneas with Virgil, after a po∣etick freedom, and flourish of inven∣tion, but to represent to the unworthy world, a most worthy Bishop, and to reproach the imprudence, and ingra∣titude of the age, by letting it see in this particular, what an admirable Bishops it had extirpated, what ac∣complished abilities it had suppressed, what useful merits it had discounte∣nanced; not onely by not rewarding, but by depriving of such rewards, as they had both deserved, and obtain∣ed by Gods blessing, and the mu∣nificence
of the Prince and Nation; I was to set forth a chief Pastor of the Church, conformable to Christs cross, as well as serviceable to his flock; having not only the crown of crucified affections, but also crucrify∣ing afflictions, yea and of crucified vertues, by the indignities of the world; nay and of self crucifying gra∣ces too, by his own humility; for while he was eminent in all men, that had eyes to see true worth, yet in his own eyes he was nothing, and Christ was all in all to him.
§. Secondly, They knew not Bishop Brounrig, who knew not how far he was from either active or passive flattery; As he abhorred both, so he needed neither; He was far above them, being so full and overflowing with reall and solid worth, that he was not capable (as lanck bladders) of any empty and aiery distentions; he had as Plato saith of one Gorgi∣as, , A soul and life that wanted fictitious comendations no more, then burnish∣ed gold, or polished marble doth need any paint, or colouring.

§. Such deceitful decorations, and spurious prayses, are for their Sepulchers who affect to be reputed worthies, when they have done no∣thing worthily, who would be recoun∣ted for great Rabbies and Refor∣mers, when indeed they were but A∣baddons, and Apollyons of all things civil and sacred; ambitious, when dead, to be called Patriots and Fathers of their countrey, yea Sa∣viours and Preservers of Religion, when they have sought to sacrifice both fathers and children, to the Molochs, Chians, and Remphans, Idols and Images, which they set up, and their fathers never knew; There are that hope to be venerated, as the Divels in India, not for the good, but for the mischeife, they were able to do.
§. For my part, I would not for a world, profane those sacred texts, of The righteous perish, or The me∣mory of the just shall be blessed, or Blessed are they that dye in the Lord, or Pretious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints, and the like, by preaching them over those
whose doings are as noysome as their carkasses; who deserve to be bu∣ried with the buriall of an Ass; Though violent and vile men, should make their graves with the rich and the Noble; yet their Monuments built with untempered mortar, made up of the bones and blood of men, will sooner rot then their corps.
§. No flattering Confectioners can make Mummy, to impartial posterity, of those abominable livers, whose names are written in the dust, and deserve to perish as their own dung; when they give no evidence to the present age, by their piety or repentance, that the name of God is gravn in their hearts, or their names are written in heaven. No venal pens, and mercenary tongues can keep after ages from cursing and detesting their memories, who like Nero, or Hierostratus, or Ra∣viliaac, or Borgia, and other mon∣sters of men, seek renown by their enormities, and study to equal their vilanies to their abilities: whose dy∣ing is not times digesting them to ma∣ture
honour; but its spewing them out to everlasting shame and abhor∣rence.
§. But where useful virtues and re∣al graces do appear in any, never so poor, afflicted, desolated, (as the Martyes and Confessors of old, and latter ages were;) every just man and ingenuous Christian, will be not on∣ly ready to bring sweet odors and spices to their burial, but they are ambitious to embalme their names and memories to a perpetuity of honour; Though proscribed and banished, though undone and de∣stroyed by the injuries of the age, in which they lived; as were Ignatius Cyprian, Athanasius, Chrysostom, Boethius, and many others among the Christians, yea and among Heathen too, as Epaminondas, Ari∣stides, Themistoeles, Scipio, Affr. and others; whose ingrateful Coun∣trys did not hinder the gratitude of posterity, as to persons that deser∣ved longer life and better usage.
§. Yea, not onely among the Hea∣thens, such extasies of admiration transported them to the superstition of
an imaginary , or deification of the dead; (whose deserts they thought purchased for them an immor∣tality, Divinity or Godship of a lower form, lesser edition, and lat∣ter creation;) But even Christians at first indeed, with moderation and caution, (afterwards by an , or excesse of veneration) did canonize those as Saints, or divi, holy, honorable and happy men and women, who by exemplary piety and patience, had sealed to the truth and peace of Christian religi∣on; hereby recommending the imita∣tion of their graces and vertues to all men, both good and bad, to reprove the one, and improve the other.
§. For not onely well disposed persons are well content to see them∣selves encouraged by the commen∣dation of those, whose worthy steps they follow; But even those, that are no great valuers, or followers of vertue themselves, no nor prai∣sers of it in others, while living, are yet content to lay aside the poyson of their envy, and sting of
their calumny towards them when they onely live in their deserved reputation for goodness; whose re∣wards even vicious men are prone to fancy they may more easily ob∣tain if they have but a mind to commend them, when dead.
§. Nor is this fallacy without some shew of reason; For vertue is prone to adopt those for her children, who have any value or respect for her even in others; As by pittying, so by praising, we are secretly allu∣red to practise things praise-wor∣thy; As evil speech corrupts good manners, so good speech is apt to mend evil manners; yea, as to smother, or calumniate, or coldly commend anothers virtue, argues little consciousness to it in ones self; So it is the surest token of grace, and vertue, to love, ad∣mire and adore them, First in the highest perfection of the Divine Idea; Secondly, in the clearest image, or representation of them, Je∣sus Christ; Lastly in the more familiar instances of them among mankind, where they are (like the Sun-beams,
in watery reflections, infinitely more remisse indeed, and less glo∣rious, than in the original, but yet more visible and condescending to humane capacities.
§. And such they were in this Ilu∣strious Bishop, however he were eclipsed by the fatal darkness of the times; yet the pregnant de∣monstrations of his worth, were publikely attested, as by that love and reverence which all good men payed him while he lived; so by that honorable and ample concourse of many Eagles to his corps and Funerals, which were attended by Noblemen, by Gentlemen, by Judges, by Lawyers, by Divines, by Merchants and Citizens, of the best sort then in London; These flocked to his Sepulcher, these fol∣lowed the Bier, these recounted his worth, these deplored their own and the ages loss of him; These reproached those who had occa∣sioned, or cast any diminutions up∣on such extraordinary merits, and such accomplished Bishops; For he was not the onely Phenix of his age and
order, who had been deplumed, and almost reduced to ashes by the inor∣dinate, flames of the times.) But I need no more to justify any so am∣ple commendation of this excel∣lent Bishop, whom none could with truth or Justice disparage.
§. My second work in this Epistle is, to give the world an account of your particular merit, as to this Dedication, wherein I am comman∣ded in modesty, not to insist upon your so propense and unanimous fa∣vour expressed towards my self, (which chalengeth its proper time, and place, for my thankeful ac∣knowledgment) because the present Subject affords me reason more than enough; Nor could I have been other than extreamly injurious, both to the Dead and the Living, (the ve∣nerable Bishop, and your honora∣ble selves) if I should have de∣dicated this work to any other than your selves; Since not onely to you they were by me at first, for the main, delivered by word of mouth, (which I know more coveted to hear, than well could, by reason of the
great crowd and concourse, of attendants, who may claime of me this Justice, and compensation, of their defeats) but to your honoura∣ble Societies, above all men living, the venerable subject and occasion of my labours, this reverend Bishop (next God) did cheifly bequeath and dedicate himself, both living, dying, and dead.
§. If he had lived longer, you had been that happy Society, which should have been honored and bles∣sed, with his presence and residence, with his praying and preaching, with his grave counsel and holy ex∣ample: The golden remains of his pretious life and strength, were yours; he was so just and grateful, as to own and requite your love and respects to him, who had so highly deserved of him.
When he dyed, and was to put off his earthly Tabernacle, those exuviae mortalitatis, which are due to the grave; It was inter novissi∣ma vota, one of his last desires, that as this mantle of Eliah's soul, was likely to fall among you, so it might
be deposited in your Temple, or Sanctuary, as an expectant of a bles∣sed Resurrection.
§. This request you not onely am∣bitiously entertained, but hono∣rable accomplished, being loth, that so great a Prophet, should be buried among the graves of the meaner people; though living, he was almost levelled to them, by some men, I fear of more preposterous, than pious spirits, who seemed most impatient to own the vast differences, which God and nature, education and grace, age and experience, learning and industry, besides our Lawes, and the universal custome of the Churches of Christ, had made among the Ministers of Christ, for the good order, and welfare both of Presbyters and people, grudging that any civil respect or reward should be proportioned to their worth and usefulness in the Church.
§. It became your learning, Ju∣stice, and wisdom, to descern and own the advantages, and discrimi∣nations, that were so evident in this excellent Bishop, who are not
only Trustees and Guardians of his Urne and ashes; but Conservators of his better self, living Monuments of his excellent soul, Admirers of his rare endowments, Imitators of his worthy example; All which were by him, and now by me devoted to you above all men, among whom he had his last hospitable and ho∣norable reception; You, by a gene∣rous civility (in an age pittifully and plebeianly Antiepiscopal,) durst in∣vite, own and entertain, with pub∣lique respect, such a Bishop, whose eminent and unspotted worth every way made him so much more, the object of some mens envy and despite, as the highest Towers and trees are of the rage of tempests.
§. For many have more patience towards Bishops and Ministers of his degree and perswasion, who are less commendable, or more culpable, than to those, whose eminency in goodness becoming Bishops and Divines, makes their injurious ma∣lice wholy inexcusable; Some spi∣rits are most eager to cast that E∣piscopal salt on the ground, which
hath best savour in it; and least of popish or popular fatuity; that greater esteem may be had of their inspired arrogancy, which by parity tends to Ataxy, division and confusion, as it is at this day; Sunt tempora in∣quibus maximis virtutibus certissi∣mum est exitium: Tacitus observes, that the worst times can least bear the best laws, and worthiest persons; whose exemplary vertues are the daily Satyrs and Sarcasmes of unreasona∣ble men, and manners.
§. Some School-men think, that the presence of a good Angel, is an augment to the torture of Divels, exasperating the regret and sense of their hell, deformity, and misery, by the others beauty, glory, and feli∣city: it is certaine (Mat. 8.29.) that the evil and unclean spirits, could not smother the great terror, even to torment, which they had seising on them, when the holy Majesty of the Messias, though vailed under the cloud of humane nature, and infirmities, gave check, to their Demoniac malice and mischeif; Thus are the best ministers, either Bishops
or Presbyters, men of the greatest learning, piety and constancy, most unwelcome, (as Micaiah to Ahab) to men of high minds, of heady passi∣ons, of giddy spirits, of impotent prejudices, of popular principles, and of licencious Practises, who affect things of vulgar ambition, and ple∣beian arbitrariness, being unpati∣ent of any thing authoritative, and setled either by civil, or ecclesiastick constitutions, and customes in Church or State.
§. Hence (then) is the Crown of your Honour, more ponderous and illustrious; That you so far owned and expressed your esteem of this learned and religious Bishop, who as much deserved and enjoyed the applause of all good men, as he pa∣tiently endured the envy and injuries of others; Him you kindly invited; Him you civilly received; Him you highly honoured; Him you greatly endeared to you; notwith∣standing the long and many dimi∣nutions, yea disgraces he had suffered as a Bishop, more to the detriment and dishonour of the publique, than
of his private comforts; For it is certaine; that every Christian Church and State in all ages, hath wanted, and ever will such excellent Bishops, as wise and exemplary Goverours, more than they can want publique rewards and incouragements: but as it was said of Paulinus Bishop of Nola, in Italy, Aequiori animo sua pertulit damna, quam alii sua lucra: No man deplored the publique distracti∣ons more, and his own depressions less, than this wise and worthy Bi∣shop; he still enjoyed himself in an holy and happy tranquility, as much, nay much more, than any of his de∣stroyers, whom he lived to see dri∣ven as chaffe too and fro, with every wind, till they were hurried to Democracy, to Stratocracy, to Anarchy, both in Church and State.
§. After many Tragedies, which he had seen and suffered, it was a great reviving to his age, to find the noble respects of your honourable Society, shining upon him, and in him, upon all worthy Bishops, and Episcopal Divines; You were desi∣rous
to be his Diocess, to own him as a Father in God; And as you deserved, so I know he intended you the best recompences he was able to give you, out of the rich treasury of his learned and pious soul, if God had spared him life and health; As you have the honour to be the emi∣nent orbe, and publique Sphear, in which this great Star of learning and religion, of Episcopal desert, and dignity, last moved, both in and out of this world; The Mount Nebo, to which this Moses was to ascend, and there to dye; So it is but just you should have this Monu∣ment of singular honour, and re∣nown, so long as the name and me∣mory of Bishop Brounrig survives, which I presume will be very long; (For he had (omnia victura et sempi∣terna, praeter corpusculum,) all things living and lasting to eternity, except his body,) especially, if I have in this work (which is thus De∣dicated to you,) done him and you, the present, and after age, that right which I intended, and of which I have thus given the world some ac∣count
as to your particular merit towards him, which was my second undertaking.
§. My last work in this Epistle is, to crave your patrociny, for my vin∣dication, both against Romish par∣tiality, whose designe and interest is to decry and destroy all Reformed Bishops; and also against those im∣moderate Antypathies, which others have taken up, against all presiden∣tial Episcopacy, and Diocesan Bi∣shops; though never so reformed in Doctrine and Manners; Yea and cir∣cumscribed by good Laws of Church and State: Not that I fear the wit, which is not overgreat, or the spite which is not very small, of those un∣reasonable Episcopomastix, whose ma∣lice is as blind, as it is bold, against all Bishops, good and bad, precious and vile, Popish and Primitive Epis∣copacy. They shall do well to try their Teeth on this file, to confute any one particular, which I have averred of this excellent Bishop, who (together with many others, his reverend Brethren, (of the last edition and perdition) now with God, (as Usher, Hall, Morton,
Davenant, Prideaux, Winniffe, Westfeild, Potter, and others,) were as far from being drones, and idle bellys, Tyrants and oppressors, Po∣pish or antichristian, as those are, who are the most unjust calumniators of them, and their Episcopal dignity; which hath been so antient and uni∣versal in the Church of Christ, and is so necessary for the polity, and well be∣ing of any Church, and was by them∣selves so abundantly deserved, yea and worthily managed.
§. I well know how provoking a thing it is to some mens eyes and eares, to read or hear the praise of any man, who is not of their party, and faction; There are many, who have no patience to behold a Bishop carried to his grave in peace, and laid in the bed of honour; It is their Hell to see a pious Prelate conveyed to Heaven; as it was Dives his regret, to behold Lazarus in Abrahams bosom; Some have sought to make the very name of Bishop a crime, and to render the or∣der, degree and honor of it odious, when the first is Scriptural, and given to Christ, first; next to the Apostles
and their cheif Successors; the second is Ecclesiastical, of Primitive, Catho∣lick, and Apostolick use.
§. There are, that wish all Bishops out of the world, with all their hearts; but withal they would have them buried in silence, and obscurity; For they are scared to see them walk after they are dead, as much as Herod was, least John Baptist, (whom he had behead∣ed in a most wanton and frolick cru∣elty,) had been revived in Christ; Some are afraid, least while the names and merits of our excellent English Bishops remaine, they might recover damages, for all the losses they have sustained; but in this I can secure their Excexcutors and Administrators, that if they can give God and their own consciences, a good account, none of these good Bishops, who are now departed in peace, and have seen the Salvation of God, will ever trouble them, being got above the af∣fronts, injuries, indignities, and in∣digencies of this world.
§. I know the formation of such a Statue, as must resemble, Bishop Brounrig, so burning and shining a
light, must needs dash the unwel∣come sparks and strictures of his well known worth, in all Antiepis∣copal faces; just as an iron flaming from the forge doth, when wrought on a firme anvel by a strong arm. It is the miserie of many, virtutem vi∣deant intabita bescant{que} relicta; first to want worth in themselves; next, not to be able to bear it in another: If envie against worthy Bishops is to be burst in pieces, this piece will do it; if sober moderate minds are re∣concilable to venerable Episcopacy (as I believe many, nay most ministers and people now are) this will further invite and confirm them to study the Churches peace, and the honor of the Reformed Religion, no less than the comfort of their own calling, by returning to such temperament and patterns of Episcopal presiden∣cy, as were to be seen in Bishop Broun∣rig, and in many others of his order in England; in which were as worthy Presbyters, and as excellent Bishops as ever blest any Church, since the Apostles daies, for whom we have cause ever to bless the Divine benignity and
mercy to this unworthy Nation.
§. I have otherwhere erected Tro∣phies, and inscribed them to several Bishops of holy, honorable and happy memory in England; yea and I have demonstrated by a familiar and plain emblem, the vast disproportions that are in all histories and successions of the Church to be seen, between the goodly floridness, and fruitful pro∣cerity of Christianity in all times, when it was preserved, protected, and prospered by Episcopal eminen∣cy, authority and unity (which kept Bishops, Presbyters and people in a blessed harmony) compared to the mo∣dern shrubs of novelty, variety, & dis∣cord, which later ages have produced.
§. Nor could I forbear (upon this oc∣casion) to set forth the industry, learn∣ing eloquence gravitie, wisdom, mode∣ration, patience, unspottedness, and holy perseverance of this excellent Bi∣shop, by way of pleniary opposition, and full confutation, of that Idleness, illiterateness, barrenness, levity, im∣prudence, riggidness, passionateness deformity and inconstancy, with which some men have been over∣grown,
as with a Manage or Lepro∣sie, in this age, by their too great itch∣ing, and scratching against all Episco∣pacy, even till they fetched blood, and brought such a festring tetter and sore upon us, as is not easily healed.
§. Wherein I have come short of Bi∣shop Brounrigs worth, your unani∣mous pleadings, and potent eloquence (full of reason and justice, of lear∣ning and religion, of order and po∣licy) may best supply my many defects, indeed there was need of another Brounrig, to have described him.
§. Wherefore, knowing my own dis∣proportions I thought it the best way I could take, to releive them first, by se∣riously studying of this great pattern, next by flying to your protection, whose honor is now inseparable from this worthy Bishops, no less than his ashes are from your antient Temple, which since its first consecrating by Heracli∣us, Patriarch of Jerusalem, (Anno Christ. 1185. in the 31. of Hen. the 2.) to this day, had never any de∣posite, of greater learning, then your famous Selden, or of greater piety and veneration, than your and our
reverend Brounrig, who as little needs any Apology to be made for him, as the age greatly needs, repentance, for treating him so much below his worth, and myself a great Apology, for my adventuring on so great a work.
§. If it be necessary for me fur∣ther to disarm or lessen that envy which possibly may befall me, for the honour of this service, which I have done to the name, memory and me∣rit, of this worthy Bishop, and in him, to all good Bishops, I am willing to conclude, as St. Bernard doth in his modest and humble oratory, upon a like occasion, Dignus sane ille qui laudaretur, sed indignus ego qui laudem, if the fire of Antiepisco∣pal anger, must still be fed with some fewel, Parcite defunctis, in me con∣vertite ferrum, let them spare the dead, and fix their talons or teeth on me, who am yet living, who am content not to be commended by them, or any malevolent Reader, yet I am sure this reverend Bishop, was most worthy to be commended by me, and all good men, which is then most effectu∣ally
done, by your selves (O worthy Gentlemen) and all equanimous Readers, when his piety, prudence, zeal, courage, humility, charity, and judicious, constancy, in Church and State, are most exactly imi∣tated by your selves, and others, which is the just and serious ambition of

Ian. 1. 1659.
