


MOst Noble Senators, having had a
necessary occasion to publish a Trea∣tise
against Superstitious Iesu-Worship,
I dedicated the same to a worthy
Member of your House. Now fin∣ding
it encountred in two volumes
by Master Barton, who after dedica∣tion
of his first Booke to the Kings
Majestie, seemes next to dedicate the same to you, I
have therefore taken boldnesse to dedicate this my Re∣ply
to you also, (being indeed an encounter with both
his Bookes) which otherwise I should not have done nor
presumed to soare so high. This man is very confident
in his cause, hee tels you hee hath hit the Marke▪ at
which hee aymed, but I am confident it will ap∣peare
for all his boasting, that he hath tooke his levell
with a false deceitfull eye. Hee first flatters you
and tels you, that your Honour advanceth truth, and
nothing more, and presently after complaines, that the
lose followers of truth and peace are pursued, (hee

meanes himselfe, and his faction) and so the two sacred
Sisters are forced by humorists. Upon whom this will
reflect, I leave to your wisedomes to consider. Hee is
not ignorant that you have broken the necke of this su∣perstition,
and favour not the followers of it. Against
me he complaines to the Kings Majestie that I have cru∣cified
Christ in his name, and have shamefully handled
the Church: heavy charges if I cannot avoid them;
For the first, I appeale to what I have written; for the
second, I am not guilty, unlesse affirming it to be unlaw∣full
to give a Church authority over Gods word, doe
make me to be so. For this opinion I know it to be one
of the maine props, and pillars of Antichrist, and it lives
and dies with him, and blessed bee God both are hast∣ning
to their end, but if I should hold my peace at this
time I should betray truth, which I abhorre to do. There
be many Malignant Spirits fit for a Malignant opinion
that doe yet plead for it. And some I know doe greatly
cry up this Mans booke; I have laboured to strippe this
superstition starke naked, that the ugly deformitie of it
may appeare, and what I have done herein I humbly
submit my selfe to your Honours grave censure, and
humbly crave of you pardon for my boldnesse. The
Lord watch over you for good, be a wall of fire round
about you, and the glory in the midst of you, keepe you
safe under his wings from the desperate plots of wicked
and unreasonable men, (as, his Name be eternally prai∣sed,
hitherto he hath done) till Babylon be laid in the dust,
and the King of glory appeare on Mount Sion in perfect
beautie; Thus prayeth

