


IN this unquiet age, I conceive, there is no∣thing so pertinent to a mans felicity, next to the enjoying of happy places, as to know where they are. And to think our neigh∣bouring Regions of Europe receive a greater share of prosperity than we in England, is (without doubt) a great mistake. Neither doth any part of the old World make such promises to all sorts of men as doth the New World, commonly called America. For he that shall desire to advance himself by his labour, will finde many places

where he may do it with much qui∣etnesse. He that shall desire to en∣joy much land, and live in a Civil Government under others, may finde places enough for him to pitch upon. He that shall desire to command a Countrey him∣self, and get into possession of it, without difficulty, wil finde many Islands fit for his turn, that are fruitfull and desolate, wanting In∣habitants, which at small charge may be transported thither. He that shall desire to be possest of great rich mines of gold and silver, and precious stones, and large Do∣minions, and withall hath but for∣titude, courage, and a reasonable English Gentlemans Estate, may by an ordinary Providence over him, attain to these great matters. And that man that shall have store of Commodities lie by him, which he cannot vent, although they are necessary for mans accomodation,

will finde here places, that he may exchange them at, to his great ad∣vantage.
But if the Decipherers of this Orbe had been as cautious in set∣ting down truths, as they have been prolixious in impertinencies, our Nation would certainly ere this have made greater advantages upon those Regions.
For, my part, as I am an English man, so I desire that name and people may grow great and famous and extend their authority and name beyond either Roman, Greci∣an, Assyrian or Persian Nations. And if from this discourse they may draw any thing that may prove for their Honour or Profit, I have my aim. And I shall assure them, I have related nothing but what my own knowledg or good intelligence perswades me is cer∣tainly true, which my future acti∣ons with Gods leave shall declare.

I have been plain in discourse of the Forreign Commerce of our Nation. All which I intended in a larger Volumn, but the Flemmings and Irish taking me in my com∣ming from those remote parts of America, took from me that grea∣ter relation, which I intended in∣stead of this Epitomie from thence, which I present with a resolution to submit to that common censure all Book-makers must undergo, but with confidence I have in this sub∣scribed my self
READER,

