



HAving ever reputed that command of God, first given in charge to the Prophet Ezekiel cap. 3. of his prophesie from verse 17. to verse 22. Son of man, I have made thee a watch∣man unto the house of Israel: therefore heare the word at my mouth and give them worning from me. When I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt surely die; and thou givest him not war∣ning, nor speakest to warn the wicked from his wicked way, to save his life; The same wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at thine hand. Yet if thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his wicked∣nesse, nor from his wicked way, he shall die in his iniquitie, but thou hast delive∣red thy soule. Againe when a righteous man doth turn from his righteousnesse, and commit iniquitie, and I lay a stumbling block before him, he shall die; because thou hast not given him warning, he shall die in his sinne, and his righteousnesse, which he hath done, shall not be remembred; but his blood will I require at thine hand. Ne∣verthelesse, if thou warn the righteous man, that the righteous sinne not, and he doth not sinne; he shall surely live because he is warned; also, thou hast delivered thy soul. Which command is again repeated and illustrated Chap. 33. from verse 2.10 verse 0. Having, I say, ever reputed that command of God to be an universal, everlasting rule of Prophesying, and so to concerne us Prophets and Teachers in the time of the Gospel, as wel as those Prophets and Seers in the time of the Law: the frequent and serious meditating thereon, sanctified unto mee by Gods Spirit, as it made me, ever since God honoured me with that Sacred, though now despised, calling of a Minister, to apply the exercising of that cal∣ling, upon all occasions so requiring, as much as I could to the observing that rule, notwithstanding the known opposition, slanders and reproaches, that I met with therein; so of late years, since the wickednesse of the wicked hath so su∣perabounded in this Nation, and the righteousnes of the righteous hath so decayed, and the sword of the Lord hath therefore wasted and devoured from one end of the land to the other: I have devored my selfe in a manner wholly to that ser∣vice, both in private and publike by speaking, preaching, and other wayes of
warning, as opportunities were offered, and God inabled. And though very lately, upon the calling to minde the successe that I had in some former warn∣ings, (being therefore, with the Prophet Jeremiah smitten by the tongue of those whom I faithfully endeavoured to keep from being smitten with the sword, and imprisoned by these whose liberty from that and other judgements I earnestly supplicated) I had once, with the same Jeremiah, resolved to have spoken no more in Gods name to men so perverse and obstinate;
Jer. 20.9. yet his word was in mine heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing and I could not stay: or to use Davids expression, I was for a time dumb with silence, and held my peace even from good, and my sorrow was stirred. My heart was hot with∣in mee,
Psa. 39. while I was musing the fire burned: then spake I with my tongue; or, to come neerer to that prophet with whom I began (and all three without either boasting or falsifying) I remained, some daies, at Ezekiel did immediately be∣fore he received that rule of prophesie but now named, astonished among the people, astonished at what I saw and heard dayly committed by them, astonished at their impudence and hard heartednesse, astonished with sorrow and indignati∣on at both,
Eze. 3.15. and astonished with thinking what I should doe to deliver my own soule from such a wicked generation; till at last, the same word that came to Ezekiel, did from him (and, I hpe, by the same spirit, though not in the same manner that it came to him) come to my thoughts againe and againe; and then God was pleased to rouse and quicken my spirit, so that my soule could no longer rest, till I had once againe delivered her from the guiltinesse of the blood of others by telling these whom it concerned, what I apprehend from Gods word hath already pulled on them the guilt of others bloods, and will, if not speedily prevented pull much more, even to the devastation and desolation of this whole Nation, and to the inevitable ruine and destruction of their owne soules. And to whom amongst all that are concerned, should I rather, or can I better direct my speech then to you of this County? whether I consider mine own obligati∣ons, or your present state and condition? My obligations to this County, and to some of you in particular, are such and so great, that I desire no longer to breath then whilest I shall be willing to spend my breath in the acknowledgement of your favours, and in the returning you the best thanks and, service, that I am able, for them. And such and so deplorable is your present state and condition, that should, I professe with Isaiah. That, Therefore are my loynes filled with pain, pangs have taken hold upon mee, as the pangs of a woman that travelleth, I was bowed downe at the hearing of it,
Isae. 21.3. I was dismayed at the seeing of it; or should I wish with Jeremiah, That my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountaine of teares, that I might weepe day and night in the lamenting of it.
Ier. 9.1. I should professe no more nor wish no other, then what your present state and condition require, and what I have already in some part performed for you. To you therefore, to you, my Ho∣noured and dearely beloved Country-men, doe I here humbly present this faith∣full and faire warning, and with it my self to suffer or to rejoyce with you, for you, or by you, as God and you shall please, and as well beseemes him, that seekes you, and not yours, the Kingdom's peace, and not the favour of any in the kingdome, the honour of the Church, not any dignity in it, and Gods Glory and the restablishment of his Truth in and above them all.

