



Most dread Soveraign!
BEsides that your try∣alls have taught you Moderation, toge∣ther with magnanimity; your Majesty learned both of im, that not only lived in
 both, but (oh horrour!) dyed for them. So that now your Moderation (as well as your Magnanimity) is become not only your erudition, and your Religion, but even your na∣ture also. VVitness those your Gracious Letters, and Pro∣clamations; the perfect model of a mind that is truly mode∣rated with all graces and ver∣tues: and so the abler to mo∣derate others, VVhich made me the more affraid of this presumption, of casting in this my small Dropp, into that immense Sea of yours: (al∣beit
 it were towards the quenching of our intestine conflagrations) and of light∣ing so dimme a Candle, before so bright and glorious a Sun. But (Great Sir!) I re∣member, I saw (on your bles∣sed Birth day) a Starre at noon-day, look out with con∣stant lustre, though before, and near the then shineing Sun. Our Nativity-spel∣lers (who were not a little guilty in promoting the men of our portentous shame and misery, to be what they were, and do what they did; through
 their delusions meeting with those of their own) durst ne∣ver meddle with this famous natalitiall Star; not so much as once to peepe at it. They know well I (for my part) am no Astrologer to Progno∣sticate. Yet can I (with so∣briety I hope) affirme from a more sure word of prophesy, it was a Light that shined, though in a dark place, to their Art; but in a light place, to your, and our hopefull Expectation (and we did well to attend it) till the day of Your, and Your
 Kingdomes happynesse, should dawne; and that great day-Starre, both by His Graces and Comforts arise in Your heart. This day-Starre did signifie to our hopes; That although the morne∣ing of Your life might be somewhat (alas too much) benighted with afflictions: yet the noon-day of your fe∣licity (and the Lord God promote it to be a perfect day) should shine cleare. That you are chosen as a Starre, to shine before the Sunne of Righteousness.
 That He that had his ex∣traordinary Starre at His birth, was pleased to vouch∣safe you yours also; that was borne to be his Vicege∣rent here on Earth. To the end the wise-men of our Kingdomes might be guided in the right way, to come and honour you. And with∣all, that we the lesser Starrs might not be over dampt, in our presumeing to ap∣proach the glorious Sun of your Majestie. Where∣upon (most Excellent Mo∣deratour, both of Church,
 and State!) I am bold to crave accesse in presenting you with a slender specula∣tion of that, whereof you are known the eminent Pra∣ctitioner. Bold again, to say; It is sufficiently known to your self; what the Im∣moderation of zeale, Male∣contentednesse, Ambition, Covetousnesse, Fraud, and Force, hath both machi∣nated and perpetrated, to the distraction (well nigh the destruction) both of Church and State. But blessed be the great God of Heaven
 and Earth! who hath made good unto us that old max∣ime: no immoderate thing is diuturnall. And this (we trust) you will make, and find as good: Nothing is to be firmely founded, or established in either of them, but upon Mode∣ration alone. Theres no doubt therefore, but your Sacred Majesty will be piously, and prudently a∣ctive, and ordering in it. All the fear is, least we our selves might fayle in the passive, or observing part
 thereof. God grant there∣fore, we may make it our maxime also. Nothing can be easy, sweet, and safe to us (in our lives, Religion, Consciences, Lawes, Liberties, Pro∣prieties) without it. With∣out it, we can never agree in the exercise of our Du∣ties, either to God, or Man. Without it, we shall be tedious to our selves, and troublesome to one another. Without it, we shall but wrangle, or wanton away our hopefull peace and prosperi∣ty
 againe: though that hy∣deous outrage, with the grievous oppression, and more then Moorish Sla∣very, that ensued there∣upon, be not as yet suf∣ficiently (nor ever can be) abhorred, and bewayled. For this cause I have at∣tempted (as I was able) to make known this ver∣tuous Moderation in the Truth, and Fruits of it: that men might so learne, and labour after their own happynesse. Having mine in this, to be made known
 (among others) to be one endeavoring (by Gods grace) still, as heretofore, to mo∣derate my self, as becometh

