







Right Honourable, right Worshipfull, &c.
ALthough my body be im∣prisoned, yet (I blesse the Lord for it) my soule is free; so free, that I fear not what man can do unto me. Tis not then to begg your helpe for my inlargement, or to crave your
support under my sufferings during my re∣straint, that I thus addresse my selfe unto you. God is my refuge and strength, a very present helpe in trouble; Therefore will I not feare, though the earth be moved, and though the mountaines be carried into the midst of the Sea: though the waters thereof roare, and be troubled; though the mountaines shake with the swelling thereof, Psal. 46. I have so much faith (praised be the Author and giver thereof) as to beleeve that some mountaines shall be removed and cast into the Sea;
Mat. 11.24. and then perhaps the Sea (as upon the casting forth a runaway rebel, Jona. 1.) will cease from her raging. But whether she doe or not, I trust I shall never be of so little faith, as over-much to be afraid of mine owne sinking. The true reason of my flying to you at this present, is, in plain tearmes, this: What externals soever I either now possesse, or have hitherto sub∣sisted by, I have received from God by the hands of one, or more, of you; and therefore before I am denuded or spoyled
of what I have (which some have threat∣ned) I would have the world know where I had it; otherwise, I should suspect that my ingratitude might betray it into their hands that are ready to catch at it. Some∣thing I confesse I have by your meanes, though from the same fountaine, more then is visible; and some thanks I must reserve for you, more then is expressable. This poore, but sincere (Exhortation to Peace, sent forth in these times of tumultuous in∣surrections, will, I hope, render me to you, and to all that shall chance to peruse it, a true Sonne of Peace, and a peaceable Son of Truth. And if no other return should be made you for what ye have adventured in so weake a vessell, I am confident yee would not thinke it lost; so intirely doe ye love, and so highly doe yee prise both those graces, in whomsoever you finde them. But if God shall vouchsafe, amongst many petitioners, to heare my prayers for Peace, you shall be sure to feele that I am a Sonne of Prayer too, by the blessing of
Peace, which I shall never cease to pray for, upon you and all yours, with as many o∣ther as love the peace of our Jerusalem. And this I am assured ye will accept as the proper retribution of a poor prisoner, and

