



Honoured and Beloved in the Lord.
THe substance of this Tract
was through the Lords help
preached lately in your ears,
and is of right now present∣ed
to your eyes, that through
his Grace, it may the better
reach your hearts. The subject thereof is
as seasonable as its excellent. The Lord

make it yours as profitably, as its made yours
affectionately. The choice usefulness of
its provisions will make full Amends for
the plainness of its Order and Dress. Its
not my work to tickle and flatter you, but
to reach healing and food to your souls. A
Signal hand of Heaven brought me over
and fixed me here near five years ago; by
the same good hand have I been kept here
in the Lords charge ever since.Deut. 8. 2, 3, &c. We have
had much cause still to mind and improve
the wonderful dealings of our God towards
us from that very day, as in former sea∣sons.
Variety of Dispensations hath he
carried us through both publiquely and per∣sonally.
Visits of Iudgement, and then
of Mercy, we have had from him again
and again. No wayes hath he left unat∣tempted
that might do us good, though
our Returns have not been answerable. The
Sword, Famine and Plague ranged in these
parts upon Gods Errand at my first coming,Ezek. 14. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
and continued a considerable time. I was
thereby occasioned to contribute my utmost
by the Lords Aid, to the relief and cure
of mens souls and bodies. It was then my

cordial delight and desire to spend and be
spent for the good of Limrick; as the same
is still my design and labour through the
assistance of Heaven. The Voyce of Gods Rod
cryed loud to this City then, that the man of
Wisdom might observe his Name who had ap∣pointed
it,Micah 6. 9. in hearing his Rod. Our Hea∣venly
Physitian saw it best then to diet and
physick us, suiting his Prescripts to our di∣stempers.
Few in this place did miss of
a Touch; the deeper smartings of many
among us warned all the rest. Our sins
deserved much worse from his hand, yet
he afflicted us very favourably. In the
midst of wrath he remembred mercy,Habac. 2. 2. and stayed
his rough wind in the day of his East wind.Esay 27. 6, 7, 8. Af∣ter
Purgations he gave us Cordials, and turn∣ed
in due time our mourning into joy.
Thanksgivings followed our humiliations,Psalm 30. 11. John . 9.
and our bitter waters were turned into sweet
Wine. The Springs of Elim followed our
Marah,Psalm 126. 5. and they reaped in joy,Heb. 12. 11. that had
sown in Tears. If the peaceable fruit of that
Rod may in Righteousness appear among
us, the Glory will be his, and the Comfort
ours. If our ill humours have been kind∣ly

removed, it will best appear in the right
use of our health. If any grow wanton af∣ter
Recovery, shame and sorrow will be
their portion. It glads my heart that Gods
Word and Works have not been quite fruit∣less
in the midst of us; yet I cannot but la∣ment
with a bleeding soul the sad improve∣ments
of his renewed Kindness.Esad 5. 3, 4. &c. What
could more be done for us then he hath
done? Why then is our fruit so wild and
so empty? That it proves better with any
of us, its of his Grace; that divers others
seem to grow still worse, its through their
fault. The Lord hath bestowed much cost
upon us,Heb. 6. 7, 8. but like the cursed Ground we bear
still many weeds. He hath not spared for
dressing or dunging: it will much aggra∣vate
their sin and judgement,Esay 5. 5. if any of us
remain still barren.Matth. 13. 24, 25. The good Husband∣man
hath cast in good seed in this Ground
of his, but the enemy hath crept in in the
dark to scatter his Tares. Multiplicious Er∣rors
still spread among us as in other parts,
which grow much faster then Christs spiri∣tual
Plants. Too many are found to play
with their Light, and abuse it to do the De∣vils

work by. That good Word, which
proves savour of Life to some,2 Cor. 2. 16, 17. proves too of∣ten
savour of Death to others. The Spirits
of divers are grown so childish, that neither
Barnabas nor Boanerges will please their Pa∣late.Act. 4. 36.
God hath restored us to health and
plenty;Mark. 3. 17. but many souls are still diseased and
starved. Sinful Infection troubles all Rela∣tions,
yet is little felt, because spiritual. Much
malignity attends those ill humours which
work so strangely and perniciously. Some
are Brain-sick with giddy Notions, and
others heart-sick with feavourish Affecti∣ons.
The Heads of some labour with Con∣vulsions;
the Vitals of others suffer defecti∣ons.
Spiritual Lethargies benumb some in∣to
sleep and mortal dreams; raging Phren∣zies
do inflame some others. Some are mer∣rily
mad with pleasing Conceits; others
melancholy through a sullen spirit: Lethal
Apoplexies take some few suddenly; and
spiritual Palsies seiz upon others more gra∣dually.
Some have lost Appetite to the dain∣ties
of Heaven; others seem to hunger, but
digest not well. Spiritual Rickets do possess
divers, and sinful Gouts trouble not a few.

Various obstructions disorder mens souls,
whence the disfiguring of their Life and
Acts. Internal stoppages often discolour the
external man; the falling-sickness and the
swounding fits do also take turns in souls
and Societies. Consumptions and Dropsies
appear so visibly, that they prognosticate but
Ominous things. Sad Symptoms are seen
in mens faces and speech, their tongues and
breathings concurring therewith. If you feel
their pulse and Beatings of heart, you may
soon descrie Syncopal Tokens. Schirrhus's
and hardness are easily felt; swellings and
sores manifest themselves. Thus this world
appears a sinful Hospital for the God of
mercy to give visits to. What comes away
from men, proves a Semeiotick that points
at the Cure by sad Characters. The Causes
of such dangerous Affects must needs be va∣rious
and multiplicious. Diseases compli∣cate
and inveterate, bespeak a difficult and
a dubious Cure. Secresie and strength add
much to that evil, besides senslesness and un∣ruliness.
Disorder in food and in exercise with
sloth and slumber aggravate the same Strains
and Ruptures with Dislocations, Tumors

and Wounds manifest more evil. Humours
and spirits being distempered do soon dis∣order
the substantial parts. Excess in Reple∣tion
and vacuity, in number and extent, still
do make it worse. Retention of evil & wast∣ing
of good, do both testifie the method of
help. Indications thus being so various, its no
wonder if the cure be slow both in Church
and State. Purgations total and particular,
must attend diet, rest and all due help. Both
the Patients care and all Assistants, will be as
needful as the Physitians skil. Politick Phy∣sitians
and Ecclesiastical had need look to
Christ for skil, strength, success. Choice and
cordial Preservatives, Alexipharmacks are
often needed, where malignity doth infest
mens souls. Industrious Care and painful
attendance will be found herein of exceeding
need. The Ladies hand and the Eagles eye,
with the Lions heart, will help very much in
all such dressings. Seek therefore and wait
for that Soveraign Aid without which no
means can find a Blessing.Phil. 2. 12, 13, Observe his Pre∣cepts,
taking what he gives,Rom 9. 16. carefully forbear∣ing
what he doth forbid. Fear to displease
Christ, our Gospel-Phoebus, that must teach

and prosper AesculapsAn eminent Physitian, the Son of the Sun among Poets. labours. That
Sun of Righteousness will rise with healing wings
to all such as love and fear him above
All.Mal. 4. 2. Neglect then no means appointed
by him;2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. abuse not the means by resting
thereon.Esay 64. 5. His All-sufficient Grace believe and
expect for his own Glory in each of his
Wayes.Psalm. 37. 4, 5, &c. If he make you smart,Prov. 3 6. its for your
good that you may be healed on the best ac∣count.Heb. 12. 10.
Here is an Antidote fitted to our Case,
the good Lord bless it to you and to me. Be
helpful to me that I may help you at the
Throne of Grace, so shall we find him our
present help still. His Grace will sure be suffici∣ent
for us,Eph. 6. 13, 19. and his strength shall be perfected in
weakness.Col. 4. 3, 4. I shall as heartily rejoyce in your
good as if it were mine;Psalm 46. 1. and shall design to
be,2 Cor. 12. 9. through the Renewed supplies of Christs
Holy Spirit,

From my study
in Limrick,
11. 11./Januar. 23. 1656.
