


SIR, as I am rejoyced to see the late works of your reverend brother in law my honoured Friend, Doctor Sander∣son; So for our mother Cambridge sake, I count it among my felicities to find our Country-man,
Dr. Hall. and by much our elder brother in that Arcademy, (a modern right Reverend Father of the Church) still increasing his voluminous, sweet and pious writings, and like a true celestial plant, bringing forth more fruit in his age; And that comfort is increased by behold∣ing you also (though constantly employed upon a Cure) so enabled to afford the world such a testimony as these papers present of solid Theology; amongst which after my perusal of the great pains and methodical clearing of that subject con∣cerning our last resolution of faith divine, into Divine Scripture; and your colle∣ction to that end of so many and so con∣vincing arguments, I could not refrain my Pen from gratulating to you this
work, so highly conducible to the glory of God, in the exaltation of his holy Word; and to the edification of milli∣ons of souls, who shall enjoy the happi∣nesse of being much confirmed and com∣forted in their most precious faith, by those assistances in your Book: for the speedy Edition whereof I do not only hereby solicite, but charge you on the behalf of our only Lord and Master Christ Jesus, and of his Spouse the Church of God our dear Mother; assuring my self that as thereby you shall distribute blessings, so many blessings from others shall redound unto your self, both in re∣putation and in their prayers, and thanks∣givings to God for you.
We deny not what they of the Romane perswasion say, That the tradition of the Church is a great testimony; yea, take the universal Church in all ages, including that of Christ and his Apostles, and plain reason and experiment will enforce all men to acknowledge that a Divine testi∣mony. To which when that key hath let us in to the Scripture it self, we find a light which manifests both it self and other things, and so we have a second te∣stimony internal and both Divine.
The fallacy then is found in making the Churches inducing testimony to be the only or the principal, and then in affirm∣ing this attestation to the present Church of Rome; from whom we must (if they may prevail) receive these two things on trust. That first, theirs is the Catholick Church; (as meer a Bull as that Tiber is
all Rivers, or a whole Palace is in one room.) And secondly, that he who must be the head of the Church (though some∣time confessed to be no true member) is absolutely infallible.
Concerning which pretended infallibi∣lity so long time contended for (though doubtlesse their learned men hold and know it a point ridiculous, for in time of three Antipopes at once, chairing them∣selves at Rimini, at Bologne, and Abignon, about 1429. to which head was then this biggen of Infallibility bound?) it hath now pleased God in this last age to pro∣duce amongst us such worthies, as have beaten down this Babel of papal pride, and levell'd it with the ground. I mean this chiefly, by that monumental piece The conference of Bishop Laud with Fisher, and Mr. Chillingworth's Book against Knot, another of the Jesuits: On both which one made this Epigram;
Two little Wills, Both understandings great,
Did fond Infallibility defeat.
That Supreme Sconce, call'd Fisher's folly won
Next Knot their gordian knot was quite undon
And for a further manifest of this, I refer you to a book of Hugh Paulin de Cressie, once a Dean in Ireland, and Pre∣bend of Windfor, who is gone over to Rome and published the motives of his conver∣sion. I read his book newly extant in Essex, from the hand of a very worthy Matron, Ms. B. a zealous Papist, and shewed her therein where he openly con∣fesses That infallibility is a word unfor∣tunate. That Mr. Chillingworth hath com∣bated
against it with too too great suc∣cesse. He wishes the Word were for∣gotten, or at least laid by: That we Pro∣restants have in very deed very much to say for our selves when we are prest un∣necessarily with it; and advises his Ro∣mists, that we may never be invited to combate the authority of their Church under that notion; And professes no such word as Infallibility is to be found in any Council, &c. Magna est veritas &c.
We and they must of force yield to that of St. Paul, Eph. 5.8. We were dark∣nesse (in the abstract) and all our light in Dom. are now light in the Lord. But how? Certainly that Oriens ab Alto; that great Bishop of all our souls, doth baptize all true believers with the holy Ghost, and with the celestial fires of his Grace: But since this Arch-prelate and univer∣sal Superintendent (for properly all cure of souls, all Baptism and confirma∣tion is from that our Lord and Saviour Christ Jesus, and he) is in heaven, and his spirit must descend to and into us; which is the Aquaeduct, the ventiduct, the Luci∣duct; which way doth Christ in his spirit and graces convey this holy water; this gentle air, this blessed light to our spirits?
Why, look back to the Creation; How came light at first? First the spirit moves and broods o're that which was a depth and darknesse; and then his mighty Word, Fiat Lux. He spake, and it was Light; then when all was dark, he made material light: and Christ Jesus is the
word, ; for as speech is the image of the mind, so he the brightnesse of his Father's glory, and the expresse image of his person, Heb. 1.3. The immaterial and eternal light of light, that was never made. And the Divine spirit goes that way still, by the Word: His word is, and makes light. This world is God's great book, wherein as in a glasse of wonders, we discern him. But his word is the true myrror of his mind: And as God en∣grav'd his form on his Son before all worlds, so what that Son is, and what the father is to us in him, the spirit procee∣ding from both delivers in the book of his word. The Sun guilds and enamels clouds and streams and hill tops with his rays, but thrusts his own pure light, his own living fires through the bodies of the stars; so other authors can but yield a faint reflexion of that beam which here is native and direct; The very Law God styles a flaming light; the Prophesies a more sure word, to which we do well to attend as to a light shining in a dark place, till the day dawn, and the day-star arise in our hearts. But the Gospel is called his marvellous light: He brought life and immortality to light through the Gospel, 2 Tim. 1.10. And in Acts 26.16. I have appeared to thee, saith our Saviour to that choice vessel of his grace and name to make thee a Minister, and a wit∣nesse, &c. And now I will send thee to the Gentiles: To what end? for a glo∣rious end: To open their eyes, and to turn them from darknesse to light; from the
power of Satan unto God. And acord∣ingly speaks that Apostle, If our Gospel be hid (2 Cor. 4.3, & 4. verses) 'tis hid in them that perish, in whom the god of this world hath blinded their unfaithful minds, that the light of the Gospel of the glory of Christ, who is the image of God, should not shine unto them. And in the 6. verse, he shews the walk and circuit of this light: God who command∣ed light to shine out of darknesse, hath shined in our hearts, (there first, and then the casting of the beam) to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus. Doth not S. Paul say, It is both the wisedome and power of God to salvation to every one that believeth? and is not that enough to give all men full satisfaction and acquiescense? what a large field lies open for the further clearing this truth, in those assertions in the fathers. Saint Chrysostome calls the holy Scriptures Lamps of Verity before our eyes.
Hom. 23. in mad. Serm de Temp. 237. And S. Austin, ad Lucernam Scripturae ambulaing. Gregorie of Valentia a Jesuit consesseth as much and diverse Pontificians in plain terms, as Holcoth and Bellarmine himself cries up the Scripture with a nihil notius, nihil certius;
Bell. de verbo dei, lib. 1. c. 2. and cries him down for the veriest fool who believes not their testi∣mony; and in the 2 cap of the same book is in his superlatives, with Scriptura cer∣tissima & Tutissima Regula credendi. He trouble you but with one more, but one instar omnium. 'Tis he that in a traiterous itch of wit, took on him purposely the
wresting and prophaning of Scripture, that so he might lewdly abuse our Princes and our Church? Yet mark, (as God compelled the Divel to testifie of Christ) what he is forced to say, and sure 'tis worth our observation,
The book is Latine & called the Que∣ries. If I diminish him not in my English; There is in Scripture (saith he) an Invisible Majesty; an hidden splendor; a glory unperishable; a wise∣dome inexhaustible; the solace of humane and the beginning of a divine life; made by the holy spirit, and making our spirits holy; compared with which the Egypti∣an Sages will look pale and poor; the Chaldee impure; the Grecians blockish; Plato, no body; and Philosophy it self a fool; 'tis the print of Heaven on Earth; and if any where the joy of Paradise, or at least a brave resemblance of divine light be shewed; it is in Scripture con∣taining all that is severed from the actual vision of God himself: Again, The paper burns me not, yet am I all enflamed in reading it; 'tis no composure, no artifi∣cial tread the Scripture uses, yet am I drawn and wrapt to follow her, and she lifts me up beyond my nature; so that I am no more mine own, but with a sacred violence and new fire I am consumed, and compelled to acknowledge the voice of God that speaks therein. Thus far that Papist, and finally both Fathers, Schoolmen and later Pontificitians, freely confesse a double means to know the authors of divine Scripture; one eccle∣siastick, i.e. perpetual Church story,
Hal. 3.978. m. 2. which introduces Faith, saith all, Hales, as the
Seta doth the thrid; and the other to∣tally divine, which
lib. 2. d. pt. divine leg. Junilius and
Institu. l. 1. c. 16. Cas∣siodor, reckon ipsius Scripturae veritas, ordo rerum, consonantia preceptorum, modus locutionis, &c. And Scotus of 10. argu∣ments, takes divers from the internal mat∣ter and majesty of the Books. But Sir, I intended but a letter, and I find my style wandred into a little Homile. It is time to end with my apprecation for a blessing on your labours, and to let you find it under my hand, That I am Your

From Leice∣ster, Nov. 1. 1656.
