



Right Honourable,
THe subject of this Tract will sufficiently commend it self, from its own worth and your acquaintance therewith. The plain Garb wherein it doth appear, can give no just cause of disparaging it, to the judicious friends of Gospel-simplicity. There is like to be most of Power and Peace, where most of Purity cloathed with plainness. The many experien∣ces

afforded to you both, by the renewed Dispensations of the Lords gracious Provi∣dence in all former and latter Revolutions, may be revived to further Improvement through the blessing of Heaven, on your Ho∣nours perusal of these lines. The Peace of God is that Signal Mercy, which hath, through Grace, very deeply affected your Hearts, and to the promoting whereof, you have been many wayes, remarkably instrumental in your respective Spheres, through the Lords good hand. Many Considerations of weight do very much press the Authors spirit, which cannot but oblige him to publish his Chri∣stian respects due to your Honors, as by all other possible demonstrations, so by this way of Cordial Expression. If my poor la∣bours in this and other parts of Ireland, have been blessed in any measure, from above, to any person; such have much cause to ac∣knowledge you both, as the singular Means which the Lord employed for the procuring thereof. Your industrious Care of this Coun∣tries welfare, and renewed solicitations, on the best account, did occasion and hasten my coming over, near five year ago. Through

the same Labour of Love, continued and enlarged by you, towards the Servants and Service of Christ, upon his score, divers other Ministers of his, besides my self, have re∣ceived good Incouragement in his Work, in these and other parts. Your Reward is sure with the Lord, who is most mindful of the least kindness shew'd to any of his friends▪ He cannot forget the meanest Cup of Water, gi∣ven to the smallest, in the Name of a Dis∣ciple. Among the many choice favors be∣stowed on your Honors, by the Supreme Dis∣poser of all things; this is one of a prime Magnitude, that he hath given you both, such hearty Affections to the friends of Christ, as well as to his Peace and Interest. The benign Influence of such a gracious Constellation, is most obliging in such a season, wherein so many malignant Aspects are cast from all parts, upon the good Wayes and Servants of God. To prove still-fixed and radiant Lumi∣naries, when so many others blaze but like Comets, and like falling Stars, or wandring Meteors, is both your Honor and your Hap∣piness. Gods people in this place and in other parts, cannot but take special notice thereof;

having so much cause to observe it, to be a singular Return from the Throne of Grace to their fervent prayers, so constantly renewed on your behalf. That you may further reap the Joyful fruits of his Divine seed, in be∣ing still farther serviceable to his Glory and his peoples Comfort, proportionably to all your Eminent Relations and occasions, through the supplies of his holy Spirit, is the Cordial and incessant Request of him, who delights to be and appear

From my study at Limrick, March 23. 1656.
