


Grave Sir,
I Know no one so worthy of (so fit for) this my dedica∣tion, as your self; it is the u∣sual way of those that make books, to chuse a Patron that doth affect the Subject, but contrary to that custom, have I shrouded this my little Lark, under your protection, not doubting but you'l trim his feathers, (whether be have need or not;) what though you have prosessed your self an utter e∣nemy to the Subject I treat of, yet my more Christian thoughts will not suffer me to con∣clude, the Sun shall set, before your wrath be over; you being a Minister of Antiquity can∣not
be unacquainted with the Apostles, saying, let not the Sun goe down upon your wrath, it was the vigilancy of Anthony the great (who when he had seen the Souldiers qarrel∣ling one with another, not to suffer them to part enemies, he would perswade them with these words of St. Paul, Sol non occidat super iracundiam vestram.)
Charity will not suffer me to speak beyond the bounds of Christianity, in whose bounds I hope you are confined; it is true, you did (in a rage) rail against Astrologie, and its harm∣lesse Professors,
Card. Seg. 1. Aphor. 24. who never did you wrong, mean while, you came under Cardans lash, viz. Stulti negligunt & contemnunt A∣strologiam, qui contradicit, ambitiosus est, qui maledicit, fatuus, but not long after, (the galld horse back being toucht must wince) when we thought your rage to be over, in an unadvised manner did you show your self to the world in a more ugly shape than ever, ne∣ver considering, Coelum est instumentum, quo inferiora agit, impellit, regitque, the Heaven is Gods instrument whereby he wor∣keth, enforceth, and governeth all things; but what your madnesse could not vent in your clumsey Annotations, you thought your malice should in your buzzardly Vindications, with thanks to Mr. Calamy for allowing them the presse.
Is it not written, that the Priests lipps should preserve knowledg,
Seg. Card. A∣phor. 146. why should you then, being a Priest, instead of so doing, en∣deavour the contrary? hear Cardan again; Qi Artem aliquam destruit, longe dete∣rior
est imperito, nec vacat mens illius ma∣litia, desidia & ignorantia.
Certainly, had you the consideration of hu∣manity or Christianity before your eyes, you could never have thus transgress'd your bounds, so far, as to
The Godly man is like God, kind to all, lo∣ving to all, mer∣ciful to all, even to the un∣godly. Mat. 6. rail at, speak evilly of, the Person, Principle, or practice of any one, who bears Gods image, as you have in that ever-envious Vindication of yours; I am sure Christ is no precedent for you, in this, and he ought to be the precedent of Gospel Mi∣nisters) nay Gamaliel (though a Heathen Doctor) was fuller of humanity. See Acts 5.
And now Sir let me tell you, by your wri∣ting thus for ostentation, you have belhed forth such horrid imprecations, which have wholy extenuated your veneration, in so high a manner, that were you young again, your writing nor preaching could never gain your lost commendation, your Pen hath made you so contemptible.
What scurrilous language hath dropt from your Pen
St. Paul came not with a rod but in the spi∣rit of meekness. Caveat Presbyt. Ioh. 8. against men you know not, as wi∣zards, witches, dealers with the Devil, hel∣hounds, Sicophants, with a thousand more non-Gospel phrases, which I should have concluded had dropt from tht mouth of one of hells fire-brands, and not from the pen of a Gospel-Minister, had not I seen your name to the Book?
Suppose some Astrologers had erred, were you the man that was so righteous as durst to fling a stone. O Hypocrite pluck out first the beam, and then may you espie the more
the better, what if the Art happen to be abu∣sed by some spurii (non veri silii) artis, is your Divinity wholy free? nay, it hath the same nay the very same fortune, and here the common proverb may well be noted, viz. All
Note, Profes∣sors of a∣ny Sci∣ence the most guil∣ty, else why are Christi∣ans now a days led into such doubtful disputati∣ons, when love and peace are the path∣way to Heaven? Rom. 14. Sciences have their imperfections: some pretended Di∣vines are not so good as they should, that makes the Gospel thus neglected, which gave occasi∣on to Mr. Powell (in his Sermon to the Parlia∣ment) to say, that generally they minded their wages more than their work.
Nay, I believe, all pretenders to Astrologie are not so honest, as I could wish; but what is this to the purpose, are all to be blamed for some mens Errors? no wise man will so de∣termine; it may be upon better consideration, you may see your error, and be sorry, to the end you may, I will give you notice of one shrewd slip, in your Vindication, in p. 57. you give us to understand, you made your a∣bode at the House of a virtuous Gentlewoman in Essex, when you were young, whose Hus∣band did (as you pretend) invite you thither to teach him Hebrew, yet in p. 33. you pro∣fesse to have but little skill therein your self; were I your Antagonist, I should make this construction, viz. seeing the contradiction in your own words, that your residence there, was not so much for the Gentlemans instructi∣on, as for the virtuous Ladies (and your own) satisfaction, for sure I am, the un∣hallowed Priests were no more privileged from the sin of Lecherie, than was the righte∣ous Iudah, see Gen. 38. in earnest, what e∣ver else you had put in the room, you had
better have kept this out; but its not my work to teach you, the oversight it self may make you more careful hereafter.
Now I come to tell you the reason of my de∣dication, and that's this, all along in your Vindication you desire to be better inform'd concerning Astrologie, that you might not die unsatisfied (you being antient) I have taken pains in the subsequent trackt, (presuming Mr. Lillye's Introduction never came to your hand) to fulfill your desires, if you deem it (by reason of brevity) insufficient, I refer you to Mr. Lilly's Introduction, where (unlesse Pharaoh's curse hangs on you) you may be ful∣ly informed of the Principles of this much-ho∣noured (but by you despised) Art. I conclude, desiring you (if your malice will not permit you read this little tract) yet (seeing 'tis yours by dedication) lay it up in your study among your other books, among whom I assure you, you have none (for I think you had never the like honour done you) dedicated with more good will;
Dyonis. that you may now cast off your envious robes, they being like Apollo's cloath of gold cloathing, nec estati nec hyemi vestis haec convenit, not sit to be worn neither in Sum∣mer nor winter, shall be the earnest desire of him, who upon the like occasion will be sure to make use of you for a Patron.

