



Right Honourable,
THe Glory of the latter daies consists very
much in their godly Magistrates; and the
Glory of those Magistrates in their promo∣ting
of Christs Glory. When the Lords
Spirit would give an abstract of heaven on
earth,Isa. 49. 23. he promises Kings and Queens for nursing Fathers

and Mothers to his Church. Thus Portion and Pro∣tection
are assured to his people, on the most honoura∣ble
and happy tearms.Psal. 82. 1.  The Lord himself is pleased to
put his own Name upon those persons to whom he
gives a providentiall Commission to act in his Name,Psal. 82 5. 
with civil Authority in the managing of his interest on
earth. He hath said Ye are Gods, by a providentiall
voice, that ye might act like God, and for God, in sub∣ordination
to his providence.Psal. 47. 9. Such Shields of the earth
belong unto him in a peculiar way, which are made by
him, and must act for him in a peculiar manner. He
needs no instruments about any work, yet is he pleased
to honour instruments about his greatest work.1 Sam. 2. 30. Its Your
Honour to be employed by him, he makes it Your
Happiness to be faithfull to him. That he will employ
Ministers of his Word to instruct his Church, it's from
his Grace; that he doth intrust Magistrates with his
Sword for the protection of his Church, it's for his Glo∣ry.
Both Jewell and Case, mans Soul and Body were
framed by him, as God of Nature; both Soul and Bo∣dy
were by his Sonne redeemed, as the God of all
Grace. Both the internall and externall man do need
his Spirit for the good of both: Magistrates and Mini∣sters
are called to Office,Ezra 1. and blessed therein, by the
same Spirit.Ezra 2. &c. Moses and Aaron were joined of old in or∣dering
Christs Law:Hag. 1. Zerubabell and Joshua were not
severed in the restoring thereof.Zech. 1. Though Primitive
Churches wanted,Zech. 3. for a season, the Magistrates help, yet
in due season were they made partakers of that Royall
favour.Zech. 4. 10. They wanted them first, that Gods glory might
not, on mistake, be given to man; they had them a∣gain,
that the same Glory might not be still abused by
man. No sooner did Antichrist make incroachments
on Christs Ministry, but he usurped as fast on his Ma∣gistracy;

he swallowed up that,Rev. 13. 1, 7, 8. Rev. 13. 11, 12. as the two horned
Beast, Ecclesiastically; and he subdued this, as the ten
horned Beast, Politically. Christ recovered both from
Antichristian Yoke in his great Reformation, as both
had been usurped from him, by Antichristian defection.
When he took care to purifie his Church in its Mini∣stry,
he shewed no less care about the Magistracy. As
some of both sorts have witnessed for him in a sackcloth
condition; so some of both sorts shall witness of him
in a seasonable ascension.Rev. 11. Jer. 3. 14, 15. Jer. 30. 21. When he gives his people
Pastors after his own heart, he gives them Rulers to
govern in his waies. Thus he acts by men after the
manner of men, because he deals with men in the
things of God. The world is his great house that must
be well taught; but it's through sinne, a discomposed
house that needs a good Rule. Gods interest is such
in faithfull Rulers, that Satan will be still attempting
all means to blast their faithfulness; if he cannot keep
them from doing Gods work, he will use instruments
to marre that very work. Much of it appeared in for∣mer
experiences, and we see it too sadly in these latter
daies. Good men shall be seduced to betray Gods
work, yea and perswaded that it's Satans work. That
which the Lord doth tender with most zeal, Error will
perswade to slight with most neglect: If God put much
stress on the first Table of his Law, Error will take it
off from the Magistrates care. What many other
parts have sadly bewailed, we finde now much cause
to bemoan afresh. That spirit that once disturbed
Germany, is gotten too deeply into our bowels. Christs
Ministers were first struck at by that hand, which
reached the next blow to the Magistrates. Those
Foxes and Wolves that would worry Christs Flock,
cannot bear good will to faithfull Shepherds. They

would first debauch the spirits of men, and then their
bodies will be surely theirs. The Ministers first shall
be Antichristian,Sisidan. Com∣ment. Bullinger. Cloppenburg. Guy de Bres. and the Magistrates shall bear that
title next. Munster had once many fair warnings,
but the things of their peace were hid from their
eyes. If we gain wisdom by our neighbours harm,
it's a mercy of the choicest kinde. That good hand
of heaven that brought Your Honours into this
wilderness, hath much to do here for you, and by
you. Israels condition in their wilderness, is a most
lively parallell of this Land.1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4. They had Christ pre∣sent
in his Ordinances,Psal. 106. 13. but wanted a heart to im∣prove
the same: Signall redemptions the Lord
wrought for them, but his wondrous works they
had soon forgotten:Numb. 16. 3, 4 16. 25. Magistrates and Ministers he
provided them, but they slighted and scorned the
one and the others: Holy profession God called
them to, they soon abused it to self-exalting: Mo∣ses
and Aaron were easily despised, when Corah and
his crue had once got their hearts. When Di∣vine
Ordinances were counted humane,Psal. 106. 19, 20, 28, 29. humane
presumptions were counted Divine. Their Level∣ling
spirits that would equalize all, soon met with
a check from their Superior. They sank alive in∣to
the earths bowels,Numb. 16. 32 that bid defiance to the God
of heaven.Psal. 106. 17. The Lords jealousie maintained his ser∣vants,
who had zealously maintained his Name.Numb. 16. 35.
They were soon consumed by fire from Gods
house,Psal. 106. 18. who made it their work to fire Gods house.
They regarded not his daily provisions,Psal. 106. 15. and they
paid dear for foolish desires. When the Lords ser∣vants
were doing them most good, they were then
plotting to do them most evil. Thus are they our
glass and our pourtraiture,1 Cor. 10. 6, 11 that we may the better

learn to mend our faults. Moses had to do with
a froward people, Your Honours charge here looks
too much like them.Joh. 1. 14, 16. 1 Cor. 1. 30. The wisdom and zeal He
received from God are stored up in Christ for all
Your supplies. That Christ who was all to Him
and to them,Ephes. 1. 23. is ready to give all to You and to
us. His Substitutes You are, who is our Sove∣reign;
that His work in Your hands may be pros∣perous,
is our ardent prayer. The Magistrates
Right is the scope of these Papers; duly there∣fore
presented to You,1 Sam. 2. 30. Exod. 19. 5.  to do their homage. They
speak Your Honour and Your Happiness, in Your
honouring and serving the Lord. His Jewels on
earth he trusts with You,1 Pet. 2. 9. . 2 Chro. 15. 2. that his Worship and
friends may be Your Jewels. The Lord is with
You, whilst You be with Him, if any forsake Him,
such will He forsake. The glorious characters of
His presence with You, to this very day, may
much revive Your hearts, and strengthen Your
hands. He hath been with You as the Lord of
Hoasts, He will be Yours still, as the God of
Peace. That You may do much, expect much
from Him, so shall Your Returns answer Your Re∣ceipts.
Those unclean spirits that are now raging
shall soon be cast out by the Prince of Peace.Hag. 2. 6, 7, 8. He
doth overturn and shake all Nations,Ezek. 21. 27. that Christ
the desire of the Nations may come.Heb. 1. 26, 27, 28, 29. That King
of Nations shall regain his right,Jer. 10. 7. which as King
of Saints he will still improve.Revel. 15. 4. Your Honours
daily work is multiplicious and momentous still;Exod. 17. 11, 12. Aa∣rons
and Hurs hands must be subservient to uphold
your own. It's our delight to serve You cordially,
that You may serve Christ most effectually. I dare

not presume any longer on You than to signifie my
zealous ambition, to be and appear in the work of
Christ,

From my Study in
Limrick, Decem. 22.
1656.
