



My loving friends,
WHat S. James so long since asserted, that the experience of our times hath confirmed: Where strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work, Jam. 3.16. A∣mongst other evils to which our divisions have been the midwife, corrupt opinions have been one most eminent, and amongst them, that which opposeth the birth-right of Christian In∣fants to the Covenant, and seal of initiation, hath been broacht with that confidence, as though the abettours bad hope, that that leaven would leaven the whole lump.
Not long after my coming to you, there was a book set forth by an ancient friend of mine, which because it was adorned with much art and reading (things formerly rare to be found in the writers for that o∣pinion,) there was almost as much triumph in it, as sometimes by the Philistines in their Goliah. And to say the truth, the camp of Is∣rael was not a little moved with it. Whereupon my self (as having more leasure then many abler) was called upon by divers friends to stand up in the defence of truth. And others with my self quickly made it ap∣pear, that the Authour in whom there was so much triumph, had ra∣ther put a better face on, then added any great strength to that errour. For all the arguments brought by him, save those that are ordinary in every Anti-paedobaptists mouth, were easily enough, and utterly quasht. The vindication of Infant-Baptisme which I first put forth: was part∣ly Cataskeuasticall to confirm the truth, partly Anaskeuasticall to refell the objections of the adversary, My learned opponent hath not yet publisht an answer to either, only in an Apology for the manner of his writing, tanquam canis ad Nilum, he hath here and there given a little touch about the matter. But a neighbour Minister hath at∣tempted
the oppugnation of these six arguments, which I made good for confirmation of Infant-Baptisme. His exceptions I here refute, together with what M. Tombes hath inserted materiall in his Apolo∣gy. And this Vindication of my former labour, I thought good to pre∣sent to you. That if providence should hereafter otherwaies dispose of me, this may remain as a testimony of my thankefulnesse to God and you. That with you in the time of Englands distraction, I found an haven of rest, with good help to a comfortable subsistance. And that by it you may be the better guarded against the Sophismes of those, that cease not to labour to draw Disciples after them.
The opposition that is made to truth, is to the conscientious lovers of it, an affliction that is grievous. Therefore to make some spirituall use of it, is not only a duty we owe to God, but a priviledge, which we our selves have need of to sweeten the bitternesse of the crosse: for a crosse never seems intolerable, after we finde it medicinable. There be two speciall uses that may and ought to arise from the controversy in hand.
First, to see further into the grounds of, and to be more setled in the truth. The questioning of a good title, though it make it not more firm, yet usually it renders it more cleer, because the grounds of its fir∣mitud, are by search found out and laid open. And so hath it been, and so ought to be with us of this present age, in this spirituall title of Chri∣stian Infants. And if any new grounds or arguments be added to cleer an ancient practise; In vain, and unjustly is that pretended to disparage the antiquity of the thing, which is vouchsafed of God as a fruit of the industry of his servants, whereof the opposition of the erro∣neous is sanctified of God to be an occasion?
2. A second use of the opposition of truth should be. That as we hold the right more firmly, so we should use it more holily, to cut off occasion from those that seek occasion. Antipadobaptists doe more oppose the use, by occasion of the abuses of Infant-Baptisme. Were it performed with that holines and solemnity, that it ought, it would cary more beau∣ty with it, and have lesse opposition against it. We should therefore study by the opposition and vindication of truth, to be excited to, and helpt in an holy and honourable use of that priviledge for our children. The more the grounds and nature of Infant-Baptisme are cleared, the bet∣ter may we be inabled to use it in faith. The more may we be moved to consider the wofull condition of our Infants, as they are from us, and
we from Adam; and so humble our selves the more, for that corrn∣ption, that is inharent in us, and propagated from us. The more may we see necessity of vertue to flow from Christ to ours, to restore them to the favour, and Image of God: and so to have this ordinance (of which only in infancy they are capable) sanctified to them, which works not naturally by the deed done, but morally by vertue of Gods blessing, which is to be procured by praier. This would not only quicken pa∣rents to cry for a blessing on this Ordinance to their Infants: but ingage them to chuse the time of most solemn Assemblies for it, when having the most and best praiers, they may more comfortably expect the bles∣sing of God on it. But I would not exceed the limits of an Epistle; Therefore with my daily praiers, that God would blesse this and my o∣ther labours to you, and glorifie his Word among you. I am

From my Study at S. Albanes, Octob. 14. 1646.
