



Right Honourable, and Religious LADIES:
IT is not any acquaintance with your Honours, that imboldens me to this dedication, for I am a stran∣ger to you; nor yet your deserved fame for your eminency, and sin∣cerity, in Religion, though that be so illustrious that it might ingage Godly Minister to be ambitious of your Patronage, But that assurance that I have, that both your Ladyships are affectionately serious against those irregular ways that I implead, and the service you may do to God by your inter∣est, in the furthering the acceptance of my poor labours to
be effectuall, where they may be of most use: for the Medi∣cine I administer is somewhat unpleasing, and harsh, and therefore needs the hands of Ladies for the application. And what Ladies can do it with more acceptance then your Ladiships; one of which cannot but be greatly respected, because the other, that first lay in her wombe, now lies in the bosome, of the chieftain Generall of those, whose actings, this Treatise doth concerne. Madam (for now I apply my speech to your Ladiship who hath been an ancient mother in our Israel) After the way that hath been called Puritanisme have I served the God of my fathers for somewhat above 33 yeares. And yet I beleeve by the same, that I have heard of your Ladiship, your Ladiship was spiritually in Christ long before me. And I may say as S. Paul (with a little alteration) that after the strictest way of that Religion I lived, and tasted deep for many years together, of such afflictions as either Chancelours Courts, or high Commisssion, were used to impose on men of my principles, and yet the dayes I see, and am like to see (unlesse the God of heaven gratiously inter∣pose) are far more dolefull then any yet that I have seen, For there is a mourning that is blessed, for it shall end in comfort, and such was that which then I met with, when my heart was smitten and withered like grasse, and by reason of the voyce of my groaning, my bowels did cleave to my skin, and I was pale with fasting, while mine enemies reproached me all the day; and there is a laughter, and triumph∣ing, which hath a wo denounc'd upon it, because it shall end in mourning and weeping. Luk. 6.21.25. And such is the joy and triumph in these dayes in successe in irregular ways. O Madam had such ways as are now in agitation been proposed to your dearly respect∣ed friend oldSee Bifield on 1 Pet. 2.13. where among other there is this passage. The Jesuites who maintain that horrid doctrine of de∣posing and murrthering Princes, are rather to be confuted with strokes, then arguments, as men that of∣fend not only against the lawes of God, but the lawes of nations, and nature. Mr. Bifield, with what an eye would he
have lookt upon them? Or let us suppose when our ancient worthies such as Cartwright, Traverse, Dod, Brad∣shaw &c. being calumniated by the Prelates for disre∣spect to authority, for not conforming to unlawfull ceremo∣nies, have replied that they did ascribe as much honour, and teach as much subjection to Magistrates as any in things lawfull and in things unlawfull, they shewed their respect by patient submission to suffering: Or when our Godly Polemicall divine, such as Jewell, Reynolds, Whitaker, &c. have rejected that false pretence of the Papist, that the Primitive Christians were so subject to the heathen Emperours, quia deerant vires tempo∣rales, because they wanted temporall strength; suppose I say, some one of the worst of Prelates or Jesuites, should have bespoke them, O ye hypocrites, or false hearted men, how do you dissemble with us, or let your hearts deceive you! for if over you be Masters of power, yee will tram∣ple under your feet all above you, that will not comply with you, yea you will imprison, attaint, murther your King; would our worthies have returned with lesse indignation, and acrimony then S. Paul to Elymas? O full of all subtilty, and mischief, O Children of the Devill, you enemies of righteousnesse, will you not cease to pervert the wayes of the Lord? Act. 13.10. And yet behold a generation risen up, who for the most part, have not known the brick-kilnes of Egypt that if they had so accused our worthies, would by their actions have made them true Prophets. Oh Madam, let us sit down and weep over our Religion, which these men have ravish'd and done her shame, and we whether shall we cause her shame to go? How shall we now looke Papists in the face? whom we have so reviled, and abhorred for their derogatory doctrine, and damnable practices against Kings, or any in supreme authority?
What shall we do with the Writings of our Worthies, shall we give over reading, as the manner of some is? or learn another trick of the Papists, and get an Index Expurga∣torius to blot out of their Writings such passages as cry guilt and shame on our actions? But affection hath almost made me forget the bounds of an Epistle. Therefore honorable Ladies, go on with assiduity, constancy, and in∣creasing servor to with-draw him (whom you so dearly respect) from society in actions so contrary to the honour of God and our Religion. Oh study, that it may never be said, That any person of Honor, and of the Protestant Re∣ligion, had any hand in so unworthy an action, as the depo∣sing and destroying of a King, whose preservation they stand bound to endevor by so many sacred Bonds. So shall your Ladiships do an office pleasing to God, Honorable to your relations, an ornament to your Religion, and unspeak∣ably usefull for your Native Country. And if as a poor means thereof, you shall present one of these poor Treatises to his Excellency, written on purpose to dispell those mists that a deceived Brother hath endevoured to cast before his eyes; your Ladiships shall deeply engage to be your Lady∣ships daily Orator at the throne of Grace
From my Study in Ivie-lane, Jan. 15. 1648.
Madams, 
