



Dearly Honoured, and Beloved in the Lord;
IT is good for man to draw
near to God,Psal. 73. 28. whose fellow∣ship
is the cheifest good, the
Fountain of all Good. The Psal∣mist
found still the choice ex∣perience
of that Divine Ora∣cle,
and therefore commended it so highly to
others. The very beginnings of spiritual ac∣quaintance
with Christ are so savory to a

sanctified heart,Can. 1. 2, 4, & 7, 9. that this precious Wine can∣not
but cause his lips to magnifie the sweet∣nessEph. 
thereof.Col  Grace is the lively Image of the li∣ving
God,Pro 4  resembling him still in activeness of com∣munication
and Holiness of Conversation.1  2. 5. They
that have tasted how good the Lord is in his
Word and waies, cannot but be moved by
the strong Impulse of such experiences to in∣courage
still themselves and others to such a
heavenly Communion with their God, and
faithfulness to him. The best good is still
most communicative, diffusing its streams
and displaying its Rayes to all round about.Rev. 17. 14.
The Followers of the Lamb have their rea∣son,
and all other Powers of the Internal and
external Man,1 Cor. 2. 15. Spiritually ennobled and sublimed
to discern all things by a Divine Light,Eph. 1. 23. and
make choice of Christ for their All in All,Col. 3. 11. incom∣parably
before all things else.Psal. 73. 25. Having once found
him whom their souls do unfeignedly love,Can. 5. 10. their de∣sire
is still to keep close to him,Can. 3 4. and walk worthy of
him,Rom. 3. 11. as far as his Grace is enabled through his Spi∣rit
that dwels in them,Rom. 6. 6. 21. to rule there for him. They
cannot but find strong Endearments obliging
ther hearts to be soliciting still others with
themselves to this Divine Exercise. It hath

pleased that Father of Spirits to make such an
Impress thereof upon my Conscience, that it
engages me to judge my self deeply for for∣mer
neglects, and binds me forcibly to more
diligent care for future occasions. This small
Piece now presented to you, will speak my
ressentments more expresly about this Subject. It
comes out in a very plain dress, and without
trimming, the matter thereof being sufficient
to commend its own worth to can did Chri∣stians,
and intended for the lowest forms of
Christs school,1 Cor. 2. 2. as well as for his Graduates.
It is my serious purpose with the Apostle not
to know any thing ministerially and practi∣cally,Phil. 3. 9, 10.
save Iesus Christ and him crucified,1 Cor. 2. 4. in the
efficacy of his Resurrection, and in the fel∣lowship
of his sufferings, being made con∣formable
to his death. Its not therefore the
inticing words of mans wisdom I would de∣light
in and labour for; but the demonstration
of his Spirit and Power. Herein I would stu∣diously
design through his Grace to imitate
Paul, as he followed Christ. None but Cbrist, none
but Christ, was the Motto of a famous Martyr.
I would make it my desire and joy, my Re∣solve
and endeavonr through the supplies of

his Al-sufficient Spirit. Your Acquaintance
with him is best known to him and to his
friends, that have had acquaintance with
your selves.
If this poor Tract may be found, any way
serviceable to the improvement thereof, my
heart shall rejoyce and bless God for it. Your
zeal for him and his, cannot be forgotten of
him, nor of them. Your labor of Love can∣not
pass unrewarded from God, whatever
construction or retribution it meets with
from man.2 Chro. 15. 2. The Lord is with you whilst you be with
him.1 Chro. 28. 9. The various experiences of his Word
and Rod, Spirit and Providence formerly dis∣pensed
and lately renewed toward you,Gen. 17. 1, 2, 3, 4. &c. will
be still of singular use and help, being duly
remembred and improved. Walk still before
him in the perfect waies of his uprightsness,2 Cor. 11. 9. as
Abraham and his faithful Worthies were di∣rected
by him,Eph. 6. 10. so shall you be sure of his cove∣nant-mercy
in the performance of your cove∣nant-duty.
His grace will be still sufficient for
you,Deut. 33. 16. and his strength gradually perfected in
your weakness. Be strong in the Lord, and in the
power of his might, for the promoting of his In∣terest
in your respective stations and motions

against all spiritual enemies. The good
Will of him who dwelt in the Bush, rest upon
you both, and all your Relations near and
farther off, for Direction, Assistance and
Blessing. In him I delight to be known
demonstratively, as occasion serves,

From my Study in Limrick,
May 19. 1657.
