



THrice noble and much ho∣noured Citizens, Give me leave to present to you that prayer which Christ presented to all Christians. The more enemies it hath found, in the Name of Christ Iesus, the more I beg of you to countenance it, and befriend it. Though some in these sad times have underprized our high calling, yet none must doubt to call this our Lords Prayer: Religion is at a low ebbe, when Gods Ministers and Christs own Prayer is little or nought set by. Justly have we been punished, and righte∣ous O Lord art thou in all thy works:
yet what ever we suffer, I beseech you in the name of God and Christ, to be the Patron of this Prayer; which among some cal'd Christians hath found as many scorners as Christ its maker among the Jewes: mockers, when you speak to God, ere you end, be pleased, thus to pray, Mat. 6. and this to say, Luk. 11. The one Evan∣gelist registring the Rule to pray by, that other recording the subject mat∣ter of our prayers: and both inti∣mating thus much to all ages, if we lay by this prayer, we lose the rule to pray by: if we say not this prayer, we misse much, if not most our Christ commanded us to pray for.
I will not trouble your religious ears with those horrid profane spee∣chos uttered, and in publick against this pious prayer.
It's no wonder to me Christs own prayer hath so many enemies, where the Devils Doctrine hath so many fast friends. But this is condemna∣tion,
that light is come into the world, and men loved darknesse bet∣ter than light, falshood than truth, and a fantastick Enthusiasme, more than Christs own Orizon.
I desire rather to pity than to re∣proach the brain-sick Humourists of our times, whose disloyall censures, like disloyall subjects, have scandali∣zed their supreme Soveraign, the King of Salem, the Son of God. The cause, because he prescribed this set form of prayer: and hence it is pre∣tended, the spirit is stinted, for that the matter and form prescribed.
But have you not heard how he who had a larger portion of the Spi∣rit than all living, who thought it no robbery to be equall with God the Fa∣ther, in the Garden of Gethsemane, prayed three times, and every time used the self same words—Let his precept there,Luk. 11.2. his practiseMat. 26.41. there, encourage your worshipfull society to patronize this book of Prayer: nay, the
very name of your Abide shall make me more confide; as God hath placed you in such an Eden, who knowes but it's to protect this Prayer which came out of the Paradise, the Breast of our Messias? your earthly Lot is faln to you in a fair soyle, while the plat of ground you inhabit is P. N. R. as in that Row you have a corporall resi∣dence, so you shall not want a true Beadsman to be earnest with God at your end, you may live for ever in his Bosome from whence came this prayer, a prayer I beseech you, oft to iterate, for a speedy post, which will convey and in a trice all your supplicats to your great Master, God Almighty. A rare preparation, which fits you for your passage from Egypt unto Ca∣naan. In a word, this prayer is that salt which seasons all your underta∣kings. Nor do I attribute this ver∣tue to the bare outward saying your Pater noster, but as being joyned with the hearts sincerity; nor would I the
outward form totidem verbis to be neglected: for know't, as thou maist be an hypocrite, and do God all bodily service, so thou canst never be a good Christian, and deny to do it. I would you therefore exercise this set form of prayer, to shew you are no Enthu∣siasts; to joyne also with your voice the spirit of understanding, to shew you are good Christians. That com∣mandLuk. 11 of Christ, shall be your war∣rant, to go down to this his forge to sharpen your blunted goads and mattocks.
I speak not this as a despiser of them, have the gift of making a prayer: that I say is to comfort such as have a mean portion of the gift of prayer. It's may purpose then not to pick a quarrell, but prevent a duell, and tell you what is justifiable, a set form, not to implead to pray as the spirit moves, so be joyned with it the spirit of understanding.
To conclude, our Christ his precept
hath made this Prayer legitimate, and when we pray, let us understand what's that we pray, and this shall stop the mouthes of all oppugners. I will add a widowes mite to this work, by recom∣mending once more this prayers, un∣folding to your protection; which if not, for love to me, who owns nought, to merit at you hands; yet for the honour of Christ, I doubt not but you will accept of the tendered service of

