



Learned Sirs,
ALthough by reason of the self-ends and private Interests of vain-glorious and ignorant persons, the Science of Astrology hath had the misfortune to be thought repugnant to your Sacred Studies; yet if it be duly (and without prejudice) considered, they may not only both stand together, but be assisting unto each other: The one, consulting the Lesser [though the more Divine] Book of Scriptures; the other, the Greater [and the more Natural] Book of Creatures.
In ancient times, among the Aegyptians (as your learned selves well know) there were none admitted into your Holy Order without being vested with a competent knowledge in Astrology. I readily ac∣knowledge, that the Errors vented, and Imposturisms practised under the Golden wings of this Art, are sufficient to antici∣pate your better thoughts from a serious Inspection and examination thereof. And it were a thing superlatively unjust, to enforce you, with the good Wine thereof, to drink the Dregs also.

Astrology is a fair and beautifull Virgin, though by many rendred a Notorious strumpet! The Fair Urania is every way most accomplished and lovely! It is my humble request therefore, that you would not consider it as it is rendred by Ignorant persons practising it; but as it is (untain∣ted) in it self. The Lute is a most melodi∣ous Instrument, being touched by the skil∣ful fingers of a Master in Musick; but hand∣led by a Porter, or Carman, from a Barn∣door you may hear as pleasing a sound. It is Astrologies greatest unhappiness, that her pretended favorites are her greatest enemies.
Learned Friends! The Design of this little Book is to take off the ugly and deformed vizzard from the face of Astro∣logy, that for many years it hath been compelled to wear, by the subtill cunning of one, who under pretence thereof hath been (sine ratione, vel religione) too bold and sawcy, not only with her, but your Learned selves. The Author hereof wisheth all honour to a Learned setled Ministry, and Astrology freed from Sycophantique Practisers; and that the learned Divine and honest Astrologer (as in times past) might shake hands with each other, and Divinity and Astrology stand together.
