



AS this Treatise is for a generall satis∣faction of the Na∣tion: so wee have forborn all parti∣cular Dedications, that it may without respect of persons, finde acceptance alike with all men. Wee have little farther to say, then
 what is contained in the Booke, only desire that the same may be read over with judgment: We have purposely left out our names, that the Reader may not wrong himself either through prejudice or partiality, but look sing∣ly on the matter as it lies before him.
It is possible some may thinke there was no neede that so much should have been written as in reference to a particular person, but lesse a great deale would have serv'd the turn.
To which we answer, 1. It is well known, that many honest minded people, in regard of the severall Pam∣phlets, which M. Lilburn hath spread abroad, have been very much abused and mislead by him, insomuch that without a large and clear discovery of his particular Crafts and deceits, we
 doubted whether such persons would have real and full satisfaction.
2 Because we find Mr. Lilb. boast∣ing oftentimes of his quick & sharp pen wee have thought good to make one work of it; that is, to prevent his fu∣ture Answer and Replies, in doing so much at once, as not to be troubled any more with him, but to stopp his mouth, and put him quite to silence.
3 The man hath been so long a di∣sturber of the peace of the Common-weath, and acted such a multitude of seditious designs, as we could not in a little give the Nation a just account thereof.
4 As our desire is, that those who are in Authority may go speedily for∣ward with the work of Reformation, so we conceive there being here full sa∣tisfaction
 given to the people of this Common-wealth, a stumbling-block will be removed, which he by his sub∣tlety and craft had cast in their way.
But some may say, you have spo∣ken too much in the justification of bad men: For answer: Here we can ap∣peale to God, how farre we have been from pleading either for persons or things otherwise then what consci∣ence, reason and justice hath guided us thereunto. It is chiefly the peace and safety of the Nation that wee have sought after: And for this Nationall peace wee are willing to spend, and to be spent, and shall think our selves suf∣ficiently rewarded, if by the publishing of this Treatise wee may undeceive such people, whom by his wiles and falshoods hee hath formerly deceiv'd,
 and that hee may no more draw par∣ties and factions after him.
For conclusion; As in the publish∣ing of this Book, we desire a generall good, so in particular Mr. Lilburn. That he may see the error and evill of his ways. No doubt it would be much for the peace and comfort of his soule another day: If this counsell of ours were followed, namely as hee hath gi∣ven occasion of publick scandal to the world, by his seditious and mutinous carriages, so to make publick acknow∣ledgment thereof.
Howsoever, it shall be our de∣sire: As persons looking into a glasse, doe thereby amend what they see to be amisse, so this may serve as Mr. Lilburns LOOKING-GLASSE, wherein he may not on∣ly
 see those foul and grosse faults, which are as perspicuous and ma∣nifest, as the Leprosie on Geha∣za's fore-head; but may under the sense and sight of them, truly re∣pent, & seek unto the Lord, that in the blood of Christ they may be washt away.
