



Right Honourable, and Thrice Learned Sir;
IT is now more than XXVII. Solar Revolutions since I first enjoy'd the Felicity of being known to Your Honour. Which, to me, was the Great∣est of Mundane Favours I ever received: because the Earliest, and of Longest Dura∣tion.
And, I should be very Ungrateful, not only to Your Honour, but also to the God of Mercies, did I not upon all laudable Occasions acknowledge it.— For, I must freely profess to owe, not only my Liberty, but (in a great measure) even my Life to Your Interest and Goodness. And, I expected long before this, to have met a better Opportunity to have testify'd my Gratitude for all Your signal Favours, or else had not deferr'd my Duty herein so long. Be pleased therefore, to accept of this my Humble Acknowledgment, until my Better Stars shall enable me to present You with a more Ample and Agreeable Evidence of my Thankfulness.
To be Grateful, was ever an Inherent Principle in me: And, I shall scarce leave the VVorld with a contented Mind, un∣less I live to make a more MARBLE Declaration of Your many Noble and Seasonable Obligations, viz. Such an One, as may continue (were it possible) as long as Time it self; To tell Future
Ages, That there liv'd in this Polite, yet Profligate, and Plotting Age, such an Ho∣norable and Compassionate Nohleman and Patriot, as the Thrice Excellent Sir RO∣BERTHOWARD: A Person of so Great and Exemplary Charity and Good∣ness, who was always Ready and For∣ward to Protect the Innocent from the Greatest of Dangers: Nay, even from Death it self.
And, now (Noble Sir) give me leave to Affirm, That I have not Prefixed Your Great Name to this Small Book with any other Design, than Gratitude, and to submit my Self and Labours to Your most Learned Judgment and Censure.
Of the Meteorological Part, I, almost, promise my self Your Just and Candid Ap∣probation. That, being matter of Fact, and, with all imaginable Care observed in London, for XXI years together. And, if in the Astrological, I hap to be too great a Trespasser, I shall rely on Your Noble and
Generous Nature for an Amnestia. The Deities would even cease to be such, were there not reiterated Human Frailties for them to remit. And, tho' I know You have, not only Privately, but Publickly Profess'd—That You have not the same Opinion of Astrology, as of other Parts of the Ma∣thematicks. Yet, since You have con∣stantly vouchsaf'd Your Favour and Pro∣tection to me, (a Poor Astrologer) I cannot (methinks) wholly Despair of Your Countenancing of me, even in That also. The Substantial Part of which being, not Common Astrology, but the Result of some of my many Years Ob∣servations and Experience. And, were this Antient Art (now, too frequently Prosti∣tuted to Mean and Ignoble Ends) by just Experiments Rectified (as the Reverend Childrey affirm'd) it might most easily be Justified. And, here I will Humbly presume to acknowledge to Your Honour and the World together,— That after more than Forty Years Study thereof, I see many things therein, and some of them own'd
as Principles) which I most earnestly wish were well Corrected, for the Honour of God, and of all his Coelestial Host.
But, lest my Prolixity should render me a Criminal, under pretence of owning Favours, I forbear all farther Discourse of these matters— My Conclusive Humble Vote shall be— That the God of Mercies, and all his Holy Angels, may ever Protect and Defend both Your Honours Person and Con∣cerns, together with all Your Honourable Rela∣tions, as Constantly and Readily, as You have Defended Me: And, (as I am credibly in∣form'd) many Hundreds more, under their greatest Straits and Troubles. So ever wisheth, and prayeth,
(Most Honourable Sir!)

