



THou sowest all life in the flesh, and thou reapest life to thy self, O Lord: thou windest up life in the body of life; thou art the Center and o∣rency of quickning life: All Creatures move in the power of that life. That substance of flesh by procreation is not that saving life, but thou art the quintessence of all life in the Soul. The Soul in its na∣tural condition is vayla, and changeable by the instinct of Na∣ture included in the flesh; varra, changeable in it self; fayla, not able to stand, unless it be redeemed by an inclusive power spiritual: and in that way God will be seen to deliver, by way of imputation of life to the Soul: Reeda Alda, at every season Helpative Soona, Plyant Dative, by a dividual dividing betwixt the Marrow and the Bones; Circumference, Deus All-fulness, Unus varius, Allmagnus, God the full beauty and life, in him all things are computed, comprized, and comprehended by him; he is All meritus and translatirus, and doth refine all things: he is the final and fountain of all perfection, the life and death of all the Creatures: every thing that moveth liveth in him. All solestial flesh is as a flower or grass that withereth away, and shall be no more in its natural perfection: for no∣thing shall live but life, that shall not dy, which is the princi∣ple of God in thee, called that immortality, which is a spiritual reviving power that shall return to God; although the flesh doth not, yet the spirit shall return to him that gave it. The Soul is the life of the Creation naturally in us, prohibited and presented by him, which is our life so preserved. The Spirit
 is an inclusive thing of union, and by an immortal marriage it hath congruity with the Soul: the Soul is a high mystery, it is the Virgin of the spirit, and the spirit dwelleth in it, till the flesh dieth, which maketh a dissolution betwixt flesh and soul. The spirit of grace is an high mystery, and dwelleth in some, but not in all: every one may have life in them, yet not that spi∣tual life, which is the life of eternity: therefore none can live after the old Adam, but shall dy the death, until the quickning power of the second Adam come in, which is Christ in thee and in me, to renew in us that which would die: for nothing carnally can live. The soul is naturally sowed in the flesh, and is of it self fleshly by four natural causes, by a Soveraingty from God; as Breath, blood, Heat and Food, which keepeth thy natural soul alive: there is a threefold life; two of them be but natural life, as vegetive life, natural life, and spiritual life, and all have their being from that eternal life: We see many times that young flesh droppeth off from the Tree of life; the aged must do so, the King must die as well as the Beggar, so must the high Doctor as well as the silly poor man; then be∣hold with me the period of mans life, and full of brevity, fa∣ding changeable smoak, or as a vapor that soon passeth away. So much for mans mortality. The next thing is to enquire and speak something of this our late deceased Brother Doctor Hill.
