



Right Honourable,
AMong the many and mighty Addresses, and Congratula∣tory thanks that your Excel∣lencie is assiduously accosted with, for the Great (and once accounted im∣possible)
 Deliverance, to these (of late) bleeding Nations, wrought by your Honours most happy Hand and Counsels; I humbly implore your Honors most Gratious Acceptance of this my mean acknowledgment. For of so universal concernment have your most prosperous and heroick Actions been, that (as by the Sun) the meanest receive advantage, as the greatest, though not in the same quantity, or degree: For the which Ages to come, will instal you blessed!
Although I am a stranger unto your Honours Person, yet should I be so unto your mighty and ever to be celebrated-Actions, I must then be the same unto the Land of my own Nativi∣ty, which with loud Acclamations and Ecchoes of joy, hath owned your Ex∣cellencie, as the only Instrumen∣tal cause of her present fruition of Peace and Settlement, and of her future happiness and glory: and of the truth of this, Men and Angles are witnesses.

My Lord! This little Book trea∣ting of things strange, Emboldens me the more, to present it unto your Honours Hand: For if we search all Chronologie, and dig thorow the deep Mine of Historie, we shall scarcely find any one thing, so eminently Pro∣digious and strange, as this— THE HAPPY RESTAURA∣TION OF ENGLAND, SCOTLAND AND IRE∣LAND, TO HER FORMER AND MOST NATURAL GO∣VERNMENT — MONAR∣CHY! AND THIS PER∣FORMED BY YOUR HO∣NOURS HAPPY UNDER∣TAKINGS, WITHOUT THE LEAST BLOUDSHED! which very thing, speaks so much of Gods most Gratious and especial Providence, to your Honour, and these Kingdom's, that the true essential cause of this most happy Turn, is to be read no where but in the Sacred Scrowl of Divine Miracles. Which
 by the Fathers of the Church, are worthily ranked among those things the Doctor of the Gentiles Terms, , the deep things, or secrets of God; and therefore not fit for Man's inspection.
I fear (my Lord!) I am too trou∣blesom: I shall conclude with a Peti∣tion, and a Prayer. My Petition is, That your Honour would not only vouchsafe your Acceptance of this little Book, but your Pardon also to its Author, who hath presumed to affix so great a Name, unto so mean and contemptible a work. My Prayer is, that Heaven would be pleased to be as propitious to your Honors Person, Name and Posterity, as it hath made your Honor, to the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland. Which is the Cordial, Fervent and faithful desire of,
Right Honourable,

