



Precious Hearts,
I Confess I am engaged in low and fruitless Contreversies, a∣gainst which I find a reluctancy in my spirit, because they tend not so much to edification as could be Wished: but as I am bound to vindicate the lowess truth from the find aspersions. and false calumniations of Satan and his instruments; so I daily, God that low things are most beneficial for beleevers of lowest attain∣ments: And what I have done in this, is for their sakes, who came out of Aegypt, out of Babylon but the other day; I am unwilling they should be carried captives back again, or that those who dearly see the doors opened to them, should be any longer kept in bondage. Many weak ones have stumbled at what Mr Lightfoot hath spo∣ken and written, though there be neither Divinity nor Reason it.

 I never intended this Answer of mine should have come to a p∣lick censure, had not Mr Lightfoot and his unholy Communic dealt deceifully (that I say not, dishonestly) with me, in breaking some sentences, and taking up such pieces of them, as they conc might bring the truth and my person into contempt and disgrace, possessing people at home and abroad, that I wrong and abuse him, whilst be shame fully conceals my whole Answer, together with the true intent and meaning of those innocent expressions he and they so much cry out upon. Wrong be shall have none, if shame, he may thank himself.
Most of you sufficiently know how patiently I have born wish him hither to, and my own conscience tells me, the truth hath suffer∣ed too much through my forbearance and long-suffering. He hath had his time to insult over, caluminiate, reproach, and belye it, re∣porting whatsoever be pleased touching my Answer to his Paper, insomuch that no any ungodly ones ell immediately to blaspheming, curng, railing, and trampling upon the Truth, as though it had been quite conquered. And although Rabshekeh's railings make no breaches in Jeusalms Walls, yet many weak Christains (see∣ing only a few unchristianly wrested-expressions in smal bits of Pa∣per, and not knowning how little Judas his receiving or not receiving doth either advantage or disadvartage a Communion of Saints) Were abundantly discouraged, and bunded downs their necks, that the Whore which sits on many warers might go over. And now I hope it is high time for me to speak in vindication of the truth, and for satisfaction of such as are so easily serupled by false reports, and rea∣dy upon every summons from Satan ro deliver up their strong holds, not knowing they have, on every side, Salvation for Walls and Bul∣warks; and to publish my Answer, most unfaithfully dealt withal by Mr Lightfoot, that ye may see it, and then judg righteously be∣tween me (or rather the truth) and him. And I would intreat those into whose hands this may come, to turn unto the Scriptures quoted (Which I hope will not be wis-printed) and strictly to examine them, and then to judg impartially: I crave no savour at the hands of any man; hough this piece Was never cut out for the publique vion; let me see my Errata's, and I shall endeavor to correct and amind them.
My Antagonist takes great exceptions at a plain-dealing Epi∣stle,
intended only for himself and some few Friends, for I had no thoughts of printing then, and is conceited that I have exceedingly wronged him in it; all the right I can do him, is, not to insert it here, and (though I am able to make good every jot and tittle of it) for the future to bury it in the abiss of Oblivion, if so be I am not enforced by his unjust clamours, and exotick constructions put upon it, to send it, With a large Comment upon it, after this.
All the exceptions he makes (so far forth as I can learn either from himself or others) against the particulars of my Answer, are so frivolous and groundless, that he durst not give them under his own hand, much less publish them to the World, and therefore I may very well pass them by; but yet I must needs vindicate the last particular (in the close of all,) against which he hath draws up a Charge of high Crimis and Misdemeanors: Good Friends and Readers turn to it; is begins thus, That I should super-abun∣dantly wrong him, if I should not rank him amongst the vilest in the Kingdom, for with them, &c. for this I must pay dearly, saith he, and his prophane fellow Members: But were not I a mad man, and might I not deservedly incur the name or title of a Schisma∣tick, should I make a breach in his Church, in his Communion? and for this he calls me twenty Fools, and mad man, &c. But work, a while, and you shall see the Food, the mad man, as well as the Whet∣stone, Will fall to his share. He would perswade people (or some o∣thers for him) that there in that place I make him a Drunkard, a Thief, a Murderer, &c. and why may be not as well perswade them I make him a Whore? The business is in deed and in truth thus; All that are in Church-fellowship or Communion With him, are, in a Scripture sence, his Brethren and Sisters. And this I dare say, I can prove against all the devils in hell by almost (if not all out or above) an hundred Scriptures: No man that hath not a fore∣head of Brass or Iron can deny it. I have beside the Scripture Rea∣son, and the consent of most Divines, whether Episcopal, Presbyte∣rial Independent, or by what nick-names soever they are called or distinguished, on my side; if any shall deny it, they must disclaim their own principles or tenets. The very Book of Common-Prayer called all the men in all Parishes throughout England and Wales, Dearly beloved Brethren, &c. I know all men of dis-enga∣ged judgments all the Kingdom over Will vote it in the Affirma∣tive,
but I am content the matter should be tryed at the tri of his own conscience, if yet is be not seared with a hot iron.
So then as long as be will walk in fellowship or Communion with prophane, wicked, loose men and women, as Members of the saw external visible body of Chirst (the Church) with himself, they must and shall be his brethren and sisters: for to say, I will wal in Church fellowship or Communion with such and such men and women, &c. and yet they shall not be my brethren and sisters, is an absierd, idle, vain, foclish, irrational, contradictory assertion 'tis to say and unsay, and in plain English, to say just nothing at all.
And for those that have been hanged at Tyburn, &c. unless b can prove that they were not by Raptism admitted into his Church, nor be into theirs; or that they were first excommunicated, (which be shall never do: and besides, let him but once mention Exce∣munication with Approbation and his cause is utterly lost,) or  less he will eat his own words, deny a National Church in so gross a sence as e ols one, or joyn with us in order to a Reformation, let him fret and fue huff and pussrage and storm, call and miss while e will, they must and shall be his brethren, &c 'tis he  made them so, not, therefore let none he offended with me: W he islams that Communion he plead for, the bonds of this bro∣ther-hood will be loosed, and not before. I confess, I was once of this brother-hood my self, but now I abhor and loath it; And yet I look upon all men whatsoever as my brethren in this sence, viz. as we are the off spring of, and have dependency upon the same eternal Being, Acts 17.28, 29.
He is willing such at Judas was should be his Brethren-Conicants; and do Drunkards, Theves, Murderers, Lyars, &c. exed Judas in Wickedness? He is called a Devil, John 6.70. and we such worse then Devils? Behold then a Communion of wse then Devils. What are the ends of the mans arguings? I wish be would declare them to us. But to hasten to a period, the viles men in England (professing Faith in Christ) shall be his brethren, but it vexeth him to the heart they should be called so.
Whereas he blaoneth abroad, That I grant Judas received, &c. as though he had obtained his end: As I doubt not but all an∣tions men will smile at his folly, so for satisfaction of the lowest ca∣pacities
amongst u, I am willing to say again, 'tis not  ath proved it, or ever will whilst he liveth, bu because he shall not say, what I contend for (viz a Communion of Saints)  up∣on Judas his receiving or not receiving, Admit he did, shos in e granted, I say, yet that doth not in the least measure advantege his, or prejudice my cause: Lt him draw his inferences.
When he gives ou, be could quickly be reled to unto, he ac∣knowledgeth the difference in affection is only on his part, and be speaks most truly, for I am willing to have the love of all man, and to live peaceably with them, so far as possibly I may; a I  compliancy with any man to the prejudice and dis-advantage of the truth. My very adversarious must needs confess I have bn so ar from preaching Contention, Strife and Division amongst godly man of dissenting judgments in matters of Worship, that I have nd∣vored to make up all branche, and to ust all names and  of distinction behind my back.
Now, good Friends and Readers, do not say I have spoken any thing in passion or bitterness of spirit, for (if I may uso Pols Aster∣veration, 3 Cor. 1.23.) I call God to record upon my soul, I have not. I find my very bowels are moved for him; and ob th e would smite upon his thigh, and say, What have I done? I am so far from hating his person, or seeking revenge for any injury done to me, that I profess I will lay my very hands under his fies to do him good.
Here is one thing that I would have you, and all men, to take special notice of, namely, That Mr Lightoo Communion D∣metrically opposeth,
1. The Scriptures, the plain Letter, 1 Cor. 5.9, 10, 11. 2 Cor. 6.14.15, 16, 17, 18.
2. His Creed, or at least this Article of it, viz. The Commu∣nion of Saints; for I suppose he believes in God, &c. and in Jesus Christ, &c, and in the Holy Ghost, &c. the holy Catholick Church, but his Communion must be of ungodly, sondal and norious sinners, and not of Saints.
3. The Covenant, by which we are bound to endeavor a Refor∣mation according to the Word of God, and the best Reformed Churches, who abbor such Communions.
4. The Directory, which saith, The ignorant and the scandalous
are not fit to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, pag.. Yea, the Common-Prayer-Book it self, which shuts the doors a∣gainst and keeps out open and notorious evil livers, till they have manifested repentance for the satisfaction of the Congregation, &c. It seems his Reformation it to bring us into a far worse condition then ever we were in, under Prelacy and Common-Prayer-Book.
5. And lastly. The Principles, Hopes, Expectations, and joy Endeavors of all godly Ministers, both of the Independent (so called) and more purely Presbyterial way; who, that it not wilfully blind, will be of a Communion that thus sets it self in opposition to all that is called God, or holy in every dispentsation and form of Worship I shall trouble you with no more at present, but carnestly entreat you seriously to consider of these things, and the Lord give you un∣derstanding in every thing, and lead you forth into the ways of Righ∣teousness, that you may walk blameless before him in Love.
Uttoxiter in Stafford-shire, June 2. 1649. 
