



IT was the Saying of St. Gregory
surnamed the Great, that the ho∣ly
Scripture was nothing else but
an Epistle sent from Almighty
God to his Creature man, by which he might
be rightly informed in all those points which
were fit or necessary to be known and train∣ed
up in the practise of all those duties which
were fit and necessary to be done: Quid enim
est Scriptura sacra, nisi epistola Omnipotentis Dei
ad creaturam suam, as that Father hath it. Ac∣cording
to which great example (though pos∣sibly
not in reference and relation to it) it
hath been the custom of men in all times and
nations not extremely barbarous, when they

could not personally expresse their minds to
one another, to mannage intelligence in
the way of Letters of Epistles; in which they
comprehend all such particulars as were ex∣pedient
to be known to either party. Inventae
erant epistolae (as Tully tels us) ut certiores faceremus
absentes, si quid esset quod eos scire, aut nostrum, aut
ipsorum interesset. And to say truth they are our
ordinary Messengers of love and friendship,
our extraordinary Posts for dispatch of busi∣nes.
By them we commonly receive advice &
counsel in our affairs of greatest moment, and
to them we commit the close conveyance of
such secrets, as cannot with like confidence
be trusted to friends or servants, His arcana
notis terra pelagoque feruntur, as Ovid's passionate
Lady writeth to her dear Hippolitus. In which
respect, considering that God hath placed us
at a distance, so that I cannot personally ac∣quaint
you with some particulars touching
the publishing of these Sermons, which I
think fit for you to know, that you may
make them known to others, I am compelled
(in a manner) to expresse them in this pre∣sent
Epistle. In which I shall first present you
with those impulsives which have induced me
(contrary to my former custom and resoluti∣ons

to commit these Sermons to the Press, and
then to let you know the reason why I have
made choice of your name in this Dedication.
And first I must needs say (and I may say
it very truly) that I never did any thing in this
kind, of which I found my self more obliged
to render a just account, then of the publish∣ing
the ensuing Sermons; which seems like
the adding of fresh leavs to a well grown tree
in the midst of Sommer, of stars to a cleer fir∣mament
in a Winter night, or finally, of wa∣ter
to a full and unfathomed Ocean: and you
may justly say to me in the Poets words,
Quid folia Arboribus, quid pleno sidera Coelo,
In Freta collectas alta quid addis aquas?
That is to say,
Why dost thou adde fresh leaves unto the Trees,
Stars to the Heavens, or Water to the Seas?
In answer to which objection, I can neither
plead the importunity of friends, the com∣mand
of superiors, nor the preventing of false
Copies from being brought unto the Press,
which I observe to be the common pretences
for printing Sermon upon Sermon; most of
the which, without any sensible losse to Lear∣ning,
or disadvantage to the Church, might
have been buried in the Studies of them that

made them. And yet I would not have it
thought but that I have some reason for what
I do, more then the vulgar desire of being in
print, there having been so much of mine on
the Press already, as might have satisfied the
folly of that desire, were I guilty of it: and
therefore I shall let you know (and in you all
others who shall read them) thas these Ser∣mons
are now published on the same occasi∣on
on which they were first penned and
preached, which was briefly this.
It was about the Year 1636. in which the
Press began to swarm with libellous and se∣ditious
Pamphlets, destructive of the publick
peace, and tending to a manifest desertion
of the received Government and Formes of
Worship by Law established in this King∣dom.
In most of which the Bishops gene∣rally
were accused for having a design to
bring in Popery, the regular Clergie of this
Church (my self more frequently then any of
my ranck and quality) traduced and defa∣med
for subservient instruments: I had before,
and sometimes after, been cast upon the ma∣naging
of some of the puritan Controversies,
(as they then called them) particularly in wri∣ting
the History of the Sabbath, the Answer to the

seditious Sermon and Apologie of Mr. H. B. of Friday∣street,
the book entituled A Coal from the Altar, &
the defence thereof called Antidotum Lincolniense,
touching the ancient & most convenient scitu∣ation
of the holy Table, which so exasperated the
spirits of those bitter men, who then disturbed
both Ch. and State with their venemous libels,
that hardly any of that numerous litter had
crept into the world in wch I was not openly
accused of Popery, or at the least of being an Un∣der-factor
unto those who had the chief mana∣ging
of that design. For the decrying of which
scandal so unjustly raised (for actū est de homine,
ubi actum est de nomine, as the old rule was) I fell
upon a resolution of preaching these ensuing
Sermons before the King, (whose Chaplain for
Ordinary I then was, and had been many years
before) upon the Parable of the Tares; and gi∣ving
in them such an assurance of my Orthodo∣xie
in Religion and averseness from Popery, as
might declare me for a true son of the Church
of England. And this I did at such a time
when the inclinations unto Popery were thought
(but falsly thought) to be most predominant
both in Court and Clergy: a course which
gave such satisfaction unto a great part of the
auditors, who before did seem to be other∣wise

perswaded of me, that some of the more
moderate sort did not stick to say (not to
touch here on some comparative expressions
which were used by others) that in the third
and fourth of these Sermons I had pulled up Po∣pery
by the very roots, and subverted the foundations
of it. Not much unlike to which was the ex∣pression
of a great Peer of the Realm, who
being present at the sixth Sermon, was plea∣sed
to say, that it was generally affirmed in the
Country, that no Sermons were preached be∣fore
the King, but such as might be preached
in the Popes Chapel, but that if the Doctor had
preached the said Sermon before the Pope,
what breakfast soever he had made for him∣self,
he would have found but a sorry dinner.
This, as it was the occasion which moved
me at that time to make choice of this parable
for the constant argument of my Sermons be∣fore
the King, so on the like occasion I am
now induced (I may not unfitly say compel∣led)
to make them publick unto others. For,
notwithstanding that I have so fully declared
my self against the errors and corruptions of
the Church of Rome in my late Comment on the
Creed, yet on a sudden (whither I will or no)
I must be a Papist, a Jesuit, or some Agent for

the See of Rome, suspected at the least for such by Dr.
Bernard, and (as he tells us) by others, for which consult
the book entituled The Judgement of the late Lord Pri∣mate,
&c. pa. 115. The author of the History of the
Life and Reign of King Charles ecchoeth the words of
Dr. Bernard, which, like an Eccho, he reiterateth (voces∣què
refert, iteratque quod audit, as it is in ovid) in his scur∣rilous
pamphlet called the Post-Hast Reply, &c. It was ac∣counted
for a prudent part in Sophocles (as indeed it was)
when he was once accused of madness, to produce one
of his Tragedies then newly written, to read the same be∣fore
the people of Athens, and then to ask his Judges,
Num illud carmen videretur esse hominis delirantis, whether
they thought it like to be the work of a man distracted?
And I hope it will be counted no imprudence in me,
being again accused of popery, or at the least suspected of
it to commit these Sermons to the Press, to offer them to
the reading of the people of Engl. & then to put this que∣stion
to them, Whether they think such Sermons could
proceed from the pen of a Papist, som Jesuit, or Agent for
the See of Rom? Adde hereunto, that finding it wondred
at in print, that so many of my books do so little concern my pro∣fession
(though I know none that do so little concern the
same as the Pamphlets hath it) I hope the printing of
these Sermons will take off the wonder, & that they will
be looked upon as in which my profession is concerned.
Such being the reason of bringing these Sermons to

the publick view, I shall observe in the next place with
what injustice the Court-Chaplains have been accused for
flatterie and time serving, for preaching up the Kings pre∣rogative,
and derogating from the property and liberty of the
English subject; in which if one or two were faulty, it
stands not with the rules of Justice, and much less of E∣quity,
that for the fault of one or two (unius ob culpam
& furias in the Poets words) a general blemish should
be laid on all the rest. Certain I am, no flatterie or time-serving,
no preaching up the Kings prerogative, or deroga∣ting
from the propertie of the English subjects will be
found in these Sermons, nor could be found in any o∣ther
of mine, had they been sifted to the bran. In confi∣dence
whereof, when some exceptions had been made
against some passages in one of my Sermons preached
at VVestminster by a mistake of some that heard it, I offered
the Committee for the Courts of Justice, before whom
that exception had been started, to put into their hands
all the Sermons, which I had either preached at Court or
in Westminster Abbie, to the end that they might see how
free and innocent I was from broching any such new
Doctrines as might not be good Parliament-proof when
soever they should come to be examined: and had they
took me at my offer, certain I am, it might have redoun∣ded
very much to the clearing of my reputation in the
sight of those Gentlemen, and nothing to my hurt or
disadvantage at all.

In the digestion of these Sermons I made it my
chief care, rather to inform the understanding then to
work on the affections of them that heard me. For ha∣ving
for seven or eight years before felt the pulse of the
Court, and finding that many about the King were not
well principled in the constitution of the Church of
England, and thereby gave occasion to others to think as
sinisterly of it as they did themselves, I thought that
course most fit to be followed in my preaching, which
was like to be most profitable to them that heard me;
for the Understanding being well informed, and the
Judgement of men well setled on so sure a bottom, I
doubted not but that their affections would be guided
by the light of their Understanding, and bring them to
be all of one mind and of one soul, like the Christians
in Acts 4. 32. Voluntas sequitur intellectum, is a maxime of
undoubted truth in the schools of Philosophie, and holds
good in all the practical duties which concern Religion.
Which way of preaching, had it been more generally
followed, (as it might have been) I think it probable e∣nough,
that we might better have kept the unity of the
spirit in the bond f peace, then by striving to stir up the af∣fections
with little or no improvement to the under∣standing.
Knowledg without Zeal may be resembled
to a candle carried in a Dark-lanthorn or hid under a bu∣shel,
which wasts it self without giving light to others,
and is uuprofitably consumed without any benefit to

the publick; but on the other side, zeal without knowledg
or not according to knowledg, may be compared unto the
meteor which the Philosophers call an Ignis Fatuus, which
for the most part leads men out of the way, and some∣times
draws them on to dangerous precipices, or to a
brush-Bavine-faggot in a Country Cottage, more apt
to fire the house then to warm the chimney.
So much being said as to the Motives which induc'd
me to print these Sermons upon the parable of the Tares,
and to my handling and accomodating that Parable to
the use of the Church, as then it stood established by the
Laws of the Land, I am in the next place to let you
know the reason why I have made choice of you name
in this Dedication. And herein I can make as little use of
those common aims, which are so frequent in Dedi∣cations
of this nature, that is to say, protection, profit or
preferment, as I did before of those common pretences
which are so frequently alledged for publishing many
of those books, which, without any loss to Learning or
disadvantage to the Ch. (as before was said) might have
been reprieved from the Press. Protection I expect none
from you in these perilous times, in wch, without a prudent
care of your life and actions, you will be hardly able to
protect your self: nor is this dedication made in the way
of gratitude for any benefit or profit formerly received
from you, (in which respect I dedicated my book called
Ecclesia Vindicata to my kind and honoured Schoolma∣ster

Mr. Edward Davies) or out of any covetous hopes of
being gratified by you with any profit or preferment in
the Church for time to come: of which if I were capable,
I might by the same capability return again unto my
own, and being made uncapable, can receive none from
you or from any other; & though, my present condition
be not such as to make me the subject of any mans en∣vy,
so neither is it so mean & despicable as to make me
the object of any mans charity. And yet I would not
have it thought but that I have some reason for this De∣dication,
and if I had no other reason then to give a
publick testimony of that dear affection which I
have to your person, it neither were without example,
for such as might not justifie and endear the action.
But besides this I have another reason for it that con∣cerns
my self, which is the leaving of my picture with
you, or rather the picture of my nobler part, my
mind; if whensoever it shall please God to gather me
unto my Fathers, you may be able to preserve some re∣membrance
of me. Patricius telleth us that the daugh∣ter
of Diaburranes the Scitionian, being to take leave of her
husband then going to war, drew the chief linea∣ments
of his face with a coal on the wall, and this she
did ne taedio desiderii ejus contabesceret, for fear lest she
might otherwise languish for the want of his company
during his necessary absence. In imitation of which art
it was an ancient custom of the Greeks and Romans to

preserve the Images of their Ancestors and neerest kind∣red,
and sometimes to advance them in the publick
places of their Cities with an inscription of their noblest
actions, of their most memorable atchievments, giving
thereby the rewards of vertue to the dead, and brave ex∣amples
to the living, sic et defunctis praemiū, et posteris dabatur
exemplum, as Minutius hath it Upon the like reason I have
sent you these lineaments of my soul, not drawn with a
coal upon the wall, but (which hath som resemblance to it)
with inke on paper: a portraiture not cut in brass or
Parian Marble, but cast into a mould of another mettal,
which possibly may be as lasting as either of them; and
I have sent them unto you as (next to your Father) to
my nearest and best beloved Kinsman by my Mothers
side, to the end that if any question shall be made in your
hearing concerning my sincerity in the true Protestant
Religion here by Law establisht, when I shall not be in a
capacity of advocating for my self, you need but bring
them to the sight of this picture, which will sufficiently
serve to scatter any of those false reports which the un∣charitableness
of some and the credulity of others may
have fastened on me.
It was my happiness to be bred under such a father as
very well understood the constitution of the Church of
England, and was a diligent observer of all publick duties
which were required of him in his place and station.
And though my Tutor in Hart-Hall (of which House I

was before I went to Magdalen Colledge) was biast on the
other side, and that I was then very young and capable
of any impression which he might think fit to stamp
upon me, yet I carried thence the same principles I
brought thither with me, & which I had suckt in as it
were with my mothers milk. Nor found I any thing in
all the course of my following studies wch might invite
me to a change of those first principles, but very much
which did incourage and confirme me in adhering to
them; according to the which, seconded by the best light
of my understanding, I have acted ever since, and on all
occasions, as easily will appear to those who have heard
any of my preachings and consulted any of my writings
from the first to the last. In all which I have really done
my best eudeavours to show my self a true son of the
Church of England, not looking with one eye toward
Rome, or squinting with the othr toward Gneva, but
keeping both upon the rules and dictates of the Church
alone, in which I have been bred & have lived so long,
and by the grace of God am resolved to die. And there∣fore
I must needs think my self in a sorry condition in
being forced upon those helps for preserving a fair me∣mory
in the eyes of posterity; which neither the impor∣tunity
of friends (when the publishing of these Sermons
might have been more seasonable) nor any other pri∣vate
considerations could have wrested from me.
I might here end, but that I am to give you an account
of a great hiatus which you will find betwixt the 6. & 7.

Sermons, the one being preached the 21. of Jan. 1639.
and the other not till the 26. of Sept. 1643. To give you
the reasons whereof I must let you know that from the
beginning of the long Parliament Nov. 3. 1640. till his
Majesty retired to Windsor on the 10. of Jan. 1641. the
Sundaies tuns before the K. were preached by such of my
Lords the Bishops as were attending on the service of the
Ch. and State; and on the Tuesdaies, not only all the Lords
of the Council, and the principal Officers of the House∣hold,
but most of the Gentlemen of worth & quality a∣bout
the Court followed the business of the Parl in their
several houses. So that I thought it not convenient to pur∣sue
the parable till I might have the happiness of enjoying
my former auditory which was not, and as it pleased God
could not be till his Majesty and the Court had been set∣led
for some time at Oxon. There I resumed my former
argument, because I found there a great part of my for∣mer
auditors, & brought these Sermons to an end; which
have lain by me ever since (without the least alteration in
words or matter) as they then were preached, and as they
then were preached so they now are publish'd. Which
said, I have no more to do but desire your pardon for the
tediousness of this Address, and that you would be pleasd
to accept that Portraiture or Picture which is herewith
sent, to make such use of it as may stand best with
your contentment, and thereby to preserve a fair esteem
in your self and others of, Sir,
Lacies Court in Abin∣don,
Jan. 25. 1658.
Your most affectionate friend and Cousin
to do you service, 
