


SIR,
ON Saturday May 17. I received a
Pamphlet from you, called The
Observator observed, inclosed
in a paper superscribed with your
own hand, To the worthily E∣steemed
the Observator, PE∣TER
HEYLYN No title added of Degree,
Profession, or any other mark of discrimination,
no, not so much as D. in Cosmography, which out
of your abundant bounty you have elsewhere gi∣ven
me, and that twice for failing. The Strange∣nesse
of the Present, and the more than ordinary
disrespect in the Superscription, put me upon a
sudden perusall of it; which having done (and
indeed before it was half done) I was both sorry
and ashamed, to see so much of the Coat, and so
little of the Gentleman in it▪ intituling me un∣to
the Observations in your Superscriptin, and

 from it in your Pam∣phlet▪
(where you call it a groundless suspition,
by me professedly disavowed) fol. 25. you make
your self an Adversary of you know not whom, &
then proceed in handling him you care not how.
But let them pass for mine this once, because
the generall drift of your discourse, will have it
so; and the designe will fall to ground, of rai∣sing
Trophees to your self, on the promised victo∣ry,
without this concession. But then it seemes,
you take me for a man of so dead a courage, that
nothing but the sense of Smart can quicken me
to accept your Challenge; and therefore lay up∣on
me the worst kinde of blowes, even reproach∣full
words, as scurrilous and unbecoming, as
Scorn & Envy can suggest, or Impatience utter.
Nor stay you here. The challenge of your Su∣perscription,
being sent in private, no body being
able to testifie the delivery of it, might have
been pocketed up in silence, without any engage∣ment
on my part, or satisfaction on yours. You
have therefore added to the first a more publick
and more bold defiance, to provoke an Answer.
Proclaiming in the Pamphlet, fol. 25. how scarce
credible it seemed unto you, that this Doctor
of all men durst be so bold, as to meddle with
you: that is to say, so bold as to finde fault with
any thing, which had passed your Pen, or to pre∣sume
to rectifie the Story in such particulars,
wherein either your intelligence or diligence

failed you. I was not wont to sit down tamely un∣der
such, and so many provocations; nor find I any
thing to affright me, from taking up the Bucklers
against such an Enemy, whose tongue hath pro∣ed
his sharpest weapon. Yet were it otherwise,
I durst have said with Cicero in another case,
Catilinae gladios contempsi, non pertimescam
tuos; I have not feared the swords of more dan∣gerous
enemies, and therfore shall not now shrink
back at the sight of yours; nor needed you to
have given me so much Gall and Vinegar, to
quicken me to an encounter; had you conceived I
might have gotten any thing from such an Ad∣versary,
whom nothing but a few hard words,
could render formidable.
And therefore if I have withdrawne my self
from the present action, put out the worke
to some bold Champion, as you know who phra∣sed
it, and left the quarrel to be managed by a
quicker hand; I would not have it charged up∣on
me, as a tergiversation, a turning back (as
those of Ephraim did of old) in the day of bat∣taile.
There are so many interessed in your bold
defiances, that I could neither want hands to
fight this combat, nor you be disappointed of the
satisfaction which you chiefly aime at.
Onely, I feare, you will be somewhat disapoin∣ted
of your expectation, and not of your own one∣ly,
but of that which you have raised in others, by
promising a Rejoynder, added at the latter nd

of your Volume; and that, both in the Title of
your History, and the Pamphlet too. Great men
love nothing more than to be attended, and are
commonly better knowne by their train of follow∣ers,
than by any other outward bravery. But in
this you have made your self too large a promise,
and presume more upon your greatness, than you
have just ground for. The Rejoynder, whosoe∣ver
writes it, will not march in the reare of your
ragged Regiment, or fill up the list of your At∣tendants,
or be dragged after your triumphant
Chariot, like a conquered Captive, and much
lesse serve as an Apocrypha, to your pure Cano∣nical.
We poor Cavies have all somwhat in us of
the Independent, and love to stand and go alone,
without such weak Crutches, as either the coun∣tenance
of your Name, or the fag end of your
Reply, can afford unto us.
I hope you will not find here any such reproach∣full
language, as you stand justly charged with∣all;
not onely in the whole course of your Pam∣phlet,
but in much of the History it selfe, as it
was first printed, and intended for the publique
view A good Cause need not be so managed,
though by interdicting all civil addresses to you
by the name of Complement, there be lesse cost
bestowed in Holy-water, than may possibly stand
with your contentment. I deny not, but that the
writer hereof may now and then incur the guilt
of some Luxuriances (you shall call them Fol∣lies,

if you please) and sport himself with grea∣ter
liberty, than the gravity of a severe Judge∣ment
can dispense withall. But I desire, you
would impute it, rather to an honest zeal unto his
friend, than to a purpose of detracting any thing
from you, when either the solidity of your dis∣course,
or the weight of your arguments, might
have required a more solid manner of procee∣dings,
than such serious vanities. How my Ad∣venturer
will come off, must neither be left to your
opinion nor to mine, both of us being too much
interressed to determine in it. The Reader is
made Judge between us, and to him I leave it.
Only I shall crave leave to say in the Poets words
(and I hope it may be said without any of the
selfe-deceivings of love or flattery)
Haec mala sunt, sed tu non meliora facis.
Lacies Court in Abingdon,
June 7, 1656.
