



IT was fore-signified by the Prophet, of Christ our Saviour, Arundi∣nem quassam non confringere, &c. That he should not break a bruised Reed, nor so much as quench the smoking flax; that is to say, as Isa. 42. 3. in Mat. 12. &c. Maldionate very well expounds the place, that his goings should be so gentle, and his weight so light, that though he trod upon a bruised Reed, he should not break it; and though he walked on smoaking flax, yet he should not quench it. Which showeth (saith he) quam in∣credibili mansuetudine, ac Lenitate usurus esset: with what incredible meekness, and in∣comparable tenderness our Saviour should pro∣ceed in all his Actions. The breaking of a brui∣sed Reed was unknown to Christ, though no∣thing be more frequent in the practise of those, who most pretend to be his followers in their Words and Actings. And if the bruised Reed ought not to be broken, if we are to carry our selves with the spirit of meekness towards

all those wich have been bruised onely by un∣gentle usage; with how much tenderness and compassion should those men be handled, who have been broken by the blows of unprosperous fortune, and crusht almost to nothing by unmer∣ciful Pressures. For certainly there cannot be a greater Argument of an uncharitable and un∣christian disposition, then to insult on those that are oppressed, and add affliction unto such as have suffered wrong; to multiply Reproaches, even on guilty persons when they have satisfied the Law, and paid their utmost debt to justice. Malice in this respect is far worse then Cruelty, Cruelty many times is satisfied with the blood and death of such as have been marked out for a publick slaughter. But Malice commonly out∣lives Cruelty, and will not suffer those to remain in peace on whom the face of heaven hath frown∣ned, & against whom the hands of men have bin lifted up, to their destruction and undoing.
Yet such is the unhappy age in which we live, that nothing is more ordinary then the adding of sorrow to affliction, and reproach to trouble; practised most commonly by those men who pre∣tend most to follow the example of Christ our Saviour, of which there cannot be a clearer and more evident proof then the procedings of some men towards you (my dear Brethren) of the Regular, and conformable Clergy of the Church of England; smitten into the Den of Dragons,

and almost broken to pieces like a Potters vessel: For when the sword had spent its fury, and the hand of power filled it self with subverting so many mens estates, the ejecting some, sequestring others, and sifting almost every one of us to the very bran; there started up a race of men, who agreed together to afflict them in a further mea∣sure, saying to one another (as did those Sons of Belial) in the Book of God) Come let us smite them with the Tongue. The fury of the Sword and the hand of Power hath already laid them open unto want and poverty; let us expose them therefore to contempt & scorn; let us add shame unto their sufferings, and sport our selves in their mis-fortunes. These are the men whom God hath smitten, and now we have them down, let us keep them under, not suffering them to rise in Reputation, or revive in credit, for fear of drawing pitty towards their calamities, or some commiseration at the least to their grievous suf∣ferings. It hath been grown into a Proverb, that when a man is once thrown flat upon his back, (qui jacet in terram &c.) he could fall no lower. But these men are so cross of nature, and have so long run cross to all publick Order, that now, they will be crossing Proverbs, to bring us lower then we are, disabling us of all means towards our subsistence, and laying all manner of disgraces on us, which either an inso∣lent Enemy could inflict, or an impeverisht Clergy suffer.
This cry first taken up in that uncharitable Pamphlet, Intituled, The first Century of scandalous and malignant Priests, was eager∣ly pursued by those, who had got their Benefices, whom it concerned to make them seem as foul as they could, the better to justifie the wiping them of their means and livelihoods. And it had been the less considerable, if onely men so interessed by their own concernments had kept up the cla∣mour, and that some others who would fain be looked on as the Sons of the Church, had not continued it as industriously, as it was malici∣ously begun. One of our Civil HistoriansHist. of K. Charles, fol. 144. diver∣ting on the late Archbishop of Canterbury, tels us that some of those whom he imploy'd as instru∣ments and subordinates under him, were so far from being blameless, that they were vicious even as to scandal, so far from being of such meek and humble behaviour, as was to be wished, that they were grown insolent, at a rate intollerable. Which though it be as much as could be thronged together in so narrow a compass; yet falls it infinitely short of that in the Ch. Hist. lib. 11. 207 Church Historian: Who speaking of a great and general purgation of the Clergy in the Parliaments Quarters, a little before the coming out of that infamous Century, tels us expresly, that their offences were so foul, as it was a shame to report them crying to justice for punishment, that when Constantine was wont to say, that if he

saw a Clergy-man offending, he would co∣ver him with his Cloak, he was to be under∣stood of such offences, as were but frailties and infirmities, not scandalous enormities; that such unsavory salt was good for nothing, no not for the Dunghil, because as the savour was lost that made it useful, so the freting was left which made it useless, whereby it was so far from being good Composs to fatten Ground, that it did rather make it barren; and therefore that Baal should be left to plead for himself, there being nothing to be said in their excuse. And thus far he had dipt his Pen in the Gall of Bitterness before he had bethought himself of a salve for it, before he considered whether the crimes had been suffici∣ently proved, as they never were, which he makes to be the main matter, as indeed it was.
But M. Baxters hand was filtered with a sicker quil, and his Ink mixt with more of the durty puddle, then the Church Historians was with gall and vinegar, when he bespattered the poor Clergy in the Preface to his Book of the Groti∣anPreface to the Groti∣an Religi∣on, Ser. 23. Religion, with all the filth that could pro∣ceed from a Pen so qualified. I need not (saith he) go to M. Whites Centuryes to be ac∣quainted of the qualities of the ejected: our Country have had too many of them, that have long been a burthen instead of a blessing; some never preached, but read the Common Pray∣er Book, and some preached much worse then

they that were never called Preachers. Some understood not the Catechism or Creed: many of them lived more in the Ale-house then the Church, and used to lead their people in drunkenness, cursing, swearing, quar∣relling, and other ungodly practises, and to a∣mend all by railing at the Puritans & Praeci∣sians: some that were better would be drunk but now and then, and preach once a day (remem∣bring still to meet with the Precise, least their hearers should have any mind to becom Godly) but neglecting most of the Pastoral cure, and lived much in worldliness and prophaneness, though not so disgracefully as the Rest. Which passage when I read over, it caused in me so great an horror, and amazement, that I could not tell whether I might give any credit to my senses or not; the words sounding loud in my ears, but not sinking at first into my heart. For who could possibly believe, that one who doth pretend to so much piety, should shew himself the master of so little charity. To all the Acts and offices of which excellent virtue, enumerated by S. Paul in his 1. Epist. to the Corinthians, cap. 13. he hath shewed himself so great a stranger▪ as if his Soul had never been acquainted with the Graces of it. Such as have thrust themselves into other mens livings, and they who patronize them in it, seem to have quitted all the other properties of Charity to the Sequestred Clergy, and retain

only to themselves the not seeking their own. For they seek after the Benefices and Goods of others. The Rear brought up by a young man of *Hickmans defence of the Fa∣thers &c. Magda∣len Coll. Oxon (whom I shall not call a whelp of the same litter, though he hath pleased to give me no other title then that of a bird of the same fea∣ther) who spends his mouth by telling his Reve∣rend brethren of the Brackly breed, that the E∣piscopal Government will be desired by the bad, and therefore that they should take care that the Good did not wish it restored also; that the Prelatical oppressions were such as might make wise men mad: that some of the Prelates might with reason be called Antichristian, whose Courts vexed sundry laborious Preachers, becaus they could not bow at the name of Jesus; when as, sundry idle sots, whom they might frequently observe to stagger in the streets, were never questioned; and finally he leaves it unto conside∣ration, whether it be not envy rather then con∣science, which maketh some to exclaim with so much bitterness, against the late Ejections, Se∣questrations & Deprivations: and whether our late Sequestrations were not more justifiable then those proceedings in the late Archbishops times, when men were suspended ab officio & beneficio, meerly for not Reading the Book of sports: In which particulars although he doth not ark so loud, yet he bites as close as any other in he Pack who have deeper mouths.
I must confess that neither finding my self par∣ticularly named in that infamous Century, nor concerned more then any other in those general ca∣lumnies, I did not think my self obliged to take no∣tice of them. It was my expectation rather, that some one or other of those who sustained most wrong, would have done themselves the right of a vindi∣cation; and not have suffered those reproaches to have gained belief, by such a dul and dangerous si∣lence. But at the last finding the cry revived by the Civil Historian, the Divine Right of Episcopacy called in question, the Bishops and Clergy igno∣rantly censured for their Proceedings in Convoca∣tion, and the subordinates of the late Archbishops (whereof I had the honour to be one) so unhand∣somely handled, I thought it my duty to appear in defence of those points, wherein I found the Author either by inadvertency, or want of better intelli∣gence to have been mistaken. And so far I was li∣berum Agens, prompted by none, but my own good affections to the pulick interess, to that undertaking. But so I cannot say of my engagings with the Church Historian, being solicited thereunto by persons of all Orders, Degrees and stations, as wel Ecclesiastical as Accademical, in the pursuance whereof, I could not but take notice of that pas∣sage before laid down, & do the poor Clergy so much right as the nature of an Animadversion might comport withal. Nec solum ad nos haec in juria∣venit ab illo, in the Poets words; it is not we a∣lone,

that are the poor sequestred and ejected Cler∣gy, but the whole Church which hath been injured by him in her power and priviledges; for the as∣serting whereof, and rectifying such mistakes as I found therein, I first applyed my self unto that per∣formance.
What led me to this Letter-Combate, with M. Baxter, you will find in the discourse it self. In which you may perceive how sensible I am of those reproaches, which he so prodigally casts abroad up∣on those poor men, whom the late Ordinance for ejecting of ignorant and scandalous Ministers hath brought under his power, I must needs say, I might have slipt my self out of this employment, as one of those whose casting out he hath disowned a∣mong many others, under the notion of being Pre∣latical, and so far interessed in the late Civil Wars, as my attending on the Kings person at Oxon can ascribe unto me. But in this case I will not sever my own interess from that of my Bre∣thren, my brethren not like Simeon and Levi, in the evil of sin, but like to Act. A∣post. 14. 5. Paul and Barnabas in the evil of Punishment, when used despitefully and threatned to be stoned to death by the men of I∣conium. For though we are all guilty through hu∣man frailties of our several sins, yet for those sins we stand accomptable onely at the Bar of Heaven: Those scandalous crimes under colour whereof so many of us have received the punishment of Se∣questration and Ejection, that the Hands of men,

falling so short from being proved, that the non∣proseuting of the Evidence to a legal Tryal, may rationally be thought to acquit us of them. And therefore I shall weave up your defence in the same peece with my own, that as we fell together, we may stand together in the recovery of that Re∣putation which is dearer to us then our lives, not suffering our common Adversaries, to deal with us as Ignorant Jurors do too often in passing their verdict upon the Prisoners at the Bar, when, with∣out consideration of the crimes or evidence, they resolve to save one half, and hang the other.
Whatsoever I have done herein, as it was done chiefly for your sakes, so (my dear Brethren) it is wholly submitted to your fair and favourable ac∣ceptaion; beseeching you to pardon the exuberan∣ces of that honest zeal, which carried me rather to the maintainance of yours and the Churches Cause, then to the preservation of my own Peace, and more particular Contentments: And to this resolution I shall stand to the very last, without retracting any thing which hath passed my hand, in reference to the just Power and Honour of the Church, or to the vindication of all Orthodox and Conformable Church-men; which I think fit the rather to make known unto you at this time, because I have met with a report, that I should supplicate for a pardon from the two Historians, for writing the Examen Historicum lately published, in which the Church and you (my Brethren) are so

much concerned; the eport was founded (as I have been nce advertized) from a passage in one of Squire Sandersons Pamphlets, in which the foolish fellow is said to affirm, That he would have spared his own and the Readers pains, in his Pur∣suit of me, if I had had so much ingenuity, as to crave pardon of him, as I did of the other, whose Hi∣stories I had also quarrelled. What he hath done in this Pursuit I am not able to say, not having trou∣bled my self to enquire after the Pamphlet, or ever heard more of it then that passage only: But if he follow the Hue and Cry no better now, then he did in his Post-hast Reply, &c. which crept out last Summer, he may be Shipt away with the next fair winde to the Isles of Scicilie. So far I am from craving pardon of this Squire, that I am sorry I have used him so like a Gentleman, and passed by so many of his follies and falsities as remain un∣touched: And so far I have been from craving pardon of the other, that being to write to him on another account, I began my Letter in these words, viz. I understand you have an Answer on the Press to my Animadversions, which I am very glad to hear of, because I hope the truth will come out between us: If you can show me any mistakes, I shall be one of the first that shall give you thanks for it, and do my endeavour to correct them: If you can charge me with any viciousness in life or conversation, do it in Gods Name, and spare not, I will not be un∣thankful to you for that neither, because I shall

the better know what I am to Reform, &c. After which preamble, I descended unto that par∣ticular which gave occasion to my writing, relating wholly to a third Person, utterly unconcerned in the differences which were betwixt us, to which he presently returns a very civil, full, and satisfa∣ctory Answer: If this be craving of pardon, I am guilty of it? And for the truth hereof, I do Ap∣peal to Mr. Fuller himself, though for my better justification, I could produce two several Copies of that Letter, one of them kept by my Amanuensis here at home, the other taken by a friend in Lon∣don, before it came to his hands; the certainty whereof I do most humbly desire you to make known, to such as come in your way, who possibly may not have the opportunity of perusing these Papers. How Mr. Fuller hath dealt with me, I am yet to learn; neither his Book it self, nor the name thereof, nor any of the Contents of it being comeM. Fuller's Appeal was sent unto the Author a∣bout four days after the date of this Preface unto me; † Which hath made me the more willing to lay hold upon this occasion, of clearing my self from that poor Aspersion, which this Squire of low Degree (they of no kin to him whom Spen∣cer speaks of) hath thrown upon me; not knowing whether I shall trouble my self in making an An∣swer to the one, but being resolved never to foule my fingers in a Reply to the other.
But all these Windes shake no Corn of mine, who have long since learned to contemn those Calum∣nies, which from my first appearing in the Churches ser∣vice, have been thrown upon me: Nor can I doubt of finding the like resolution in you (my Brethren) who have

so long been trained up in the School of Patience, that the suffering of reproaches, whether from the Tongue or Pen, from the Press or Pulpit, cannot be taken out as a new Lesson, never learnt before. I know I speak to men who are not to be put in minde of that, which you once learned in *Aesopi Fa∣buloe. Aesops Fables, in one of the Morals whereof, you are taught to imitate those generous Horses Qui latrantes canicusos cum contemptu pretereunt, which use to pass by barking curs with neglect and scorn; or to be told of that which you once read in the Annuals of Tac. An. lib. 13. Tacitus, viz. Convitia spreta exoles∣cant, that contumelies soonest dye, when regarded least; or to be remembered of that memorable saying of S. Cy∣prian, who had suffered as much in this kind as the most amongst us: But having suffered no more by the tongues of his Enemies, then Christ our Saviour did before from the hands of Judas, he thus encouraged himself, and others, by this Golden Sentence, Nec nobis turpe esse pati, quae passus est Christus, nec illis gloriam facere quae fecerit Judas. Which passages, though very full of use and comfort, how infinitely short are they of that Celestial consolation, which our Saviour gives us in his Gospel, pronouncing Mat. 5. v. 11. 12. a blessing on all those which were persecuted and reviled, and against whom all manner of evil is falsely spoken for his Name sake; assuring them, that it should be a cause of gladness and rejoy∣cing to them in this present life, and of a great reward in Heaven for the life to come. Let us therefore behave our selves with such sobriety and moderation, such piety and Christian candour, *1 Pet. c. 2. v. 12. 15. that the ignorance of foolish men may be put to silence, and that all those who speak against us as evil doers, may be convicted of their faults and malicious speakings before God and Man: But more particularly let us not suffer our selves to be abused, by any flattering and deceivable hopes of bettering our con∣dition

by the change of times; but entertain Fortune by the day, and patiently submit our selves to the appoint∣ments of that heavenly Providence, which powerfully disposeth all things to the good of the Ʋniuerse: So do∣ing, we shall show ovr selves the followers of that Lamb of God, which opened not his mouth before the shear∣ers; the Scholars of that gracious Master, who when he was reviled, reviled not again, nor used any unbe∣coming speeches in the midst of his sufferings. For my own part, I hope I have so carried my self in these. Let∣ter Combates, that my language shall not be offensive to any, though possibly the matter prove unpleasing to some, who are of a different judgment from me in the Points Disputed. From whom if I heare nothing which may force me to Replication, I am resolved to sit down quietly for the time to come, having concluded with my self, not to engage hereafter in any of these unhappy Con∣troversies, which this unhappy Age hath bred, but where some unavoidable necessity shall compel me to it: For though Mr. Baxter hath been pleased in a late Book of his, to give me the Title of an hot Anti-Puritan, as I am credibly informed by a Letter, which is come newly to my hands: I verily perswade my self, that nei∣ther you nor he, will finde any such heat in my Confe∣rence with him, as may render me obnoxious to that ac∣cusation: But whether it be so or not, and whether that which I have done in that whole Discourse, to which Mr. Baxter is a party, will be taken for an acceptable service to your selves and the Church our mother, re∣mains in you to be determined; to whose upright, just, and impartial censure, I do most chearfully recommend my performance in it (the other tracts having particular applications) as I do you to the divine consolations of the Heavenly Comforter, with that affection which becometh.
 Lacies Court in Abing don, y 2. 1659.
