



Sweet Child,
THou hast (by the Lords Grace) this day receiv'd the first visible Signe and Seale of his Covenant with us: thou hast e'en now beene Baptiz'd with Water, and (as I may comfortably conceive) with the Spirit of God, who (if thou canst attaine the yeares of discretion) will (I hope and pray) as∣sist thee with his effectuall grace, to cast off the old man, Adam, with his sinfull affections and actions; and put on the new, Christ Jesus, with his whole Righteousnes: renewing thy heart by degrees, and sanctifying thy person; thus begetting thee to himselfe, by the outward seed of his Word, and his inward lights and motives. This is my hope and pray'r for thee. But because this converting Word is not often preacht so fully & diligently, as I wish; our old men being commonly in manie places of this Land, babes in knowledge, and Children in Christian wisdome: lest thou should'st want that necessarie food, for thy soules everlasting life; here is, my Love, here is a help, to know that God, to whom this day, thou hast vow'd Faith and Obe∣dience. Here is a Confession, made for thee in the Wombe, and now presented thee, for thy future in∣struction,

consolation and salvation. Receive it courteously, Deare Babe; cast on it thy mild lookes; take it with thy litle fingers; kisse it with thy soft, sweet, sucking lips; and hereafter esteeme it above all riches, & keep it as thy life. 'Tis thine, & made for thee, although I say, it is likewise made for others, thy vertuous and beauteous Mother, thy wittie and prettie Sister. Thou maist hereafter un∣derstand, Knowledge is like the Sunne, which casts his beames abroad, and yet looses no light: Or like a Torch, at which millions may be lighted, without prejudice to anie, or to it selfe: for, light and heat are common unto all bodies, and given all to all. In giving Instructions, that, which I give, remaines with me; and although all the world divide my gift, yet each man may receive it whole. Thinke not therefore this Booke lesse thine; be∣cause composed for others: but rather indeavour, to make it truly thine, by diligently learning it, and heartily beleeving, boldly professing, faithfully practising that sound Faith, and those pious Works, I have taught thee in it and in my Catechisme, de∣dicated to thy faire and loving Sister, which I give thee likewise. And when thus thou hast made them thine, hide not thy light, my Deare; burie not thy talent: but as a Sunne, impart thy light and heat to thy friends, nighbours, yea all men, with whom thou shalt converse. Let it be thy daily studie & holie ambition, to doe well to all men; so behaving thy selfe, that by thy vertuous examples, Christian in∣structions, and friendlie admonitions, no man goe from thee without gaine. Convert sinners from their ill wayes: comfort the penitent and afflicted, in their sorrow & griefes: releeve the poore, in their hunger, nakednes, miseries: instruct the ignorant, in honestie and religion: and as Peter,

confirme thy brethren the faithfull, in Christian verities and religious duties. Doe this, my sweet Infant, doe this diligently, having no other inten∣tion, then to please, serve, obey that God, who shall (I hope) give thee both the will & the deed, both the desire and pow'r to doe such noble things. And as that gracious God hath made me a good helpe, for thy greater and speedier abilitie, to advance his glorie; studie my Love, studie by thy dutifull observance, to answer (if I live) the great affection, care and paines of me.

Pointington.
2. of March, and the 13. day of thy Life. 1644.
