



IT is not the Ignis fatuus of Ap∣plause, and po∣pular Euge's, that produced this Publi∣cation; since 'tis perspicu∣ous,
 no man, but he that hath as great a stock of impudence, as impiety, can lay claim to it; being the composition of your Reverend Pastor, lately devested of Mortality.
Nor is the exposing these Sermons to publique view intended to add to the mass of any mans do∣lor or Internal Regret, for the violent death of the pi∣ous Author; but to pre∣vent the fictitious Chimae∣ra's of many crazy brains, that would shroud them∣selves under his Name,
 induced to it by Avarice,; whose thoughts level at no other mark but their own sordid Lucre; and also, that so pious a Beads-man might have somewhat en∣graven upon the forehead of Time, and his name velit nolit invidia vigere. Wherefore here ye have a Volume of the elaborate Pieces of this famous Pillar of the Church; some, as they did flow in their na∣tive purity from his own mouth; others, penned by no meaner a Scribe then his sacred self.

'Tis but small, as to the Bulk; but vast, as to the Value; in which is such a plerophory of significant expressions, besides the solid Divinity, that if up∣rightly fathom'd by the utmost extent of the subli∣mest thought, it will be judged so neat and terse a Piece, that the whole World can scarce pro∣duce a Parallel. Therefore they croud and thrust themselves under the wings of your Patronage, that so (being acceptable to you all his quondam-Parishioners)
 they may be sheltered from the con∣tagious emissions of that universal Basilisk, Detra∣ction.
That there is nothing able to preserve a mans fame intire and verdant in spite of the Iron teeth of time, but the issue of the Brain, the Muse of Mel∣lifluous Naso, as inge∣nuously, as harmoniously, informs us, by this war∣bling Rithme:

—Nil non mortale te ne∣mus
Pectoris exceptis, ingenii{que} bonis. Pity it is, they should continue in the obscure darkness of Latency, and the opack shades of silence. Therefore do they now, like Noahs dove, bear an Olive-branch of Assu∣rance and Consolation to all soules, that as yet re∣main in the Ark of God, preserved from the deluge of sin.

They were the last that he pronounced in a Pul∣pit; therefore should be entertained with more zeal, and read with more circumspection: that God may be praised, his servant admired, your souls bene∣fited, and our Holy Mo∣ther the Church lamented for the death of so pious a Son of hers; whose loss no pen can pourtray with its sable colours, nor tongue express by all its diapred variety. But since it is the will of the Almighty to permit such things for our
 correction and amend∣ment, let us with a pious silence resign our selves up unto God (according to the advice of this renown∣ed Clergy-man in his last words) and pray for a more comely decorum in the Church, that so the coelestial Manna of Gods Word, may be admini∣stred to us by the truly-Orthodox; that the Queen of Sciences, Divi∣nity, may not be so slut∣tishly attired, as it ap∣poars too often she is, to our intolerable grief; that
 men may no longer shun the beauty of the Church, but dwell in Gods Holy Temple.
One thing may not be omitted, and that is this: when the Library of this famous Divine was sur∣veyed, on some of his writings there was found engraven with his own pen, these words;Luk. 18.13. God be merciful to me a sinner; and underneath, this inge∣nious and divine Para∣phrase: To separate God and Mercy, would be blas∣phemy; To separate Mercy
 and Sinner, would be de∣spair; To separate me and sinner, would be presum∣ption: A divine Para∣phrase, worthy so rare a Divine.
To accumulate his Herse with Encomiums, will be to little purpose, since his works will predi∣cate his Fame,
—A Gabibus usque
Auroram & Gangem.
This is the comfort of all true Christians; he is not amissus, but praemissus;
 not lost, but sent before: let us crave therefore of the Almighty Jehovah, that we may all meet in Hea∣ven with him, there to sing perpetual Hallelu∣jahs, VVorld without end.
