




THe richest rarest mercies, daily sent
(Right Christian brethren) to us of this land,
From Gods ore-flowing grace, al-filling hand
May be compar'd to th'Sun in firmament.


Whose glorious rayes all creatures hearts revive,
Whose light enlightens all the world throughout,
Whose heat doth cherish plants that spring and sprout,
Whose shine to want doth us of ioy deprive.


Yet since, so daily, man doth it enjoy,
Who is't (almost) that valews it aright?
Who yeelds due praise to heaven for heavens sweet light?
O few or none. Abundance does us cloy.



From whence, we (therefore) iustly may conclude,
That Gods rich mercies, which we oft possesse,
Wherwith he daily, hourly doth us blesse,
We all receive with great ingratitude.


I need not stand t'exemplifie the same,
It is a fault too frequent, too rank grown,
And yet to God, more odious, ther's not one,
And which to Christians brings more smart and shame.


Of spirituall-blessings, our thrice blest Salvation
Wrought by our Saviour, bought with's precious-blood,
Was most divine, gave man his chiefest good,
Was more admir'd than was the worlds Creation.


But, of all temp'rall-blessings we enioy'd
Since God did form the Earth and heavenly frame
To our deliverance, never greater came,
When Rome by pouder, would have us destroy'd.


How thankfull for the first, to God we are
I'll tax nones conscience, but examine mine:
But for the second, how we doe decline
From giving thanks to God, I may not spare,


To tell you all (my Christian brethren deare)
That, which if I should silence, sencelesse stones,
(Tis to be fer'd) would sound with mournfull groans;
Englands ingratitude is too-too cleare.


For why? not only Popish Jebusites,
Already do begin (as plain appeares)
To buze, with brazen browes, into the ears
And mindes of their seduced proselytes.



Yea and perswade too-many Protestants
That there was never any pouder-plot,
But, that (we falsly) stain them with that spot
The Cath'likes to disgrace with cuslesse taunts.


For this cause, therfore▪ I have ta'ne in hand,
Again to sing (to Gods due praise and glory
In this revived and most faithfull Story)
How powerfully God to our Church did stand.


Which, now, at last (though, with much strugling) I,
(By Gods aid, in our pious Parliament)
Have brought to publike view, thus to prevent
Our times dough-Hos. 7. 4, 6, 7. D. Baker a late most impudent Apostate, who would not license this my Historie, because, as he said, we were not so angrie with the Papists now a dayes (though wee never had grea∣ter cause than in these our daies) as they were 20. or 30. yeers agoe, and one Mr. Cros∣field a Se∣nior fel∣low of Queenes Colledge in Oxford, could not (as he en∣deavoured) get it licensed for the Presse there. Nor could Mr. Daniell▪ Cambridge Printer (who would have printed it there) get it licensed at Cambridge, Dr. Brumrick being then Vicechan. O tempora! O mores! Bakers base malignity:


Who, heated had their Oven, extremely▪ hot,
To burn-up in Oblivions smoakey-flame,
The memory (to our eternall shame)
Of this nefarious Popish Pouder-Plot.


And 'gainst which, though some temporizing-minde
May scoffe and scorn, in this my good intention,
Though from Romes favorites, nought but reprehension
And taunting termes I shall (uniustly) finde,


Though Rome doth curse me with bell, book and candle
And like a gal'd-backt-iade doth kick and winch;
Yet I their sores have laboured so to pinch,
As in their nature, iustly, them to handle.


But, if to you (my brethren deare) I may
For my poore labour kindly be respected,
And from calumniators fangs protected
I shall acknowledge this a rich repay.



If I (hereby) may move and stimulate,
Your Christian hearts to zealous detestation
Of Romes most impious foule abhomination,
And heavens rich mercies oft to ruminate,


Chiefly, the great miraculous defence
From this nefarious pouder-plot of Rome,
Wherin our King and Kingdomes they did doome
To dire destruction, fatall violence.


Then, happy I (maugre Romes worst despight)
That God, hereby, may have due thanks and praise,
That this occasion may mens hearts incite
This fact, with fame to memorize alwayes;
Read then (kinde Reader) what's amisse amend,
And kindly take the good-will of thy friend,


