



WHen I first heard that I was designed for this solemne service, being conscious of my own in∣sufficiencie to Preach to so awfull an Assembly, I couldnot entertaine it without trouble; yet resolved with Luther, rather to undergoe others Inveniar sanè suberbus &c. modò impit silcu∣tii non arguar dum Dominus patititur. Luth. Ep. ad Staup. censures, then to be reproved for ungodly silence, in such times when the Lord suffereth. And now I have as much reason to be full of blushings, to thinke that this plaine Dis∣course should be exposed to more publique view; but herein I must resigne up my self unto your disposings, to whom I owe, & quod possum, & quod non possum, much more then my meanenesse can performe.
This Sermon, such an one as it is, I humbly tender to your Gracious Acceptance, who have adopted it; I put it into your Honourable Protection, who have listed it; I commend it to your Practicall observation, for whom I intended it; heartily desiring Gods Blessing upon your spirits in the perusall of it; that you may read and act it, turning words into works, that you may repeate it over in your lives, which is the best repeti∣tion of Sermons.
Our present breaches, call for a contribution from every

one, for the repairing of them; but much is expected from you, who are called to be publique Counsellors, and thereby ob∣liged to expresse a publique frame of spirit (which is the beau∣tie and strength of a Great Councell), swallowing up your private interests, in the publique Welfare. Not with Baruch, seeking great things for your selves, which is most incongru∣ous to Stormy times, but rather resembling Melancthon, who Ier. 45▪ 5. professed, though he had many Domesticall troubles, yet the publique wounds of the Church most deeply afflicted him. England is more bemoaned, by many with that language in Austin over the poore man. Quomodo huc cecidisti? Alas how camest thou into these distractions? She may answer as Aug. Ep. 129. the poore man there, standing in more need of reliefe then dis∣course. Obsecro cogita quomodo hinc me liberes. Thinke how I may be rescued out of thse troubles. Towards this blessed Worke, I have cast in my two mites, moving in the proper sphaere of a Divine, as an Agent for the Truth, per∣swading you, who are betrusted by others, and have farre en∣gaged your selves in the Reformation of Religion, that with all your might, you would promote The Trade of Truth.
It is not for me to suggest a Methode in the execution of your counsels. He whose name is Counsellour guide you; yet I shall still pray that in your Intention, the purging, the set∣ling, Isa. 9. 6. the advancing of True Religion may be most Dear un∣to you. It is one maine end, and a pretious fruit of govern∣ment, that wee may lead peaceable and quiet lives in All Godlinesse and honestie. This is well worth peoples wrast∣ling prayers, and your most active endeavours. The sta∣billity 1 Tim. 2. 2. of all our blessings must come by the True Religi∣on, Gods presence is the best security, who is most power∣fully present where there is most power and purity of Re∣ligion. Would you have a flourishing Kingdome, advance the Kingdome of Christ in it. Let the State maintaine Religion, and Religion will blesse the State, could you settle all our State liberties, yet if the Arke of Truth bee taken from us, Our glory is departed, we may write these mourning chara∣cters upon all our Comforts, ICHABOD, where is the glory? 1 Sam. 4. 21, 22.

It is too high a complement in the Lord Cordes, a French Commander, who often said, that he would willingly lie Hollinsh. in Hen. 7. seven yeeres in Hell, so that Callice were in the possession of the French againe. We blesse God for that reall selfe-deny all and activity ye have expressed, abating so many personall and fa∣mily contentments, in your long attendance upon publike affaires. Be not weary of well doing, in due season ye shall reape if you faint not. Gal. 6. 9.
Never had any PARLIAMENT more work to do; Ire∣land still bleeds, the affaires thereof find unhappy obstructi∣ons. To subdue Rebellion, to plant Religion there, are great matters. England is very much out of frame. The Church cals for Truth; the State cryes for Peace, they who sowed in hope, reape in feare, out sickles are turning into swords. Now to effect an happy correspondence betwixt our Soveraigne and his people, a blessed compliance betwixt England and Religion, heres work for the strongest should∣ers.
Never had any PARLIAMENT greater opposition. As Nehem. 4. 17. our builders worke with one hand, and hold a weapon with the other. Achitophels plot, Rabshekahs raile, Sanballats mocke. Yea since councels of Reformation, there is a more malignant antipathy appears against truth in many places. As 2 Tim. 3. 13. evill men and seducers waxe worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived. Yet be encouraged Worthy Sirs. Never had any PARLIAMENT so many Thundring Legions of praying Christians, to assist them. when others insult and blaspheme, Iacobs posterity are wrestling with God for you, resolving not to let him goe till he blesse you. And whilst you are pursuing peace, allow this plaine Sermon that humble boldnesse as to whisper you in the eare, beseeching you still to maintain your former zeale in the cause of Truth. When did your counsels prosper more, then when you were most active about religion. When you were building the Lords House. For hee builded yours as Hag. 2. 19. from this day I will blesse you.
Be pleased therfore more and more to engage your selves

for the Truth, so shal you engage God for you; let your cause be His cause then his Attributes will be yours, his providence will work for you, his spirit wil work in you; then will you 2 King. 6. 16. have more with you then against you, though the Devill and the Pope combine. Do your owne work, trust God with his; duty is ours, Events, successe are his. Commit the keeping of your soules, of the Church, of the state, to him in well doe∣ing as unto a faithfull creator. Truth will yet Triumph, Ba∣bylon 1 Pet. 4. 19. and all her Crutches must downe; the fight of faith is a good fight, because such souldiers are sure of the victory. 1 Tim. 6. 12. The kingdome of Christ shall prevaile, though second causes be impotent, yet the zeale of the Lord of Hoasts will perform this. Isa. 9. 7.
When Hierusalem is restored it will be a city of Truth Zach. 8. 3. O that all our Parliament worthyes, might bee so valiant for the Truth that England might become a king∣dome of Truth; following Chronicles will then give you a share in that Honour of being the Churches Saviours, as O∣bad. v. 21. and God will put Zerubbabels high dignity upon you, making you as Signets. Hag. 2. 23.
The Good Lord guide, unite, act and blesse your counsels, And think upon you for good, according to all you have done, or shall doe for his people.

