



I Doubt not but there are many amongst you, Right Ho∣nourable and Worthy Citizens; yea, very many who seriously set their faces towards Sion; The whole Kingdome hath abundantly tasted the excellent fruites of your reall forwardnesse in this good way. Travellers are usually as glad of Guides, as of Companions, especially in doubtfull wayes: And wee are fallen among so many Questio∣nists, and such thick mists of strange Doctrines, obscuring the good way so much, that we had need seeke cleere direction, other∣wiseMany mists of new opinions which much puzzle Travel∣lers. wee may soone be at a losse. We heare of Antinomians who deny the Law, to bee a rule of life to Saints: Wee heare of Socinians, who in a manner overthrow the Gospel, denying the satisfaction of Christ: We heare of Arminians, who undermine the Covenant of Free-grace, that they may gratifie Free-will: We heare of Anabaptists, who with-hold Baptisme the Seale of that Covenant from the Infants, even of such as are in Cove∣nant: We heare of others, who question the Truth of our Church, and of our Ministry, in and by which so many thousand soules have been new borne to God: Yea, we heare of some grown to

that desperate height, that they say, there is no need of Ministry or Ordinances, flattering us with hope of new Apostles, & glo∣rious discoveries by them. Hereby Religion is much mangled, and well meaning minds not a little distracted, which way to take. It is the Ministers worke to warne against enemies, to directEzek 33. 7. Matth. 5. 14 Joh. 5. 35. Psal. 119. 105. against errors, to carry the Lanthorne and Candle of Gods Word, before people in the darke, that they may find the best way. What sparkes of light this plaine Sermon holds forth, were at first blowne up by your desire, and now by your importuni∣ty being made Publike are kept burning. The good Lord (who de∣spiseth not the day of small things) quicken your Spirits hereby in Heaven-way; I shall heartily rejoice if your attention in hearing, shall be seconded with intention in acting over that Counsell whch was given you from the Word of God. This is the best commendation of a Sermon, to walke in the light and heat of it in your conversation▪ what is wanting in the strength and lustre of this Discourse, will in part be supplyed by its seasonable∣nesse.
In these times of Reformation we should bee often put in mind, to stand, see, inquire: As in building we beware of mistakes in the foundation; In Physicke, of errors in the first concocti∣on; in both these they are dangerous, because hardly corrigible; So in journeys we should wisely watch against erring, both at our first setting out, and especially when we come to a great turning, if then we mistake the right way, we shall not easily recover. How carefull was Ezra to seeke of God a right way, when he was going from Babylon to Jerusalem? Hee proclaimed a Fast for that purpose at the River Ahava, and that a most religiousEza 8. 21. ground, Ver. 22. We in England are now engaged in counsels of Reformation, that we may remove further from Babylon to∣wards Jerusalem. And by the good hand of God upon us, we are under his owne Ordinance, an Assembly of Ministers is called to discover the Scripture way. It is worth much importu∣nity,

in Fasting and Praying; that being come to so great a turn∣ing, upon so grand a change in the Church of England, wee may cleerly find the good old way: Wee must expect SatanZach 3. 1. who stood at Joshuahs right hand to resist him, when hee was about Temple-worke, will now use all his methods to prplexe and to mis-lead us, to involve us in difficulties, and in angle us with errors: If he cannot wholly turne us out of the good way, he will indeavour to cast stumbling-blocks in it, and by variety of opinions, to multiply divisions about it; yea, hee knowes how by faire pretences, and by good words, to cousen us into bad wayes. New-England affords us a sad instance of this policy. A wor∣thy Divine of their owne tells us, by what sleights the Antino∣mians, Familists, and Libertines, infected the Churches there, As they would lift up themselves, (saith hee) so also theirSee Mr. Well Preface to a short Story of the rise, and reigne, and ru∣ine of the An∣tinomians, Fa∣milists, and Li∣bertines which infected New-England. p. 4. opinions, by guilding them over with specious termes of Free grace, glorious light, Gospel Truths, as holding forth naked Christ, &c. and this tooke much with simple honest hearts, who loved Christ; especially with new Converts, who were lately in bondage under sinne and wrath, and had newly tasted the sweetnesse of Free-Grace, being now in their first love to Christ, they were exceeding glad to im∣brace any thing that might further advance Christ and Free-Grace, and so dranke them in readily.
Yet be not discouraged, I beseech you; your wise and powerfullIsa. 9. 6. Saviour hath the Government upon his owne shoulders; heZach. 3. 2. can easily rebuke Satan, well knowing how to confute errors, resolve doubts, and compose differences, hee can conquer the greatest difficulties, or remove them with ad∣vantage to his owne Cause, and your Soules. Doe not despaire but Gods Counsels are ripening towards such a time, when you may find rest after your long motion, stability after your many shakings, and when you shall reape the harvest of all the prayers and good indeavours you have sown, and receive rich interest

for all the blood and Treasure you have expended in his Gospells Cause. Who knowes but London, by the Free-Grace of God, after all these blacke and bloody clouds, may have cause to coine Money, (as they did in worthy Mr. Farrells time, who hadSulet. Annal. p. 384. 474. Post tenebras lux. Deus no∣ster pugnat pro¦nis. been so much opposed and threatned in reforming Geneva and o∣ther Cities?) with this Posie on the one side: Light after a long darknesse; and on the other side: Our God fights for us▪ You have had many visible Providences, as well as precious pro∣mises, encouraging you to persevere in the good way. Hee hath wrought wonderfully for you, and by you; his good hand re∣maine upon you, till he bring you to ervelasting rest.
The Lord refresh London with the comfort of those goodZach. 2. 5. words he spke unto Jerusalem: I will be unto her a wall of fire round about, and will bee the glory in the midst of her. So prayes heartily,

