


IT is the commendation and glory of great works to be carried through difficulties, to be borne up and brought to passe in despight of oppositions. The street & wall of Ierusalem were built in troublous times. The Church comonly passeth thorough fire and water to her highest advancements & inlargements. So it comes to passe, partly thorough the malice of adversaries, who straine their rage higher according to the Churches risings; if we could empty hell and the world of enmity, we might perhaps) steale quietly to Heaven, and injoy spirituall priviledges with out∣ward ease; principally, thorough the wisdome of God in the dispensation of mercies; he raises the value of them by put∣ting them off upon hard termes. We should be apt to surfet of priviledges, to kick against him that feeds us, and light∣ly to esteeme the rock of our Salvation, if the Lord did not diet and physick us, if he did not acute our appetites by some sharp mixtures, some bitter ingredients in our sweetest and fullest cup; if he did not keep our souls in a longing temper by holding forth blessings to us, after which we must reach and straine, and presse even thorow a piece of hell, through a world of dangers and hardships before we attain them. And
if good things dearly come by are to be highly prized, I do not see how we can over-rate those we are now pursuing. All our gold in full weight cannot satisfie our enemies, their sword is cast into the ballance, they hunt after our pretious souls. Yea, the Lord cals upon us to expend not only teares and cries, but bloud and life and all: Rich mercies they are which he holds at such a rate, indeed more worth then our all. The insuing dis∣course shewes forth a little glimpse of their excellency, which in all humility I present to your view. It is your high pre∣ferment in Gods favour (Honourable Patriots) that he conveyes our blessings to us through your hands that you are made the chieftaines, the leaders among and above your bre∣thren. And although the heat, the brunt lie mainly upon you, yet are your protections strong, your reward sure. I need not tell you that the eyes of men and Angels are upon you; that the Christian world is at agaze, filled with expectation of the glorious results of your high and difficult indeavours. We all rise or fall, in all probability) as you stand faithfull & uni∣ted in the work you have in hand. Your imployments are emi∣nent, your interesses deep; the concernment is publike, reach∣ing all that have a share in Zions prosperity. The Lord fa∣sten you as nailes in a sure place, that we may be an ha∣bitation of justice, and a mountain of holinesse, and the blessings of the Lord may be upon us. So prayeth

