



My Lords,
GODS Providence hath cast you in∣to these times wherein there are ve∣ry many of Solomons Puritans, Prov. 30. 12. There is a genera∣tion that are pure in their own eyes, and yet is not washed from their filthinesse. Wherin Iudes Separatists swarm, such mockers who walk after their owne ungod∣ly lusts, who separate themselves, sensuall, hav∣ing not the Spirit, Iude ver. 19, 20. But I hope his Spirit is teaching you to bee Pauls Separatists, acquainting you with such a pure Separation from

unclean persons and things, as may well bee the ob∣ject of your thoughts, the matter of your Coun∣sels, the summe of your Prayers, and scope of your Indevours. It will bee a very great addition to your greatnesse, to ingage your selves fully herein. There are no men more miserable then those who are Gratius est no men pietatis quam potestatis. great and evill, none more happy then they who are great and good. It is noblenesse indeed to have an heroicall spirit for God: It is true high-minded∣nesse to bee heavenly minded, to have pure mindes.
This poore Church hath had her Autumn, her declining under many pollutions, and her Winter of Humiliation; Blessed bee the good hand of God, wee see some hopes of a Spring, of pure Reforma∣tion, which will usher in a Summer of deliverance.
It is true, wee are still in the Wildernesse, where wee meet with many Amalekites, who do oppose us, and with divers false spies, who raise an evill re∣port of the promised Land, disparaging by their tongues and pens our hop't for Reformation. The Lord keep us all from Wildernesse sins, from repi∣ning and quarrelling at his dispensations: farre bee it from any to desire such Captaines as would bring us back againe to Aegypt. Your Lordships have had the honour to bee our Ioshuahs, to bee our Leaders in several steps of the Reformation: (which

will stand upon Record to the everlasting renowne of the House of Peers) and I hope you have ta∣sted some such bunches of Grapes from the Holy Land, as will quicken your desires after a more full separation from all impurity.
There are two taking words abroad, grown very familiar in our discourses, Purity and Liberty. Let Purity and Liberry goe hand in hand. Sweet words, precious things, it is pity they should ever bee severed. It is well worthy of your care to incourage such a purity as will adorn and sweeten Liberty, and withall to countenance such a Liber∣ty as will maintain and cherish purity. God forbid, that any should expect countenance from you, for any thing like licentiousnes, whereby purity should bee in the least measure blemished and betrayed.
Sometimes amongst Physicians there is as much in the Method, as in the Medicine; I beleeve Poli∣ticians may finde the same. I doubt not but in your Treaty for Peace you will begin with Purity; the wisedome which is from above, is first pure, and then peaceable; and rather abate in any thing which James 3. 17. concernes your selves, then in purity, wherein the honour of God is so much interessed.
Ride on prosperously in all your Marches after Scripture purity; If you meet with Mountaines of difficulty in the way, bee not dismayed. Re∣member

Lots Wife, what it cost her who looked back only, though she went not back. You wel know, that Faith and Friendship are best tryed in extre∣mities, and in the heat of opposition.
If the distractions still continue without, labour to get and keep a calm within, no feast like that of a good Conscience, which is Meat, Mufick, Wel∣come; No such Friend, who will bee a cheere∣full Companion though alone, even in the worst seasons: Bee yee therefore doing much for your God in the cause of purity, alwayes abouding in his work, forasmuch as you know that your labour is not in vain in the Lord. Bee pleased to ac∣cept 1 Cor. 15. 58. this from a Remembrancer to

