



Right Worshipfull,
AMong the many comforts I have met with in your family, where I found the first safe and quiet har∣bour after my wanderings and tossings in the common storme, I cannot but prize it as an eminent one, that there I injoyed the sweet company of that worthy Gentleman, our dear friend, whose name this paper bears; by whose favours I have been really helped and refreshed, and from whose wisedome and goodnesse (if I prove not defective to my selfe) I might learn much. When I was cal∣led to performe that last sad office for him, I could heartily have desired that it had ra∣ther
been put into the hands of some one of the most able and famous of my brethren, whose parts and credit might have better reached the worth, and set forth the renown of a person so worthy of the highest honour. Yet that which animated me to the taske, as a duty something fit for me, was the consider∣ation of my intimate converse with him in the last and best acted part of his time; whereby I had this advantage, that as affe∣ction stirred me to speak freely of him, so conscience prompted me, and experience in∣abled me to speak the known truth, and that only. My hopes are, that my obscurity or weaknesse, shall not leave any blemish on his excellencies, which deserve to be drawn and flourished by the most curious pencill; which will shine forth in despite of oblo∣quie and ill will, either of open enemies, or of those at home, whose ill-affected eyes could not brook the clear and lightsome beams of
his unmasked and unmixed integrity. In∣deed I doubt not but when all such shall be parables of the dust written in the earth, rotting in infamy, his memory shall be bles∣sed, and his name dear; yea so long as the name of Parliament shall be precious to England: And precious may that great name be, preserved and blessed that society, so long as we continue a people.
This incult piece, such as it is, I humbly present to you, and that as your due; not only in regard of my manifold and deep ingage∣ments to you, but principally in respect of your interesses in him that is gone to God; between whom and you there passed and continued an intercourse of hearty, reall, and scarcely to be parallelled friendship. Besides, the subject matter of the Sermon is proper and pertinent to you; it sets forth the serviceablenesse of the godly to their generation. For your part, Sir, your cor∣diall,
usefull, unwearied activity for the publique, is well known to all that know you aright. And you, Madame, are every day casting in your contributions, laying out your interesses in Heaven for the common good. I know you both desire to act rather then to hear of what you do. Go on to do as you do, and still more abundantly. And the choicest blessings of Heaven and earth be multiplied upon you, and upon your hope∣full progeny. So prayeth.

