



GEntlewomen, of what degree or condition soever, whe∣ther high or low, rich or poor, nobly descended, or sprung out of the Beg∣gars Cottage, I beseeeh you call to remembrance (be some of you never so
great and eminent) That ye are all the Daughters of Eve, who was the Author of much more evil to mankinde, in se∣ducing her Husband to eat of the forbidden Fruit, then Judas was in betraying our Saviour; for thereby, not onely Adam, and all his Poste∣rity became accursed, as ever since, to eat their Bread in the sweat of their Brows; but also the
very Earth was cursed for his sake to bring forth Thorns and Thistles; and all Creatures ever since, even to this present day, have, do, and will to the end of the World, groan under the burthen there∣of; which I have thought fit to premise to work in you poverty of spirit, and that excellent and adorn∣ing Grace of Humility, which is the first, second, and third step to Heaven
(yet doth not abound in most Women:) But however, that foundati∣on being laid, ye will be the better fitted and pre∣pared, patiently, and without prejudice to read the ensuing Treatise, e∣specially if ye call to re∣membrance, that into∣lerable Pride, that high and transcendent Pre∣sumption, and that un∣parallel'd Disobedience against the Mighty God,
committed by Eve in eating of the forbidden Fruit; whereas in very few days before (if not the same day) she was made but of one of the crooked Ribs of her Hus∣band, and he himself but of the dust of the Earth: And not to be content to live in that pleasant Gar∣den, and to eat of all the rare Fruits therein (one Tree onely excepted) but to aspire to be as God him∣self,
knowing good and evil; and yet she was ex∣presly forbidden by her Eternal Creator not to eat thereof, telling her, That the same day she did eat, she should die; yet she hark∣ned to a lie told her by the Serpent, that old de∣ceiver, who was a lier from the beginning, being the ruthless enemy of man∣kinde: And thereupon seeing that the Tree was good for meat, and plea∣sant
to the eye, did eat and gave to her Hus∣band; preferring the voice of the Devil, be∣fore the voice of Almighty God.
And good Women, let me humbly entreat you to search your hearts, Whether from that accursed example, ye are not to this day more prone to give ad∣mission and entertain∣ment to the dictates, and
cunning insinuations of Satan, then to the blessed Motions of Gods holy Spirit.
I have often read over the whole Book of God, and taken several Notes, and many Collections out of the same, and thereby am as well pre∣pared to express the du∣ties of Husbands towards Wives, as of Wives towards Husbands, for the Scripture is full of
both; which service I will readily do for any of your Sex, who shall de∣sire it, and will be pleased to signifie so much unto the Printer hereof, who will soon give me notice accordingly.
But I am loath to leave you sad and melancholy, for notwithstanding this great transgression, com∣mitted by your Grand∣mother, there remains comfort to your self,
and to your Off-spring: To your selves in that thorow-bearing of Chil∣dren, ye shall be saved: to your off-spring, in that God telleth the Devil thus, Thou shalt break his head, and he shall bruise thy heel.
Moreover, Cornelius Agrippa writing in com∣mendation of Women, hath four notable Ar∣guments to prove the nobleness of Women.

1. From the more excel∣lent Name which God (who knew all Creatures before he named them) gave to the first Woman thus. Adam had his name from Earth, but Eve hers from Life.
2. From the order of time, for God made Wo∣man last, and with her fi∣nished his work, leaving off at his best, and most perfect∣ed piece.
3. From the place of
her Creation, Man was made without, and was afterwards brought into the Garden of Eden, but Eve was created even within Paradise it self.
4. From the Matter, Adam was formed out of Matter inanimate (vile Clay) but his Wife of a Matter purified and ani∣mated.
But I will draw to a conclusion, and humbly entreat a favorable, and
charitable construction to be made of what I have here conceived; and that I may not be so un∣happy as to be stiled (or so much as thought) to be an enemy unto Wo∣men, whom I love and honor, and from whom I had my beginning, sucking the Paps of my own Natural Mother; and having been the Husband of two Wives, and the Father of many
Children, both Sons and Daughters yet living.
Lastly, I must ac∣knowledge that I entred into the consideration of these things, upon obser∣vation of the lives, dispo∣sition, and conversation of two Gentlewomen nearly related to me, and both of my intimate ac∣quaintance for divers years last past.
And therefore as some Almanack-makers write
thus, That their Book was calculated for the Meridian of such a place, but may serve generally for all Great Britain, so I hope, and pray, That this poor work of mine (being principally in∣tended only for the good of the two particular Gentlewomen before men∣tioned) may speed as well, and be useful in all places; and then this Widows mite being ac∣cepted,
and having that operation, will encourage me to publish another Work of a far higher concernment (almost ready for the Press.) So commending it, and all of you to Gods blessing, I take leave and rest

From Grays-Inn, 20 Dec. 1659.
