



May it please your Lordship,
IT was the speech of the Roman people (to whom the name of King had been render'd odious, as well by the tyrannie of the Tarquins, as by the Genius and Decretals of that City) 'Twas the speech I say of the Publick, however pronounced from a private mouth, (if yet Cato the Censor were no more

then such) That all Kings are to be reckon'd amongst ravenous Feasts. But what a Beast of Prey was the Roman people, whilst with its conquering Ea∣gles it erected its▪ proud Tro∣phee so far and wide over the world, bringing the Africans, the Asiaticks, the Macedom∣ans, and the Achaeans, with many other despoyled. Nati∣ons, into a specious bondage, with the pretence of preferring them to be Dezons of Rome? So that if Cato's saying were a wise one, 'twas every whit as wise that of Pontiue Telesinus; who flying about with open mouth through all the Com∣panies of his Army, (in that fa∣mous encounter which he had with Sylla) cryed out, That Rome her selfe, as well as Sylla, was to be raz'd; for that there would alwayes be Wolves and Depraedatours of their Liberty,

unlesse the Forrest that lodg'd them were grubb'd up by the roots. To speak impartially, both sayings are very true; That Man to Man is a kind of God; and that Man to Man is an arrant Wolfe: The first is true, if we compare Citizens a∣mongst themselves; and the se∣cond, if we compare Cities. In the one, there's some analogie of similitude with the Deity, to wit, Justice and Charity, the twin-sisters of peace: But in the other, Good men must defend themselves by taking to them for a Sanctuary the two daugh∣ters of War, Deceipt and Vio∣lence: that is in plaine termes a meer brutall Rapacity: which aong men object to one a∣nother; as a reproach, by an in∣bred custome which they have of beholding their own actions in the persons of other men, wherein, as in a Mirroir, all

things on the left side appeare to be on the right, & all things on the right side to be as plain∣ly on the left; yet the naturall right of Preservation which we all receive from the uncon∣troulable Dictates of Necessi∣ty, will not admit it to be a Vice, though it confesse it to be an Unhappinesse. Now that with Cato himselfe, (a Person of so great a renowne for wis∣dome) Animosity should so prevaile instead of Judgement, and Partiality instead of Rea∣son, that the very same thing which he thought equall in his Popular State, he should cen∣sure as unjust in a Monarchical, other men perhaps may have leisure to admire. But I have been long since of this opi∣nion, That there was never yet any more-then-vulgar-pru∣dence that had the luck of be∣ing acceptable to the Giddy

People; but either it hath not been understood, or else having been so, hath been levell'd and cryed downe. The more emi∣nent Actions and Apothegms both of the Greeks and Ro∣mans have been indebted for their Eulogies not so much to the Reason, as to the Greatnesse of them, and very many times to that prosperous usurpation (with which our Histories doe so mutually upbraid each o∣ther) which as a conquering Torrent carryes all before it, as well publick Agents as pub∣lick Actions, in the streame of Time. Wisdome properly so call'd is nothing else but this, The perfect knowledge of the Truth in all matters whatsoever. Which being derived from the Registers and Records of Things, and that as 'twere through the Conduit of certain definite Appellations, cannot

possibly be the work of a sud∣daine Acutenesse, but of a well∣ballanc'd Reason, which by the Compendium of a word, we call Philosophy. For by this it is, that a way is open'd to us, in which we travell from the con∣templation of particular things to the Inference or result of universall Actions. Now look how many sorts of things there are which properly fall within the cognizance of humane rea∣son, into so many branches does the tree of Philosophy divide it selfe. And from the diversity of the matter about which they are conversant, there hath been given to those branches a diver∣sity of Names too: For treat∣ing of Figures, tis call'd Geome∣try; of motion, Physick; of na∣turall right, Moralls; put all together, and they make up Philosophy. Just as the British, the Atlantick, and the Indian

Seas, being diversly christen'd from the diversity of their shoares, doe notwithstanding all together make up The Ocean. And truly the Geometricians have very admirably perform'd their part. For whatsoever as∣sistance doth accrew to the life of man, whether from the ob∣servation of the Heavens, or from the description of the Earth, from the notation of Times, or from the remotest Experiments of Navigation; Finally, whatsoever things they are in which this present Age doth differ from the rude sim∣plenesse of Antiquity, we must acknowledge to be a debt which we owe meerly to Geo∣metry. If the Morall Philoso∣phers had as happily discharg'd their duty, I know not what could have been added by hu∣mane Industry to the comple∣tion of that happinesse, which is

consistent with humane life. For were the nature of humane Actions as distinctly knowne, as the nature of Quantity in Ge∣ometricall Figures, the strength of Avarice and Ambition, which is sustained by the erroneous o∣pinions of the Vulgar, as touch∣ing the nature of Right and Wrong, would presently faint and languish; And Mankinde should enjoy such an Immor∣tall Peace, that (unlesse it were for habitation, on supposition that the Earth should grow too narrow for her Inhabitants) there would hardly be left any pretēce for war. But now on the contrary, that neither the Sword nor the Pen should be allowed any Cessation; That the know∣ledge of the Law of Nature should lose its growth, not ad∣vancing a whit beyond its an∣tient stature; that there should still be such siding with the se∣verall

factions of Philosophers, that the very same Action should bee decryed by some, and as much elevated by o∣thers; that the very same man should at severall times em∣brace his severall opinions, and esteem his own Actions farre otherwise in himselfe then he does in others; These I say are so many signes, so many ma∣nifest Arguments, that what hath hitherto been written by Morall Philosophers, hath not made any progress in the know∣ledge of the Truth; but yet have took with the world, not so much by giving any light to the understanding, as entertain∣ment to the Affections, whilest by the successefull Rhetoricati∣ons of their speech they have confirmed them in their rashly received opinions. So that this part of Philosophy hath suffe∣red the same destiny with the

publick Wayes, which lye open to all passengers to traverse up and down or the same lot with high wayes and open streets; Some for divertisement, and some for businesse; so that what with the Impertinencies of some, and the Altercations of others, those wayes have never a seeds time, and therefore yield never a harvest. The onely rea∣son of which unluckines should seem to be this; That amongst all the writers of that part of Philosophy, there is not one that hath used an idoneous Principle of Tractation. For we may not, as in a Circle, be∣gin the handling of a Science from what point we please. There is a certain Clue of Rea∣son, whose beginning is in the dark, but by the benefit of whose Conduct, wee are led as 'twere by the hand into the clearest light, so that the Prin∣ciple

of Tractation is to be ta∣ken from that Darknesse, and then the light to be carried thi∣ther for the irradiating its doubts. As often therefore as any writer, doth either weakly forsake that Clue, or wilfully cut it asunder, he describes the Footsteps, not of his progresse in Science, but of his wandring from it. And upon this it was, that when I applyed my Thoughts to the Investigation of Naturall Justice, I was pre∣sently advertised from the very word Justice, (wich signifies a steady Will of giving every one his Owne) that my first enquiry was to be, from whence it pro∣ceeded, that any man should call any thing rather his Owne, then another mans. And when I found that this proceeded not from Nature, but Consent, (for what Nature at first laid forth in common, men did af∣terwards

distribute into seve∣rall Impropriations, I was con∣ducted from thence to a∣nother Inquiry; namely to what end, and upon what Im∣pulsives, when all was equal∣ly every mans in common, men did rather think it fitting, that every man should have his Inclosure; And I found the reason was, that from a Com∣munity of Goods, there must needs arise Contention whose enjoyment should be greatest, and from that Contention all kind of Calamities must una∣voydably ensue, which by the instinct of Nature, every man is taught to shun. Having there∣fore thus arrived at two ma∣ximes of humane Nature, the one arising from the concupisci∣ble part, which desires to appro∣priate to it selfe the use of those things in which all others have a joynt interest, the other pro∣ceeding

from the rationall, which teaches every man to fly a contre-naturall Dissolution, as the greatest mischiefe that can arrive to Nature; Which Principles being laid down, I seem from them to have de∣monstrated by a most evident connexion, in this little work of mine, first the absolute neces∣sity of Leagues and Contracts, and thence the rudiments both of morall and of civill Pru∣dence. That Appendage which is added concerning the Regi∣ment of God, hath been done with this intent, that the Di∣ctates of God Almighty in the Law of nature, might not seem repugnant to the written Law, revealed to us in his word. I have also been very wary in the whole tenour of my discourse, not to meddle with the civill Lawes of any particular nation whatsoever, That is to say, I

have avoyded coming a shore, which those Times have so in∣fosted both with shelves, and Tempests. At what expence of time and industry I have beene in this scrutiny after Truth, I am not ignorant; but to what purpose, I know not. For being partiall Judges of our selves we lay a partiall esti∣mate upon our own producti∣ons. I therefore offer up this Book to your Lordships, not avour▪ but censine first, as ha∣ving found by many experi∣ments, that it is not the credit of the Author▪ or the new∣nesse of the work, nor yet the ornament of the style, but only the weight of Reason, which re∣commends any Opinion to your Lordships Favour and Appro∣bation. If it fortune to please, that is to say, if it be sound, if it be usefull, if it be vulgar; I humbly offer it to your Lord∣ship

as both my Glory, and my Protection; But if in any thing I have erred, your Lordship will yet accept it as a Testimo∣ny of my Gratitude, for that the means of study which I enjoyed by your Lordships Goodnesse, I have employed to the procurement of your Lordships Favour. The God of Heaven crown your Lord∣ship with length of Dayes in this earthly Station, and in the heavenly. Jerusalem, with a crown of Glory.

