


THe GOD of heaven and earth, who is in himself an infinite ocean of Perfe∣ction without either bank or bottom, hath been pleased by the overflowings of his power and goodnesse to create this orderly glorious frame of Heaven and Earth out of nothing; the Earth he hath furnish∣ed not only with great variety of excellent Beings, but also hath Gen. 1.28. Psal. 4.5, 6. set over them a visible Governour to be his Vicegerent, giving him dominion over all things beneath; Who although he be a little lesse then the An∣gels, yet is he answerable for this trust to God alone. This glorious God hath furnished him with Job 38.11. 32 8. Reason & understāding, more then the beasts: & that he might be more happy than the world can make him, he hath not only given him vast desires, and such a capacity as cannot be satisfied by Creature-fulnesse, but hath de∣signed him to a higher end, a Heaven, which principally consists in the Rev. 22.4. 1 Cor. 13.12. Psal. 16.11. enjoyment of himself. But because his reason is not 1 Cor. 2.14. sufficient to discover this to him,

or bring him thither; therefore he hath sent forth his Psal. 43.3. Light and Truth, the blessed 2 Pet. 1.3. shinings of Reli∣gion, to lead us to his dwelling, and to the place of his abode: which is not Eph. 1.9.3, 9, &c. mans designe, but Gods dis∣covery of his will and mind, pointing out the way to blisse. Yet hath he not appointed that man should reach this end without opposition, and that not only from corruptions and 1 Pet. 2.11. lusts within which fight against the soul, but also poor man is encountred by the Eph. 6.12. prince of darknesse, and spirituall wickednesses in high places: which makes his passage to his end so difficult, that did not that Almighty power that hath decreed him to the end, worke 1 Pet. 1 4, 5 effectually to the preserving of him in the way, he must needs come short of happinesse. The truth is, amongst all encounters he meets with, there is scarce any monster that more endangers him then that Hydra Haeresie; which if it once gets place in the Head by assent, hath a generall influence upon his affections and actions, and is a fruitfull mother, producing quickly like some fertile weeds a numerous progeny. This ensuing discourse will in some measure discover that unto you: Which you will not find polite, but very plain, in an unaffected dresse. But I beseech you re∣member, I did but bring up the Rear to my reverend Brother, in Application of that, which with great vari∣ety of Learning he doctrinally laid before you; and it was intended not to tickle the ears, or please the fancy of any, but to affect our hearts with a deep sense of that sad evil of Haeresie; to mourn for which, pray against it, and beg mercy for Church and State, we were assembled together. 'Twas your command that I should publish it: In obedience to which, I have sent it abroad under your protection, to be a remembrancer to

you, of your engagements to God, prayers, and resoluti∣ons taken up that day, wherein for this cause you af∣flicted your soules before God, and supplicated the de∣struction of it.
Causin. l. 9. c. 42. It is reported, That during the time the Olympi∣an games lasted, there was not a Fly seen on Mount O∣lympus; the like is Paul. Fa∣gius praefat. ad Thargum. affirmed of Onkelos his Chalde Paraphrase. I cannot say much for the truth of either: But this I am sure of, That it is not so with us; for the Baal-zebub i. e. muscarum princeps.
Shindleri pen∣taglot, vervo  Prince of Flies, during your sitting, hath raised such swarms of flies an every corner of our Land, that many of our Congregations and Families are mise∣rably Fly-blowne with Haeresies and corrupt Tenets. The truth is, the World is now grown old, neer its ruine, and 'tis no marvel if it dote & be full of fancies. But when they are grown to such a heigth of madnesse, that they produce destructions, (as our Apostle stiles Haeresies in the Text) is it not time to cry to you for help? He was a Monster of men, that could please him∣self with fidling, when Rome was on fire; or could make a sport to see poor wretches swim for their lives and drown'd in Tiber, being thrown thither by his com∣mand. We know you are Christian Magistrates, who resembling the God of heaven in his care for soules, will not endure that the Devil his enemy should try∣umph here, or be worshipped in his image Haeresie a∣mongst the inhabitants of this Island, seeing it is so opposite to the first Truth, and dangerous to peoples im∣mortall spirits.
If it shall be thought, that I have not sufficiently pointed out what I mean by Haeresie; I answer, My reverend Brother did prevent me; and as I did not in Preaching, so I will not in Printing, actum agere, but

referre my self to his description of it. Only give me leave to say, That if the Opinion overthrows any Fun∣damentall Truth, I intend that, by the name Haeresie: if it shake or loosen the foundation-stones, it is not to be past by; Little serpents grow great ones by degrees, if they be let alone; the Egge may quickly become a Cock∣atrice, nay a Flying-serpent. But as for more petty differences in opinion, concerning things not much material, either not determined in Gods word at all, or after such a manner as is dubious, not only to par∣ticular persons, but also to many Churches of Christ, as some particulars perhaps in Discipline, and the like; so the peace of Church and State may stand with it; if the persons professing it be of an humble & conform∣ing spirit to Authority, not stubborn or refractory, but willing to open their eyes to further light, not plotting nor contriving the overthrow of others, nor seeking to undermine what tends to order & safety, nor have their mouths open to censure, condemne, and raile against others; Such persons I have Multa do∣nanda ingeniis puto, sed do∣nanda vitia, nō portenta sunt. Senec. praefat. l. 1. contr. not the least aim at in any part of this ensuing discourse, only wish them the spirit of judgement and of a sounder mind. But as for foul-mouth'd Haeresie, I wish the same Joh. 2.15, 16, 17. zeale that was in Christ, may act strongly in you, to whip them out of the Temple. God hath dealt by you, as Eph. 6.11. A∣hashuerus by Mordecai, cloathed you with his own robe and title, called you Psal. 82 1, 6. Gods, and put Rom. 13.1, &c. power into your hand: I hope it shall ever be your Motto with the blessed Apostle, 2 Cor. 13.8 We can do nothing against, but for the Truth. If for the Truth, then certainly against Error, Truths chief opposite. I look at you as Cant. 3.7, 8. the spirituall Solomons guard of valiant men about his bed: Error is got into Christs bed-chamber,

mens soules, and there attempts to assault Him that is the Truth, in the hearts of his people. We are confident you are too well-affected to this King of Kings, to suffer it: Yet give me leave to tell you, That many of these unworthy people have not a little boasted of encourage∣ment from Above, as they call it; but we believe it not, knowing that their tongues are much their own, and that they are great masters of untruths: We rather think it is here, as it was in the speech of Henry the VI. who when a man that counterfeited a recovering his sight at his dead Ʋnkle the D. of Glocesters tombe, was brought unto him, the man hoping by magnifying the holinesse and vertue of his Ʋnkle to have gained some reward from him; He having found out by en∣quiry that he was a man of a wicked life, in stead of giving credit to him, told him, That he knew his Ʋnkles goodnesse so well, that he was sure, if he had seen, he would rather have pluckt out both his eyes, then have restored either of them to him. The like we may say of you. Yet give me leave in all humility to represent un∣to you no small affliction to good men, which is, The fruitfulnesse of the Presse in producing monstrous mis∣shapen births: 'Tis believed by wise men, Sueton. vit. Tiberii. that Tiberias as much was Non sunt commiseratione digni, qui tanti putant caput potius quàm dictum perdere. Sen. l. 2. contr. mistaken in that connivence of his at such kind of trash as this, which might tend like a spark to some terrible flame, as almost in any act of his government.
To conclude; I beseech you do not delay this busines, There is nothing more excellent then Gods truth, nor more of concernment then Mans soule; both lie a bleed∣ing. It is observed that the Spartans, too much con∣temning the weaknesse and pusillanimity of the The∣bans, made but petty inroads upon them by small par∣ties:

had they put forth the utmost of their power, the Thebans were a people at that time so sluggish and un∣apt to resist, they might easily have subdued them; but by these small parties they so awakened them, that they made them warriours, and after a grievous slaughter found their own error and mistake too late.
The GOD of heaven direct and guide your Counsels. Which is, and shall ever be the Prayer of him that is

