



THe great God of Heaven and earth, who made what ever he made for his owne praise, hath stamped more excellent cha∣racters of his glory on man, then on all the rest of his sublunary creatures besides: not onely making him Lord of all his works, but giving him understanding more then the beasts; whereby, he might not onely be able like a earthly Monarch to rule over these earthly beings, but also might see in all his God, and thereby have his will inclined, and affections moved af∣ter him, to know, and enjoy him, who is his eternall life. To this, man hath not onely an obliegement by commands, be∣nefits, and the like; but also by creation, an ability, and aptitude so to doe: But alas, how hath he lost what he then received! and now like Sampson, his spirituall eyes being gone, he is a stranger to the light of heaven, and all true liberty.
And what is our ministery set up by this God in the world for? Is it not to turne poore undone men from darknesse to light, and from this spirituall bondage to the living God? But how shall we performe this taske, unlesse by indeavouring so to bring this glorious God to light before them, that they may discerne what a glory they have sleighted; and mourne, what a goodnesse they have turned their back on, and change their mind; making for the future this God their end, and ayme in all their actions, and so make to their soules straight steps toward the injoyment of him?
We shall finde in Gods booke, that when Nations have overflowne with sinne,Hos. 4.1.6. and consequently with ruine as a just recompence and wages of it; it is attributed to the lack of
 this knowledge;Esay 11.9. so on the other side, when the iniquitie of Kingdomes is destroyed, the knowledge of the Lord is laid downe as a meanes whereby it was brought to passe.
This made me the rather pitch upon this subject, that this glimpse of God might so affect our spirits, as not onely to fit us for that dayes duty wherein it was preached, but also for the future it might attract our minds unto him.
The subject is high indeed, far sitter for an Angels tongue, then for a mortall mans, especially incompast with such darknesse and infirmity as my selfe; which not being senselesse of, had not your command ingaged the publication of these thoughts, they had never seene the light. But seeing your Wisdomes have judged this meet; I shall sit downe well pleased to have testified my obedience. Therefore I beseech you, though the gift be far beneath your worth and eminen∣cy, yet let the givers minde be accepted in it, which is not in∣feriour to any that prayes for your happinesse, and desires al∣wayes to be found,

