



Much honoured Sir,
IT is recorded of Marcus Antonius the Philosopher (and Emperour of Rome) that he chose rather such Senatours as were most apparreld with vertue, to be husbands for his Daughters, then who could produce a large scrowle of their Pedigree, or could boast of being rich Tenants to fortune, esteeming vertue the best inheritance. . Herodian lib. 1. cap. 1. Though providence hath given you a large porti∣on: though your name pleads antiquity (they who seek the original of Printing are acquainted with it) yet I rather make choice of you for Marke's reasons; especially considering how your hands
have been alwaies open to me a Pilgrim in Eng∣land; and indeed, I even blush to think how long I have continued in your debt, like an ungratefull—And now have nothing with which to repay your noble courtesies; but some fewpoor sheets of Paper. I know your gallant mind can as well forgive as give: but what acquittance is that to my consci∣ence? I was by you used more like a brother then a stranger, more like a Son than a banished man, (for such almost I was when I happily arrived at yours (as another Calanders house.) I was told before I had need to see England, That this was a Kingdom of Curtesies for strangers: And truly Mr Futz (I feare God and flotter you not) had all English harts been lost but your own, I might have found England epitomised in your most incompa∣rable self. Pray Sir take this mite in part of pay∣ment; as a () testimony of my thank∣fulnesse: and the use of what is behind. It is a leane Commentary upon that excellent Book, which is the contents of all that was to happen from our Lords ascension till (and after) the dissolution of all things: And therefore most worthy reading by the most curious eye; herein (I hope) I have not raised the sense of Scripture one note higher, then the Spirit first tun'd it to; doubtlesse I come
short of many things: bonus Bernardus non vi∣dit omnia; yet I hope many an honest Christian shall by the means of my poore Torch receive some glimpse of light to walk better and surer in the dark paths of these mysteries: wherein I have strove more to speak to capacity, and to edifie, by much plainnesse, then by either affected expressions, much quotation of Authors, or many Languages to shew my self to have been bred as a Son of the Mu∣ses. Sir, I doubt not but these times have given you occasion to examine (like the wise Bereans) many things, which all of us formerly took upon trust. Among the rest I recommend to your seri∣ous consideration to weigh,

1. Whether the seven Angels of the seven Churches treated on in the three first chapters of this book were not ordinary Ministers, ordained by the Apostles to succeed them as Ministers (not Apostles, or comites Apo∣stolorum.)
2. Whether these were not seven par∣ticular private Congregations (for so the Anci∣ents seemed to esteeme of them.)
3. Whether they were to give any account to any but Christ, (re∣member however John was then alive.)
4. Whe∣ther every true Church and Minister (without looking further then the word) have not a power to cast out—as well as they: and will not be as
liable to Christs censure in case of neglect (as well as they.)

Thou sufferest that woman Jezabel Rev. 2.20.—though these were distinct Cities, of distinct Customes, Manners, and Laws: yet the Churches acknowledged but one head Christ, and each respective Church and Minister had a pecu∣liar power under him, without dependency, to give account to no other person or Church, no though Romes Church had then a being; but Ile not make too great a doore to my little house. I leave you to read your Book, wherein (if as a dwarfe on a giants shoulder) I have seen more then some giants (pardon the expression) let Christ Iesus my Saviour have the glory; and his holy ones the comfort. The Lord encrease your spiritual and temporall blessings.
June 20. 1650. From my Vicaridge house in Sutton-Valence.
Sir, 
