




AS all Rivers pay tribute to the Ocean from whence they receive their water, so I (re∣membring my (many wayes) engagements to the Honou∣rable the Commons of England (for countenance and maintenance) com∣ing a stranger (a kind of a banished man) out of Ireland (knowing ingra∣titude to be the worst badge of a Christian) have been bold to present yee with these lines; Worthy and
Worshipful Gentlemen, Yee who are a representative of the Honoura∣ble the House of Commons in this County. Yee usually receive their debts for them Here,—and give them a just account; Be pleased to accept of this mite; which, though no way answerable to my engage∣ments to them, yet who payes least, is more out of debt then he that payes nothing at all. Pardon me Gentlemen, if since I had occasion to make my thoughts legible, I have coveted your Worships to shrine them (being worthy to be Sanctua∣ries to greater offenders:) In these lines yee may in parr see how I spend my Lords Dayes—in Sutton; in which if any word have but the face of an enemy against Church or State (though every Minister cannot be at present satisfied with every conclu∣sion in them) remember they are the words of a quiet man, in whom ne∣ver was found any true ground of jealousie or feare of disaffection, no
not when the grand rising in Kent was carried on even with a generall applause; when (pardon my bold∣nesse) some of your selves began to play with the bait, I never smelt at it, scarce swam in the River, though I had more reason then some others to wish his Majesty well, being a Pensioner of his in the Irish-univer∣sitie many years.
And truly 'tis beleeved, that the often rising of those who only Chri∣sten themselves by the name of his Majesties friends, were the occasion of his sudden death. By the prece∣ding lines you know my Countrey to be Ireland, a Countrey like Joves, where no creature is poysonous (un∣lesse you object that much experi∣ence shewes poyson to be lodg'd in the heart of the Natives;) Truly Gentlemen, I understand not the mystery of that Rebellion; per∣chance the Spanish King had factors there; surely if a Crowne were the the prize of the game, 'twere no
wonder to see foule play among the gamesters: Yet my thinks if the I∣rish did not bear some good will to∣wards the English, we might have had worse carding of late when they had almost the whole game in their hands; doubtlesse tyrants sinnes call for bloud; their bodies seldome have any other enbalming; forbearance is no acquittance. I fear me should they pay the old debt easily, they would be apt to run (too soon) upon our score again.
And I pray God, the life given to it by the late peace, be not as life given by some Physitian to a woun∣ded man, only for some few groans the longer.
In fine, the chief cause of our mi∣sery there, was our sin, de te destructio¦tua —it runne over, which made God fill up his Viols to the brim; how sugared soever it was, God has justly soured it for her Ini∣quity; but I take my leave of that Kingdom for the present; the Lord
look upon them, and blesse the for∣ces he has intended for them.
Five years ago I came out of that Kingdom into this; how sorry was I to see English men the subject of En∣glish mens valour? as if yee had scor∣ned any should conquer ye but your selves,
Vt nemo Ajacem possit superare nisi Ajax.
When your Supernumeraries were spent, my thought I saw ye spend of the main stock, half of which would have restored Ireland and to spare.
But that troubled me much (as a Minister) to see such dissentions in Religion. I am afraid of Hereticks, who seem to confute God & truth, but as their parents, at last they will befoole themselves: the snuffing of a light seldom puts it out, but makes it burn the brighter. Yee have here unparalleld Ministers, tis true; but Hereticks are miracle-proof, words in them make little impression.
Errours of smaller bulk (till God
shall reveal) may be better tolerated. Sed haec libertas in vitium ruat. A green errour (if no care taken) may fester to an old soar of Heresie. But being a stranger I forbear; pardon me Gentlemen, I have been bold as a traveller to give you some account of my travels. He that made yee, save yee: The Lord blesse yee all from Dan to Beersheba.
From my Vica∣ridge-house in Sutton-Va∣lence Iuly 10. 1649.

