


WHen I considered your constant reading Meditations, Prayers, Christian charity, tears, your much se∣questring your self from the world: when I looked upon your deare Sister Eliza∣beth, whose practice is Christ, whose study is Divinity, whose whole work is Religi∣on; My thought your religious courses invited as well as deserved my pains; (much endeared Aunts,) indeed I have not with a little joy taken notice, how oft by me (when have been accidental∣ly at your house,) you have sent your cha∣rity to the door, not knowing to whom, ('twas enough they were poor People,)
not desiring your left hand should know what your right hand did; also how oft you have chid with your servants for cal∣ling the poor, beggars (in contempt,) be∣cause perchance we are all such; We all say, Give us this day our daily bread—Also since the same hand which made them such can lay our honour in the dust. Indeed the time spent in Gods service is the most choice time, the only days of comfort, for is not one houre spent with Christ, more precious, joyous, comfortable, then all the rest of our days? how do these end in mirth, those in mourning?
I wonder not to heare Moses from a Courtier to become a fellow-sufferer with Israel, since his recompence as well here as hereafter was so great. He left a tyrant King for a mercifull God, a Court of pleasure, for a Kingdome of grace, At∣tendants for Angels, Courtiers for Saints, Dainties for Graces, a kind of Sonship for true Adoption, a Kingdome of Trouble for a Heaven of Ioy.
How insipid are things below to a Christian in respect of Christ? how like the white of an egge (in Job) without tast? how empty is the Creature, to the Cre∣ator;
what delight is there in the Word? what heavenly conference among Saints? what humble familiarity have they with Christ by Prayer? how doth he answer them, filling their hearts with as it were laughter, and their souls with joy? they envy not the worlds favourites or dar∣lings, while they enjoy their Christ. How sad is a Christian that (but seeming∣ly for a time) hath lost his Christ? (who is his life and soule of his soule) what faint∣ing is in that soule? what enquiry after Christ by Prayer, as the Spouse in the Canticles doth.
What hungring and thirsting is in the Saints after Christ? (more then in the Hart after the water-brooks)
How dejected is a Saint after sinning? what a Stranger to himself? how mourn∣fully he walks? how unpleasing is every thing to him? what rivers of tears doth he shed? what sorrow like his, till recon∣ciled to his God?
How do the Saints hate sin (tho they fall into it,) how do they condemne, strive to crucifie it, (tho it dog them?) flesh and blood never taught them this, nor the Divel will not willingly cast out himself,
you may see whose children they are, by their practice and obedience.
How easily do they kisse the rod when their Father scourgeth them? how like Mephibosheth are they content to part with all to enjoy their David? how do they live by Promise, counting it far be∣yond an inheritance? how easily do they submit their will to Gods Will? in summe, how are they delighted in goodnesse? how much in the Company of Saints? (to see Christ in them, to see them deckt with his graces,) more then in the company of Princes that have not acquaintance with Christ? Dear Aunt, I love your practice, and strive to imitate, since it will bring e∣ternall peace. Pardon me if I have a little commented upon your (I hope, a Saints actions) I will do no more, I could do no lesse; Go on to Perfection, to them that overcome Christ will give Crowns—
Sutton-ValenceJuly 10. 1649.

