


SIR,
MY Letters seldome arrive safely with you in Ireland, by reason of the distance. Wherefore I have annext this printed to my Book, which I doubt not but in time (if alive) you'll receive. It will certifie you (somewhat) the state of my soule (though not of my body.) If you ask me the reason of my publishing so mean an Exercise in a time of such Paper-prostitution: among many rea∣sons, Ile give you (Sir) this, as most con∣cerning your self. The death of my ever gallant Ʋncle Captain Stephen Hussey, and the never enough by me deplored losse of my two deare Brothers, Henry and Joshuah Holland, slain in these unnatu∣rall warres, made me first apply my self
to this subject. I have comforted my self, considering the graces God formerly wrought in them as footsteps of himself, and then considering his loving to the end; considering that afflictions are signes of love; that death is beneficiall; and so∣dain death no argument of his hatred: Josiah's death was such. And indeed, I had scarce with sighs dryed the teares off my face (which I had shed for them) when God blest me with a son. I thought God had sent me a summers day in the winter of my sorrow; little did I dream its sun would set so sodainly I baptized it with your name, and thought with Hannah to have given it to the Lord all his dayes. But indeed it proved but an April sun∣shine, which had a present shower waiting on it. God saw me not humble enough nor fitted for such a blessing. For by that time it had twelve moneths blest me with many a smile—peor babe! as if it had performed the errand God sent it for, it returned to him that gave it: doubtlesse it hath took possession of the heaven of Saints for me, of which our Saviour long since took possession for us all. This made me more earnestly study on this subject, (Gods love in affliction) that I might the more willingly kisse the rod that
scourged me. This was one reason made me publish these lines; That whiles I could not enjoy my friends here, (nor my sweet Randol) I might at least have, as it were, their Funerall sermon to read.
Thus thanking you for your care to wards me in my Education, for your Prayers (of which I believe I have had benefit) desiring the continuance of them and your health,—I rest

Sutton-Valence, July 10. 1649.
