



Dearly Beloved,
I Know not to whom I may better dedicate this little Treatise, than to your selves, to whom I have dedica∣ted my self, under Christ, in the work of the Gospel, from my first begin∣ning to be a constant Preacher of the Gospel. And I have accounted it my priviledge to succeed such faithfull Ministers, who, for many yeares, continually instructed you in the wayes of holinesse. The first of them
 was Doctor Baily, who preached un∣to some of you, yet living, the Pra∣ctice of Piety, which he after pub∣lished. And, during the time of my continuance among you, I have not ceased to preach (according to my ta∣lents) the Doctrine which is accor∣ding to godlinesse. As Paul requi∣red Timothy to charge some, that they preach no other Doctrine; So I charge you (as having received the charge of you) that ye receive none other Doctrine, than what is according to godlinesse. Be not ha∣sty to heare such, as bring contrary Doctrine: run not with men of itching eares, after such as are ad∣mired for teaching meer Novelty: Wandring starres (to which such teachers are compared in Scripture) sparkle more than the fixed starres of greatest magnitude. And one Comet, or Blazing starre (though it portend mischief) is more wondred at, than all the Starres of Heaven, yea, than the Sun in the firma∣ment.
 But be you carefull, with the wise men, to follow such starres, whose motion tends to the place where your Saviour is. And although you finde him here, not clad in soft rayment, nor deckt with tapestry, but, as in his infancy, laid in straw; yet think not much to bow down and worship him, and offer your gifts, your whole selves, spirit, soule and body, (of far greater value than gold, frankincense, and myrrhe) as due to him, who offered his soule a sacrifice for you.
Beware of being intangled with the profits and pleasures of the world, which (as I have lately shew∣ed you) are the two great barres that hinder soules from coming to Christ. Think it not much to attend once in a week upon a Lecture sermon. Those that will not leave their ordinary worldly businesse to attend upon the Word of Christ for one hour, when they may return to it again, will be loath to forsake all to follow Christ,
 if they should be called to it: and without this you cannot be his true Disciples. Oh be not like the mur∣muring Israelites, that despised the heavenly Manna, because it fell daily at their tent doores, and lusted after flesh. Be not like the multitude of unthankfull poore, that wax wanton in this time of plenty: Lest the Lord, by sending among you a famine of hearing the Word, cause it to be∣come precious. But while you have the Ordinances of grace, wait dili∣gently upon Christ who is the foun∣tain of grace) in them: Pray, and labour for sanctified hearts, and lives, considering that Holinesse is your reall Happinesse (as I have more largely taught you in these following Sermons.)
Never feare that my pressing you, or your pressing on to holiness, or good works, will in the least derogate from the freenesse of Gods grace: for they are not your own work but Gods work in you, and by you: nei∣ther
 by them do you adde any thing to God, but God to you: you doe not increase his glory, but he augments your happinesse; so that what good you doe (being done in the strength of his grace, and tending to the perfe∣ction of your own soules, makes no Recompence to God, but makes you the greater Debtors to him. The more holy, and abundant you are in good works, the more you have received from God, and the more you owe to God. And you have no more cause to glory in your selves, for what good you do, than to glory in your selves for the free pardon and remission of your sinnes.
These Sermons were not preached, neither are they now published with∣out my unfeigned prayers to God for a blessing upon them to your soules. As I have been at the paines to compose, preah, and publish them, (in which I have found Gods assi∣stance and direction) for your sakes;
 so be you at the paines to read them carefully, and practise them diligent∣ly: which, that you may be enabled to doe, pray earnestly, that so glory may redound to God, advantage to your own soules, and comfort to

