



Whorthy SIR!
YOu may censure me for over-much boldness to set to you, or use your name in this insu∣ing Treatise for Patronage without your leave or licence, but that is Plea sufficient, that you did not know it, if any danger, or disgrace should befall it, or it miscarry.
But the truth of Christ needs no defence, for Christ himself will grace his own truth in, and for his Saints that love it, if they should hold their peace.
Sir, I desire io know no man after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, and am determined not to know any thing here below, but Jesus Christ, and him crucified, and with that spirituall eye do I desire to look upon you, and love you, and is the onely motive moving me to make thus bold with you.
Sir, It is the Politick practice of impostors (like cun∣ning crafty masking mummers) to hide their faces, and rattle a boxful of Counters instead of good Gold & Silver: So these men wind in their erroneous doctrines, and counterfeit opinions, and then perswade poor silly people, it is the pure truth of Jesus Christ: And thus have they done with some of my people, and by this means brought me upon this unpleasing work, constraining mee to shape an Answer to a wrangler, and that only for the satisfacti∣on of some of my people, and reducing (if possible) some who are seduced, and to confirm the rest in the truth of Christ, they have been taught; and the rather also, be∣cause
M. Haggar's Book was brought me by one of my own peopl, but now a seduced Backslider, who left it with me for this very purpose. In which Book I find many absurdities, falsities, impertinencies, and Scuilities of and against men better then himself, but the Lord rebuke him.
It may be (Sir) you have heard of that Noble Morali∣zers Fable of Amphialus, who was challenged to combate with Argalus a Knight of the Sun, who when he was pre∣pared with all his Military accoutrements to meet his ene∣mie; The wife of Argalus dress'd her self in her Hus∣bands Armour, and gave the onset to Amphialus, and gave the first charge; whom he encounters valiantly, and overthrows with a mortall wound in the body: But when he opened the Armour, viewed his conquest, and saw it was the wife of his enemy, he could have no comfort of the day, because it became not a man so to ruine a wo∣man: Such is my case in this work in hand; The love of peace is glorious in the Church, even among those that dif∣fer in opinion. But if they wil p on the arms of an enemy, (because they wilfully will be enemies) with whom I am challenged to combate for the truth of Christ; I can∣not help it, if they meet with a blow, though I glory not in it. But I am truly sorry that there should bee any such cause. It is not for any evill to their persons, but to give a mortal wound to their damnable errors.
Plutarch tells of Archidamus, who being once chosen Arbitrator in a difference betwixt two persons, brought them to the Temple of Minerva, and there decreed, that they should not depart thence till they were agreed. I could desire that, M. Haggar, and his party would agree to come into the Temple of God, and bee tryed by the holy Scriptures faithfully explicated, and applyed.
In the mean time, I leave it to your charitable cen∣sure, and pray the favourable acceptation of this testimo∣ny of love and thankfulness, that I owe, and am not able to pay, but in prayers for you, and all yours, who am

Prees, From my Study July 12, 1658.
