



Much beloved in the Lord,
IT is the Councel of the Apostle John, not to believe
every spirit, but to try the Spirits whether they are of God. And sure
there is now as much need of this counsel as ever, because there are
diversity of Spirits and Prophets gone out into the world, and all pretend to
God; but all confess not (that is, magnifie not, or lead not to exalt)
Jesus Christ come in the flesh; but divers of them de∣ny, or undervalue
that; by which it is manifest that they are not of God to those that duly
try them, but that they are of that spirit of Anti∣christ, of which we have
heard, that it should come into the world: And truly, though it be an heavy
judgement of God to order such a spi∣rit of error to enter
into, and amongst men, and men to be possessed and acted by him; yet
if the matter be well and duly considered, it will ap∣pear a just and
righteous judgement, and may afford us much matter of warning: For where∣in
hath, or could God have testified or com∣mended his love more to the world,
then in gi∣ving forth his only begotten Son to be believed on; and to that end
to be delivered to death for our offences, and become the propitiation for our
sins, and being raised again and glorified to hold forth in and through him
unto us an im∣measurable fulness of glory and salvation? And what might
God look for, and challenge at our hands for so great goodness, less then
all possible thankfulness, and most chearful ready receit of, and
submission to him? but alas, how contrary are the returns that he findeth
from men? What is there that is so little regarded, and so much neglected
as this his Son? what so little received and fed upon by men? Is not the
preaching of the Cross of Christ become foo∣lishness, again, not onely
to the rude and pro∣phane, or to the Pharasaical, that establish to
themselves a righteousness of their own; but which i the most to be lamented, to such as have tasted
of his goodness, and had him livelily set
orth to them: even many such
have crucified im to themselves
afresh, and have not obeyed the truth, so far as to cleave with
stedfast pur∣pose of heart unto him. Many that have received
the tdings of Christs Death and
Resurrection for them, as sometimes the Israelites the Manna
with joy and admiration, have with them also after a while grown weary
thereof, as if it was a light bread: and their souls have loathed him, and
lusted after some other thing to feed upon, that might more puff them up in
themselves, and give more sensual satisfaction. And alas, how few are
there who are not more or less tainted with this infection, as if there was
not an enoughness in Christ, & his Death, Sacrifice, and Mediation for
them to feed upon: Now what more just with God, then that his so great love
being so abrogated, and so nothing set by, should turn to jealousie,
and that he revenge the injury done unto his Son, and to himself with the
heat of indignation, by sending to them (as to the Israelites for
their offence, fiery Serpents, Numb. 21.) spirits of error, and of
delusion; that because they received not the love of the Truth that they
might be saved, but had pleasure in their unrighteousness, in
disesteeming so great a witness of love, and not in the truth;
therefore the efficacie of error should infatuate them, and carry them
headlong into destruction; the abuse and contempt of greatest love
deserving to be revenged with the severest condemnation: But alas, where
the spirit of Error hath gotten root∣ing, how many are there so
strongly giddified therewith, that they make but a mock of these things,
and think there is no other hell but what here befals them; throwing up the
whole Christian Faith by the very foundation! A pite∣ous, and much to be
bewailed mischief, which cals for not onely our best endeavours, by
Pray∣ers and Supplications, and faithful Instruction to prevent its
spreading; but might also chal∣lenge in many the Magistrates
inspection; that as of late they have worthily made an Act to prevent and
punish Blasphemy against God, so they might endeavour to stop the
over-free spreading of Blasphemy against Christ by the like
provision. But for that, its our business to pray God rightly to direct
them, and that none of them that should discountenance such evil, be
either tainted therewith themselves, or so far destitute of that
spiritual Eye-salve, as not to have thereof a right discerning.
As for your parts, Worthy Friends, I hope you have received so
much of that holy Unction as hath helped you to understand the wiles of
Satan; so that I may say to you, as the Apostle in 1 Joh. 2.21.
I write not to you because ye know not the Truth, but because ye know
it, and that no lie is of the Truth; both blessing God that he doth
keep you in so evil a day; and praying for you, that yet ye may be filled
with the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, and so more
abundantly anointed with that spiritual Eye-salve, that ye may be further
able to discern things that differ, and so be kept for even. And indeed I
know no better thing that I can wish for you then that; for where that is
not, I know not what else can preserve men: For Satan com∣ing not in his
own colours, but disguised as an Angel of Light, not as an enemy but (as of
old the Serpent) as a friend that will shew the way to a more happy and
glorious condition, its an easie thing to be circumvented by him; such high
expressions, such glorious speeches, such enticing and swelling
words (though full of vanity to a spiritual discerning) because they have
not the bread of Life, the foundation of our hope in them, with whom are they
not taking?
The consideration of which having pressed me forward to the
writing and publishing of this small Treatise (in which though I be but
weak, I have endeavoured according as by Co∣venant I am bound for the rooting
out of Error and heresie in my place and calling (though not primely upon
that consideration) to prevent the spreading of this grand infection; that
though I have little hopes of reducing those that are cor∣rupted, yet I might
be a means to stablish some that are wavering and prevent their falling)
I have chosen, as to the Saints in general, so to you in
particular, to Dedicate and present it, out of that respect I bear to you;
and the good thats in you, and sense of obligation upon me toward you.
Desirng God ever to guide and preserve you; And you yet to account me,
Ladies,

Lin, 
Novemb. 2. 1650.
