


Worthies of Israel,
IN this extreame age (for this last is mostly upon extreames) if I should write nothing but a Title of dedication (as they call it) J should seeme Cynically to neglect.Nmios in  Hesiod. If J should inlarge the Phylacte∣rie, or Panegyrick of usuall prefa∣cing, J should be thought Pharisaicall, or Parasitiscall. If I should relate what relations have been between some of you and this Embryon of thoughts, to quicken it to that it is now growne, J might be deemed here impor∣tune, & unseasonable if not impertinēt. Or if I should take upon me now to implore your forward spirits to doe any thing for the Church or State, I should but anticipate the booke it selfe. Therefore J shall onely spend so much time, paper and words as to assure you, that in and from my best intentions, and affections this discourse is yours, my prayers yours; and what by my utmost abilities, and endavours J may doe for you, in the Lord is also yours. Your acceptance is onely to reade that, and to beleeve
this. I know truth will maintaine it selfe. The Lord hath made it a God on earth. Magna est veri∣tas, & praevalebit. But somtimes her speaker is malig∣ned,Gal. 4.16. for her sake; though an Apostle. The ungram∣mar'd world will pinch on the moode and tense, when they cannot gaine say the sence. Jf the sermon was preached for your sake, and the world prate against mee for the Sermons sake, I hope you will looke upon mee in∣nocent and candid in my intentions, for the same reason Solomon favored Abiathar that was really in fault. Hortis vir. Hee forbare to punish him as he deserved, because (saith heto him) thou bearest the arke of the Lord God before David my father, and because thou hast beene afflicted in all wherein my father was af∣flicted. J minde my promise of brevitie. Therefore for close.
The sweet God of heaven blesse his Majestie, the true nobly Nobles and you worthies in this our Israel for that great good you have done; and the same God prosper you, that the wine of the Churches through refor∣mation kept to the last, may prove the best, to the increase of the Churches joy of feasting, bere with her Christ,Iohn 2. Prov. 9.1, 2, 3, 4.5. Isa. 25.6. Mat. 22.4. in his pure ordinances; Is the earnest prayer of him that is intirely yours in the Lord with all humblenesse,

From his unworthy obscure study. Agust 4. 1641.
