



Right Honourable, and highly respected.
THis Peece is yours by a double right, I As Agents occasioning the discourse; 2 As Patients, Co-suffering in the cause. If I have not pleased all men, I have escaped aLuke 6.26. Woe unto you when all men speak wel of you for so did their fa∣thers to the false Prophets. Woe. If truth hath offended any, it is their woe, they are not sons of truth. It is my Idiom and Ge∣nius to be down-right, and in the publick place to feare no man on earth. If I have thereby the fewer Patrons, yet have I the more peace. The world may say, I am therein lesse a Politician, but the WordJer. 9.3. Valiant for the truth. saith I am lesse a Coward, and the more a Christian. The present tempers of men (I confesse) can hardly beare free∣dome ofEò ven est ut nec vitia pati possumus nec remedit Liv. speech. And I am justly quits
with them, for I cannot beare with their sinnes. For it is my RIGHT, if Eng∣land be a Free-Commonwealth, for me a publike member thereof, freely to speak against the Common-evils, in behalfe of the Common-good: There is need enough. For, being an age of Warre, we would learne one posture, AS YEE WERE. I know of no sinnes in the old Edition of the Kingdome, but are in the New, of the Commonwealth, andBefore men sin∣ned by frailty in practise, Now by impiety of principles. The foolish Virgins had no oyle in their vessels, that is, they had lost their prin∣ciples. bolder; with this Addition (to make us grow old in vice) a confused decrying of Legalities, that should binde us, Magi∣stracies that should force us, and Mini∣stryes that should perswade us to be better. I confesse there may be emendations in all, but their indistinctnesse of speech, and their reproaching the whole, make mee feare they aime not so well. And when all the fence is downe, then the Common∣weale may soone become a Common of all confusion. They are sicke of any thing that hinders them from turning any thing, onely of their owne faults they are
not sicke. They pretend humility to make others low but it is that they might seem great; And plead, it is against their con∣sciences to pay duties to whom due, but it is, that they might be rich for nothing, whiles their Preservers become poor for their labours.
But you, Noble Senatours, of this good∣ly famous City, notwithstanding these dis∣couragements, whiles ye are in being, up and be doing what is your duty to doe. Act within your spheres to the utmostSinatura, multò ma∣gis gratia agit ad ex∣tremum vi∣rium. of your power, for God and the common good, so you shall have your share. And at the worst, it shall be more honor & comfort to you to perish by doing your duties, then to perish for the neglect of them. Hold your own right, whiles yours, and look to the maintenance of the Ministers, your friends, in this City, who may plead with God and men for you (for that should seem is left to you, while others take care of the Country.) Part with what you will of your owne, and let your Ministers be impoverished from their places, and
from you: yee shall have never the more thankes, from them that love to keepe it in their owne pockets. They will still, suppose gaine to be godlinesseTim 6.5 Perverse disputings of men of corrupt mindes, and desti∣tute of the truth, sup∣posing that gaine, is godli∣nesse. and to be their piety in that way, to save their profit, till they be really taught that modesty, not to runne before the Supream Authority; and that prudence, not to shift off an old garment, till a new one be provided.
But seeing they would seem to be so conscientions, let them give me leave to put one case of Conscience to them, Whether the Maintenance of Magistracy and Mi∣nistry be any private mans owne, by the Lawes of God, or man? If not, whether they can be in any shew, just and righteous dealing men, that withhold it as their own? Surely it is no more their own, then the common ayre and water is their own. For nor they, nor their fore-fathers ever bough it, or their Predecessors sold it. God from the beginning setled Tribute to the Magistrate; and in the New Testa∣ment, paid and commanded to be paid
by Christ himselfe. And the Apostle Rom. 13.6. gives a reason. And the Tenth was called Gods owne, to maintain the Table of the Lord,That is publicke charges for publick worship, and neces∣saries about it. the Table of the Minister, and the Table of the poore. Therefore were the Deacons chosen to looke to those Tables (in the plurall) Act. 6.2, 3. These of Tribute and Tenth have beene seconded with positive humane Lawes in all ages. And the Civil Law saith, (that the Advowsion of a Ministers Maintenance, is in Nu∣bibus, to expresse it is not any private mans right to with-hold it. And semel dicatum Deo non est ad humanos usus transferendum. So that in all bargaines of sale, or purchase of Lands, there was but about eight parts, or eight and halfe really bought and sold, the rest being exempted, as not saleable, but must be paid to the uses aforesaid, whosoever pos∣sesseth the estate.
I plead not for Tithes to the Minister, much lesse for Tithes in kinde, that great inconvenience in a State. But I
say, and all godly men that are learned men indeed, doe know, that I assert the grand, divine equitable Truth, that the Tenth is due to God, for the Tables a∣foresaid. It were better if men were so good, to maintaine Ministers by volun∣tary conscientious contributions. But whiles the Corinthians neglect Paul in that way, he presseth upon them the Divine Law, as still a Gospel equity, 1 Cor. 9. And for us (that I may not seem impertinent) the Generality is divided into two parts. The one, make it a peece of conscience to pay nothing to the Mi∣nister. The other, will rather give money they may have no Minister. Instances there are at hand, and at hand, plaine enough, and neare enough.
Therefore if it be useful for a State (to speak in the lowest key) that the Gospel be preached, whereby men may be preached into their duties in that state, that it be not swallowed of Barbarisme, then its Equity a State-maintenance should bee setled for that end, which may not depend
upon the humours of uncertaine men: Till that be, the people either make the Mi∣nister nothing, annihilating him out of his duty; or makes him all things they would have him to be; muzzeled, that he de∣clare not the whole truth; or a flatterer in doctrine; or a prophaner of the Seales, prostituting them to men of a lewd life
And there is the same reason in the o∣ther predicament of power. In making Magistracy not onely a heavy labour, a continual watching, a weighty trust, an object of many affronts, and the ha∣zard of many damages and dangers; but besides all, a vast charge (impar ho∣mini, impari oneri) too much for that man; Yee cause the goodly fruitful Vines and Olive trees, (men of parts and piety) necessitatedly to refuse the office, or purchase that the office refuse them, and the Bramble to take it, a spreading thriving bush, but a Bramble. He is Briareus, hee hath hands, power enough, but he is not Argus, he hath not eyes enough, or not good enough. And therefore in this also,
is as equall an Equity, that there should be a State-pay for a State service. If so, in the higher Region, of Lord-Keeper, Lord chiefe Justices, &c. and in the lower, of Captaines, Lieutenants, and Serjeants then in the median of Cities, and Corporations. So you shall make good men great, and may expect great good to be done by them.
But I feare, by this time I weary you. Pardon me; it is my use to make my Epistles of things usefull, not of complements, which former I beleeve are more acceptable to you that are men of businesse, and rea∣alities. However, I may sooner weary my selfe, and the obsequious Reader, then wean this age from their own wayes. Therefore I shall close with a request to our God, The Lord, that is the All-wise, All-powerful, and All-merciful Governour of all things, in-courage, direct, and protect you, and your friends, his faithful Ministers, is the prayer

From my Study at Mary Staynings London Ap 29. 1652
