



May it please Your Grace!
THere is no Nation that has produc'd so many E∣minent Persons knowing in the art of Horse∣manship, as this of ours. And of these, your Grace may deservedly claim the most superla∣tive Renown, since what others can pretend to, either by way of Theory or Practice, is not a little exceeded by your perfection in both.
To observe you guiding the manag'd Horse, and how becoming your seat is there, would out-do all Complement to express. And whensoever you please to commit your Person to the pleasure of the Runner or Hunter, you ap∣pear no less an ornament to those performances. This might enough incite my ambition to present you with this Poem (tho the first of this nature that I know of in any Lan∣guage) however it may suffer from your acurate Judg∣ment, and whence I must allow its greatest hazard: Tho otherwise I might presume to think it capable of giving some entertainment where the Subject here treated shall ap∣pear grateful. Not doubting but persons so inclin'd
will find here deliver'd (if my verse does not abate the worth of the Argument) what may improve their observa∣tion.
Where Poesy has merit, it can be as commendably ap∣plied to the due esteem of the Creature (of which none can claim from man a parallel-esteem with this here mention'd) as to what does peculiarly adorn the most extraordinory acti∣ons of humane life. Since if the providential part (from a∣bove) be duly consider'd, men have as much reason to acknow∣ledg its benignity to them in the useful subserviency of the Creature, as any other Attributes bestow'd on humane conser∣vation: And which would find but an odd condition in this world on other terms. For what were it for man to be accounted a Master of Reason, if Creatures beneficially convenient and divertive were not ordain'd to apprehend and obey him? What value the Ancients had for the He∣roick swiftness of the Horse, is highly discernable from the use of their Olympick and Chariot-Races: At which great Princes and Captains were not only indulgent Spe∣ctators, but had their particular Conducts in the manage∣ment of this Creatures hardest speed and performance.
But there needs no other commendation of the worth of such noble Recreations, than what your Grace has added to their embellishment amongst us, and which as much sur∣pass all foreign Ingenuity in the same sphere of Science.
Should your many other Vertues be mention'd that have rendred you more than conspicuous in Camps and Palaces, the reality of your worth would far exceed the best protrai∣ture of fiction, at least would require a better Muse to sing the praise of your Accomplishments than is in the power of your Grace's

