



Much honoured and beloved in Christ,
I Know not to whom the inscription of this Sermon
could more justly belong, then indeed to your selves, who are the
proper subjects of it, movers for it, and Auditors
to whom it was delivered. To You there∣fore I tender it (not without
your own invitation) yet not limited to any particulars, but rather in
common and at large; that so whilest that All have an
equal interest in the occa∣sion, they might equally share in the
remembrances and publica∣tions of it.
The scope of this Discourse before you is to improve the
present opportunity to the best spiritual advantage;
which is (or should be) the end of all such solemn
Assemblies and performances as these are; Gods Ordinances being
too good, and instituted to better purpose then meerly to serve
mens Fancies, and Formalities, and Complemental
devices, which yet the generality of the world for the most part makes
them to do.
I know not how it comes to passe, but your late
meeting hath not obtain'd that effect, which I know you
desired and design'd in the first appointment of it;
from whence you will finde some passa∣ges in the close of the
Sermon to be a great deal truer in the event then I wist
they would be when I utter'd them. And yet I cannot very well tell
where to lay the blame. I am apt to perswade my self (and
would have the World so perswaded too) that it proceeded 
not from want of Affection, but rather of
Contrivance. This is most certain and undeniable, That there were
divers persons at that time amongst you which came together with
large intentions, and some with great preparations
to very noble and honorable atchievements; only they had not a channel
so readily cut out unto them wherein their Charity might stream it
self. You wanted not liquor, but vent; not matter,
but method; not concep∣tion, but obstetrication.
The children were come to the birth, but there was not strength to bring
forth.Isa. 37.3.
It will therefore very neerly concern you, both in point of
con∣science and honour, to resume the work again, and to
find out some way or other for the more successefull
accomplishment of it; which you had better never undertaken, then not
bring to some perfection. Think not to smoother it in silence,
and that time will wear it out, for that it will not. God
knowes your thoughts a far off. And your Resolutions with him are
Subscriptions, as your Subscriptions due Debts.
Remember Ananias and Sapphira who kept back part of the
price,Act. 5.2. what was said, and
what was done to them. And consider what Solomon sayes of
those that boast themselves of a false gift; that they are like
clouds and wind without rain.Prov. 25.14. But I
will not so far suspect you, as to presse too hard upon you
in a businesse whereunto I suppose you are of your selves so
readily inclined. The Lord make us all faithfull and serious in our dealings
with him. You will so much the more affectionately resent this
seasonable suggestion, as it proceeds from the hearty desires
(seconded with prayers) of
 From
my Study in Gresham-Colledge
Jun. 3. 1656.
