



Worshipfull, Worthy and beloved;
SInce God hath called me by his providence to be over you in his Word, it is my desire and care to be usefull to you therein: an instrument of the happiness both of you and yours, as knowing that God will require it at my hand, if through my default you should miscarry. For this cause (as I would gladly serve you in any thing that might further your good) I prepared these brief Instructi∣ons for your families, as being a part not only of my care but of yours also respectively; especially your children, who as parts of your selves, ought especi∣ally to be cared for by you; and not so much how they may live in this world & be respected of men, as how they may know and believe in Christ, and be followers of him and his blessed doctrine, that they may live for ever with him in the world to come. It is too common a fault (I fear too much yours, I wish I may not say mine too) to be careful∣ler, how they and theirs may correspond with and thrive in the world, then how to know and thrive in the grace of God. Whereas the best Parents can do for their children,Eccles. 2.19, 21, 22, 23 and 5.10, 13, 14, 15, 16. is to leave them a blessing from God; the way to which is to be godly them∣selves, and teach them to know & serve him; other things are full of vanity, and we see often turn to their hurt & ruine, that main thing being neglect∣ed
by them,Mat. 6.33. whereas if God and his grace be first and chiefly lookt after, even those other things also so far as shall be good and needfull shall be added to them.
To further you in that one needfull thing, I took this pains though in much weaknes of body, as briefly and plainly, as in such a piece I could to set before you the main points of Christian truth ne∣cessary to be known and practised both by them and you: In which I have chosen rather to steer my course by the Scriptures, then by the traditions and opinions of men, as knowing that in Gods matters, its safest walking by the rule of his own word, and not by the Votes of fallible men, who are then ap∣test to miscarry when they are great in their own eys,1 Isa. 39.13. and cryed up as masters of the Faith by others. They whose fear to God is taught by the precepts of men worship him in vain. Its a main part of our duty towards him, to cleave perfectly to his word, and prefer the authority of his single saying, before the conceptions of a whole world of men: Though yet they are neither few nor despicable, nor of ye∣sterday, that are of like apprehensions with me, a∣bout the Ʋniversality of the Grace & love of God, and of the extent of the Death of Christ, in which some over zealous for their own mistakes possibly will dislike me. Men of more moderate spirits and sounder learning both here in England & beyond Seas (witnesse Mr. Baxter here, and Dr. Ami∣rald in France and others) begin to see and say
more: for the grace of God in its extent then some by over hot running into extreams have formerly been willing to own; and I doubt not but the truth of God in those points will daily get ground, though not without its usuall oppositions from men of cor∣rupt mindes, and that are destitute thereof. What I herein have offered, I have drawn out of the wels of Salvation, and doubt not but is wholsome, and may look its worst Adversaries in the face. And therefore I am bold to commend it to you, and should be glad to see you so accept it, as to call upon your Children and Servants to minde and learn them: which would also adde encouragement to me to serve you in the Lord in what else I may. However, I have herein discharged part of my du∣ty, and shall leave this as a Witnesse of my Love to you; and desire of the good of you and yours: which possibly may be of use to some when I shall cease to be.
Dearly beloved, fare ye well in the Lord, and see (I yet beseech you and request of you in his Name) that you make it your busines to know and live to him, as you will answer that great Shepheard, and most faithfull Bishop of your Souls, at his appear∣ing. To his grace and gracious custody, commend∣ing you all with my self and my endeavours; I re∣main,

Octob. 27. 1655.
