



Right Honourable, and highly Respected;
ACcording to your desires, I have Printed this Sermon; which for your desert (much obliging me) I present to you, as in speciall yours. Not to be accepted by all men, is common to al. If some dislike, my comfort and recompence is, all do not; you are witnesses. If others be displeased with what is common to man (.*) they forget they are men. If with the substance and its relation to the solemnity; they may review, and remember,And the Prophetin a passion (say the Learned) spake in∣congruous Hebrew. Rom. . I speak against sinne, not men; I advance in my judgment and conscience (which they so plead) the very truth of God: And REGARDED THAT DAY TO THE LORD, as they observing it not, say, To the Lord they regarded it not. And of common equity they owe me this freedom, that I may be as zealous for mine own Nation, as they are for another. They have their liberty in what is essentiall to it (if they please so to keep it) without cost or labour. Wee purchase ours (next under God, sought by prayer) at a great rate in necessi∣tated warrs. We are not willing to disturb their injoyment, whiles quietly they aquiesce there. If they doe ours, whence theirs doth spring, they wrong themselves, as wel as us. 'Twere happy so as to end these dividings, if we did enquire into their causes. Whether they be not insufficient, and rather to be removed from our
mindes then our mindes to bee moved by them? As whether it be not want of practise of what wee professe; Viz. to be Saints, and love Saints, because we be such, and they be such? Or whe∣ther it be not a supposed ty to a part of an obligation, that is now non-ens; or to us impossible which is much at one (voluntas non fertur ad impossibilia?) The remainder: ACCORDING TO THE WORD OF GOD (put first, as the Basis of all) we may still endevour to the utmost, and welcome. Or whether it be not an un∣willingnesse to promise what all Christians do, and would in foreine Nations of Turks, Papists, &c. to submitt quietly to the present ci∣vill Government? Or whether it be not an hoped content in desired future Governours and Government (of which we have no good experience) rather then in the present; preserved and approved of God by the testimony of many glorious wonders? Or whether it be not such an Interest of some men as is inconsistent with the Go∣vernment of the State, and is a Partition Wall between Christian Brethren? Or it be not a great mistake; supposing a violence hin∣dering some Members going to sit in Councill should null the ses∣sion of the rest that are the quorum, contrary to the course of all inferiour Courts? Or lastly, it be not our Non-consideration of the Prophesies and Promises of the great change of things God is now about to make in our times, and downward, to the advance∣ment of Christs Interest and Kingdome, whiles we expect things to be as they were? Put in vaine; as this insuing Treatise hints; and may perhaps be seconded in other larger Treatises, if God permit. The meane whiles, be pleased to weigh this well; and the Lord blesse it to your Honour, and Worships, and to all candid Men, who had never seen it but for your sakes, whose humble Servant in Christ Je∣sus, is,

From my Study at Mary Staynings, Lon∣don, Octob. 21. 1650.
