


Brethren,
YOu cannot but know that the Church of God is in Scripture
resembled to a natural body, wherein are many members united to each other,
and to one head, and by one Spirit growing up in exact unity; now as in the
natural body there may be many infirmities, and many things are liable to
offend and hurt it, so also is it in this mystical: sometimes it may be
subject to distempers by nause∣ous, crude, undigested humours the want
of thorow closing with, and drinking in divine truths, or the drinking in
untruths, may occasion a surfeit, and aversation from truth; sometimes
flatuous and windy humours of pride, high-mindedness, and lying spirits
getting into some of its members, may di∣stemper it; sometimes
feavourish heats of violent headiness instead of wel-tempered zeal for
God and godliness may inflame it; and sometimes the cold aguish, or
palsie humours of deadness in, & benum∣medness to Spiritual motions
in its tendency to its spiritual and supream end, may so
seize upon it, as much to impair its strength, and to appearance bring it
nigh to death; But God, whose Temple it is, hath provided for it against
such distempers and dangers both meat and medicine to feed and cure it: As
Christ himself is the prime and great tree of life, in whom the word is
so united to the humanity, that the humanity was ever in all times of Winter
blasts, and Sommer droughts re∣freshed and upheld thereby, and made
glorious, fruitful, and his fruits are good and prosperous, fit to feed, and
his Leaves full of vertue to heal the Nations: So is every one that through
grace is brought to believe in Christ, and gathered up into unity with
Christ, and lives upon the word of Christ, Psal. 1.3. as a tree
planted by the waters side. Jer. 17.7,8. Even one of those trees
of life that grow upon the banks of that great river of the knowledge of God in
Christ, that proceeds from out his sanctuary, and runs from beside the
Altar (or sacrifice of Christ) and under the threshold, (the Gospel and
its Ordinances holding forth Christ) Ezek. 47.1.2.12. whose fruit
is for meat, and its leaf for medicine: The lips of the righteous feed
many; and their fruit is as a tree of life, Prov. 10,21. and
11.30. the doctrine they receive from Christ is a wholsome
doctrine, 1 Tim. 6 3.4. and full of healing, by which they are more and
more rooted into, and united with Christ, till they all grow up into such a
close and full union with him, that the many trees on the
banks of that river. Rev. 22.2. be made perfectly but one on
both sides of that river, Eph. 4.13. Till we all come in the
unity of the faith, and acknowledgement of the Son of God unto a perfect man.
Now I know∣ing that in this body there are at present (as at other times) not
only many inward weaknesses, but also many things from without
indangering it; yea, that many parts of it are sorely laid open to infections
from divers that seem to be of it, or con∣verse with it; though I be less
then the least of all Saints, yet according to the measure of the gift of
Christ given me, I have endeavoured to administer that that I have from the
head, which may make for its strength and nourishment; yea, and to hold
forth such of his Leaves supplied to me by his good hand, as may either
prevent or cure the infections feared; desiring that we may all so press
after further knowledge of, and growth in Christ, as that yet we may be kept
from imbracing false Christs, and from being snared by the poison of
those false Pro∣phets, who instead of hastening mens growth up into
Christ, which they pretend, do secretly and subtilely corrupt men from
the simplicity that is in Christ; as if a man by stretching of a twig to
make it grow longer, should pull and sever it from the body of the tree
upon which it groweth. As for the mind to be without knowledge is not good;
so he that hasteth with his feet sinneth, Prov 19.2. I
desire that what I present to you in love, and for your good,
may be taken in good part, and soberly considered by you, and that what you
see to suit with, and proceed from that good spirit of God, that is but one
and the same in all ages, and gives unity to the body in all its memberly
differences, may be received and held fast by you; and if in any thing you
see either further or better then I, impart of your measure also to me,
that we may grow up to∣gether by that which every joynt supplieth, all
hold∣ing fast, and not letting go the head from whence we receive the right
and true spirit that will give us to increase: So shall our feet abide
within the gates of Jerusalem, and the Lord himself shall dwell
amongst us, shall judge, rule and teach us, and in his teaching we shall
not be vainly puft up with a carnal mind, like those bodies that are
puft up with unwholsome humours, but grow solidly fat and well-liking,
and shew that he is gratious, and that there is no deceit or
unrighteousness in him. To him, and the word of his grace, which is
able to build you up and give you the inheritance, I com∣mit you, with my
self, being

