


My Lords,
WHen Your Lordships were pleased to summon me to this Work of Preaching to You, I must confesse I had at the first some reluctancies in me as being privy to mine own unwor∣thines, and insufficiency to so Great a Task; But when I had recollected my self, and consider'd that in Your summons there was in a sort the Call of God, I now began to be very much satis∣fied, yea to draw incouragement from that which before was a dis-heart∣ning to me. Observing this very well, that it is the usuall manner of God in such businesses as these are, not onely to work by weak, and worthlesse Instruments, but also sometimes by them (to choose) rather then others, 2 Cor. 4.7. that the Excellency of the power might be of Him, and not of us. It is no matter what be the Tongue in the motion of so Admirable a Guide as his own Spirit; nor it is no matter what be the Pen in the Hand of so excellent a Scribe as Himself is. Surely the Providence of God in those Imployments whereunto Himself cals us, does make a very Great Difference in those Persons, which are otherwise the same, either by raysing the Actuall performance above the Habituall Qualification, in regard of Assistance, or by blessing the present performance with an efficacy beyond it self in regard of successe.
In these Thoughts, and Hopes (Right Honourable) have I under taken this Double Service in Obedience to Your Honours Commands; in the Pulpit first, and now in the Presse. The latter of which specially, I should never have ventur'd upon Mihiquidem ad scribndum animus non tam est cupi∣dus quam nec idoneus; Sci∣enti nonesse bs{que} periculo multorum Ju∣diciis ingeni∣um tenue & exile commit∣tere. Russinus in Exposu sym∣bol, sub Nom. cypr., if as I was warranted thereunto by
the fulnesse of Your Lordships Authority, Hoc ad crimi∣na nostra ad∣dimus, ut cm in ommbus rei simus, m bonos nos, & sanctos esse credamus: ac sic in nobis cumulentur iniquitatis of∣fensae praesum∣ptione justitiae Salv.de Gube. Dei. lib 3. Rev. 12.12, 2 Cor. 2.11. De verb. Apli. Ser 26. so I had not been animated thereunto by the Freenesse of Your Lordships Invitation.
I here humbly present both to Your Honours, and to the World an Ar∣gument, which I conceive most sutable to these Times, which are now up∣on us; Being at once both Dayes of sin, and Dayes of security; wherein (as Salvian of old complain'd of those Times which Himself lived in,) we do aggravate our Iniquity by the conceit of our Innocency; and are so much the worse, as we think our selves the Better.
Indeed I know very well, that the Devill is there most busie, where he thinks he has the shortest time; And Times of Reformation are for the most part Times of Temptation, but therefore we should not be ignorant of Satans devices, but there increase our Jealousies, where he studies to increase our Dangers.
There are two things which (as Austin well observes) do make the Dayes to be Evill. MALITIA & MISERIA. Sin, and the Punish∣ment of sin. * . Thu∣cyd. Histor.l. 1. sub finem. We have our share in Both at this present Time; And the latter as consequent to the Former. We might save God a Great deal of labour, and our selves a Great deal of sorrow, if we had but lesse sin amongst us; Which (as Pericles said once to the Athenians) is to be feared does us more hurt, then all the plots of our Enemies be∣sides' The work of this insuing Sermon is in some small and weak mea∣sure to lay open this unto us, and to affect us with it. All that I now take care for, is to have the Blessing of God upon it, to make it successefull whtch (besides the daily remembrance of Your Lordships unwearied In∣deavours for the Publick Good) is the earnest and most hearty prayer of

