


Honorable, and Right Worshipfull,
IT was the saying of Socrates, as
Zenoph. de dictis & factis, So∣cratis. Xenophon relates,
By . That ungrateful persons are to be numbred amongst the unjust, and that
. by how much the more and greater favours any have received, so much the unjuster he is, if he be unthankeful. Yea, and so hateful was the crime of Ingratitude to the Persians (as the same Xenophon tells us) that they used to teach their children to abhor and condemn it, and
Zenoph. de Cyri paediâ lib. 1. , &c. severely to punish those that were guilty of it, as conceiving (& that not amiss) That Ingratitude is that cursed Principle (and a compendium of Vices) that leads those in whom its planted, and by whom its nourished, to be inju∣rious to, and neglective of both God and man, and to be attended with a shameless impudency, which is the very Ringleader unto all filthiness and abomination. And verily Sir, as they guessed not amiss (for the
Ingratum si dixeris, omnia dixeris.
holy Scriptures couples
e 2 Tim. 3.2, 3. unthankefulness with unholiness, yea, puts it before it, as the inlet to profaneness, and follows it with want of natural affections,
Deut. 32.14, 15. truce breaking, false accusing, &c. and elsewhere speaks of it as the beginning of Apostacy) so are their sayings, especially considera∣ble with reference unto God, the supream fountain and soveraign Au∣thor of all good, towards whom unthankefulness is so much the greater injustice, as he exceeds and excels all others in favors towards us. If we should go about to number up his kindnesses,
Psal. 40.7. they would arise to such a reckoning as is far beyond us. Great and many are his kindnesses to us in this life, as his giving us life, breath, limbs, strength, health, food and raiment, the shining of the Sun, the falling of the rain, with fruitful Seasons, peace, liberty and gladness, victories over enemies, and good successes, Day to day uttereth speech, and night to night uttereth knowledge, and they all are Evidences and Witnesses of his goodness. But whence all these to sinful unworthy creatures,
Rom. 2.14. & 1.32. whose consciences daily accuse us of evils, and tell us death and vengeance is due unto us? Sure∣ly as the Scriptures say they are the beamings of his bright goodness, the issues, or out-flowings of the life in Christ, which is the light of men, which life was and is in him through his sufferings for us.
Joh. 1.4, 5. For verily Adam forfeited for himself and us, what ever might evidence goodness towards us, even life it self, and all other mercies thereof, so as had God dealt with us after the demerit of his sin, nothing but wrath and misery had been upon us. But verily Christ stepping in, upholds all things, and makes them consist and stand together for our use and service. Yea, there-through also have we in these latter days, that which is yet more precious, the Publishing of the Word and Gospel of God, ordered unto all Nations the end and tendency of all, which too is to lead us to repentance, that repenting of our evils against one so good to us, he might shew us greater things still, even the blessings of a better life, prepared and made ready in Christ Jesus for us, pardon, and peace, and spirit, and eternal happiness. And surely the gift of Christ, and his death and suf∣ferings for us, must needs it self be an inestimable favour, and deserve at our hands unutterable thanks, which is the way and inlet, yea, in a maner, the onely procuring cause under the good Will of God of all these mercies. How then are men in generall bound unto thankefulness, but especially we in this Nation, that enjoy the Scriptures, and publish∣ing of the Gospel therein, which many other Nations have wickedly put away from themselves and their posterities? their supream powers yielding up themselves to the power of darkness, and neither imbracing
the Word of Truth themselves, nor permitting it to others. Yea, what cause of thanks have we to God, that hath broken yokes of Tyranny and Oppression from off us, that formerly hindered mens receit, and free con∣fession of his goodness? What salvations hath God wrought for us in the midst of this earth? What plots hath he discovered? What designs of the enemies of Sion hath he defeated? How hath he guided Counsels, and strengthened Armies to deliver us from the Power and Oppressi∣ons of those who being ingrateful to God themselves for his goodness, could not indure that others should acknowledge it aright, and be truly thankeful? And, O that we also after such an addition of favors above what all have in common, may not run into that horrid sin of unthank∣fulness, nor reject the tidings of his great goodness, and by observing lying vanities, forsake our own mercies, much less abuse and turn it in∣to wantonness.
. Ephes. 5.3, 4. Surely for these things comes the wrath of God upon the children of unperswasibleness. Yea, not onely destructions, and desolati∣ons of Persons, Families, Cities, Countries, and Nations here, but also hereafter eternal vengeance.
Now of the evil of unthankefulness, dear Sirs, how greatly guilty are they, who though they confess men faulty for it, and can aggravate the evil of it above my Rhetorick, yet make it a part of their business and Religion, with zeal and earnestness, to perswade the most of men, that they have cause to doubt whether they have any thing in good will from God, and so by consequence, whether any real ground and cause to be thankeful to him, while they hold forth to them, that Christ died but for a few, and the rest are the objects of his hatred from everlasting, and all they have, even the Gospel it self, they have in hatred and displeasure from him; and so onely to this end, that they may work out, and increase their own misery by them? Against which their evil Doctrine I have written this insuing Treatise, in which I have indeavoured to remove that froth of wit, and humane reason, and high thoughts of error, which are with so great noise of Orthodoxness (equivalent to the Romanists cry of Catholike) lifted up against the Apostles Doctrine: and to shew that God is good, really good to All, but especially to those that his good∣ness makes good, and thankefully through faith to live unto him. And so also that all have real cause of believing, and living thankefully, do∣ing good after his example to All, but especially to the good, and the believing; and that the unbelief of his goodness, and unthankefulness to him for it, is the true cause of multitudes perishing. And now, Dear Sirs, that I might not run into that odious evil of ingratitude toward
you, from whom as instruments in the good hand of God, I acknowledge I have received very much favor and kindness, and under whom I enjoy my Place and Liberty of Gospel-preaching, (and many others with me have received many ingagements of thanks for and to you) having finished this Treatise, I am imboldened to thrust it out into the world, under your Protection and Patronages, under God and the Lord Jesus, to whom supreamly I have devoted my self and service. I hope your Honors will not expect it should exceed its Author, in whom you know weakness, but I hope you will take it in good part, as a Testimony of my thankefulness. I expect it will meet with oppositions good store against it, as is always the Lot of Truth in an unthankeful world, especially from those it argues guilty of mens unthankefulness; may it but finde with you, that entertainment Truth should have with the Saints, so far as you shall see Truth held forth in it, I shall rejoyce therein concerning you. For whom (with your beloved Consorts, and all yours) My desire is, That God would please so to order, guide, and keep you, that walking righteously in the earth, and serving your generation with faithfulness in the Work of God, you may receive the reward of the righteous in eter∣nal life, by Jesus Christ our Lord, in whom I remain,
From my House in South-Lyn, June 20th. 1650.
SIR, 
