



Honored and Beloved,
GOds Furnace of affliction, and refining Fire hath beene visibly set up among you, as in other parts of this distressed Island, the furnace hath beene as hot, and the flame as great, as in any of Gods work-houses in the land: Me thinks pity should be shewed, to you so deepely afflicted and tossed with tempest, by your friends. Your enemies, and the Churches oppressers wil not spare to add to your afflictions, persecuting you as evill doers, and charging you with Dis∣loialty, a Crime more bitter than your sufferings, were the charge but just; unjust aspersions will turne to greater ho∣nour at the last, therfore may be present comforts; I pray both for my selfe and you, the abhorring of that Sinne next to Rebellion against the Lord of Glory; I trust we shall strive
equally against it, & be approved before the Reproacher in the latter end. But why disloyall? if I may a little reason) because obedient to the lawfull commands of the true funda∣mentall power ordained by God over us? such obedience cannot be Treason, unlesse that power bee Traiterous; and before this Age it was never known that a true Parliament was a subject capable of the crime of Treason; and truer than this rais'd according to the fundamental constitutions of this Kingdome never was any, let the enemy himselfe be Judge. In this case it is safer to be accounted a Traitor for obedience to such a power, then to bee one indeede by resi∣stance of it. To the accusers returne, The Mystery of In∣iquity, as it covers sinne in poysoning, so it hides the cause in persecuting; It pretends Christ, when it would convey into the Soule the very Hell of Antichrist, and it cries out Faction, Treason, when it would murther outright Christ in his Members; And this devise is too well knowne now, than that Gods chosen should bee deluded by it; wish them againe to leave calling Traitors, and waite for the Chroni∣cle in the next Generation, which will more truely tell the generations to come, who have beene indeede Traitors in this Age: And tell them once more, it little concerns the Saints in this matter to be indged in mans day or of mans judgement; Gods day and judgement are hasting on, unto which alone doe we appeale: There shall they answer Christ and us, and untill then wee will patiently beare and wait for sentence from our Iudge.
Your great suffering in the eyes of others both God and Men will finde, I hope, better acceptance, and draw sweeter expressions for returne: God hath not hid his face from you in yours deepest darknesse; in the flame he hath kept your Bush from burning, and in the furnace your selves and
substance yet from consuming All that I pray for you is, ye may not be found unthankful nor unfruitful, but that ye may tread in the steps of Gods bosom-sonne to learne obedi∣ence by all that ye have suffered, and returne unto the Lord according to mercies received.
For your helpe in this course, I am bold to present this worke to your eyes and hearts to be seene and studied: My first conceptions of it (I confesse) were occasioned by my owne afflictions, for my owne use, which though bitter to the flesh, I hoped to sweeten by the Spirit of these truths bound up in this Apostolicall advertisement to the Christi∣an Hebrewes: and I blesse God, my hope did not altoge∣ther faile nice in this matter. Afterwards my thoughts were inlarged to some Sermons upon this subiect, with de∣sire not to keepe close these reviving cordialls, but to impart them in measure for the comfort of Gods afflicted; The de∣sire of some of these to have those words under their eyes, which did but touch their eares, hath prevailed with me to compose all in this Treatise, & now to make it of publike use. Yet in sending it abroad my hearts desire is to give it a spe∣ciall direction unto you, and my prayer to God, that it may a∣bundantly be profitable to your soules: To the love and care wherof as I am ingaged by the more speciall bonds of Christ; so if you may better prosper under chastenings by this first fruit of my labour on you, it will be my full rejoycing.
I present this worke to you, and the afflicted Church, the rather at this season, to bee both a remedy against present pressures, and an Antidote against the malignity of future troubles in the flesh, which the Holy Ghost seem's to bid us to expect in these last dayes of testifying against the Anti∣christ, and his vassal creatures, if we be the Saints of God: he points at our time, and all that space remaining to the
harvest of Antichrist,Revel. 14.12. with that finger, Here is the pati∣ence of the Saints; Here and now trialls enough shall be raised to exercise the patience of Gods Saints, but no cause to undervalue Saintship for this. Blessed Saints in this time that store up patience, that keepe the Commande∣ments of God and the faith of Iesus; The victory and Kingdome shall be theirs. If any afflicted soule may by this Treatise be directed to its due exercise under the rod, and help't on to the receiving of the desired fruit, it is all I aime at, that God may be glorified in it.
Vpon you (dearely beloved and longed for) J cast this seede with a great hope of a sweete returne of a treble fruit, toward the rod, toward your God, toward your selves, which I beseech the Father of mercies by the word of blessing to perfect, & you by your obedience to helpe on, that we be not ashamed. 1. Towards the rod, I shall long and hope for your returne of patience in a sweete bearing of it, that ye neither faint under it nor despise it; of obedience in a due hearing of it, that like the Bee, yee may worke hony out of every netle; and of diligence or watchfulnesse to be conformed to Gods Covenant, for which the Rod pleads, that it may be as the thorne at the Nightin∣gales breast, your constant Awakener unto God.
2. Towards God, no lesse shall I desire and wait for, the eminent Piety, Holinesse, and zeale for his cause in the power of them, to give him Glory his Peculiar, in word, in waies, in worship, this he will have, either from you, or upon you: How well spent are we, if we be consumed and God glorified? Saints are but Lamps or Candles of God, they burne and shine to shew his beauty, and at last are done,Col. Gould. goe out sweetly and expire in his glory. Such a Lamp is lately gone out with you, that is burnt & spent for Christ,
his Church and you; His life was light, and that desired, his death darkenesse, not in yours onely but the kingdomes Hemisphaere, and that lamented: I cannot thinke upon such a publike Man but with Honour, and though Envy barke, the memory of the iust shall be blessed; I mention him onely to move you to a repaire of such a Light, Be all so; burne and shine, and spend state, and parts, and lives to become at last Gods Glory in expiring.
3. Towards your selves, I pray and waite for out of all your troubles the fruit of Love & Vnion; though in times of peace Christians may perhaps grow fat, and proud, and wanton, and kick with the heele, yet me thinks the rod and afflictions should tame them; Though in the palace the Martyres may contend, the stake did surely make them friends: One scourge upon all backs for one cause, by one Adversary, will certainely whip the hearts of them together that suffer: Either ye are not all indeed sufferers in the same cause of Christ, (if so, let Hypocrites unmaske them∣selves) or else ye must bee of the same heart and minde; O let that cursed selfe dye, and let Christ live in you, then ye shall bee of one heart and of one minde. Selfe-conceit, Selfe-ends, Selfe-pleasing, let them perish; Is this a time to seeke things for our selves? Seeke Christ, serve and please one another in him; no way so holy and so prosperous. Let the rod have such an answer: or if by any other argu∣ments I may, let me now beg you into mutual love and sweet accord; I will strive by the Apostles strength: Beloved, if there be any consolation in Christ,Phil. 2.1, 2. any comfort in love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowells and mercies, fulfill my joy to be like-minded in the Lord. With this hope I send this token to you, in this hope I am hasting towards you, your union and mutuall love in Christ
will be my joy, your divisions from him my greatest griefe: Honour Christ, and comfort me, and blesse your selves in yeelding this fruit. Take now this pledge of my love and use it. I also shall bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, that while ye are reading, the Spirit of life and light may fall upon you, and change your hearts into the likenesse of every Truth; Hee teach and stablish, and comfort, and perfect you unto Gods Heavenly Kingdome; Into his bosome I now commend you through the Beloved, In whom I must subscribe my selfe,
Lond. May. 11th. 1644.

