



Worthy, and beloved Friends,
IF question be, Why comes this in print? I will truly tell you; not my Ambition to be publicke by the Presse in this Worke: when I preached the summe of it unto you, my thoughts were not in the least motion this way (God knows it.) But as by stroking, and by wringing the milke is drawne from an hard-milch't beast, so hath it fared with me. The love of Friends, who thought bet∣ter of it than I my selfe, hath been stroking it out: but however a motion was made, yet did it not come by that: Shortly after, false and uncharitable aspersions upon the dead and living, with defective copies of my Sermon flew about the Country; and these did wring mee, so that I resolved to hold back no longer: Having therefore desired at
the throne of Grace, that not my selfe but God might be eyed in it, I set upon the per∣fecting of my Notes, and yielded, that the World should see, what doctrine I delive∣red, and whether I spake any thing of your deceased Pastor that was not deserved. My friends thus have their desire, but the Ene∣mies perhaps an Eye-sore, I shall pray it may be an Heart-healer to them, if they vouch∣safe to use it?
Now having thus prepared it, as I send it to the World, so have I thought good to di∣rect it with a speciall Dedication unto you, not for patronage over it, but for a believing Entertainment of it. If it be truth God is the Patron of it, he wil defend it, if it be falshood, it is not worth the countenance of a man to shelter or abet it: And for my owne part, I thank God, my prayer & my studie is, not to get Patrons to my selfe, but to make Friends and Favorites in the World to Christ. Upon this condition, this worke is yours, Deare Friends, truly yours, all yours, and I am yours, and shall rejoyce to be so, if you be Christs. I have but one word more unto you to stay you in the entrance, and it is of hum∣ble request not for my selfe, but your owne precious souls. The hand of God hath bin a∣gainst you in breaking and burying one fa∣mous Chariot, wherin you were carried swift∣ly towards Christ; And no lesse hath it been
for you, in a sweet providence repairing that losse, and sending you a Man of God, to carry on his saving work among you. Now there∣fore I beseech you, Forget not your losse, let his name be precious to you, let his labours live in your hearts and ways, fulfill his dying desires, that yee be holy: and undervalue not this great mercie in your repaire. In many places Wolves watch over the poore flocke of Christ, that hurry them, & suck the bloud of their souls. What a mercy is it to have a Pastor after Gods owne heart to keep & feed them? Such hath God given you: Accept this blessing and rejoyce in it; Love, honour & obey him that is set over you in the Lord to watch for your souls, that he may give up his account at last with joy to himselfe, and abundant profit and gain to you. This I beg of you, for this cause I shall pray for you. The Lord of Glory, who is exalted to shew mercy to his people, from his High throne and boundlesse fulnesse, power out upon you the riches of his grace, he strengthen, perfect, and stablish you. To him be Glory for ever, And in him I am,
From my study in Tavistock, March 28. 1642.

