



SIRS,
THere is no Age in which God doth not manifest his infinite Wisdom, Goodnesse, and Justice,Psal. 107. ult. by some apparent stroaks of His hand; and daily observation will teach us experience herein: And indeed in the Age even now past, or the last Century of

yeares,Psal. 107.1, 2. We that are the redeemed of the Lord, which he hath delivered from the Egyptian dark∣nesse of Popery, and Spains hellish cruelty, and from the devillish treachery of others: We (I say) may well sing aloud,Psal. 111.2, 3, 4 O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good, for his mercie endureth for ever. His works are honourable and glorious, which he hath made to be sought out,Psal. 105.2. & 26.7. and remembred of all them that have pleasure therein. It is our duty then to search out, and to keepe in remembrance Gods gracious providences concerning us in this Land, and to confer together of them, and declare them to others, and especially to raise up our hearts into an holy admiration, saying unto God himselfe, O! how great is thy goodnesse, which thou hast laid up for them that feare thee,Psal. 31.19. which thou hast wrought for them that trust in thee before the sonnes of men!Psal. 66.3. And how terrible art thou in thy works! Through the greatnesse of thy power, shall thine enemies submit them∣selves unto thee. And withall consider with our selves;1 Pet. 3.11. What manner of persons should we be in all holy conversation and godlinesse? Now that we might so doe, I have endeavoured (according to my poore ability) to bring to remembrance the dealings of JEHOVAH with this Kingdom of England, and our ingratitude and dis-loyalty to him in this by-past Age; not at large, but briefly, humbly beg∣ging of every one his largest bounty, for the augmen∣ting, amplifying, and compleating in his own minde, the Meditations herein pointed at; so shall my single and simple Musick (by the good blessing of our God)

be not onely increased, but multiplyed; and thanks shall be given to God by many (and those far more fit for such a Caelestiall service,2 Cor. 1.11. then I am) by my means; and all of us together, as a well-tuned Quire, shall make sweet harmony, whereby Gods glory shall be promoted, which (I know) your re∣ligious selves conscionably ayme at. Therefore (most worthy Sirs) I am bold to present this Ser∣mon unto your Patronage, hereby to testifie both to you my sincere thankfulnesse and love, and to the World (who hath heard of the fame of your renown∣ed Ancestors, for harbouring, relieving, yea even maintaining many faithfull Ministers, be∣ing persecuted,) that the Lord hath not left your Honourable Progenitor (being in his time a pat∣tern of Piety) destitute of a Worshipfull Posterity,M. Allen, Pre∣face to Doct. Gosp. (your selves and your brethren) who walke in the steps of your religious Parents; and are not onely inheritors of the same earthly Mansions and Pos∣sessions; and successors in their high places of authority, importing dignity and duty, but also (which is best of all) Possessors of the same Spi∣rit of Christ, and the graces thereof,Rom. 8.9.2 Tim. 1.5. whereby you are enabled to behave your selves in those places, and use those estates to his Glory that gave you them. Thus humbly intreating Jeho∣vah to counsell and direct you in all the weighty Agitations of this Kingdome, to make you doe right worthily, and to prosper your selves and yours in soule and body; And craving of you to pardon my boldnesse and rudenesse, and to extend

your wonted favours (the Asylum of many faithfull Ministers) to me (though unworthy,) who indeed am much more willing,Ad vos tan∣quam ad Asy∣lum consugi∣mus. then able to serve you: I remain,
London, Sept. 20.

