


Honourable and Renowned Patriots,
IT was a pretty Rhetoricall straine of words, though scarce reasonable (unlesse as a Paradox may be made) with Moralists or Divines,. Longin  To fall in great matters is a Generous and Noble sinne. It is but a conceit, that the height of materials where∣about
the slip was, should innoble sinne; False coinage upon Lead will be as high Treason as that upon better mettall; and Treason upon Gold as base as that upon Brasse.
In the Oracles of God, where we have words not inferiour to mens, but wisdome and truth farre above them, We are thus taught, Slips in highest things are the greatest faults, and a fall in Heaven fouler wicked∣nesse than a stumbling on earth. Sinnes draw the highest aggravations from the Greatnesse of God against whom, and the height of place wherein they are committed. The An∣gels which left their first station, and man that sinned in Paradise, have felt the truth of this. Zeale for God and you, and his Church, (most Noble Worthies) wil make his & your friends reckon little of their lives to keep you that are in Highest places from such high transgression. By the grace given to me, when I was called by you to speak from God to you, & for you to God, in the day of your soules affliction, I had this in my greatest desires, to keepe you that are in highest places, and mannaging the highest matters of God, from sinne against him. I
therefore (as became a Minister of Christ) de∣sired to use all plainnesse in setting out the Kingdome of our Lord, unto which all States must how that would be prosperous, and in pointing at such sinfull irregularities which render God an enemy irreconcileable, and such States thereby eternally miserable. In all which (the Judge of spirits knows) I intended not either by matter or form of speech to be spatter such an Honourable Judica∣tory with false charges, or make a Parlia∣ment vile among the people; (I have learned better of Christ by Gods grace) my aime was onely to be a faithfull Remembrancer of you from God, of the fatall diseases whereunto such Politique Bodies may be subject, in their members; that a timely care may be had of purging your selves, least death ensue.
I hope your hearts are as willing to beare such plainnesse, as God would have them in commanding it. Never was there a more fa∣tall character upon the State of Israel, then that bitter speech of Idolatrous Amaziah to Ieroboam against honest Amos, The Land is not able to bear his words.Amos 7.10. When States
cannot beare sound words from God, spoken in his Name; or not so beare them, as obedi∣ently to answer Gods mind in them, the doom of Elies sonnes will cleave to them.1 Sam. 2.25. The God of all grace keepe off such a curse of an Impa∣tient hardned spirit from you, and give you the blessing of a boared eare, and a soft∣yeelding-obedient heart, so shall ye prosper.
Ʋpon your Order of acceptance of these poore labours, and for publishing the same, I have been obedient to your desire; and now in all humble duty and thankefulnesse doe present that to your eyes, of which your eares have tasted; I have made a few additions for clea∣ring some passages which straits of time then shut out; I hope none will be loosers by them. The height of my ambition is,2 Cor 3.3. that by this Inke-worke the Spirit of the living God would write the Name of the Lord and his Christ upon this Parliament, and upon the people of the Land; that ye may be the Lords State, ruling for Christ, and he in you, as one Party; and they the Lords people, the lot of his Inheritance.

And now having done my worke with you, I shall by the good will of our God re∣turne to my place, and there labour for you, to helpe on the work of Righteousnesse, Truth, and Peace, in your hands. My suit to the Thron of grace is and shall be the Aversion of all those Woes sounded by this Trumpet upon the wicked, and the Accomplishment of all those Woes sounded to the Church; that Christ may be fully exalted in these united Kingdoms and reign, that the Churches of the Saints also may sing, and alwaies rejoyce in their Lord, whose these Kingdomes are; and all in your daies, and by your power mannaged graciously in the band of our Lord. By whose command I must signe my selfe,

