



I Have offered violence to my selfe to satisfie your desires, in Preaching first, and next in publishing, these weake and course-spun meditations; fitter indeede for a popular auditory then such an awfull and judicious assembly concerning which I may fitly say what Zeba and Zalmunna sometimes did of Gideons brethren, each one resembled the chil∣dren of a King, Jud. 8.18. or as Cyneas the Embassador of Pyrrhus being asked af∣ter his return from Rome, what he thought of the City and State, made answere , the same may I, with better reason, say of your Honourable Se∣nate, It seemed unto me to looke like a little Common-wealth of Kings. When first I understood you had designed me (the unfittest in many respects you could have thought upon) unto this solemne service: I resented it truely no otherwise than Jonah did his message to Nineveh, with much trouble and emotion of spirit, not to say discontent: and as forward should I have beene as he (had not a strong band of reason and con∣science held me backe) to flye to Tarsus or any whither else, rather then undertake the Province you had called me to: Not out of any disaffection to the worke, or the Authority that summoned me to it, which I shall alwayes honour, and next to that of Gods, esteeme sacred; but being sensible of nothing more in all this world, then mine owne defects: and knowing well how hard a matter I finde it to satisfie my selfe, I held it impossible for me to bring forth ought that might satisfie others (especially such a grave Court of great Statesmen) either in the Pulpit or the Presse. However since you are pleased out of your ingenuity and candor, not onely to owne this worthlesse piece, but to over value it so far, as to call it forth into the publique light, having no∣thing else to sway with me, besides the obedience I owe to your commands, I do there∣fore in all humility present it unto your honourable acceptance, such as it is it glorieth to be yours, and were all the body of this simple discourse, like Solomons Lineae aureae cum punctis argenteis, Cant. 1.11. wrought with lines of gold and en∣ameled with pearles, I should not hold it too rich a present, for such unparalleld Wor∣thies, which have honoured God so much, and are so much honoured by him. Your ex∣emplary zeale and piety, your Noble and heroicall atchieuments, for the honour of our God, and the advancement of his kingdome, hath already stamped for you such an Im∣pression of respect and reverence, in the estimations and thoughts of all the godly, that you seeme to be as the stones of a crown lifted up, and as an Ensigne upon our Land, Zech. 9.16. Go on and prosper, most worthy Senators, in the great worke which you have so happily begun, till you shall have fully crowned our hopes, and perfected your owne most glorious undertakings. Never had any Parliament ei∣ther

so glorious a prize as you have to contend for, or so many potent adversaries, op∣positions, and difficulties, to encounter with: but this may serve as a more then suffici∣ent encouragement to hearten you on, that you have a good God, a Noble Cause, an Honourable Reward, and what could you wish more? See what you have done alrea∣dy, and let your former, many and precious experiences of divine favour and assistance, animate you to waite upon God, with an unwearied patience, till he shall make all your enemies of the Synagogue of Sathan, to come and worship before your feete, and to know that he hath loved you. Consider how many great and stupendious workes God hath already made you instruments to bring about. How many mighty Nimrods have you cut down? how many yoakes of oppression and tyranny have you broken? how many dying Saints have you revived? The Lord hath made darkenesse light before you, and crooked things streight, he hath levelled mountaines, and raised vallies; what enterprize have you taken in hand, which hath not in the Issue prospered beyond your expectations? You have sprung a myne under the walls of Babylon, unsetled the Throu of the Beast. Behold how the Antichristian faction languisheth, the Pontificall chaire reeles, the Miters wither, the triple Crowne shakes: that which the Lord threatned sometimes against one of the worst of the Kings of Judah, the same he seemes to doe now against the great Monarch of Babylon, Remove the Diadem, take away the Crown, I will overturn, overturn, overturn it, untill he come whose right it is, and I will give it him, Ezek 22.26, 27. Me thinkes I see the proud turrets, and battlements of Rome falling, and Sion rising up faire as the morning, cleere as the moone, terrible as an Army with Banners. Howsoever this is certaine, God hath promised, and he will no doubt in due time make it good, which we have in the Prophet. Esay 24.23. The moone shall be confounded, and the Sunne ashamed, when the Lord of Hosts shall reigne in Mount Sion, and before all his ancients gloriously. I hope the happy time is at hand, which God hath appointed for the full working out of his Glory and our deliverance, and that this dawning of our hopes may break forth into a perfect day of joy and tri∣umph, It is and shall be the earnest and constant prayer of

