



MY LORD,
I Am as willing to acknowledg, as to know my self unworthy, thus, to appear unto the world; more, to approach your Honours presence. And yet I am not conscious that this discourse hath cause to blush, save for its Authours weaknesse. Nobility can cover that: much more Christianity. It can't but speak me happy, as it makes me bold, to meet with both in One. 'Tis not belief but sense, whereby I speak it; Which though it were not late, is not so long since, as to wear out by this. Nor may it; since those,
Nec in te quic∣quam mutavit fortunae ampli∣tudo, nisiut tan∣tum prodesse posses, & velles. Praef. Nat. Hist. 2 Cor 10. when legitimate, never wither. The spring and winter is all one to them. I ha'nt forgot how Pliny once did court Vespasian: but well remember 'tis beneath your spirit to admit that dialect. And yet, me thinks, 'tis pity, genuine merit should not have its due reported, when the picture of it hath been even adored. But that your thoughts reply in silence. He whom the Lord commen∣deth; and works do eccho thereto lowder then to need our words. It is not doubted, though still, and therefore, 'tis desired, that God would lead you in this way, even to your journies end. And for this Tract be∣fore
you, though 'tis granted, your turning to it may be a digression: Yet sure, the subject of it is the ready road your Honour doth, and is to walk in; according to that work God cuts you out, and place he sets you in. Yet do'nt my utmost thoughts reach farther then to make it, only as a Monitor, not Informer. And that if not so properly to your self, yet unto those subordinate to you, or on whom you may have influence: And, sole∣ly, for this end, the farther to promote the highest inte∣rest.
My Lord, as it is the suit of many hearts, so thought the best expedient hereunto (could an expedient to it be found) that your Honour, having now, to miracle (by the glorious arm of mercy only) subdued our enemies, would put on further to make the godly friends. It may be 'tis your chief, or only task behind. Were it but pos∣sible,
Jer. 32.39. as it is desirable! And what should hinder, were our faith but answerable, to see one heart and way a∣mong the faithfull?
My Lord, I have adventured far upon your favour. It is enough, and over, for me (will your Lordship only, but excuse me) whil'st by this, I tell the world, that, as I have been, for Christs interest and the Common-wealths, somtimes under your command, I am, and ever shall be,
My Lord,

