



My LORD,
YOur eminency for the Profession of Religion, and the
lawfulness of your Office, only invites us to dedicate
these our papers to you, not that they so much expect
your protection, as intend your instruction, they only
beg your serious perusal, which may prove a happy corasive, or o∣therwise
leave you excuseless: your Lordship certainly knowes,
that this day Michael and his Angels, and the Devil and his
Angels are in fight, and the Dragon seemes to have got the bet∣ter.
Now at such a time as it is a sin accursed with a bitter
curse, to stand a newter; for 'tis a seavenfold more accursed sin
to fall from Michael, and fight on the Dragons side: if he that loves
not the Lord Jesus shall be cursed with a bitter curse; what shall
befall that Professer who hateth the Lord Jesus, and persecutes
him in his Members? Certainly, that mans sin comes near to the
unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost: The World may read his
name written in Hell in great Characters, the sin against the
Holy Ghost may be committed in one Act; it is a sin frequently
committed in this age in England, by Professors, as there are cer∣tain
straits in the narrow way to Heaven, (as repentance and self
denial) the which if a man passe, he shall never fall away; so there
are certain precipices in the broad way to Hell, the which if a
man passe, he shall never be able to return again, though he hear∣tily
desire it. Cain passed this precipice, and Judas in betray∣ing
his Master, and Esau in selling his Birth-right for pottage;
we are far from charging your Lordship (as we are free from

acquitting the men of these times) of these damnable sins, let
God and your Conscience condemn or acquit you, before whom ere
long you must appear; our design is only to unbowel that little
bigbellied Viper (of the Romish Conclaves hatching) the Ingage∣ment,
which like the Trojan Horse hath concealed in the belly of
it, the ruine of lawful Magistracy, lawful Ministery, and the law∣ful
reformed Religion; your Lordship knowes full well, that
these are three precious Jewels, and your Lordship cannot but
know as well, if you please, that this Ingagement is the designed
ruine of them all.
How sad a progress it hath made already the sincere Prote∣stants
of the three Kingdoms to their sorrow know: long since it
hath been the design and endeavour of our inveterate enemy the
Pope, to extirpate Protestant Magistracy and Ministery; but
they never could effect it until this day, and that principally by
this Ingagement: is not the Protestant race of Kings utterly ba∣nished
this Kingdom by this Ingagement? and are not all the
Protestant Ministers, now about to be turned with their Wives
and Children out of their Estates and dwelling-Houses, and ba∣nished
at the pleasure of their tormenters, and all by this Ingage∣ment.
My Lord, We beseech you to consider what Ministers they
are that are persecuted; for what, and by whom they are perse∣cuted?
your Conscience tells you my Lord, that they are the Or∣thodox,
grave, learned, sincere, zealous Ministery of England,
that by this Ingagement are persecuted, and for what? but only
because they will not forsake a good Conscience, and a just cause,
that Covenant Cause which they ingaged in, which they must do
in taking the Ingagement, and that the contrivers of the Ingage∣ment
knew full well, and for that end contrived it. And who are
they that put this in execution, but they that entred into the same
Covenant with us? that pretended the same cause, those whom
we have with the hazard of our lives, Estates, and all we have,
preserved from ruine, and been the cause of their promotion; e∣ven
those who make Lawes for our ruine: these men out-law us,
these men sequestrate and imprison us, these take away our Birth∣rights
from us, and which is worst of all, these are now about to

banish our Ministery, who have alwayes been our comfort and in∣couragement
in times of affliction. Woe unto us, were ever poor
Protestants so miserably deluded? or were there ever such notori∣ous
grosse Hypocrites, Apostate Pasters in the world? are
these the Saints that cryed out against persecution of tender Con∣sciences?
is this the year of our liberty so much boasted of by
many? is this the removing of the yoak of oppression and Tyran∣ny?
is this the year of throwing down Antichrist, and propaga∣ting
the Gospel of Jesus Christ? when our chief Protestants,
both of the Parliament and City, are inforced to look through
prison Gates, and the archest incendiaries of the Romish party
are imbraced and consulted with; and when our constant, real,
zealous Covenant-keeping Ministery, are they that must be ba∣nished,
with their Wives and Children (as in the Irish Rebelli∣on)
and Malignants and Sectarians.
Jesuites and prophane Fellows suffered to enjoy their liberties,
we appeal to your Conscience (my Lord) whether this year
be the year of Jubilee with the Protestants or Papists: are not
all Oaths, penalties, Lawes and Statutes, taken clearly off from
the Papists? and is not the Ingagement only designed as a snare
to catch the sincere Protestant, and to bring him under seque∣stration,
banishment, out-lawry, and what not?
The righteous Lord look upon our afflictions, our unheard of
afflictions; that our Brethren are risen up against us, and hate
us, and persecute us with a far more hatred then our open ene∣mies,
and that without a cause.
The Lord judge betwixt us and our enemies this day; if we
have dealt deceitfully in the Covenant of our God, then let God
search it out, and bring us to ruine; but if we are persecuted
for holding fast to our Covenant, the Lord plead our cause: we
can with comfort and boldness say this in the midst of our af∣flictions,
Lord thou knowest our integrity, this appeal our
enemies cannot make.
Come forth (my Lord) from amongst the tents of these ungod∣ly
men, lest you perish with them, for their folly is made known to

all the World, and their damnation sleepeth not: be not found a∣mongst
the number of Hypocrites, Apostates, Atheists and Pa∣pists,
persecuting the poor Church: the sword is put into your
hand for the preservation, not for the persecution of a godly, zea∣lous
Ministery: The God of all wisdom direct you for the
Churches good and his glory; for which ends we dedicate these
our Papers to you.
