




May it please your Grace,
WHen I reflect upon the many Great Ser∣vices you have done to this Church and Nation, and the vast obligations they both owe to your Grace for their Peace and Prosperity; it raises in me not only an admiration of your Person, but a grateful sence of them, and fills my heart with wishes for your Health and Happiness.
It is upon this consideration, My Lord, that I hum∣bly presume to dedicate to Your Grace this ensuing discourse, which, I hope, out of the known candor and goodness of your Nature, you will be pleas'd not only to pardon but accept of, as a small tribute of thank∣fulness,

and to give it your Noble Patronage and Protection.
It is a Sermon, which, tho mean enough in its com∣posure, yet sincerely exhorts my Fellow Subjects to pray for the welfare of His Sacred Majesty, and to serve him with their Lives and Fortunes. Now, at whose Feet can I better lay it than at Yours, who have hazarded all that is near and dear to you in this world for his Present Majesty's Interest, for the Sup∣port of Monarchical Government, and the Protestant Religion; for which Your Illustrious Name ought to be had in everlasting Remembrance.
It is true indeed, some Pamphlets have, of late, appear'd abroad with a full design to blacken Your Grace, and injure your Reputation. Such things, as these, have been in all ages and will be still incident to Great Men: for such as move in High Spheres and with a vigorous lustre, must needs (as the Sun) raise many envious Exhalations: But God be thanked Your Graces merit and integrity are so well known, your Glo∣rious Name and reputation shine so bright in the En∣glish Horizon, as makes it beyond the power and capa∣city of a Pamphleteer to eclipse or blemish them.
Alas! we live in an Ʋngrateful Age: The King himself, tho the Author of the greatest happiness to this Nation, yet hath his Enemies. How many have we amongst us, whose Madness and Stupidity make them

desire to exchange a golden Sceptre for an iron Rod of French Cruelty and Popish Revenge; Who repine and murmur, complain and conspire against the best of Princes? Some long for troubl'd waters to fish for an Estate in, impatiently wait for the moving of the wa∣ter, to repair their broken, or heal their lame fortunes; so great is the Vice and Immorality of some, that they hate such a Governor as enlightens the sublime Orb he moves in, with the bright lustre of an exact and an exemplary Conversation, and studies nothing more than a general Reformation of Life and Manners, and so endeavours, as much as in him lies, to make His People happy, by having the Lord for their God.
All I have to add, is my hearty prayers that nothing may undermine our State, or shake King William's Throne, that nothing may disturb our Happiness and Tranquillity, that God may preserve Your Grace and Noble Family, and give a Blessing to all your faith∣ful Endeavors for the Peace and Prosperity both of this Church and Nation. I humbly beg leave, My Lord, to subscribe my self,


