



Right Honorable,
WHen God is pleased to doe any singu∣lar worke,Kek. lib. 3. Eth. 5. Cap. 19. either to lay the founda∣tions of Kingdomes, or restore those that are shaken to their integrity; he stirreth up heroick spirits to per∣forme it; great workes must be ef∣fected by powerfult causes: Now those that are of heroick spirits, are led with vehement desire and love of some excellent end, and lift up their minde to the last and chiefe end, even to God and holy things, to the highest pitch of honesty; that so they might preferre the publique good, before the private, by a certaine high prerogative: when desire is found in heroick natures, men will walke with in∣credible constancy, so as that they cannot bee inticed from their proposed endeavours by any pleasure, or hindered by
any troubles and difficulties. Nue censebat civitatem fe∣licem stantibus maenibus mentibus moibus,Ang de civitate  libro 2. c. 19. cap.  that Com∣mon wealth is not happy whose manners are destroyed: In caelesti nepublica Dei voluntas lex est, in an holy Com∣mon wealth, the will of God is the Law unto which all the members of a Common-wealth must consent, Ut ex sonis harmonia in musica, sic ex summis mediis & infinis con∣cordia in republica, As harmony in Musicke is made of di∣verse sounds, so is a Common-wealth made of the concord of three states: The differences that arise betweene the Prince and people must be brought to concord by the third: and therefore Aristotle saith,Arist. eth. 8 c. 11. . as large as any society is, so large is friendship; and Kekerman, Amicitia simpliciter necessaria ad vivendum, men cannot live without friend∣ship. Ier. 29.7. Seeke the peace of the City, whither I have sent you captive: pray for it, for in the peace of it yee shall have peace:Kek. lib. 1. c. 3. And Psalme 122.6. Pray for the peace of Je∣rusalem, they shall prosper that love thee: and this is the order that God hath set in nature, that Gods Lawes should be above all humane. Those that are publicke above pri∣vate, that which doth simply respect that which is honest be∣fore the publick good: You see men must preferre the pub∣like good before the private good; because every mans own per∣ticular safety is lapped up in the publique peace; but men must preferre God, and truth or honesty, before themselves: but you may see that this is more then an ordinary degree of morall vertue, to have an heroick and publique spirit: Men naturally when they have power, seeke themselves: that is a divine and her ick resolution, when they that have power in their hands, shall use such moderation, as not to make a∣ny use of it to their owne ends, and opression of the publique. When every part of the kingdom may have their due, then cer∣tainly the sword is in a good hand: But this is and hath been very rare, when heretore the flatterers at Court did per∣swade his Majesy that all power was in his hands, though
indeed the orderly and just use of the Sword, was to be ex∣ercised by and under the Courts of justice; yet in those times the Courtiers did perswade his Majesty, to carry too strict a handover his Commoners, and not suffer them to plead their priviledges and liberties, as in justice and equity they should have been permitted; and therefore God was pleased for a time, to let his Majesty see that it was in his power wholy to have wrested the Sword out of his hand: then there was an opinion passessed the Commons, that they had gotten the Sword: And now againe it commeth into confi∣deration, whether they were not over strict in keeping the King and Lords from pleading their rights in a peaceable and friendly way.
I humbly and heartily wish that the Houses would both agree to settle the power and priviledges of Parliament, in such a friendly way as may conduce to peace, that no part wight make use of their power and interest of the people, to assume to them more then of right doth belong to them, to the prejudice of the other paty; power is a most uncertaine thing, where it is not regulated by wisdome and Law; that some course may be taken for the punishment of all delin∣quent subjects, of what ranke soever; and accordingly it might be regularly administred: a course is plaine, which way a Lord way be punished by way of impeachment; but which way a Commoner of criminall, is not yet clere, which I am confident hath given this boldnesse to the Army to break out in this extraordinary way. And now I shall take the boldnesse to informe your Lordships a word or two touch∣ing this strange accident that hath lately happened from the Army: First, I say they are the rod of God, which is no∣thing to the justice or unjustice of their proceedings, and that so farre as they shall desire, that course may be taken that the proceedings of Parliament may be put in a forme of justice, that may afford a speeay tryall of such Members of the House of Commons as shall be criminall, that may have
a facile and speedy progresse and determination before com∣petent Judges. And I hope the Army will be content to in∣forme what they can in a judiciall way, against these Mem∣bers they complaine off, and not desire that any judgement of suspension or otherwise, may bee passed against them, without tryall: They professe themselves just men, I hope therefore their demaunds, as somewhat the more large for that they saw no way open for their tryall, and for that none have yet been punished: which if the way were opened, not onely they would be content to walke in the common path, and others that deserve it, may be punished as well as they; the Members themselves made more wary, the people receive satisfaction, and a loving peace confirmed, Which God grant.

