



TO preserve the precious names, perpetuate the pious memories, and publish the eminent gra∣ces of dead Saints, is a due debt from the living. The glory which from hence re∣dounds to God, the benefit which hereby ac∣crueth to the Church, the respect which herein we manifest to them, are all severally, much more joyntly, strong obliga∣tions to this service. No fitter instrument for such a work then the pen, which surpasseth the voice in this double excel∣lency, that it both extendeth farther, and continueth longer, according to that knowne expression of the Poet,Vox audita perit, littera scripta manet.
These I doubt not (worthy Sir) were the impellent causes moving you to desire a publication of this imperfect piece, in which, if there appear any lustre, it is no other then what it receiveth from the beames of his Virtues, whom it repre∣sents. Indeed, what S. Bernard said of his friend Malachy, I may justly apply to your deceased Father; he was, while he lived, Lucerna ardens & lucens, a burning and a shi∣ning Lamp: and by Death, Non extincta sed admota, not so much put out, as removed to Glory. The light of his good words is still left behinde him, and now set on a

Candlestick to enlighten with its splendour this declining Age of the World.
The Character here given to this faithfull Servant of God, may by some (who throughly knew him) be justly ac∣counted deficient; by others, (through Envy, or Ignorance at best) be unjustly censured as exuberant. To the for∣mer I shall Apologize in the words of the Oratour: Picto∣ros pulchram absolutam{que} faciem rarò nisi in pejus effin∣gunt,Plin. 2. an exact face is seldome drawne but with much dis∣advantage. To the latter, S. Bernards expression shall be my Answer, Testimonium veritati praebeo non affecti∣oni; my Conscience witnesseth to me, that my Testimony concerning him, was not byass'd by Affection, but measured by Verity.
To your Candid acceptance and Patronage (Honoured Sir!) I present these unpolished Lines: the truth whereof I know you can fully, and will freely attest. I have nothing more to adde but a gratefull acknowledgement of your many immerited favours, and my incessant supplications at the throne of Grace, That both your self, who esteeme it an happinesse to have been grafted into the Stock of that Worthy Family, and all the naturall Branches of that choice Root, may be daily watered with the plentifull showers of Divine blessing, continually grow up in a re∣semblance of these pretious Fruits which he brought forth: and finally, be transplanted into the Paradise of Blisse, where, together with him you shall be flourish∣ing Trees of Righteousnesse for ever. So prayeth he, who is

