



Madam,
I Finde this Holy Apostle directing his Second Epistle to an Elect La∣dy;Ep. 2. v. 1 whereby hee conferr'd no small Honour upon her; I am bold to dedicate this Second Part of my weak Labours on his first Epi∣stle to your Ladyship, as esteeming it (and that justly) a great Honour to mee.
St. John dignifieth the Person to whom hee wrote, with the Title of a Lady; it seemeth hee was of another spirit than our Levelling Quakers, who denying a Civil difference of Superiour and Inferiour, refuse to give those Respects, both in Gestures and Titles, which are due to some above others. And as he calleth her a Lady, in reference to her external Quality, so an Elect Lady, in re∣gard of her choice internal qualifications, as being,Hieron. Ep. ad Demetri. to use St. Hieromes Language, concerning a prime Lady in Rome, Non minus sanctitate quam

genere Nobilis) no lesse good, than great▪
An Amiable sight it is when these two entwine each other; Piety in a mean one, is like a Mine of Gold in the earth; Nobility in a bad one, is like a blaz∣ing Comet in the Aire: But Piety in a Noble person, is like a bright star in the Heavens. Honour without Vertue, is as a Cloud without water; Vertue without Honour, is as a Room without Hangings: But Ver∣tue and Honour is as a Golden Apple in a Silver Pi∣cture; or rather, as a Pretious Diamond in a Golden Ring. Both these were conspicuous in St. Johns Elect Lady, and I may no less truely say, are met together in you.
Should I give the World a true account of those Intellectual, Moral, and Spiritual endow∣ments, which God hath conferred upon your Ho∣nour, I easily beleeve (what St. Hierome saith in reference to a Noble Lady, Si quacunque virtutibusId. ibid. ejus congrua dixero, adulari putabor) I shall bee cen∣sured as a Flatterer. Besides (to speak St. Am∣brose his phrase in an Epistle to the same Lady) IAmbros. Ep. ad Deetri. am justly fearful, N verecundiae tuae onerosa foret etiam vera laudatio, lest I should offend your Lady∣ships Modesty, by expressing a Character of your worth, though never so consonant to truth. I foresee also, how needlesse any Enconium will bee of your Merit: The Lives of great persons, being, as Cities built upon an Hill, generally obvious. I am withall sufficiently sensible what an arrogance it is, ut tuis praedicationibus ingenium meum par esseId. ibid. praesumam (as the same Father in the same Epistle e∣legantly)

that I should think my rude pensil fit to draw the Lineaments of your better part; upon all which considerations I have resolved against that common custome of a Panaegyrick.
Onely (after St. Johns pattern) I beseech youEp. 2. v. 5. (Madam) that you would abound yet more in all vertue, so as the light of your good works may shine more and more to the perfect day. To this end, Let those excellent counsels which are giv∣en by him in this Chapter, and though I cannot say fully, yet I dare say faithfully expounded by mee in this Book, bee firmly engraven upon your Noble Breast.
Account it your Highest Honour (with Mary)Vers. 3 6 to sit (as it wete) at Christs feet, not onely that you may hear, but keep his Commandements, and to make good your Christian profession by trea∣ding in his footsteps, and walking as he walked.
By imploying (as you do) this Worlds goods, for Pious, Hospitable, and charitable uses, let it appear that you have learned to Love your Brother, and not10▪ 16▪ to love this world.
Go not forth to those Antichristian Lying Teach∣ers, who by Heresy and Schisme are gone out of the Church of England, that (according to the19, 2. Motto of your Honours Armes, Cavendo tutus) your pretious soul may bee still safe from errour, by bewaring them, and their poysonous doctrins.
Finally, As you know, so abide in him, whom24▪ you have beleeved, and let those truths, which you have heard from the beginning, and

hitherto embraced, abide in you to the end of your life.
I must not (Right Honourable) conclude this Epistle, without fulfilling the chief End of its De∣dication, namely, to confesse my Obligation, and professe my gratitude to your Ladyship, for those kinde aspects, and benigne influences, which in these black and cloudy daies, the bright beams of your goodness have vouchsafed (as to many of my Reverend Brethren, so) in particular to my self, the unworthiest of them all.
I have nothing more to adde but my Devotions▪ That the great God would accumulate upon your own person, with all that are descended from, and related to, you, the blessings of Life, Health, and Wealth, of Love, Grace, and Peace, of Joy, blisse, and Glory, is, and shall bee the uncessant Prayer of
Madam,

