


Gentlemen,
THe chief Pillars of a Nation, are the Ma∣gistracy and Mini∣stery; the one for punishing Sin, the other for advancement of Righteousnesse. These are the Officers of State, which,

like the two great Lumina∣ries of Heaven, give Law to all the rest; and amongst the Wisest, and Best of men, are accounted as useful to a Com∣mon-wealth, as Castor and Polux, to the Mariners in a tempestuous night: So that as the flux and reflux of Nile, portends plenty, or dearth; so these Sword-bearers of God, are pledges of his favour, to that Nation, or Place, where they are Honoured and Respe∣cted; and great care ought to be had in the due election of such as may be for the promo∣tion of the great end of such Places: for, as one lately said well, They should not be

like brambles, which teare the wool off the poor sheeps backs that come to shelter, for prote∣ction, under them. The Lace∣demonians chose none into the Senate as Magistrates, but one∣ly upon account of Honesty and Vertue; forgeting the bare con∣sideration of Riches, Friends, &c. where piety was a stran∣ger. And Cicero tells us, A good Magistrate is the Common-wealths Physitian, Badge of Vertue, Staff of Peace, and Pillar of Honour. I would onely beg leave to break my thoughts to the first of these: and though to some this may seem boldnesse to be free; yet considering that A

good cause teacheth confidence. I think in this case I should offend if I presumed not; and I have taken care so to order my flight, as not to soare a∣bove the Region of Duty and Civility.
Gentlemen, I set before you three Grand Impieties, viz Drunkenness, Swearing, and Sabbath-breaking, sins that are opera tenebrarum; It's your work to look to them, they are Rageing, Reigning, Pollu∣ting sins; sins for which a Land mourns, and the Nation puts on the Sable garments of sor∣row and heavinesse: these sins beget a controversie betwixt a people, a place, a person, and

God, and who is able to abide his indignation? for if once his wrath be but a little kind∣led, blessed are all they that put their trust in him. These therefore are sins that ought not to go unpunished, and that without the strictest seve∣rity in a Christian common∣wealth.
Magistrates are not to beare the Sword in vain; if you do not quarrel with sin, God will with you; you are, or should e, the Banks of the Common∣wealth, to keep us from a Land-flood, and Torrent of confusion; you are the Hed∣es to prophanesse: The life of the Law is executions; Its

a principle in Moral Policy, That not to execute the Lawes, is worse than to break them, Acts and Or∣dinances will not beat down prophanesse, unlesse the first be throughly acted, and the last set on fire by authority: many take encouragement by the slack execution of Justice, which otherwise might with care prove a hinderance, not onely from sin, but punish∣ment, nay, it may be, from Eternal flames. I am much afraid that many are guilty of others sins, more than they dream of, by suffering their understandings to be darkened in the sense of their duties, tho∣rough

the sight of their Ho∣nours; not seriously weighing what trust God hath commit∣ted to them: They cannot de∣ny presentments, but think it a work below them to search and find out debaucht houses, or persons, or examine who idlely stayes from the Word; or take care in publick resorts, to find out Blasphemers, Cur∣sers, and Swearers, and pu∣nish them in the Act. How sad would it be to us, if we heard the sad cryes in Tor∣ment? it may be some saying, O that the Magistrate had hedged up my way with thorns! had he set bounds to my drunken meetings, cursed

oathes, and prophane Sab∣bath-breaking; then had I not been now roaring in an∣guish, under the fury of a Re∣vengful God! The mild pu∣nishment of obstinate trans∣gressors, makes sin grown to an excrescency: It festers a body Politick, as well as Natural, to have the wounds not tho∣roughly dressed; it forces to a relapse, where the causes are not diverted or rooted out.
Seeing Drunkennesse hath so great confidence, as if Au∣thority led it by the hand, let me strike at the bowels of it, that hath so many thousands crawling out of it; Oh that we might see this sin reel with

the Drunkard! that there were a frequent visiting of Ale-hou∣ses, and none suffered, under the greatest engagements, Not to suffer any to be drunk, or drink to excesse! and methinks, as I travel these Northern parts, especially about (I had almost said in) the Metropolis of these Counties, its scarce pos∣sible to passe without infection, the streets are lined with these Pest-houses; the greatest won∣der is, that they are under the roof of Authority, and yet suf∣fered to breath. Oh down with disordered Ale-houses, that rove the Hell and Damnation f many a poor soul! where many poor wretches sit secure∣ly,

and there drown their fa∣milies bread in Drunkennesse! where many a person of respect, buyes the ruin of his families honour, together with his own▪ at a vast expense! One said, If it were not for secret Drun∣kennesse, they might bar up their doors; Oh, set a Barica do to the entrance of such im∣pieties and villanies, which flow hither as the humours to the stomack! Banish these fire ships from the Coasts of  Christian Common-wealth, o we shall be set on fire from hell then your Towns, Counties Cities, and the whole Nation will move in a Regular Orbe, & Congregations be well filled

We may say, it would be a wonder in England if it were in any great Town, as it was in Rome, where there was a street called Vicus Sobrius, because there was not an Ale-house in it. What if some have no other living? the question is, can they live no otherwise, than by making men drunk? I admire the neglect of this foundation of Reformation in this place, which so oft by the faithfull Servants of God hath been rei∣terated in our Congregations! If these corners of Hell were blown down with the breath of Authority, all the traine of At∣tendants, like a great Cour∣tiers, would fall with himself;

as Cursing, Swearing, Blas∣pheming, the Holy Name of God, Murthers, Adulteries, and all other such wickednes∣ses, for which the hand of the Lord is ready with his judge∣ments to reach us: till this be done, till we see the Sword of Justice make sin stagger, and like that mighty wind that came from the Wildernesse up∣on Jobs children, blow down the four corners of these pla∣ces of iniquity; I say, till this come to passe, every moment will thrive towards a dismal no one, the minutes of time will swell into ages, and those into eternity of punishments, if not prevented.
If Gods wrath and anger be the evils that compasse these sins about, like sparks of our own kindling, and if the refor∣mation of sin, be the removing of Judgement? what need then to strike at the root of iniqui∣ty? If Ahabs Humiliation, and the Ninevites Sackcloth and Ashes, caused God to let the resolution of his Judge∣ments run backwards; If Phi∣neas Zeal stayed the plague, and saved many thousands; I say, if outward reformation tyes Gods hands from outward plagues, what need then to look about and reform? lest we that are left of so many thousands lately swept away

by sicknesse, diseasses &c. be made examples because we learn not to beware.
I could instance many Ex∣amples of Gods severity, to such as were slack in their Du∣ties; as Eli, whose impunity to his sons impiety, shrunk him under the heavy stroke of Justice; but I had rather lead you by examples of Piety and Justice, than drive you by those of Judgements. Look to Ne∣hemiah, he sets servants at the Gates of the City, and laid hands on such as prophaned the Lords Day. Its worthy Observation, what Ambrose sayes to Theodosius; That he was more earnest and care∣ful,

to observe the things of God as a Magistrate, than himself as a man. The La∣cedemonians had their E∣phori; Magistrates that took care to all manner of intempe∣rance and excesse in the City, and if any were found, they were beaten publickly. The Carthaginians made a Law, That no Magistrate should drink wine; such was their care to avoid this beastly sin of Drunkennesse: Solons Law was death to a Prince that was drunk. In Carthage, Lace∣demon, and Creet, this sin was so abominable, that all which were found guilty of it, were thrust out of the Senate, and

dismantled of all manner of li∣berty to bear any office in their Cities. What zeal was here in Heathens against this odi∣ous sin? And this may not unfitly be accounted as the rea∣son why a woman reflected up∣on King Philips unrighteous sentence of Judgement, by desiring to have her cause re∣moved from Drunken Philip, to King Philip Sober: and it may be, this sin of his, was the cause of his death, which by a Lacedemonian Gentle∣man was executed by a thrust in his body, because he refu∣sed to do Justice. We read of Lewis King of France, up∣on reading Psal. 106.3. Bles∣sed

are they that keep judge∣ment, and he that doth righ∣teousnesse at all times; was so wrought upon, that he pre∣sently said; He that doth not punish sin, is the patron of it. These sins I speak of, are grown now so bold by impuni∣ty, as if Justice were afraid to look them in the face; like the Snake in the Fable, rise up against the greatest and most noble Ingenuity possible; Its severity must subdue them. When true zeal bends the bow, and draws the arrow of Ju∣stice to the head, then it strikes sin to the heart; it flyes home to the life of the Law, and death of the offence. A

Modern example we have of an Irish Lord,Epistle to Mr. Murcots Wo. who lodged at West-Kirby waiting for his passage, and being a prodigi∣ous Swearer, the Officers serve a warrant upon him, at which he rages with Curses and Oathes; but they seize upon his horses, and forced him to pay 20 pound to the use of the poor of the Parish; and all the while he stayed there, his tongue was held as with a bit and bridle. This is the true effect of Justice, which looks not asquint upon any man; like Aristides, who without an eye of favour to father, or friend, or malice to his ene∣mies, distributed alike to all,

so that he purchased the de∣served name of Aristides the Just. In the Areopagite Ju∣dicature, they onely heard the Cause, and never saw the per∣sons, giving judgement in the night, that all might have e∣quall Justice.
I cannot omit the example of one Mayor of Ex∣ceter. Mr. Jourdain, of whom it might be said as of David, That the zeal of Gods house had eaten him up!Mr. Man∣tons E∣pist. to his life & death. for when the Book of Sports came forth, he sent an expostulatory Letter to the King, inclosed to the Bishop of Exceter, who carefully con∣veyed it to his Majesty, who reading, said in a rage, He

should be hanged that wrote it: The Bishop fell on his knees, and begged pardon, say∣ing, That God had not a bet∣ter servant, nor his Majesty a better subject. The Bishop after being visited by Mr. Jourdain, said; Ah! Mr. Jourdain, would you put me upon so hot service, knowing how many eyes Sus∣pected to fa∣vour Puri∣tans. are upon me! who replied, Yea my Lord, the eyes of God, and his holy Angels, are upon you, to see how you dis∣charge your office and duty. By his justice upon Swearers, he brought such an awe and dread upon men adicted to that sin, that many Citizens obser∣ved,

that in places of Publick resort, they heard not an oath sworn for many years toge∣ther. Ile end with one pretty passage recorded of King James,VVil∣sons. K. James. who being upon Re∣moval to Theobalds, his Ma∣jesties Carriages went out of the City upon the Lords Day, which the Lord Mayor hear∣ing of, commanded them to be stopt; which affront, was re∣presented to the King, with as great asperity, as men in Au∣thority crossed in their hu∣mours, could expresse. The King swears, He thought there had been no more Kings in England but him∣self; but when it may be he

thought there was a King in Heaven; he sent a warrant to the Lord Mayor, whom with these words he obeyed. While it was in my power, I did my duty; but being taken away by a higher power, it is my duty to obey; which after∣ward it's said, the King took well, and thanked him for.
But least I be taken for one▪ transported with an over-hea of Zeal, without a regular and proportioned mixture of Knowledge, give me liberty to clear my self, and leav my thoughts behind me, th I may not be found guil of that asperse, (which

some men pressed with a fiery zeal, vented more in passion than discretion) which fixes a scandal to Justice, more than it promotes Gods Honour or Reformation of men: were to consult with the prudent part of our duties, mannaging punishment to such as are drawn aside by temptation, &c. with reproof, and that secretly: But to incorrigible transgressors, such as are so accustomed to do evil, as if they professed debauched cour∣ses, let the severity of the Law proceed; for to such onely, the Law strikes, to such as will not be warned: who can they blame but themselves,

if they smart? And if I should here plead for respect to be had to persons, it may by some be thought, to be out of the way; but however, I am much for it, and do ac∣count it no lesse than a Grand Master-piece of Prudence; for if such as seem to lead others by their example, be won from prophanesse, the fruits cannot be bad.
If therefore there be any of the better ranke which di∣gresse from the good orders of Government, either of the Na∣tion, or themselves, we are to use such with all the winning respect imaginable; and if the Law be satisfied, not to

provoke their displeasure: the Law aimes more at Refor∣mation than punishment; and to persons of Quality, whose reputations in the beame of Honour weighs down the rate of their punishment: we ought to deal with candid behavi∣our, and to extend meeknesse and respect, as far as the greatest Civility, and favour of Law will reach. Ʋpon this ground, no Question, was that prudent Piece of Admi∣nistration of Justice; perform∣ed by a chief Magistrate, upon a Person of Quality, not long ago; by sending a Letter, beg∣ging his excuse, and hoping as e was a Gentleman, he would

not be angry at the Admini∣stration of Justice, which was his honour; demanding satis∣faction which was due by Law for so many oathes, which in such a place he had sworn; The Gentleman with a High ac∣knowledgment of civility, free∣ly submitted. I would not be thought a favourer of debauch∣edness in any, much less in the Gentry, in whom, if such vice be set, they have a bad foil; Ye I must needs say, they ough to have more allowance that common persons; especially if they be ingenious (as alas many that are most ingenious most often fall into the snar of temptations!) A little li¦berty

they expect more than o∣thers, and as much as is not an affront to the Law, let them have; because, its fit to win such by civility, which the Law cannot by force do, without a Rape upon their ho∣nours and reputations; and one great reason is, because many times inferiour persons are the inflictors of punish∣ment, which cannot have over good a relish, unlesse sweetned with a kinde of submission; and therefore when drink or passion is de∣parted, then to write or send to them: Yet where civil∣lity and meeknesse will not allure, to that just decency

and order, which holds con∣formity to the wholesome Lawes of the Nation, then Currat lex. All which I could wish were done with∣out Malice, Prejudice, Re∣venge, a spirit of domineer∣ing, or to be accounted some petty some body; but with a principle, that may not onely approve the integrity of a mans soul to act for the glory of God, but also a not expecting your reward from popularity, or any other secret advan∣tage below the truth and in∣tent of the action; guided by the best principles both Divine and Moral.
Now, Gentlemen, to you that are guilty, or may be found in these disorders; If Lawes were not, we had as good live amongst Salva∣ges; you could not say your lives were your own, if an∣other through fear of the Lawes, were not kept from murdering you; if we had none to punish transgressors, we had as good be without Lawes: for your own ho∣nours therefore, beware you involve not your reputations to the punishment of every mean officer; be not angry at Justice which is more the Honour of the Gentry, then any; because they are looked

upon as patrons of it: be ra∣ther like King Henry the fourth, who thanked God, that Justice was executed, though it lighted upon one of his own loyns. To conclude, Are not these sins fitter (if for any in any sense) for Brutes, Beasts, Beggars, and the scum of a Nation, than for Gentlemen or Christians? for shame then, you that are in any de∣gree guilty of such foul spots of dishonour, to the Nation, to Christianity, to your Fa∣milies, good Names, and your own Souls, let these wicked, debauched, beastly, pro∣phane sins, be abandoned from your thoughts and actions,

and hate it in others, that the Nation (the Gentry first lead∣ing the van) may make ini∣quity and sin blush, and even shame these vild courses to the eternal Honour of Eng∣land.
And now Gentlemen, to whom I have been bold to Dedicate my paines, I beg you to look upon the Work, in that which you see it doth drive at, and not at the unworthinesse of the Authour, whose desire in it is nothing lesse, than may be concluded in this wish: That by your Good Government, they that are to come, may blesse your re∣membrance, and we present,

may together with your selves, live a comfortable, peaceable, and quiet life, and that in all godlinesse and honesty.

