


Worthy SIR,
UPon your first motion of publishing this Ser∣mon, I took it into a serious review, and finding the notions very common, and the expressions home-spun, I adjudged it unworthy to survive (except in the me∣mories of the Auditors) that houre wherein it was prea∣ched: But being loath to deny your desire, I resolved to deny my owne judgement, and withall, hoping it may prove usefull (though not to informe the judgement, yet) to awaken the conscience of the Reader, I am willing to hazard my owne reputation, if I may advance the edifi∣cation of others.
That which (Reverend Sir) I conceive to be a subor∣dinate end in your intention, is to testifie your abundant (yet deserved) respects to your deceased Neece, in taking care that whilest her body rots her name might live; and surely, since the memory of the just is blessed, an en∣deavourProv. 10▪ 7. to perpetuate it is pious. Praise-worthy then is your regard of her memory, but much more commen∣dable is that course which you have taken for preserving

your owne, by an eminent and lasting The building and endowing a free Gram∣mer School by, and Writing-School in the Town of Le∣wisham, toge∣ther with an annuall Main∣tenance for 7. Schollars to be sent from thence to the University. act of charity, for which the generations to come shall call you blessed.
Indeed by this worthy work you have honoured the Pa∣rish whereof you have been, and are a carefull watch∣man; the Church of England, to which you have been an obedient Son; the Gospel, of which you have beene a laborious Preacher; and Protestant Religion, of which (I trust) you are a sincere Professor. And truly, both the present and future ages will be very ingratefull, if they shall not highly honour so munificent a Benefactor.
However (I hope) you have so learned Christ, as not to make mens applause the scope at which you aime, or marke whereat you shoot, well knowing that vaine-glory sullyeth the splendour, and evacatueth the reward of our best actions, turning Christian charity into pharisaicall hypocrisie.
To Gods mercifull acceptation▪ and gracious remu∣neration (I doubt not, good Sir) but you commend your pious and charitable designe, who (though men should)Hebr. 6. 10. will not be unrighteous to forget your work and labour of love. To his powerfull protection and most wise di∣rection, I commend both you and your endeavours, who will not forsake you now you are aged, but preserve2 Tim. 4. 18. you to his heavenly Kingdome. To whom be glory for ever and ever.
AMEN.

