



Reverend Sir,
I Am very sensible that this Dedication will revive the memory of your great losse, and thereby renew your grief, But withall, this publication will perpetuate the memory of your dead Son, and that may be your comfort. Indeed, this (as I conceive▪ was the chief cause why it was so earnestly▪ desired by many of his friends, and this (I am sure) was the onely reason why it was at length yeilded to by me.
But truly, so pretious is his name, that I am abundantly assured it will live though he be dead, not onely in the inkie characters of this paper, but the tender affections of many hearts: The truth is, might prayers have prevailed with God for his life, he had not yet died; and would tears have brought him back from the dead, he had again lived. What the name of the place was where the Angel of theJudg. 2. 5. Lord spake to the children of Israel, so that they lift up their voices and wept, might justly have been given to that Church upon the day of his Enterrement, it was BOCHIM, a place of weeping; every eye almost bedew∣ing his grave with tears. And though in respect of himJob 14. 7, 8, 9, 10. they were as needlesse, so fruitlesse; the case being (as holy Job observeth) farre different between a withered root, and a dead man; yet as the Jewes said of Christ weeping

for Lazarus, it might well be said of them, Behold howJoh. 11. 36. they loved him: and doubtlesse, he cannot but be remem∣bred by them to whom he was so much endeared.
This I have thought fit to mention (Good Sir) as for his honour, so your joy; at least the mitigation of your for∣row for him, who lived so beloved, and died so lamented,2 Tim. 4. 7, 8. and though he is buried, will not be forgotten. Yet still, that which is, and ought to be, your greatest consolation, is the good hope you have of his eternall salvation, on whom, having finished his short course, in keeping the faith, and fighting the good fight, (I trust) the crown of righ∣teousness is already in part, and shall be in that day fully conferred by the Lord the righteous Judge.
And now (worthy friend) I cannot but take notice of that whereof (I am confident) you are not unmindfull, the various dispensation of Divine Providence towards you and yours. Both your hopefull Sons he was pleased to take away in the Morning of their Youth, and you have lived to the Evening of Old Age. Both their years put toge∣ther could not make up much above two thirds of those you have already lived to, and (if it be Gods will) may you see many more, for the sake, as of your surviving Chil∣dren, Grand-children, so especially the Church; that having expended a long life in Gods service, you may at last exchange it for an eternall life in his glory.
So prayeth 
