


SIR,
WHen the Cry of Sodom ascended to the ears of Al∣mighty God, you cannot be ignorant of the deter∣mination, Let us go down and see whether the Cry be so great as reported: It cannot be inter∣preted from this expression, that either the re∣moteness of the place, or the descension of God, did obscure or add to the knowledg of him, before whom all things are naked and open, but written for our learning, that great observa∣tion be had before we proceed to sentence. Sir, By the series of your discourse it will appear, that you have not only judged before the time, but also prevaricated righteous Judgment: To condemn the innocent, or justifie the wicked, is equally abominated by the Judg of all men; and although you have strained industry by Argument to maintain a Charge, seeing you have Argumentum hoc solum quod sit secundum pondus ad ae∣quatum, dolus versatur gene∣ralibus, commu∣ne non distin∣guit. levelled at a wrong ob∣ject, your Argument and Charge in the eye of Reason stand annihi∣lated. It must be granted you have abilities, yet let me mind you of this School Maxim, Corruptio op∣timi est pessima. The prevarication of the best is the worst corruption. You are pleased to say, that although we have not the Latin tongue, yet we have the lying tongue: 'Tis pity they are so inseparable in your self; your animosity is against Lay∣mens Preachings; sure you are from Rome, for your speech be∣wrays you: in the Common-wealth of Saints there is no such distin∣ction of Laity and Clergy, but all are one (or alike) in Jesus Christ. Let your term be granted, yet some of your own Poets differ from you, viz. Laicis licet enim curam de Religione et Ec∣clesia suscipere, cessantibus vel non officium fa∣cientibus Epis∣copis & Eccle∣siasticis. It is lawful for the Laity, in case of vacancy, or deficiency of Bishops, and Ecclesiastical persons, to take upon them the care of the Church and Religion. If there was equity for this in the time of Polanus, certainly there is Aetas paren∣tum pejor. a necessity for it in this present age, and the words of Calvin may now fitly admit of a Resurrection, viz. This is certain, that for these hundred years there hath scarcely been

every hundreth man chosen, that understood any thing of holy doctrine, Cap. 5. Sect. 1. So many as are consecrated Priests, are of Horses made Asses, of Fools made mad men, Calv. Just. lib. 4. C. 19. S. 29. But you will say, there is now an alteration: Then let us take a review; at the beginning of these present differences it may be five or six, or such a number in a County were Antagonists to that persecuting Power which did enslave tender Consciences, and acted gloriously at that season, but how few of that number that now endeavor not to erect the same coercive interest, though under visor of Presbytery? I know there is a remnant of that Tribe who are both godly and moderate Ministers, and deserve all due encou∣ragement; but I give my Judgment with Mr Calvin, scarce one of a hundred who do not as eagerly thirst after the dregs of Pre∣lacy and Tyranny, as Israel did after the Egyptian flesh pots.
In one of your Epistles you mention your Imprisonment and suf∣ferings, great reason that you have, or should have, reparation; and 'tis a great grief to him whose sufferings are At the first sitting of this present Parli∣ament, about the business of Mr Hamden, I was cast into several pri∣sons, had my goods sei∣zed on, and arraigned for my life before Judg Heath. superlatively equivalent unto yours, to observe so much remisness in the Parlia∣ment of this nature. Sir, you say, this Discourse of yours was the work of leasure times, mine extracted by the dispensation of my dayly work. No wonder if you (being fed fat with the ruines of the people) appear an Anakin; and my self, who eat my bread by sweat of my brow (or industry) am rendred a Yet I suppose as frequent in Exercises of Religion as most of that Tribe. Pigmey; and though I cannot dispence with my occasions as to wait upon you in every particular Argument of your Book, yet so often as you appear I take boldness to ask you how you do, and remain

Stonystrat.
July 2. 1651.
