



May it please your Excellency,
THe reason why I suffer this Discourse to go abroad, and not some others, (though urged by friends, yea com∣manded thereunto by your Excellency and the Council,) is partly to beg pardon for that Disobedi∣ence, partly to evidence, that it was no defect in my Will, but in my notes, and manner of writing, that hindred me from paying that observance, which now I yield; But especially, because the Spirit of God, (for mine own, or a worse, neither could, or would ever have
done any such good office for me; I say therefore undoubtedly the Spirit of God) by these and the like injections and intimations, helping me to plead and press them, and to hold them up before the Lord, and to spread them before Him, as Hezekiah did the Let∣ter, hath many a time, sustained and cheared mine own heart, and so renew∣ed the face of that earth, after much Winter weather, after many trials, troubles, and tremblings: for when God speaks, where are the Lips that will not quiver at His voice? into whose bones will not rottenness enter? and happy they, and they only, who now tremble in themselves, that they may rest in the day of trouble.
This,Heb. 3, 16. (not to mention any other ground) gives me some small glimmer∣ing of hope, that the same Powerful Spirit, may be pleased also, further to manage and improve the same Medi∣um, to the relief and advantage of others: and (I can say it) it is useful∣ness and service that I have aimed at in this enterprize.
Amongst all the Helps to Devotion
that I have seen, (I mean Books so in∣titled, commonly containing some forms of Prayers) I remember not any thing, at all of kin to this Undertaking, which tends to help the Gift, not to stint the Spirit of Prayer, and only layes a few sticks together, (pointing to the Wood where more may be had.) which by His own breath, He may be pleased to kin∣dle.
Whatever strangers, either in place or affection may imagine, I know your Excellency to be a Pleader, and (I hope) a Prevailer with God daily.
I therefore offer this poor Essay unto you, not so much by way of Assistance, as of Acknowledgement that under God, You have been and are the Instrumen∣tal cause of my enjoying a fulness of opportunities, of doing some service in my Generation; the value whereof I desire daily to renew upon my heart, above all the things that this world can af∣ford, or brittle mortality enjoy.
As it hath been Your Lordships mer∣cy, that hitherto you have had help from on High, to know and Love the Lord, His Name and Image where ever you
discern it, and to walk acceptably with Your God, and usefully to His Peo∣ple, for which you have, your Record on High, your witness amongst men, and in your own Bosom: So it is now be∣come your Obligation, and only Inter∣est, still to be found in the same wayes of Righteousness; wherein that you may persevere unto the End: and that your Path may be, as the shining Light, which shineth out more and more un∣to the perfect day! That you, your most precious Consort and hopeful Children, may prove an inestimate Blessing in this world, and eternally Blessed in that to come, is, and shall be the daily prayer of,
(My Lord) 
