



BEing employed not long since into Barbary, the land of your Capti∣vity, where at this present you live in great Bondage and Slavery, and so have done this long time (as do also the rest of your Brethren and Nation else∣where, dispersed throughout the world,Account∣ing from their first entrance to the day of their depar∣ture thence. Exo. 12.40. groaning under the yoke of their cruel Task-masters, as did your forefathers in the land of Egypt four hundred and thirty yeers; this Captivity of yours having continued now almost four times four hundred yeers; the last and great∣est

of all, then the which was never heard nor read of greater of any peo∣ple, from the Creation of the World to this day, nor shall be) The King at that time of my arrival, upon his ex∣pedition towards Fez, I appointed to stay at Saphia till his return back from those wars; where I remained in the lower Castle almost six moneths, solita∣ry, and in suspense, expecting the doubtful event thereof. Whether re∣sorted to me often to accompany me, and for my better instruction in the Hebrew (whereof I had a little taste before) one of the chief Rabbins of that your Sy∣nagogue, Rabbi Shimeon, a man of grave and sober carriage, and pleasant otherwise, of whose company I was ve∣ry glad. Now and then (among other matters) arguing and reasoning of the Messiah (as ye say, yet to come, but as we say, and are able to prove, by invincible arguments and demonstrati∣ons, both out of your own Law and Rabbins, already come) which gave me occasion (having little else to do, and not knowing how to pass that tedious time better) to gather together all those arguments and reasons I had read, or

for the present could conceive of my self, drawn out of the sacred Scripture, and other Books, as touching that con∣troversie. Whereby I might be the more able, over and besides the matter of employment and business I came about, to maintain that Religion professed in my Country, and the Ʋndoubted Faith, whereof his Majesty, the King of great Britain (as others his Predecessors have done) prossth himself a chief Defen∣der; according to that his most just Title, Defender of the Faith. And afterwards, when the King sent for me to Morocus, being lodged amongst you by his appointment in the Judaria, in one of your principal houses; where I staid, before I could get a dispatch from the King, three moneths and an half; where also I grew familiarly acquaint∣ed with divers of your Nation and was presented at sundry times (especially at your Marriages and solemn Feasts) with divers of your Dainties, which I took very kindly, and ever since have studied what Christian Dainties I might send you back again in recom∣pense; or rather Duties insteed of those Dainties. Seeing also in the mean time

(which I could not chuse but see with much pity and compassion) the great and grievous oppression under which you groan; taxations, vexations, ex∣actions; grammings (as you call them) even with torments rather then fail; drubbings (so many hundred blows at once, as my self have both seen and heard) with that base servile and most contemptible state and condition (other∣wise above any other Nation or Peo∣ple) under which you live: not only in Barbary, but in all other parts of the world besides, as a fatal effect of that heavie curse laid on you by your own forefathers long ago upon the death of Christ (when Pilate the Judge washed his hands, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just man, look ye to it) they cryed with one consent, his blood be upon us, and on our chil∣dren. As also of that Prophesie of our Saviour in his life time, when he wept over Jerusalem, saying, Oh if thou hadst even known, at the least in this thy day, those things which belong to thy Peace, but now are they hid from thine eyes, &c. And more particularly to his Disciples, he

reneweth it over and again; When ye shall see Jerusalem besieged with Souldiers, then know ye that her de∣solation is at hand. For these be the days of vengeance, to fulfil all things that are written. For there shall be great distress in this land, and wrath over this people. And they shall fall on the edge of the Sword, and shall be lead captive into all Na∣tions, &c. Which heavie curse of your own forefathers, and Prophesie of his, how truly they have been fulfilled both the one and the other, all the world seeth, and ye your selves feel the effect, as before. The Lord in mercy take a∣way the vail from your hearts, that at length ye may know those things which belong to your peace, which now are hid from your eyes: For why will ye die, O ye house of Isra∣el? These considerations (I say) and reasons, with some others, have moved me; and partly in recompense of those your Defina's and Dainties, whereof I tasted so often while I was amongst you, to send you here a small banquet, of such Dainties as Christendome can af∣ford; wishing you would but tast some

part of mine (as I did of yours) being indeed Sabbath days dainties: Tast (I say) and see how sweet the Lord is.Psal. 34.8. And the rather do I invite you to this Banquet, yea rather provoke you there∣unto,Rom. 11.11. even to your own salvation, which through your fall is come to us Gen∣tiles to provoke you; as it as in that place, for that now the time of your redemption draweth near (with ours, much neerer now then when we be∣lieved) foretold also both by Christ and his Apostles, as was your desolation; and shall one day as surely and certain∣ly come to pass, the one as the other. For God that hath promised, is of power to perform it, he will do it; He is able to graff you in again into your own O∣live Tree.Luk. 13.35. Verily I tell you (saith our Saviour to the Pharisees) ye shall not see me, until the time come, that ye shall say, Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord Therefore such a time shall come, without all doubt, wherein ye shall so say, that is to say, most willingly obey the heavenly cal∣ling, without any more resisting the holy Ghost,Acts 7.51. Luk. 21.24. as did your forefathers, Also in another place, And Jerusalem

shall be trodden under foot of the Gentiles, until the time of the Gen∣tiles be fulfilled: So long, and no long∣er, there is the period. And Paul the Apostle in a most fervent manner, both prayeth and prophesieth to this effect: Brethren, my hearts desire and pray∣er to God for Israel is,Rom. 10.1. that they might be saved. Then prophesieth at large in the chapter following, and that most divinely, as of their fall, so of their general call in due time, with ma∣ny arguments and reasons to that pur∣pose. Which Prayer and Prophesie of h, proceeding from a Divine Instinct and Revelation, no doubt shall one day take effect. For it cannot be but that the word of God should take effect. For it is the power of God unto sal∣vation to every one that believeth to the Jew first, and also to the Greci∣an: To the Jew first, there is the pro∣mise, there is the priviledge. Lift up your heads now therefore O ye Jews, sons of Abraham, children of the pro∣mise, to whom pertaineth the adopti∣on, and the glory, and the covenants,Rom. 9.4. and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the promises: of

whom are the Fathers and of whom concerning the flesh, Christ came. I say, lift up your heads, and listen to the heavenly calls of Christ and his Apostle Paul, For your Redemption draweth neer. This is the generation of them that seek him, of them that seek thy face:Psal. 24.6. Jacob, Selah. Lift up your heads ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors and the King of glory shall come in. And let us Christians also (upon whom the ends of the world are come) lift up our heads and know (remembring that pa∣rable of the Fig-tree) when we see these things begin to come to pass,Luk. 21.28. that the Kingdom of God is near, even at the doors.Mat. 24.32. Verily, I say unto you, This generation shal not pass, till all these things be done:Acts 20.32 Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away. They are the words of our Saviour.
And now Brethren (to return to Paul) I commend you to God and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which are sanctified.Psal. 51.18. Be favourable unto

Zion, for thy good pleasure build the walls of Jerusalem. Then shalt thou accept the sacrifice of righteousness, even the burnt Offering and Oblati∣on, then shall they offer Calves up∣on thine Altar.Psal. 53.6. O give salvation un∣to Israel out of Zion; when God turneth the captivity of his people, then shall Jacob rejoyce, and Israel shal be glad.Psal. 126.1 When the Lord brought again the captivity of Zion, we were like them that dream; then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with joy: Then said they a∣mong the Heathen, The Lord hath done great things for them.Psa. 106.47. The Lord hath done great things for us, whereof we rejoyce. O Lord bring again our Captivity, as the Rivers in the South.Psal. 90.15. Save us (O Lord our God) and gather us from among the hea∣then, that we may praise thine holy Name, and glory in thy praise.Psa. 102.13. Com∣fort us according to the days that thou hast afflicted us, and according to the yeers that we have seen evil. Thou wilt arise and have mercy upon Zion, for the time to have mercy thereon, for the appointed time is

come. For thy servants delight in the stones thereof, and have pity on the dust thereof. Then the Heathen shall fear the Name of the Lord, and all the Kings of the Earth thy glory: When the Lord shall build up Zion, and shall appear in his glory: and shall turn unto the Prayer of the de∣solate, and not despise their prayer. This shall be written for the genera∣tion to come, and the people which shall be created shall praise the Lord, for he hath looked down from the height of his Sanctuary, out of the heaven did the Lord behold the earth: That he might hear the mour∣ning of the Prisoner, and deliver the children appointed unto death; that they may declare the Name of the Lord in Zion, and his praise in Jerusa∣lem. For God will save Zion, and build the Cities of Judah,Psal. 69.35. that men may dwel there, and have it in posses∣sion: The seed also of his servants shall inherit it, and they that love his Name shall dwell therein. Surely the Lord will not fail his people,Psal. 105.8. neither will he forsake his Inheritance.Psal. 94.24. He hath alway remembred his Covenant

and promise, that he made to a thou∣sand generations.Psal. 74.2: Thou wilt think upon thy Congregation which thou hast possessed of old, and on the rod of thine Inheritance, which thou hast redeemed, and on mount Zion wherein thou hast dwelt. Yea when the Lord turneth again the captivity of his people, which will be when they turn unto him by hearty repentance, not be∣fore;& 107.6. when they cryed unto the Lord in their trouble, he delivered them out of their distress; then will he make even their very enemies to become their friends, and give them grace and fa∣vour in the sight of all those Kings and Princes under whom they now live, and groan in most miserable slavery and bondage (as in their former captivities may be observed) He saw when they were in affliction,& 106.44. and heard their cry. He remembred his Covenant to∣wards them, and repented, according to the multitude of his mercies, and gave them favour in the sight of all them that led them captive;Prov. 21:1 for the hearts of Kings are in the hands of the Lord, as the Rivers of waters, he turneth them which way soever it

pleaseth him.Ezra 1.1. So the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus King of Per∣sia (after that their seventy yeers ca∣ptivity in Babylon,chap. 6.1. as also Darius and others, to write in their behalf, sundry most favourable Edicts for their return into their own Country again, with large liberality for the re-edifying of the Temple of God in Jerusalem: For the Lord had made them glad,chap. 6.22. and turned the heart of the King of As∣shur unto them, to encourage them in the work of the house of God even the God of Israel. Therefore Ezra blesseth the Lord for all these extraor∣dinary favours,chap. 7.28. saying, blessed be the Lord God of our Fathers, which so hath put in the Kings heart to beauti∣fie the House of the Lord that is in Je∣rusalem, &c. Yea rather then fail of his promised deliverance to his people, when they cry unto him in their distress,Psa. 105.14. He will rebuke even Kings for their sakes: As he did Pharaoh King of Aegypt, in the days of old; with this peremptory command by the hand of Moses over and over;Exod. 7.16▪ & 8.1.20. & 9.1.13. & 10.3. Let my people go, that they may serve me, or if thou wilt not, &c. inflicting upon them one

plague after another, till at length they were forced to drive them away (as it is in that place) Rise up,Exo. 12.31. get you out from among my people, and go serve the Lord, as ye have said. And the Egyptians did force the people, be∣cause they would send them out of the Land in hast (for they said, we die all) giving them favour in the mean time in the sight of the Egy∣ptians: Also Moses was very great in the land of Egypt,& 11.3. in the sight of Pharaohs servants, and in the sight of the people. Behold,& 7.1. I have made thee Pharaohs God (saith the Lord) so he brought out Israel from among them,Psa. 136.11. Account∣ing the time as be∣fore. for his mercy endureth for e∣ver; with a mighty hand, and out∣stretched arm, &c. after four hun∣dred and thirty yeers captivity in Ae∣gypt. And when the four hundred and thirty yeers were expired, even the self same day departed all the hosts of the Lord out of the land of Egypt.Exo. 12.41, And the Lord went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud to lead them the way,& 13.21. and by night in a pillar of fire to give them light. He divided the Sea in two parts,Psa. 236.13. and

made Israel to pass through the midst of it, and overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the red Sea, for his mercy endureth for ever. So leading them through the wilderness, and feed∣ing them forty yeers with Manna from heaven; till at length he brought them safe and sound (as it were upon Eagles wings) maugre all difficulties and oppositions of enemies whatsoever, even to the promised Land of Canaan, the lot of their Inheritance. Where thy continued in peace and prosperity so long as they served him, and kept his Commandments; but when once they sinned against him (or rather as often as they sinned, for it was not once, but often) and forgate the Lord their God, which brought them out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of Bondage: then he suffered their enemies to prevail against them, and tyrannize over them, somtimes one, and somtimes another, till at length they were carried captives to Babylon. Yet ever (as the Burden of that Psalm is) when they cryed to the Lord in their trouble, he delivered them out of their distress, raising up from time

to time Judges as he did Moses and Joshua at the first,Judg. 2.16 which delivered them out of the hands of their Op∣pressors.
Othoniel,Judg. 3.7. who delivered them out of the hands of the King of Aram, as it is in that place, where it is said, That the children of Israel did wickedly in the sight of the Lord, and forgot the Lord their God, and served Baalim; therefore the wrath of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he sold them into the hand of Chushan-ri∣shathaim, King of Aram, whom they served eight yeers. But when they cryed unto the Lord the Lord stir∣red them up a Saviour, even Othoniel, &c. So the land had rest forty yeers. Ehud,chap. 3:12. who delivered them out of the hand of Eglon, King of Moab. Then the children of Israel again commit∣ted wickedness in the sight of the Lord, and the Lord strengthned Eglon King of Moab, &c. So they served E∣glon King of Moab eighteen yeers. But when they cryed unto the Lord, the Lord stirred them up a Saviour, Ehud the son of Gera, &c. So the land had rest eighty yeers. And after

him was Shamgar the son of Anath,Judg. 3.30. which slew of the Philistims six hun∣dred men with an Ox-goad, and he also delivered Israel. Deborah and Barack who delivered them out of the hand of Jabin,& 4.1. King of Canaan. And the children of Israel began again to do wickedly in the sight of the Lord, and the Lord sold them into the hand of Jabin king of Canaan, whose chief Captain was Sisera. Then the children of Israel cryed to the Lord, &c.& 4.4. And at that time Deborah a Prophetess judged Israel; Then she sent and called Barack &c. And the Lord destroyed Sisera, and all his Chariots, &c. And the Land had rest forty yeers.& 5.31. Gedeon, who delivered them out of the hands of the Midia∣nites.& 6.1. Afterward the children of Is∣rael committed wickedness in the sight of the Lord, and the Lord gave them into the hands of Midian seven yeers, &c. So was Israel exceedingly, impoverished by the Midianites:& 6.6. therefore the children of Israel cry∣ed unto the Lord, &c. and he raised them another Saviour, even Gedeon, that valiant man, who with three

hundred men (and no more) such as lapped water with their tongues (the rest sent away by the Lords command) overthrew the whole host of Midian,Judg. 6.12. & 7.5. with this cry,& 7.20. The sword of the Lord and of Gedeon.& 8.28. Thus was Midian brought low before the children of Israel, so that they lift up their heads no more: And the Country was in quietness forty yeers in the days of Gideon. But when Gideon was dead,& 8.33. the children of Israel turned away, &c. and remembred not the Lord their God which had delivered them out of the hands of all their enemies on every side, &c. After him succeeded Abimelech his son, after A∣bimelech Tola: after Tola, Jair the Gileadite. After these arose Jepthe, who delivered them out of the hand of the Ammonites.& 10.6. And the children of Israel wrought wickedness again in the sight of the Lord, and served Baalim, &c. and forsook the Lord, and served not him. Therefore the wrath of the Lord was kindled a∣gainst Israel, and the Lord sold them into the hands of the Philistims, and into the hands of the children of

Ammon, &c. Then the children of Israel cryed unto the Lord,Judg. 10.10 &c. So the Lord raised them up another vali∣ant man, even Jepthe. Then the spi∣rit of the Lord came upon Jepthe, &c. So Jepthe went unto the children o Ammon to fight against them,& 11.1. & 11.29. and the Lord delivered them into his hands. Thus the children of Ammon were humbled before the children o Israel. And Jepthe judged Israel six yeers.& 12.7. After him Ibzan of Bethle∣hem judged Israel. After him Elon. After Elon,& 13.1. Abdon But the children of Israel continued to commit wic∣kedness in the sight of the Lord, and the Lord delivered them into the hands of the Philistims forty yeers. Then God raised up Sampson, who with the Jaw bone of an Ass slew a thousand of the Philistims at once.& 25.15. vi. 20. And be judged Israel in the days of the Philistims twenty yeers.
Thus may we see by at these exam∣ples (and make use thereof, if we be wise) what the state and condition of Gods people hath been ever of old, the effect in brief, or burden of the Song, nothing else but this: When they sin∣ned

against the Lord, he delivered them into the hands of their enemies: but when they cryed to the Lord in their trouble (that is to say, repented) he straightway delivered them out of their distress, raising up from time to time one Saviour or Deliverer after another, and so immediately governing them by Judges till the day of Samuel. When this people growing worse and worse, and not contented with this sa∣cred kind of Government, immediately from God himself, but desiring a King like all other Nations: Make us a King to judge us, like all other Na∣tions: He gave them a King in his anger, saying to Samuel: Hear the voice of the people in all that they shall say unto thee;1 Sam. 8.5. for they have not cast thee away, but they have cast me away, that I should not reign o∣ver them, &c. And as before under the Judges, so now under the Kings still as they sinned and multiplyed their transgressions, so did the Lord inflict and multiply upon them his judgements one plague after another, til at length they were carried captives into Baby∣lon. After which long captivity, yet re∣stored

again upon their repentance, the time was not long, but they fell again to their old byas, and forgate the Lord their God, which had done so great things for them▪ yea, rather now worse then ever, persecuting the Prophets from time to time, whom God raised up a∣mongst them, and killing them one after another, even till the coming of the Messiah, and him also they crucified. Whereupon ensued this last and final de∣solation as the full measure of their sine deserved, and as themselves desired, saying, His blood be upon us, and up∣on our children; which hath continued now almost these sixteen hundred yeers; the longest captivity, and greatest mise∣ry that ever hapned to any people; and, so shall continue, till they (as did their forefathers) turn to the Lord by true and hearty repentance, & cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and then will the Lord deliver them out of their distress, according to the former exam∣ples, and not before. And this is the state and condition of the Jews at this day the miserable state I say, with the cause and the remedy which God grant they may make use of, Amen.
