


I Now tender what you are pleased to owne: sooner I could not, because want∣ing time and health, I had onely broken notes. I am now come as neere my selfe, as my notes will help mee. It was my resolution from the first, to hold me to the worke in hand, the worke of the day, the worke of my calling; accor∣dingly I made, and pursued my choice, waving all disputes Sacred, or Civill. Things ever move best in their owne Spheare: And O that all things might ever runne in their right channell! My worke was to Mourne, to Preach; not to Parliament-it: and I never brought a sadder heart to a businesse. Nay, The divisions of Reuben still stick, and have left those impressions, which will not off.Judg. 5.15. I
bleed still in the breaches of Dying Ireland, and in our Home-Jealousies. Alas! That Brethren, who promise and purpose so well, worke and sweat so hard, should so hardly understand each other. There is, I feare, a Divine displeasure in it. Where Unity is,Psal. 133: 3. the blessing is. The spirit of Iealousy and division is a Messenger of wrath.Judg. 9. &c. And then most, when All complaine of it, and No One will owne it. For this My Soule shall weep in secret; and in Rebeccahs case, I will take up her complaint; Why is it thus! As for you, Noble gentlemen, What can I say now? It is wisdome (you know) to know ones owne Compasse, and you are far above me. Your Place is high, your Task great; and yet your strength not infinit. By Place, you are Gods:Psal. 82. and yet Men; you must Fall, (and may sail) like others.Quidest Eccle∣sia? Viri. & mulieres. Chry. in Eph. 5. Gods own Synod (the Church) is made up of men: and men be Men, in the Greatest Councels. Compare them to the High∣est God, their greatest agitations are but as the busie sweatings of so many Ants in a Molehill. Your work is also great. As your Place, so your Work is Gods. Your businesse lies about Laws, and Orders. Order is a Sacred thing. Law, the work of a God No man can see, or say All in his Law; Sin will evade; witnesse our good
Laws touching The Lords day, Swearing, and Drinking. Now (forsooth) you must tell us, what Prophanenesse is, what Swearing you meane, and when a man is Drunken. Nay, when a Law is with some difficulty conceived, and with more brought forth, it is not an easie thing, to teach it to Speak plainly: nor are men so happy in their expressions as was S. Paul, who wrote, nor more,2 Cor. 1. nor lesse, then we Read. I speak not this in a Dis∣couraging way. Noble Spirits know not what that meanes. Onely they know from the Poet,Et neseit remea∣ve Lon. Claud.  &c. Eurip. That it makes a man, lesse then nothing. Laws therefore must be; else all goes to losse. Leave men to them∣selves; each mans lust will be a Law; each mans Opinion, a Bible. My speech onely tends to this, to provoke you, and my self to prayer, and depen∣dence. He that will undertake the work of God, with the wit, and strength of a man, will but shame the work, and break himself. My hope is, That you will begin, and end with God: that you will doe all in his strength, and do his best work, first. Mens Consciences are miserably perplexed between Command, and Command. Our Congregations are as much divided, betweene Tea∣cher, and Teacher. The conclusion in time will be, Wee are of Christ,1 Cor. 1.1 We will believe none
of them all. Let me assure you, The case betwixt Pastor, and Flock will be very sad, if there bee not a timely settlement. But things of this nature I had rather speak in Private, then in Presse, or Pulpit. And there rather to God, then to Man. I therefore reine in and betake my selfe with aged Jerome to my Tuguriolum, and there blesse God, that I dare sleep, and can say, that ought is my owne, and there deplore my barren ministery for almost twice twenty yeares, and implore the blessing of heaven upon my Deare Soveraigne, and his Great Councell.Esay 9. 2 Tim. 2. Now the Great Counsellor give you a right understanding, in all things:2 Thes. 3.16. And the God of Peace himself (he alone can do it) give you peace, in all things, by all meanes. So will pray

From my poore Study,
Iune 13, 1642.
