



Beloved in the Bowels of Jesus,
AS there hath alwayes been a reluctancy upon my spirit, whiles seeking for approbation from men: so have I alwayes perceived a relu∣ctancy upon the spirits of men, when about to grant me that which is so ordinary a favour. And though I will not say it made them more scrupulous how they approved: yet certainly it made me lesse scruple at their Non-approval, because, I needed not (as some others) either Epistles of commendation unto you, or letters of commendation from them; you were our Epistle written in our hearts, known and read of all men. 2 Cor. 3.2, 3. Neverthe∣lesse (as occasion hath been offered) I alwayes desired it. 1. That I might live peaceably amongst, and keep a correspondency with the neighbouring Ministers, and not separate for circum∣stance, so long as we agreed in the substance of the truth. 2. That (while providence made way) I might not be charge∣able (though I feared not my being troublesome) to any of you. 3. The maintenance allotted to the place at which I usually preached, and near unto which I was born, did arise (as some of you know) from within the Precincts and Borderies thereof;

and the people were generally willing, and freely petitioned, that it might be disposed off to me rather than to strangers, that exercised at places farre remote, and yet with all earnestnesse sollicited for it, This last general call (in obedience to which, I with many others crowded up to London) cannot possibly but have been heard of by every one of you, And my desire is, that you should truly know, what was upon my heart before, and in reference to my going thither; what entertainment I found there, and how it cometh to passe, that you are now presented with, and invited to peruse, an explanation of these (Scarce intelligible) passages.
I was not freer in my spirit to seek for approbation now, than i the dayes of old; nor did I expect these in commission now, to be any freer in granting (to such as me) than men entrusted by men with the like power, had formerly been. Though I professe, 1. That I honour some of the present Commissioners exceeding highly for their works sake; and am glad (as well for their sakes as the quiet of my own mind) that providence so ordered things, that they were not present at this Transaction, nor did sit to vote concerning me. Tender hearted Christians might perhaps have been troubled at themselves afterwards, least they had offended some of the little and despised ones. 2. I could not be perswaded of so much as an intended opposition from, or by the brethren of the Classis in the County of Lancaster, because I knew 1. That the Grandees of that party had refused for these four years last past, to observe either the publick days of fasting or thanksgiving appointed by the State; And I did not think men of that zeal and spirit, would strain their con∣sciences, and make use of that power (no not if they had been as∣sured thereby to promote their own catholick cause) which they had so lately refused (meerly out of conscience) either to pray or give thanks for according to 2 Tim. 2.1.2. Their own con∣sciences might tell them, that though they alwayes have the happ to get and keep, that which is by them called the honour of main∣tenance: yet men as disputable as I in their account, deserved countenance from the powers that be, as well as they. 3. Nei¦ther I, nor any friend of mine (that I heard of) ever

harmed any of them either in their persons or estate; And though they were guilty,A vindication of the answer to the Queries lieth by me in scattered sheets: the publishing called for, and at hand. (as many reported) not only of delive∣ring (as is pretended against me) but of acting some Illegal and Antinomian Passages; yet were they passed by in silence; no ad∣vantage taken, nor information posted up against them. 4. My conversation (to say no more of that) these very men have not excepted against, and the points wherein I seemed to differ from them, whether in doctrine, worship, or discipline, have been so fully discussed in writing, and pillars of that party so farre en∣gaged upon that account, that I deemed it inconsistent with the ingenuity of the men, either to fetch Arguments from Carters Topicks, or with Mr. Baxter, in a passion sure, to Querie about the extent of the 38. Article of our late Charter.Reply to Crand. pag. 43. 5. I was not conscious to my self of any point of doctrine maintained or pub∣lished by me, that differed really from the Christian Religion contained in the Scriptures, and held forth as the publick pro∣fession of this Nation. And therefore as the Law is good, so if used lawfully, I saw not wherein possibly I could be judged a Transgressor of it; But contrary to my expectation, letters were written to a Brother, or Brethren in London. These passages sent up in that form, and in those very words at they are presented to you in the following page: And the minds of the Commissioners, so far as some of these mens Interests could prevail (for I speak not of them all) exasperated and prejudiced against me. But to say no more of that. The method and manner of their procee∣dings with me was briefly this, and thus.
At after ten dayes tedious attendance, I had the favour to be called in, and was then honoured with the presence of a full Com∣mittee: my certificate never questioned, nor any Querie propo∣sed to me to try my knowledge and utterance: or discover whe∣ther the grace of God was in me of a truth. But the passages fol∣lowing were distinctly read twice over; I was required to answer yea or nay, as to the matter of fact, had liberty to speak what I thought meet in order thereunto, commanded to withdraw, recal∣led at after a short pause, and heard the sentence of a Non posse approbare: scilicet, That the Brethren had consulted together, and could not grant the one of those printed papers (which yet

were so common, that four hundred at least had gotten of them) called an Approbation. One of the Commissioners who appeared (as to me) more respective and ingenuous than any of the rest, was pleased at after this to offer. 1. A reference into the countrey for examination of things before witnesses (as to the matter of fact) if I conceived my self wronged, and did desire it. 2. A li∣berty (as I apprehended) to answer those passages in writing, and present it to the Commissioners, unto the latter I said nothing. In order to the first I answered: that for ought I knew, the men in our countrey that were best known to them, and to whom I should be referred were my professed adversaries; to which the Gentleman replied, that I might leave the choice of persons for the discharging of that duty wholly unto them. Whereupon I de∣sired a copy of the passages, and time to consider, both which were granted. And upon consideration, I did not think it meet to accept of the first offer. Because 1. The letters of Reference (since gran∣ted to neighbouring Ministers) were commonly directed to those I took to be the Informers themselves, assisted with some of their own brethren, and collected from that, compared with the entertainment I had already found; That this sort of men, had such an influence upon, and were of that repute with the Com∣missioners, that it was not possible for them to account me any other than an evil Doer. They answered and said unto him, if he had not been an evil doer, we would not have delivered him up unto thee. Ioh. 18.30.2. I am willing to submit to every ordi∣nance of man for the Lords sake: yet it suited not with that Christian wisdom and frame of Spirit the Lord hath given me, to desire and petition for orders of this nature, or voluntarily to put such a cause as this upon trial before the Judges qualified in such manner as I conceive them to be. 3. If it be possible, as much as lieth in me, I desire to live peaceably with all men, and therefore seeing they have smitten me on the one cheek, and taken away my cloak, which they knew to be the Summum jus, or utmost that could be done (by vertue of any Law or Ordi∣nance yet in force) it was upon my heart to follow Christs coun∣sel, even offer them the other, and not forbid them to take away my coat also. If the quiet enjoying of the unrighteous Mammon

will make them my friends, I love them so well as not to suffer them to incurre any further guilt by continuing my enemies. And not the latter; for 1. I freely and publickly delivered my judgement upon some of the passages (instead of returning my yea or nay) which was so stumbled at by the Commissioners, that I thought my Writing would give no satisfaction at al, but more of∣fend. 2. Though when called, I was willing to submit my parts & gifts, and my life and conversation, or any thing I can call mine, to the credit of Commissioners impowred by the State: yet the doctrine I preach, being such as I cannot call mine own, I dare not submit it to the vote of any man on earth: unlesse they could make it out that they have their Commission immediately from Jesus Christ. 3. I knew my self unable to answer De facto, to all or any of these passages, which I conceived would be chiefly, if not solely expected. For first, I took no notes in writing of any Sermon preached by me for this eight years last past, and if I had, yet these being (as the Informers well call them) meerly passages, not positions or conclusions, it is not likely that I should have booked any of them, 2. It is (so far as I can learn from others, or collect by circumstances) three years and a halfe at the least, since the Sermon was preached; in which it is pre∣tended that these passages were delivered, and I have not so well studied the Art of memory, as to recollect passages of so old a date. Nor can I hear that any of those hundreds that were pre∣sent at that publick meeting (except only these Informers) re∣member that I delivered any such; or can punctually call to mind any form of words then used; save the text it self, Rom. 10, 6, 7.3. Though the passages, as here presented without any thing consequent or antecedent sound somewhat harsh; And those that know me best, can scarce think that I should be so spermalogical, or egregiously act the part of a babler as (ipsis terminis) to deliver any such: Yet do I so clearly discern several precious truths latent in, obscured by, and struck at through this mist of words; that though I cannot own the words them∣selves simply considered: yet can I not disown the things hinted at by them, without making shipwrack of faith and a good con∣science.
And hereupon I did resolve to write an explanation of these passages: that so I might (according to the measure of light and grace received) 1. Vindicate clear and free those truths of Christ, which I looked upon as contemned, darkened, and here imprisoned through the unrighteousness of men. 2. That such scruples and Queres might be removed, as may hereby have been cast into your minds, and disquieted the peace of your spi∣rits. 3. That I might discharge mine own conscience, and leave with you a reason of the hope that is in me; for the conviction, if not satisfaction, of all such as shall ask for, or expect it.
And now (my brethren) I hope I need not in the close of all to put in one caveat more against my self, and tell you what so ma∣ny say, and you your selves already know, Scil. that I am a man not only subject to the like, but more passions and infirmities, than other men. Yet however let me minde you, that though I pro∣fesse, I neither speak nor writ any thing but what I believe to be a truth; yet dare I not believe that all is true that I do speak and write, nor do I think it safe either for you or me to adhere to any expressions, or form of words whatsoever: but such as the holy men of God have left upon record who spake as they were moved by the holy Ghost: Sine verbo Dei temerarium est asserere quod videtur nobis bona consequentia trahi, saith Luther, It is a rashnesse to assert without the word of God that which seemeth to us to be drawn from it by good conse∣quence. And hence I much admire the greatnesse of the Beam, that is in some mens eyes. Daring to condemn others for asser∣ting a perfection practical, when they themselves practise to∣wards others,Reply to Mr. Blake, page 49. as if they were infallible in their judgements. I confesse saith Baxter) I was well acquainted with the Genius of many of my reverend and newly honoured brethren. I thought that no godly man would have taken himself wronged, if a man told him he had error, no more than to tell him he had sin. I took it for granted, that Humanum est errare, and that we know but in part: and that sanctifying grace had so farre destroyed pride, and made the soul apprehensive of its imperfections, that at least men of eminent godlinesse, could have endured patiently to hear that they are not omniscient nor infallible: & that they have some

ignorance with their eminent knowledge, and why not in these points as well as others. Try therefore all things, and hold fast that which is good. And with those noble Bereans, search the Scriptures daily, whether these things be so. Know no man after the flesh, and though you hear others say, they are resolved to think the worse, and that doubtless it is a Jesus of Nazareth, and not of Ierusalem, that is here held forth: yet do not you say, that you are resolved to think the better of what is written: be∣cause you know who it is that writ it: nor yet be ye affraid of their terrour, or drawn aside by the excellency of their speech or wisdom, from the simplicity of the truth: But look up unto God and the word of his grace, which is able to build you up &c. Ac∣counting, as I alwayes preach, Christ Jesus the Lord, and me
SCALES, Aug. 18. 1654.

