



Madam,
YOu may well expect that I should appeare in guilty colours, and even blush my self into blood at the thought of my temerity; You may justly condemne my presumption, and reproach my confi∣dence, that durst attempt to dedicate these recreations to your reading, or think, that Inke and Paper could be a Present that might deserve your acceptance: No, Madam, though it were possible they could be writ with a quill pluck't from the wing of an Angel, yet could they not de∣serve so great a blessing. What then can I hope for, who make my Addresses so poor∣ly? Who is there that will not judge me to be so great an offendor, as to have soared above the reach of your pardon, and that you ought to invent new punishments, if
you would have any that might mach my crimes. But when I consider that variety of Ornaments wherewith Nature hath so plentifully enrich't you, that had she made another like you, she had utterly undone the whole race of perfection, & no woman would hereafter have had the pri∣viledge to becall'd handsome; when I con∣sider in the shallownesse of my fancy all that is excellent in you, I cannot but think that Charity hath a great share in your soule, and that you can pardon a person, whose ambition in sending these un∣refined papers to kisse your faire hands, was not at all to disturbe you in your higher and better imployments, but only that in such small things I might explain the greatnesse of my Devotion. I confesse that the largenesse of gifts are generally powerful in the minds of the Receivers, & can either create merits where there are none, or set a luster upon those that are but small: but I know, you have a soul of ano∣ther composition, and can value the gift by the person, and not the person by the
gift: and truely 'tis that which renders you most like your selfe, and makes you approach neerest to Divinity; For, hea∣ven receives a Prayer, or a grain of Incense, (if free from impurity and hypocrisie) with a greater relish and re∣spect, then if they had sacrificed whole Hecatombs, or emptied Arabia of its Perfumes. I begin therefore to think it a crime of no small extent, to mistrust your favour, being I offer this with the same zeal and reverence, in which a Lover courts his Flame, or a Pilgrim his God. 'Tis true, Madam, when I cast't my eyes upon you, and survey'd the height of your merit, and then turn'd them upon my selfe, and beheld the meannesse of my owne, the greatnesse of the disproportion made my duty struggle with my respects, and I doubted, whether I might write or no: But all oppositions were vain, and quickly vanish'd; for, were my Teeth a row of Thornes, yet my Tongue would through, when it is to make its addresses to such an Angell as your
selfe, whose every look utters Captivity, and can turn Saints to Idolaters.
When I first took notice of this Pa∣negyrick, as it appeared in the French its naturall Language, and finding the Matter well and orderly disposed, the Sense perswasive and eloquent, the words high and significant, I judg'd it worthy to be translated for my selfe; but, when I considered the strangenesse of the subject, that it was a Woman; and the dignity of the person, that it was a Queen, that had deserved all these Encomiums, I then began to think, (pardon the expression) that it was wor∣thy to be translated for you: For, Lady, do but strip the great Christina, of her Majesty and manly Vertues, and I'le then say, I do but present you with those graces, which you represent, and, like a true Glasse, only shew you what you are.
But, Madam, in the reading of these my Endeavours, if you finde any thing to be well done, I must pay my thanks to you; for, 'tis from your fair eyes that I
fetch'd my directions and influence. But, if any thing look with an unpleasant aspect, my unskilfulnesse in the language, and the fewnesse of my years, being yet arrived but at the age of twenty, may make up, if not a just reason, yet (at least) a prevailing excuse.
It is not my ambition, nor was it ever my desire, to appear in Print, I alwaies judged my selfe then most secure, when most private; nor had I now exposed my thoughts to the publick view, had not the importunity of some friends, and a desire to serve you, and your fair sex, (like two perswading Oratours) so wrought upon my resolutions, that they could no longer deny to pay obedience to such powerfull reasons. Some persons there are, who strive to eclipse the glories of Women, and draw a cloud over that flowing lustre, that alwaies attends their graces; but I have here discovered to the world and them, in the happy exam∣ple of this great Queen, that Women, as well as Men, have Soules; that may not
only be capable of great matters, but can also enjoy all those ornaments, which may make up a just accomplishment, and render persons both happy and admir'd.
I will not say, that this Translation is exact, nor dare I say, 'tis acceptable; but, as to that part which belongs to my endeavours, I freely confesse, it is not worth your perusall: Yet, Fair, do you but throw your eyes upon it, and it presently becomes pretious, and may be fit for the Cabinets of Princes. So the daring Prometheus, wrought a Picture out of clay, deform'd and cold in the touch; but it was the fire which he stole from heaven, that added life and motion to that imperfect Embryo.
But, Madam, being 'tis to you that I write, it might well be expected, that I should not so much strive, how to tran∣slate a Panegyrick, as how to compose one: For, the world might count me an Infidell, one void of the light of Reason and Nature, if, having so fair an op∣portunity as this, presented to my accep∣tance,
I should not glance upon the en∣dowments of your person; Nay, I should think it a piece of justice, if heaven, be∣cause I would not praise you when I might, should strike me dumb, and not let me praise you when I would.
But, Madam, your commendations are so copious a subject, that every thought of them, puts my fancy in a Labyrinth, where the greatest of inventions may for ever wander, and yet never finde a thread to procure their liberties. The choice of Wits might here strike saile, and confesse, that silence is their best Orator; and that a look from your face, can more explain your graces in one minute, then their tongues in a whole age. And there∣fore I shall only say, that heaven hath dealt with you, as the Geographers with the World, which though a vast Body in it selfe, they have contracted into the narrow compasse of a Globe. So, all those graces that are scattered about the world, are united in your face; and while I contemplate you, I behold them all.
Some Women, like the Panther, have fair and well-proportioned bodies, but are fain to obscure their faces in their silken clouds, fearing to betray the mise∣rable ruines, either of time or diseases: Some are like Ermines, beautifull in nothing but their skins, and some are like rough Diamonds, whose out-sides carry no enticeing charmes, but look within, and you'l finde soules full of brightnesse and action. But in you, Madam, as so many Lines running to one Center, these severall graces meet, and frame up an exact Harmony. You shine above others, as a Planet above a private Star: And if there be any yet, who dare over-va∣lue the excellency of a Lady, and call her a Star, I'le say, you are a Constella∣tion: for 'tis but justice, that I should rank you with your deserts; and, as nature, so description, might make you exceed.
Perhaps, Fair, you may say, that I flatter. But, Oh! don't brand my in∣nocence with so great a sin. I confesse, had I said this to another, I should have
been my owne Judge, and condemned my selfe, as a person guilty of that crime: Had I told another, that her eyes carried fire enough, to tempt the gods to invent new disguises, and visit the earth again. That Lillies and Roses enjoyed no Whites and Reds, till her Cheeks taught them their complexions, I should have thought, I lyed; but when I speak the same things to you, that which before was false, is converted into truth, and that which was a sin before, is now become piety. And therefore don't think, that I write this out custom, but devotion; not as though I use to speak so, but because you use to be so.
But, Madam, I shall no longer sus∣pend your judgment, or spin out time and my thoughts in a discourse, where my respects may prove as tedious, as your graces are alluring; I fear, lest while I strive to entertain the more pleasing sub∣ject, I keep you from the more pleasing matter; for, me-thinks I see your incli∣nation more towards the Author, with a desire to hear him breathe, where you will
finde wit and invention run like para∣lells, exact and equall. As for the Lan∣guage, so much as refers to the transla∣tion, I resigne it to the justnesse of your censure. My thoughts are yet but Me∣teors, and maintain only a flattering and borrowed light; it rests only in the power of your creating smiles, to make them seem reall Stars, and become six'd. In which blessing, though I claime nothing, yet I scarce doubt an interest. For it were a crime to think, that a Body, soft and melting, like yours, can be inhabited by a soul of a more stubborn constitution.
If, Fair, you will now vouchsafe to pardon all those defects, which you finde, either in my Pen or my Person; either in what I write, or what I am, your good∣nesse will multiply my debts, and add new chains to those fetters, wherein you have so bound me, that sooner can heaven want power to punish offenders, or your fair face to procure adorers, then I have a Being, and not be,

