


My Sonnes,
I Have left this short ensuing Treatise to you as a Le∣gacy; if I shall not live my selfe, to shew you (what therein is written) by examples, which I know instruct far more then precepts; yet precepts from a dying Father, instructing of his Children what he hath seen and knowne, and received information of from wit∣nesses free from all exceptions, should make such an impression on them, as at least to beleeve their Father writ what he thought was true; And therefore suppose those things worthy to be put in practise by them, which he himself would have done, if it had pleased God to have grant∣ed him Life and Liberty; Especially seeing the matter it self, which is required by him to be done, is in shew so profitable, and so easie to be effected, and with so little charge, considering the great gaine that is proposed by it, that not any thing can restraine a rational man from triall thereof, but not giving credit to the Relator.
The whole Discourse shewes you, how to Improve barren and hea∣thy Land, and how to raise more then ordinary profit thereof, by such waies and Meanes as are not practised in England: but as commonly in some parts of Brabant and Flaunders, as the Husbandry of Wheate and Rie is here. By that meanes you may nobly augment your estates, and will receive so much the more profit and praise, by how with more industry and diligence you governe your affaires; and will not onely be imitated, but also honoured by your Neighbours, when they shall see your labours prosper so farre, as to convert barren and heathy ground left unhusbanded for many ages, into as com∣modious arable land, with Pastures and Meadowes, as any be in this Kingdome. And certainly, that man is worthy of praise and Honour, who being possessor of a large and barren Demeasne, constraines it by his labour and industry to produce extraordinary
 fruit; which redounds not onely to his own Particular profit, but also to the Publique benefit. Cato saith, It is a great shame to a man, not to leave his Inheritance greater to his Successors then he received it from his Predecessors: and that he despiseth the Liberalities of God, who by Slothfulnesse loseth that which his land may bring forth, as not seeming willing to reape the fruits which God hath offered him. Nay he threatens the crime of high Treason, to those that do not augment their Pa∣trimony so much as the Increase surmounts the Principal. It is a thing much celebrated by Antiquity, and thought the noblest way to gather Wealth, for to imploy ones Wit and Money upon his Land, and by that meanes to augment his estate. If you observe the Common Course of things, you will finde that Husbandry is the End, which Men of all estates in the world do point at. For to what purpose do Souldiers, Scholars, Lawyers, Merchants, and men of all Occupations and Trades, toyle and labour with great affection, but to get Money? and with that money when they have gotten it, but to purchase Land? and to what end do they buy that land, but to receive the Fruits of it to live? and how shall one receive the fruits of it, but by his own Husbandry or a Farmers? So that it appeares by degrees, that what course soever a man taketh in this world, at last he cometh to Husbandry, which is the most Com∣mon Occupation amongst men, the most Natural and Holy, being commanded by the mouth of God to our First Fathers. There is Care and Diligence requisite in Husbandry, as there is in all the Acti∣ons of the World; and therefore as a Captain hath a Lieutenant to command his Souldiers in his absence, or for his ease: So must you provide some able honest man, to whom you will commit the execu∣tion of such things, as you your selves cannot do without too much la∣bour: whereof you must often take an account, and conferre with him (as occasion shall require) about your businesse, that nothing may be left undone for want of Providence. To such a man you must give good wages, with intent to advance your own gaine, and take the more ease by reason of his honesty and knowledge.
You will finde this Husbandry (after you have once had experience of it) to be very pleasing to you, and so exceeding profitable, that it will make you diligent: For no man of any Art or Science (except an Alchymist) ever pretended so much gaine any other way, as you shall see demonstrated in this ensuing Treatise. The Userer doubles but
 his Principall, with Interest upon Interest in seven yeares; but by this little Treatise, you shall learne how to do more then treble your Principal in one years compasse. And you shall see how an Industri∣ous man in Brabant and Flaunders would bring 500. Acres of barren and heathy Land, that was not worth at the most above 5. l. a year, to be worth 7000. l. a year, in lesse time then seven years. I know no reason, why the like may not be done in England: for we are under as good a Climate as they are; Our heathy Land that is nei∣ther Sand nor Loame, is as good a soile as their barren ground is. We have not onely Dung to enrich our Land, but also Lime and Marle, of which they know not the use, where they sewe their gain∣fullest Commodities mentioned in this ensuing Treatise, nor of any other Manure, but onely Dung. In fine, I am certain, there is none of their Commodities but grow in England, as they do in Brabant and Flaunders, but ours are not of the same kinde, as theirs, nor put to the same use. What cannot be vented at home, may as well be vented from hence into Holland, as the like Commodities are from Flaun∣ders thither. I will say no more of this Subject in the Preface: one∣ly it remaines to tell you, that you must not expect either Eloquence or Method in this ensuing Treatise; but a true Story plainly set forth in the Last Will and Testament of your Father, which he would have you execute: but before all things, to be sure you lay the Foundation of your Husbandry upon the Blessings of the Almigh∣ty God, continually imploring his divine aide and assistance in all your labours: for it is God that gives the increase: and beleeving this as the Quintessence and soul of Husbandry, Primum quae∣rite Regnum Dei; et postea haec omnia adjicientur vobis. These things being briefly premised, I will leave the rest to this short ensuing Treatise, and commit you all with a Fathers Blessing to the Protection and Providence of Almighty God.
Thus far Sir RICHARD WESTON'S Introduction to the Discourse of BRABANT-HUSBANDRY; which is shortly to be published in a Second Edition corrected and enlarged.
