




HONOURED SIRS,
HE whose memory is a faithful Register of former practice, and whose judge∣ment doth not much miscarry in his observation of present experience, will as easily acknowledge this truth as I can propose it, viz. That men of noble and gallant spirits, able to scorn injuries, bravely to conquer, yea to revenge themselves upon the base attempts of malice, by not vouchsafing so much as to take notice of them; yea men whose magnanimity is heightened by danger, and their courage increaseth with it; that these generous mindes, have been disconsolate at the absence of a friend, have been male-contented at the death of a beloved rela∣tion. Hee who could not bee astonished by Hectors va∣lour, nor his attendants rage; yet when the news comes that his friend Patroclus is dead, it is then said.
— , &c.Iliad. 6.6. Sorrow like a thick cloud sate upon his countenance, and obscured those sparkling rayes which used to come from
it. The victorious David that trembled not to see Goliah, but with undaunted resolution, though a young stripling, sets upon him; yet Jonathans death, makes him say, I am distressed,2 Sam. 1.29. when hee was grown elder, and had more ex∣perience of Gods presence with him.
The Holy Jesus, that great exemplar of piety, who al∣wayes submitted to his Fathers will, and therefore could not bee obnoxious to the corroding thoughts of discon∣tent, yet by his practice, shewed how much our nature was liable to bee afflicted with the loss of Friends, for hee who wept but twice (that I remember) wept once for impeni∣tent Jerusalem,Joh. 11.33, 35. dead in sins and trespasses, and another time when the beloved Lazarus lay in the grave, and the cho∣rus of mourners came lamenting him.
Nature it seems quickly opens the flood-gates, the in∣genuity of Christianity allows a serious sense of the presence and absence of a reall friend; true goodness promotes com∣passion, — , the great skill is to moderate the passion, that the stream may keep within the channel, and not over-flow the banks: I hope all you, by your piety and prudence secured your selves from discontent, when you heard of the sickness and death of our dear and truly honouréd Friend. But I for my part must confess, that few Providences in my life, have hither∣to been made such arguments to it, by the tempter to mee, as this was; and because it is possible, that some in your Famous University, might feel the same disease with my self, I shall make bold to tell you (I am sure I speak to my Friends) the course I took for my Cure.
The Dictate of the Imperious Stoick, soon came into my minde, Non sentire mala non est hominis, non ferre, non est viri, Not to feel an evil, speaks no humanity, not to bear it, speaks no man-hood.
This I thought was soon said, but all his arguments (though I deny not their usefulness) yet were too short to bring mee to that manly, I will rather say that Christian , peace and tranquillity which I desired: Two things I found , that had the true vertue of
Nepenthe in them; partly awing mee, and commanding down impetuous tumults; partly relieving, and refreshing mee in my combate with them.
The first of them was the command of our Saviour to his Disciples, Let not your heart be troubled.Joh. 14.1. When I consi∣dered the occasion of it, the command was strange, but the stranger it appeared at first sight, the more emphatical and remarkable it was. The great evidence of Gods love to man was now withdrawing; the Prince of life was to suffer death. He whose presence animated the poor Disciples, as the Generals doth the unskilful Souldiers; Hee whose Miracles kept them from contempt. Hee for whom they had for∣saken Father and Mother, goods and lands. Hee who asked them most pathetically when others forsook him, Will yee also go away? Hee is now leaving them,John 6. will go away himself, and yet hee saith, Let not your heart bee troubled.
I from hence concluded, that if I had been in the Dis∣ciples case, I should have seen more reason for discontent than now I do: And if it was not lawful at the farewel of the blessed Jesus, it could never bee lawful.
Whilst I thus stated my duty, I found something re∣freshing mee, and it was nothing else that satisfied mee, but that which was the occasion of the grief of the Disciples, and of all good men before them, and since: — (viz.) That Christ dyed,Thus the wise God can make use of this sad providence to satisfie under another. and all the holy men that lived before him, and all that had given up themselves to him as his servants since his coming into the world: For I consi∣dered there was no reason why God should work Mi∣racles for my sake, and since so many were dead, that I knew were the love and delight of God; I concluded death could not bee to a good mans loss; and since I saw God had provided for the world, notwithstanding the death of so many useful persons thus long; I concluded hee could still, and if for the world, and the Church, sure hee could for my peace and comfort.
Whilst I concocted these meditations, and surveyed the examples recorded in Scripture. None sooner came into
my thoughts, than Moses, who by his Country man is truly called , and the Heathen not at all mistaken, when hee said, ,Philo Judaeus. lib. 1. Longinus. a man not of the ordinary rank, but rarely accomplished, of whom God himself gives most full testimony. His death in the Wildernss, when one would have thought his life might with much confi∣dence have been expected,. Diadorus Sic. lib. ult. made mee thinke a discourse on it, was pertinent to the present occasion, and would tend both to awaken some, and satisfie all others that were perplexed at the death of our Friend, so suddenly upon his coming hither, and entring on the Ministry in this City.
This Discourse, such as it is, is yours, and though there are many things in it, that will need your pardon, and a second reading makes mee observe more Errata's in my own copy,Nam & mihi prope semper sermo meus dis∣plicet. August de Ca∣techiz. rudi∣bus. cap. 2. than in the Press; yet because I know it is next to impossible for mee to please my self; and because I know it will bee welcome for his sake, whose death was the oc∣casion of it, I present it to you, with confidence of your ac∣ceptance.
The Almighty God bless your Society: Make your Col∣ledge a Nursery of Religion and Learning: Sanctifie this pro∣vidence to us all, convince us by it, more fully of the vanity of all things,Quod cuiquam conting it, cui∣vis potest. yea of learning, that most curious peece of vanity, make us to provide for sickness and death; Make us thankful for life, health, the use of reason, and understanding, care∣fully to improve all for the glory of God, that wee may dye with the testimony of a good conscience, and the love of good men, yea of God himself.

