


Right Worshipfull,
YOUR Order brought this Sermon some few moneths since into the PULPIT, and now into the PRESS: Might I have been mine owne Chooser, I should have wished that this slen∣der Discourse, like David in the Text; after it had done some small service to its Generation,
might have fallen asleep, and seen the light no more: But obedience to your Commands must make me to break through all my owne private desires.
I hope the Matter here handled, did not, nor will not, give you, or any other person any oc∣casion of offence, I know Truth is biting, where there's guilt;Veritas lo∣quendi gran∣de praesagit malum: La∣ctant. and therefore to some it is very dangerous to preach it, but yet the sound back will endure to be touch'd,Amara est veritas & quisquis e∣um praedicat amaritudine satiabitus. Hieron. and there's no kick∣ing at it.
I humbly beg your candid acceptation of this poor Mite, such as it is, and your pardon for two things; First, That so much time is runn'd out since your Order, before it was obeyed; which hath not been occasioned from an ela∣borateness in the Work (as every Reader will easily perceive) such Mushroomes as this may grow in a very little time, and a few daies are enough for so mean a Birth: But partly by ma∣ny occasions interveniug; partly by some threatning tryals in my Relations, which have much distracted me in my Studies, and partly by my very great backwardness to ap∣peare thus in Print, unto which (during my
present yeares and abilities) nothing should drive me but meer necessity. I further beg your favour in excusing some variations that possibly you may take notice of in the Printing and in the preaching; the substance and mat∣ter is the same, here and there some expressi∣ons and enlargements are altered, which I have done, because I judge, that which is presented to the Eare, may with greater advantage be pre∣sented to the Eye, when it is a little put into another dress.
The drift and designe of my Sermon was to quicken you up to an active and publick Spirit: And I pitcht upon this Subject, not in the least to reflect upon you, as being slothfull and selfish in your places, but that I might stir you up yet to abound more and more in the work of the Lord,1 Cor. 35.  and in your activenesse for the good of your Generation: Should I say the former I should very much wrong you, and should I say there was no need of the latter, I should very much wrong my self.
It is observed of the Planets, the higher they are in their scituation, the quicker they are in their motion. God hath set you in very high places,
a low,Monstrosa res est gra∣dus summus & animus infimus, se∣des prima & vita ima. Bern. de consid. l. 2. and lazie, and un-active Spirit is very un∣becomming to your places; I beseech you therefore with indefatigable diligence lay out your selves for God, and the publick, trade your Talent of power to the utmost advantage. Let your Spirits be as publick as your Places are; Hath God set the Sun in a publick Orbe to give light to its self? Self-seeing was alwaies naught, but in such times as these, it is naught with a witnesse: Seekest thon now great things for thy self?Jer. 45.5. seek them not. Let the blessing of many come upon you for your zeale and since∣rity in serving your Generation; It is better to have the Prayers of the publick, then the Profits of the publick. Do you work for the people of God in the Court, they will work for you in the Closet, let them have your Power, you shall have their Prayer, do you rule for them, they will pray for you.
To you (Right Worshipfull) in whose hands the Sword of Authoritie hath been late∣lie held, at the laying down of which this Ser∣mon was preached; I hope you find the com∣fort of what Service you have done. Genera∣tion-work is like the gathering of Roses, which
in the gathering, may be they prick the fingers, but when they are gathered, they are very sweet. I think he went too far, that writing the life of Anastatius, said thus,Stella de vit. Pontif. Aquo haud quicquam habetur quod merito reprehendi queat. I am sure I should not go far enough, as to your Government; if I should not say, much was done by you, which deserves justlie to be commended, you are not yet fallen asleep, though as to that Office you are. The Lord heighten your zeale, and make you yet more instrumentall for good, that your Life may be comfortable to others, and your Death comfortable to your own self; Which is the heartie prayer of,
Febr. 26. 1656.

