



My Lord,
I Will not injure your Lordships Temperance, in giving you a Surfet of the Feasts of the Ancients; their kindes, Military, Ci∣vil, and Sacred; upon Births, Marria∣ges, Covenants, Travels, Inaugurations, nay,Cutting of Teeth. with some common (yet proper too) Feasts at their first flesh-breaking. The Scripture gave the Jews their Regalim: Buxt. Syn.
And Primitive Christians had their A∣gapae: And, through your Lordships quickning and encouraging influence, our Countrymen too, for these three years past, have been no Heteroclites from good Presidents in their Yearly Meet∣ings, Copied out from our own, and other Nations.
Many actions that seem petite, are great in consequence (as smal Stars have mighty influence.) This mingling, helps humility:Cael. Rod. Antiq. and uniting, symbols frugali∣lity: this Traffique of hearts, amicabi∣lity: from these Associations, men deri∣ving a respect one for another, as the Loadstone and Needle do by contact: Thus Men (like Virginal-jacks) are ty∣ed together by the Teeth: and Bag-pipe like, commonly make best Musick, when they are first blown full.
Yet all this is but a Herd at Pasture (for Beasts can claw one another) till the Minde and Soul be contesserate: For though some Seraphique Fanta∣stiques, would have the Soul, like the Philosophers Sphere of Fire, to eat no∣thing; yet this is found a popular Er∣rour, as well as that of the Camelion:Dr Brown. for she has a mouth, nay two for failing, placed indeed somwhat strangely; one in the Ear,Herodot. the other in the Eye. To treat which came in that first Course at the Aegyptians Table,A dead mans Scull. viz. A Head that spake without a Tongue.Buxt. Syn.  Jos. contr. App. The Jews Chidoth, as appears by Sampsons Rid∣dles (at his Feast:) Our Saviours Pa∣rables at his Swain Entertainments: Nay, our very Cheese-trenchers have got the parings of old sentences on them, as if thereby they intended to Preach at
Dinner. It was then very fitting at a Feast of Christians, the Soul should be caressed, and first served with her spiri∣tual Viands; which was the true occasi∣on of both these Sermons: the Publi∣cation whereof (as additional to what is said elsewhere) is no more, then by the Simposiaque Laws, as it were to pass the Censor:Pancirol. and as Fronts and Porches are usually set before Buildings, fairly Adorned with some Great Coloss, or Gyant, Bowing under their pre∣tended Weight; so are these Episto∣lary Praeludiums prefixed, which do no less Attaque commonly some Fair Name; with this difference only, That there the House sustains the Sam∣pson that seems to pillar it, but here the Patron doth reallize the contrary.
And now my Lord, I am like the
Sun in his Perigee, or slow Motion, at my hardest task: to account to your Lordship, why Conon, or his Rape, should be a Person, or Present for the Court: How a Pilot, so obscure for parts, and so little known for Person, can vouch so high a Name: Or that this Fraight, that consists neither of the Gold of Ophir (to wit, any deep Specu∣lations) nor so much as the painted Pea∣cocks of Eloquence, should yet so boldly address to an English Solomon.
In this great strait (my Lord) if the Queen Reason should seem to with∣draw her presence for a while, I am sup∣ported by the mission of her next Atten∣dant, and principal Lady of Honour, I mean, Excuse.
For grant it true, that the Comets on∣ly shine for Emperours, and Princes;
yet the Fixed Stars do influence the de∣spised Peasant as much as them; and and the meanest Swains are inqual Wardship with them, to the brightest Angels.Gafferel. Let the Talisman Profes∣sors mourn over their lost Art of attract∣ing the vertue of a Star, to Constellate a Vegitable therewith; yet we of inferi∣our Orbs are comforted by what we see the Chymists do, viz. Extract the sweet∣est Virtues better by course Dung, then by the Suns most Noble and Fiery Beams.
And certainly, Honour, the Jewel of the High can be Forged nly (like Jewels) by the black hands of those be∣low, in whom it seems more Fountainou∣sly to reside, then in the persons honoured; insomuch,Arist. Eth. l. 1. that the very eity it self, l∣led with all perfections, wanted this, till
a Creation: As the Longitude of the Earth is taken by Eclipses,Carp. Geog. just so (me∣think) Your Orators obscurity doth give aym to take the Dimensions of Your Lordships Excellence.
Neither should this seem strange in him, though Cloystered up at home, and removed far from the practical know∣ledge of your Lordships actions, any more then the man immured from visibility in his dark Optick Cell, is helped by that Blackness, through the little unnel in his Window, to Landskip all those float∣ing Figures, and flying species,Aquil. Opt. that seem to lose themselves in the wandering Ayr.
And though (My Lord) Munifi∣cent Bounty, with Learned and unpa∣ralleld Charity, concentring in a Person Nobly streaming from Ancient Pro∣genitors, sets You up to shine in an high
sphere; Yet alas! the dire blasts of En∣vie often waste those Lights, Torching in a blustring Ayr, while blinde Vaults preserve the burning Lamps for many Centuries:Plin. Nat. Hist. If such effect should from these papers happen, how much should he rejoyce in that obscurity that preserves Your Glory? That, as a Corps wrapt up in Balm, and Spice, by the Retalia∣ting power of Your Name, will be kept sweet, and whole, in despite of the teeth of Time and Envie: For, though the Tropicks and Poles move on their own little ones; yet in Mensuration, recourse must be had to the greater Circles: So mens valuations passing by these Atomes of Work and Person, shall take the Rise of their Judgments from the greatness of Your Noble Protection.
Yet besides these wide shoes, Lasted
for many Feet, there are some more pro∣per for mine; I being a poor twig of that Corporation, that drew much sap from the Roots; and so long joyed under the shades of Your Grandfather, of Dear Memory, and your late Departed (the Vespatian of that Town and Country) Brothers Boughs;Amor ac deli∣ciae humani generis. Suet. in vit. Tit. Vsp. both whose Fruits there (when other Families are consu∣med in the Maw of Time) in the peo∣ples choisest affections will be preserved. And now (My Lord) we Your Coun∣trymen look upon You as that Sun, into whose bosom their flames have shed their lights; as somtimes the expanded streams of Brightness came in, and made a Pe∣riwig of Glory for Heavens greatest Luminary, on the fourth of the Creati∣ons day: of which we are daylie more assured, whilst by Your great Humility
(though an Eagle of the highest Ayr) yet You disdain not to fly in the Train of the meaner Birds of your Country, to perch with them, and feed in their A∣vearies (their late Feasts) and shew them an example of imping their large Plumes, in pious, and charitable exten∣sions, towards the feathering, and feed∣ing of many other naked and hungry Birds of the same Covie. Among others, your Orator is in Arrears, as for your Attendance on, and Countenance, en∣couraging his work; so for somthing hid in the bowels of the subject of both his Discourses.
The first represented David, a great Man, putting himself into Gods Inns of Court, and there Professing himself a Student of the Divine, as you in great Condiscention have done of the Com∣mon
Law. Thy Testimonies I have &c.
The second shewed Jesus Christ, that Lapis Theologicus (as the Scripture calls him) in whose quest we never labour in vain; Destin'd by Heavens Colledge of Phisitians to be Bruised, nay Cal∣cind to Dust, and burnt up in the Fur∣nace of his Fathers wrath; that so the World might boast at last of an Ʋniver∣sal Medicine, for all Patients what∣soever. Thus have we seen Blood issu∣ing from one part of the Body, stopt by opening the Cock, and letting the Sluce fly from another Vein. It pleased the Lord to bruise him.
In which Noble Science as in all o∣thers, the End crownin the Action, is not obscure to the very Hospitallers, who pray that your Lordship may amply re∣ceive
your Fees from Gods (not earthly, but) heavenly Angels: And if your Lordship (as 'tis not doubted but you do) to the Law and Phisick, and Davids study of Gods Testimonies, and Isaiahs sublime Chymistry, you will without all peradventure be Entitled by posterity, the English Trismegistus.
But I am afraid, lest dealing too long in Phisick, I should make your Lordship a Patient: If any thing in these Ser∣mons, or this Epistle be ill resented, as Luther was said by some to call S. James Epistle,Camp. dec. rat. Epistola straminea; well may be sit down quietly then with a worse character of his, that desires to be num∣bred amongst the faithfullest of them that honour your Lordships Virtues, and is in the work of the Gospel,

