


Gentle Readers,
HEre is presented to you a Brief, Learned, and a very seasonable Treatise for the Age we live in: It was many years since Penned by King James of happy and blessed Memory, Entituled, A Counter∣blast to Tobacco; It it here verbatim, faith∣fully transcribed out of the large and learned Volume of His other Works in Folio, which are rare and scarce to be had for money, and of too great a price for the common sort of Tobacco-smokers to purchase: It is granted, the thing may be good, and Physical, and healthful, being moderately and but seldom taken; but for men to take ten or twenty Pipes in a day in all Com∣panies, Morning, Noon and Night, before and presently after Meals; this is a strange way of taking Physick. Now the King understanding the evil Custom of taking To∣bacco, or, as we now call it, smoking a Pipe, was grown to a great head, he seems to be very much insensed at it, and discovers how it first came into England, and its first Original; and how that it was used much amongst the savage Indians, to cure Lewes Venerea, a Disease among them: His Majesty wisely fore-seeing the evil conse∣quences that would follow, by such immoderate suck∣ing in the foul smoke of this Indian Weed, and He being the Physician of the Body Politick, doth by many strong and excellent Arguments, disswade his Subjects
from imitating the practise of the Heathen Indians, in drinking this noxious fume. It was in his Time but a Novelty, and practised but a little, except amongst the Nobility, Gentry, or great Ones: But now what is more frequently used in every Ale-house and Coffee-house, be∣sides great Inns and Taverns in London, and all the Three Kingdoms over. Whereas if men were so wise for their own good, both in Body, Soul, and Estate, as to handle a good Book, either of Divinity, or of Morality, half so often as they do the Pipe of smoke, it would be better for them in all respects, more precious time and money would be saved. I shall detain you no longer from a more learned Epistle and Treatise of the matter in hand: And as King Solomon, who was the wisest of Kings, saith in his Book of Ecclesiastes, That where the word of a King is, there is power; so I say, If what our famous King James hath written, be not of Power sufficient to divert all Eng∣lish men, &c. from this evil and hurtful Custom; It is here seconded, and backed home, by the words and advice of an able and learned Doctor of Physick now living; it being so sutable to the purpose, was thought fit to be added to this Counterblast. And that it may not be said (as the common Proverb is) To be only one Doctors opini∣on, I have thought fit to add another, Collected out of a Treatise Of the Bloud, written by that learned Physi∣cian Dr. George Thompson, who agreeth with the former against smoking Tobacco, as dangerous. I apprehend, that what hath been spoken against drinking Tobacco, may much more be said against immoderate drink∣ing of Wine, Ale, Beer, or any strong Liquors, and Dishes of Coffee, &c. Thus hoping thou wilt make a good use of what is here gathered together, and offered for thy good, I rest.

