



(Reverend, and Worthy Sirs.)
WHereas you are the onely Representative of our severall Churches, sitting in each particular Consistory; Out of whom, according to the good, ancient, and laudable Custome of our Church-government, fitting Members are to be chosen and deputed by Letters of Deputation to assemble together, whereby to compose, and form a Colloquie, which is the super-in∣tendent power of our Churches, and hath been honoured, and ac∣knowledged to be so, and is our onely naturall, and proper judi∣catory, and Judges within our selves for the ordering and regulating of all our Church affairs, for and during a very long succession of years; I have therefore to you, (As my dutie requires me,) made this present Dedication of the following Remonstrance: Wherein I do not doubt, but upon your serious perusall and Consideration, my impulsive necessity to publish the same to your View, will be most evidently manifest. To the end I might justly vindicate my self from the false, and scandalous Aspersions of Mr. Christopher Cisner & Mr. John Baptista Stouppe, and some of their Adherents, Members of the Consistory of London. And therefore give me leave, I beseech you with as much brevity as I can, to declare unto you the motives, and grounds that induce me hereunto.
Some few Members of the Consistory of London taking part
with Mr. Cisner, whereby to cover, and conceal his manifest Er∣rors, and injuries, committed by him against the Doctrine and Discipline of our Churches, and to scandalize and abuse me toge∣ther with Mr. Elias Delmey (our pious and faithfull Pastor,) and Mr. Daniel Fervacques (amongst many other Fathers of Families) in particular, did the last year, (as if it were the Act of the whole Church, when in truth it was but some part of the Consistory) print and publish a Book both in French and English: Wherein (among  many other Calumnies, and reproachfull Termes.) they unworthily charged Mr. Delmey to have raised an un∣happy Quarrell between Mr. Cisner, and my self and Mr. Fer∣vacques And instead of labouring to appease it, he had kindled, and venomed it; joyning with us two in a foul Accusation which  set forth against Mr. Cisner, and upholding the Quarrell with us to the very last. Although the Consistory had declared it to be false, and ill grounde; Hereby designing to justifie them∣selves, in outward, and common Appearance; by casting a Blemish, and disgrace upon us as of we should be offenders and enormous persons For clearing whereof and that our selves are innocent, and their Book false, and slanderous I commend the ensuing, Re∣lation to your Censure Whither Mr. Cisner dealing treacherously with our Colloquie in the year 1646 by falsifying, and betraying his Deputation from them in the Case of Doct De Laune, and Mr. D'asigny at Norwich, as is so palpably discovered in this Book be not worthy of due Reproof, And when as also he delivered false and erroneous Doctrine in the Pulpit, and also maintained it to me and Mr. Fervacques upon the Exchange, for which I de∣sired him to give me Christian satisfaction, by proving or denying his position he instead thereof returning ill words to me at that place by traducing Mr. Delmey and others with my self without cause, Calling us that party that troubled the Church and declining to give me any satisfaction at all. And I thereupon replying that the troubles of the Church, proceeded from one of that party, that was sent to Norwich for the peace of that Church but betrayed it, he then gave me the Lie, & accused me to the Consistory of London
that I had called him Traitor on the Exchanger And thereupon be∣ing summoned to attend them, produced my Author Mr. Fervacques who confirmed his Report made to me of Mr. Cisner's treachery, and owned the business, offering to prove it, and accordingly hath fully done it by valid and sufficient Testimony, and indeed from Mr. Cisner's, own hand writing. Yet nevertheless some Members of the Consistoy would still unjustly hold me on with Mr. Fervac∣ques to maintain my words: Notwithstanding since that he owned and maintained them, I ought then by all Laws and reason to be discharged from further Attendance or prosecution thereupon. And that they might the more injuriosly deport themselves they wick∣edly acquitted Mr. Cisner notwithstanding the proof and evidence of  offence and suspended me from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper Refusing all offers propositions and terms of putting the difference to a Methodicall Enquiry and judgement, severall times made and proposed by me to them, according to our Discipline, and government that your selves in Colloquie as my proper judges, might determine the same. And for that Cause I made my protest against them and appealed to all our Churches in Colloquie: Which by their indirect means was prevented from forming at London in January 1655 and also from assembling at Centerbury, As of common right they should have done the 12th of May 1656. And instead thereof they laboured to introduce and bring in a Coetus of the strangers Churches in London onely conjoyned with themselves, and dissolving all brotherly Communion with some of our Churches, most unnaturally would have set the Coeus up to be the naturall judges of all our differences in our Church in London: Being di∣rectlie opposite to the verie nature and constitution of a Coetus; which is an assemblie, merelie, and onelie for consulting and order∣ing of Civill affairs, and hath no power or influence at all upon matters of Church government, since the establishing of our Col∣loquies for almost eighty years together: And by this Device would destroy and overthrow the use of our Colloquies, and in the end, and bent of their intentions, quite root up our government and ba∣nish it totallie out of our Churches. But at length, by his Highness
gracious favour we obtained the libertie of a Colloquie, which was vigoroustie opposed even before his Highness person, by Mr. Stouppe and others of Mr. Csner's Abetters Before whom I did expect that my greivance should have received a due haring and full Relief. But as you will herein fully discover (besides many of your own personall knowledges thereof,) that by the irregular Actions of onelie five persons deputed to sit in Colloquie in August and September 1656. (who, being the less number of the De∣putes of all our Churches concerned to sit, and refusing to receive two of our Churches, could not regularlie act as a Colloquie rightlie constituted according to our government,) all my hopes became frustrate and all our Differences left without redress; Whereby such a grand and notorious division hath happened amongst us as renders us Contemptible to the nation, wherein we live; for that being brethren of one common profession, and so ought to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, we by our own unhappy dissention are accounted, even as common enemies one against the other. Which in truth I must confess had been (by Gods blessing) prevented, and happilie pacified, if those persons in the Consisto∣ry, who have been so active with Mr. Cisner had inclined to the Advice of Mr. Florantine ainturier, (a godlie ancient and well experienced Elder,) and not have abused their brethren that dissented from them, as did Mr. Vancourt, and four Deacous with them in Consistory. And indeed I cannot complain against the whole Consistory in generall, but the Major part, who are lead away by Mr. Cisner and Mr. Stouppe, and three or four leading men more onely.
But for as much (Reverend and worthie Sirs,) as that the Con∣dition of all the Churches in generall, as well as my own Case in particular, is so sad and lamentable, and that our government hath been at tempted to be pull'd down, and a new form introduced, to our verie great scandall & prejudice, and dishonour of our Pre∣decessors, and that also contrived onelie by some few disorderlie, passionate, and unexperienced persons, and merelie out of wilful∣ness,
and obstinacie to countenance, and abett, and protect from ju∣stice a notorious Delinquent, (as Mr. Cisner is,) to the great dishonour of God, and trouble of our Churches, I humblie there∣fore beseech you to quit your selves like good Christians, by inter∣posing your Aid, Councell, and advice, whereby to preserve, the honour and Authoritie of our Colloquies from ruine, and destru∣ction, and also to put your judgements into action, that a Colloquie may be speedilie called, and regularlie formed, or some other means foundout; Whereby justice and right may be done to everie one grieved, and oppressed, and such Censures be imposed on persons offending as the merit of their fact shall justlie deserve: Which for my own part I am verie readie and willing to submit unto, if I shall be judged an offender. That thereby the Churches may be re esta∣blished in peace, and tranquillitie and the Discipline, and govern∣ment thereof defended, and protected against all opposition, and from confusion amongst our selves. And these things I humblie in∣treat you to lay to your hearts, and activelie prosecute, and pursue, that, what by the Religious care of our reverend, and worthie Pre∣decessors was in the worst of times asserted and maintained, may not by our negligence, disrespect, indifference, or carelesness be deserted, and forsaken in the times of greater light, and manifesta∣tion of truth.
I should not upon any termes have made my self (being a private person, though verie much injured,) so publick as to be visible in Print, were it not, that my sincere and heartie love and affection to the order, good government, and reunion of our now sadlie distracted Churches do move me thereunto; Albeit that the scandals and hard Censures past upon me, vented even by one, that I hold to be a godly man, but partiall in his judgement, had been sufficient cause to move and stir up anie man that desires to hold faith and a good conscience, and to walk as becomes the Gospell of Christ, to vindicate himself by all due waies and means. And more especiallie when as the parties, that appose and gainsaie him, upon all Accompts where by to prevent and obstruct the verie ordinarie and direct Rule and
means of Redress, shall be so wilfull and obstinate as to refuse and reject all Propositions and offers of peace and settlement whatsoever. And that this is my case, you will manifestlie discover in reading this Book: Which for your better Information I present unto you.
And with all desire you to be pleased to consider one verie mate∣riall Circumstance in the Case of Mr. Delmey, which is this: That at the verie time, when Mr. Delmey was suspended from his office of Presidentship, there were (as I am informed), but seven Elders of thirteen in the Consistory of London, whereof three Elders oppo∣sed, and voted against his suspension, whereby it was carried but by one vote of the Elders. This I offer, that the Churches may be advertised, how few persons in number have begun and carried on the ungodlie procedings against Mr. Delmey; who ne∣ver (as I have heard) had anie Complaint made against him, by anie of the Congregation either for Doctrine, or manners: For which there have been divers Complaints made against Mr. Cisner, as being erro∣neous in Doctrine & scandalous in his Conversation; Nor have anie opposed Mr. Delmey, but the pluralitie of the Consistory. Which Theseech you well to consider in reference to your Observation upon the Book latelie printed, concerning Mr. Delmey and themselves, published by the Fathers of Families; that when it shall please God to instruct your hearts for the assembling of a Colloquie, or finding out some other means of deliverance of our poor Churches from di∣stress, and violation, you may be the better prepared to act, and de∣termine concerning our present differences. And that Almightie God will be mercifullie pleased to direct your Counsells, and Engage∣ments for the welfare of our Churches, whereby Religion may flourish in its puritie and the power of Godliness be continued therein against all Error and Corruption, to the glorie of God, and honour of our Christian profession, is, and shall be the praiers of him, who is.
Sirs, 
