



Right Reverend and honoured Fathers and Brethren,
I Never thought or intended to appeare in print in this learned and criticall age, being conscious to my self of mine own insufficiencies: I speak it not in an humble arrogancie, as the Orator observed some did write treatises against vain-glory, and then in a vain-glorious ostentation put their names thereto. Muchlesse should I have pre∣sumed to handle this controversie, which hath been so fully agita∣ted by others both at home and abroad. Not only by those amongst us, who have distasted the Hierarchicall frame of government, whose arguments have been by the Prelates answered for the most part no other way then by suspensions, silencings, deprivations, and proceedings against them as disturbers of the Churches peace, and contemners of the commands of Authoritie: but also by almost all the Divines of note in the Reformed Churches, in their Pole∣micall dissertations against Papists, out of whose Magazine our Hierarchists have borrowed those weapons whereby they defend their own authority, and oppose their enemies; as is evident to any that shall compare the writings of the one and of the other, and (to say nothing of this as objected by the good old Non-con∣formitans to the Patrons of Prelacie) is acknowledged by the Pa∣pists
themselves, witnesse that short marginall Annotation of the Rhemists,In Iohn 20.17. The Protestants otherwise denying this preemi∣nence of Peter, yet to uphold their Archbishops do avouch it against Puritans. The course of my studies when once I became a Smatterer in Divinitie, was bent another way then to the hand∣ling of Controversies. My principall and chiefest aime being this, that I might through Gods blessing on mine endevours be fitted for a Pastorall employment, whensoever the Lord in his due time should call me thereunto. Wherein I desire in humility and thank∣fulnesse to say with St PAUL,1 Cor. 15.10. By the grace of God, I am what I am. As for this controversie in particular, though I had some reason to have pried into it, in regard of my fathers suffe∣rings more then once under the Prelates, in whose deprivation I and the rest of his posteritie have had our share of sufferings also; yet knowing mine own inabilities to wade through it, wanting time in regard of other studies more necessarie for the fitting of me for that calling wherin I was, and observing my fathers own tēperature & carriage, who forbare discoursing of it in private, or mentioning, much lesse handling of it in publike, meerly on this ground, that he might fulfill his ministery in that remote, barren, (in respect of the Word) rude, and ignorant corner of Wales, to which the Lord by his providence removed him, I did also for∣beare the studying of it. The practises of the Prelates which caused such commotions in Scotland at first, and in the issue the abjura∣tion of the Prelacie; the proceedings against Dr Bastwick here in England for his Flagellum Latiatium episcoporum, and those high challenges which were made in the Star-chamber Speeches about that time, did first cause me to enquire into that tenure of Divine right, by which our Bishops laid claim to their Preeminence. The Oath in the Canons which came forth after∣ward did provoke me to set to the work a little closer; which yet I entred on only for my own private information and satisfaction, and after the considering of some places of Scripture, I addressed
my self to Bishop Halls Treatise on that subject, conceiving that in him, being the latest that did write, and withall a man of note in the Church, I should find the substance, strength and sinewes of all those arguments which could be produced in that cause. Whom when I did peruse, the more I looked into his treatise, the further off I was from receiving satisfaction by him in that Tenure of Divine right, and from subscribing to his assertions. Hereupon for my own private use I set down some short marginall animad∣versions (and to speak the truth, as farre as I am able to judge, there is roome enough in the margent to answer the whole booke) divers of which are now at the desire of some godly and learned members of your Assembly presented to publike view. Sundry other Collections I had once, but Sr Arthur Astons upholders of the Protestant Religion, finding my papers, when they rifled my house at Reading of what they could, soon made an end of them by fire, and with them of some Treat ses of my Fathers, in this and other arguments, which (in regard of that employment in the Ministery which lay on me whilst I was in those parts) I had not read over. Being thus driven from my habitation, and by losse of my Papers and Manuscripts disabled from dealing in that con∣troversie, I had quite laid aside the thoughts of it, untill that com∣ming before a Committee of your Assembly, according to an order of the house of Commons; I was by the Chairman of that Commit∣tee appointed to handle before you this Text, and controversie out of it. Which I perswade my selfe was done rather by way of Pro∣bation then out of any desire of Information from me, who am far more fit to be informed, and to receive, then to give information or satisfaction. Being thus east on a necessity of reviving my for∣mer notions, and reviewing my marginall animadversions with some other observations (which I had left) I undertook the taske, and presented before you those collections and arguments, which you were pleased immediately to call for. Let that I beseech you, Fathers and Brethren, now find a second, which found a former
acceptance at your hands, and unto acceptation vouchsafe to adde a Patronage. Something I have indeed now added which was not in my former papers delivered, which I have done partly by the intimation of him by whose appointment I first did enter on the discussing of this question; partly because I saw the great confi∣dence of the Bishop with whom I principally deale in this vexati∣ous dispute, whose grounds I held it in some respect necessary to consider and examine. If in these papers there be any thing which may be subservient to the glory of God, and his great work which he hath in hand, I have my desire, and shall therein rejoyce, desi∣ring to returne all to him from whom every good gift proceeds. Give me leave to close my Dedication with the same petitions which closed my Sermon in your Assembly. The God and Father of our Lord Iesus Christ the Father of mercies grant that his Spirit of peace and truth may be the President of your Assembly, that the peace of God may rule in your hearts whereunto ye are called in one body, and nothing may be done amongst you through strife, vain-glory or contention, but ye may seek the truth, and speake the truth in love; that so through his blessing on your en∣deavours, studies, conferences, meditations, the breaches may be made up which are in the Church, and the Lord in his due time heale the breaches of our Land, Kingdome, and Nation, which are exceedingly shaken; which is the hearty desire, and daily prayer of
Fifeild, March 6. 1643.

