



Most deare Mother,
I Cannot but acknowledge you to be the true Church of God,Mater est Je∣rusalem. Lyran. Ecclesia est con∣gregatio Israel. Rab. David Kimhi. and the Spouse of Jesus Christ, when I consider these particulars following,
1. That the definition of a true Church doth accord with you, which is this. A true visible Church on earth, is a company of people called by God from Idols, to the true Religion, and professing subje∣ction to that call, 1 Thes 1.9, 10. Jam. 1. ult. 2 Cor. 9.13.
2. When I consider that the Church of England hath Christ onely for her foundation, 1 Cor. 3.11. I confesse wood, hay, and stubble hath been laid upon this founda∣tion, yet salvation in mercy belongeth to such as are the true sons of it, verse 15. and doe retaine the foundation in faith and verity.
3. When I consider that Christ is your Head,Eph. 1.22. and not Antichrist, though in circumstantials you doe sym∣bolize too much with Rome.
4. When I consider that you have all the Essentials of a true Church, though not all the Circumstantials;Ecclesia parti∣cipans ipsam essentiam quae ipsi in sua spe∣cie debetur, est vera Ecclesia. We have the Word and Sacraments, like gold Oare mixed with some dust, but yet it is called Gold, Job 28.6. Iob was a true man, though he was full of biles, and his friends knew him not, Iob 2.7. The seven Churches
in Asia are not unchurched for their imperfections, Rev. 2.3. The Church of the Jews was a true Church, in Es∣sentials, when it was most corrupt, and Christ did not de∣part from it, but did labour to better it.
5. When I consider that Christ hath not given you a Bill of Divorcement as yet, for he hath still communion with us in his Ordinances, and is about to refine you, & to enter into a neerer union with you: Hos. 2.16, 17. he is taking away the names of Baalim out of your mouth, and pulling downe the reliques of superstition.
6. When I consider your opposition in Fundamen∣tals to the false Church, I meane to Rome, that Syna∣gogue of Satan.
7. When I consider of Gods extraordinary love to England, in affording us his presence so long, even unto admiration, and in defending his people here as much as in any Church in the whole Christian world; Exod. 33.13, 14, 15. Iacob would not have kept company so much with Rachel, if she had not been his beloved wife.
8. When I consider your fruitfulnesse, I cannot but take you to be the Spouse of Christ, Cant. 1.16. Do but look on former Martyrs, and on the present Parliament and Assembly of Ministers; yea doe but behold those sons of our English Church in New-England, and who can but say our Mothers bed is green? Cant. 1.16. Christ doth lodge betwixt her breasts, ver. 13. even all our night.
9. When I consider the hatred of Antichrist, it con∣vinceth me that Rome and England are different Chur∣ches, Iohn 17.14.
10. When I consider your agreement with all the true Churches that have been or are in Christendome, in Essentials, and how that all the Reformed Churches in Europe have and do give the right hand of fellowship
to England; I cannot but stand and admire that any should be so ignorant and uncharitable,Mammae indi∣cant legem u∣tram{que} scrip∣tam, & ve te∣nus acceptam. Rab David Kimhi. as to deny the womb that bare them, and to despise the paps that gave them suck.
Yet notwithstanding all this (deare Mother) I cannot but mourn when I behold your present lamentable face in a new, yet true glasse, made by such as have not onely skil in feeling your pulse, but also in viewing your phys∣nomie. Wherein though you seem to appeare to me, in the shape of a true Church, and living Spouse of Christ Jesus, yet I cannot deny, but that you are a corrupt and sick one: (the Lord help you) Now in the griefe of my soule, give leave to a legitimate child of your owne womb, to crave on his knee one curtesie at your hands, it is but this, to accept and make use of a little spirituall physick prepared for your necessity, & presented to your sin-sick, yet curable-selfe, in this Galley pot, containing within it, Parliament physick for a sin-sick Nation.
But lest you should deny me the common curtesie of indulgent mothers, who love to heare their little ones prattle, and to reade their scribling notes, though as full of blots and blurs, as Iacobs sheep of ring-strakes & spots, give me leave to Apologize a little for my selfe.
First, because as the Ordinance of Parliament is new, seasonable, and necessary; so the Explanation and Ap∣plication of it must needs be something answerable to the nature of it, though far short of a correspondent ex∣cellencie.
Secondly, because your own Act in that Representa∣tive Body, doth put me upon this Kingdom-healing du∣ty, which I cannot so fully and publikely performe, by preaching only, as by writing also.
Thirdly, because its a thousand pities that such an Ordinance as this is, should be buryed in the grave of
Oblivion, which may be also profitable for succeeding Ages.
Lastly, because as I have appeared on the Stage, a friend to the Parliament of England, according to my power; so I desire to goe off no changeling, leaving be∣hind me, not only a testimony of my constant resolution to live and die with such a pious, loyall, charitable, wise, and truly Honourable Parliament: but also rendring a reason of my faith, and Anti-cavalier actions.
Now what remaineth (deare Mother) but prayers for an all-curing benediction on this Catholicall medi∣cine of Repentance, hereafter following: Except it may be thought necessary to use one motive to perswade your appetite to long after this metaphysicall potion, & that in regard of its transcendent excellencie.
Many men have received grosse receipts upon either a vain, or weak hope of a short and imperfect health. And of these I will report a few, which the more un∣pleasant they are to be uttered, the more fit they are, 1. To shame our negligence in taking, 2. To perswade the speedy and greedy using this most excellent parcell of Divine physick, compounded after Parliament prescri∣ption for a sin-sick Nation.
The excrements of dogs and of swallows have been taken for the squinancyGal. M su. Maom. Arab. Avicen. treat. of the diseases of the throat.. The dung of a wolfe with white wine for the collickAvic Pe. Ap. li. de Venen. c. 4. Gal.. Doves dung for the tor∣ment of the stone and bladderPlin. lib. 30. cap. 4.7. New Asse dung, and al∣so goose dung with white wine for the yellow jaundisArnol. 2. vin. lib. 2.. The dung of horses, boares, sowes, beares, calves, hares, mice, for many other griefsPlin. lib. 28. cap. 14.. And generally the dung of all beasts is good for one distemper or anotherPaul. Agine. lib. 7..
Also Physitians prescribe the urine of a boarePlin. lib. 28. cap. 15., of an asse-coltPlin. lib. 28. cap. 10., and of divers other beasts for several usesGal. cap. 2..
The sweat and filth of the cares both of men and di∣vers
beastsGal Simp. l. 10. Plin. l. 28 c. 4., spittleGal. dict. l. 10, and some other excrements of men and women not fit to be namedGal. ibid..
Furthermore, they have prescribed the foame of hor∣ses & of boarsPlin. l. 28. c 10. Hoofs of goats and assesGal. Simp. l. 10.. The brains of mice, & vomit of dogsPlin. lib 30. cap. 11.. A Vulture fatted with mans fleshPlin. lib. 30. cap. 10. A Viper roasted like a pigPlin. lib. 30. c 6.13.. Also they have pre∣scribed red sliesPlin. lib. 30. cap. 12., and wormes of the putrefaction of Vi∣persMarcel. c. 6. Argumentum a minore., and such as breed in rotten trees. And many of other sorts, any of which, a man would not give a horse, were it not for health sake.
Now the strength of the Argument lyeth thus. If men will take such base materials (as I am ashamed to write in cleane paper, and thou mayst blush to reade) and that only for the regaining of a little bodily health and ease: how much more should you (sick mother) be perswaded to take the potion of Repentance, which is most precious and healthfull for the soule, as appeareth in the Ordi∣nance, and the explanation thereof?
Say not that a physicall life is a miserable life,Medice vivere est misere vi∣vere. Dissicilia quae pulbra. a me∣lancholy and painfull life; for you know that sweet meat must have sowre sauce. Gainfull physick is always pain∣full. Its true, Repentance will make you weep a while, while it is working, but it will make you merry for ever and a day, Psal. 16. Mat. 5. after it hath done working. Though it be bitter in the taste, consider bitter physick is better then sweet poyson. Consider also that its usuall to take unpleasant pils, to sweeten life, though they be hurtfull to all the parts of the body, in one regard or o∣therMese. lib. 2. Intent. 2 Sum. 1 cap. 1. can. 2., and that chiefly by two means: 1. By evacuating the healthfull humours together with the hurtful. 2. By affecting the parts, with a quality contrary to natureMes. lib. 1. de virib. cord. tract. 2. c. 2.. There is no physick but hath some poyson in it, & a de∣stroying power in some part of itAver. 5. Col∣licen. Avicen. in 4. prim. Gal. Simp. l. 4.. Hereupon Plutarch affirmeth, that they are so far from purging the body,
that they had need themselves to be purged, because they breed grosnesse and hardnesse in the bodyAvenzoar li. Tisi tract. 9. cap. 8.. Here∣upon divers Physitians have setled an opinion, that its the best physick to take no physick at all.
But its not so with this Parliamentary physick, as here∣after shall appeare, if it shall please your wisdom to cast an impartiall eye, and benigne aspect on this my Prim∣rose composition; the which, with the most humble addresses of a self-curing child, I present to your chari∣table hands, both for acceptance and protection in these physick-spilling, and Physitian-contemning dog-dayes. Think not (deare Mother) that all the aspersions which are cast on your first borne, and the Glory of your san∣ctified wombe, I meane the Parliament and Synod now assembled, or on me your Apothecary-son, are true, or likely to be so.Declaration and Vind cati∣on of Iohn Pym Esquire. p. 4. To put all out of doubt, I will con∣clude with that great Orator, State-Physitian, and Patriot of his Country, Cicero Pym, whose words are these. How unlikely this is, and improbable, that I have pro∣moted and fomented the differences and schismes now a∣bounding in the English Church, shall to every indifferent man be rendred perspicuous; For that I am, and ever was, and so will dye, a faithfull son of the protestant Religion, without ha∣ving the least relation in my beliefe, to those grosse errours, of Anabaptisme,And not only of the Prote∣stant profes∣sion. and Brownisme, and the like, every man that hath any acquaintance with my conversation, can beare me righteous witnesse: These being but aspersions cast upon me, by some of the discontented Clergy, and their fautours and a∣bettors.

