



My Lords:
I If this ensuing Sermon present you with ought worthy your esteem, 'tis the jewel of plain-dealing; Twas preach't to a Noble audi∣ence, and (I confese) with the li∣berty of much plainnes;Ezek. 2.6. Tit. 2.11 Ʋt post ulgura plu∣vis, ita post prae dica∣toris verba, auditorum lacbiymoe subsequamur. Illivs dectoris libenter vecem audio, non qui sibi plausu, sed qui mihi plactum mover. Si persuadere vis, ge∣mendo id magis quàm declamando fludeas. Bern. Ser. 59. in Cant. Vxod. 15.11. but he that made you Noble, enjoined me to be faithfull.
I dare not flatter attentions into smiles, no not upon a day of Thanksgiving. So poor are our improvements of rich mercies, and so fear∣full (yea) in praises is the God of our victories, that even upon a festivall, the stage should keep it's distance from the Pulpit. And if Sermons deserve to be suspected which on a day of rejoi∣cing walk in the attire of flattery: should they goe in that garb on a night of mourning, surely
they deserve to be apprehended. My Lords, mine was a Fast-Sermon. Soothing which is alway bad, would have been this day, abominable.
The faithfullest messengers that ever God employed,Duplici sub specie di∣vinus spiritus se mun∣do ostendit, columbinâ & igneâ, quia omnes quos implet & colum∣bre fimplicitate man∣suetos & igne zeli ar∣dentes exhibet, Greg. 2. part past. c. 11. Moses sic amavit ent quibus praesuit ut pro eis nec sibi parceret, & tamen delinquentes sic persecutus est, quos a mavit, ut eos etiam Domino parcente pro∣stereret. Causam populi apud Zeum pre∣cibus, causam Dei a∣pud populum gladijs allegavit. Intus amans ire divinae supplicando obsistit: foris saeviens culpam feriendo consumpsit. Gregor. Mitis Stephanus cum lapidaretur, sed seviebat cum non audiretur. Aug. in Ps. 32. have set us a copy of freenes in reproving: they are known examples of Moses, his deportment towards Pharoah, and (after) to∣ward his own people, of Elijah, towards Ahab, of Nathans toward David, of Jeremiah, John Baptist, Steven, Paul; All which were as full of zeal for God, as pity to people, and as holi∣ly impatient against others sins, as holily pati∣ent under their own sufferings; against those they had tongues of fire, though under these they had the temper of a dove. They who when they were with God mourn'd and prai'd for the people, when they came among the people expressed their zeal in pleading for God.
My Lords,Clem. Alex. paed. lib. 1. cap 8, 9, 10. . Id Ibid. Charitas piè solet sae∣vire, sine dolo muleere, patienter novit irasi, hutliter indiguar. Bern. ep 2. ad Fule. Inesse rectoribus debet & justè consoans mi∣sericordia, & pie sae∣viens disclplina. Greg. 2. p. past. Remissa tenita amputanda severa integritas albibenda, Sit amor sed non emolliens pie∣ta sed non plusquam expediat parcens. Greg cap. 6. Molestus est medicus surenti phre∣netico & pater indisciplinato fuio, ille ligando iste coelendo, sed ambo diligendo. Aug. ep. 1. ad Bonif. Host is redemptor is est qui per rect a opera quae sacit, ejus vice ab ecclesiâ amari concupiscit. Adulterinae coitationis est reus si placere puer sponsae oculis appetit per quem sponsus dona transmifit. Greg. cur, past. par. sec. cap. 8. In your commanding me to preach, there was (at least) an implicit forbidding of me to flatter. Sermons must shew a right way, not a smooth way, the way of duty, not of delight, the way which you ought, not which haply you love to go in; The work of a Preacher is not to prepare you sauce but physick, not so much to take away pain, (especially on a day of afflicting the soul) out of your wounds as to prevent festering: And so for our selves, we get not up into the Pulpit to be safe, but to be serviceable, not for our own pleasure, but our masters employment,
to win and woe you to Christ, not to our selves.
Your Lordships never deserved the least hurt at my hands, sure I am,Censura intermissa ali∣quando proficit, un∣quam remissa. Bern. ep. 24. ad Hug. not that which being a sinne can never be a debt, should never be payment,Plus persequitur lin∣gua adulatoris quam maus interfectoris, Aug. in Ps. 70. I mean the soothing of your souls into destruction: nay the danger of flattering you, is extensive beyond your selves. Flattery bound up in a Sermon and thrown into a Parlia∣ment,Naturali ducimur ma∣lo, adulatoribus liben∣ter favemus, & quan∣quam nos respondeamus indignos, & calidus rubor ora persundat, tae∣men ad laudem suam intrinsecus anima le∣tatur. Hieron. ep. 22. ad Eustoch. is no better then a bag of poyson cast into a common conduit serving for the use of a whole City.
May we that are Ministers ever tremble to hold our esteem by so crazy a title as holding our peace. Every one must be accountable for his idle words,Non solum ille trans∣gressor est, qui palam denegat veritatem, sed qui propter timorem tacet veritatem. Auth. op. imperf. Mat 10 33. Iure ist am vitam quā∣do divinitus afflun∣tur amaram seutiunt cujus amando dulcedi∣nem peccantibus amari esse nolunt. Aug. and a Minister for his idle silence 100. The greatest enemy to reproofs is unable to put in security to save either himself, or the flat∣tering Minister harmles another day nay even in this life (as Augustine excellently) God makes the world bitter to Ministers by sufferings, because they make it so sweet to wicked mgn by flatteries.
Beside, flattery is no other then Court-idolatry, and why should this piece of it be longer lived then the rest, especially among those that professe a de∣testation of it in every part.
My Lords, Your only worke that now remains (for God hath done the rest to your hand) is the
setting up the Temple, and the only stop is the serving of the time. My text is a harp tuned by the finger of God himself, and 'tis to drive away this evil spirit of temporizing, in a time of Temple build∣ing. I confesse he that of late used that harp, wanted the hand of David; and therefore 'twas his fear he should not do the worke of David, but I and sure he hath not wanted the spear of Saul, and therefore 'tis his hope that he hath endeavoured to do it. My Lords, I desire to rejoyce in any suffering for the service of your souls: I consess my ruins would be very unworthy to set up the least peece of abuilding of glory to Jesus Christ, or to make the smallest ad∣dition to the structure of his Temple, but may they in the least conduce to such an end, my enemies though against their wills, endeavour my happines.
The Lord give you a discerning eye 'twixt friends and flatreries, 'twixt the Mephibosheths and the Zibahs of these times: Dishearten not your plain-hearred friends, who dare not wear it to save their souls (much lesse to thwart an opposite way, or to lay rubs in the way of Reformation) dare not (I say) break their Covenant, or be false to their own principles; That God would increase the numbers of such as for him serve you, and your resolutions to serve him and love them, is the prayer
My Lords

