


Great Sir,
THat I approach so faire a shrine, with so coorse an offering; accuse not my unworthinesse, but your owne worth which like the load-star, is pleased to attract even the coorsest mettall, to make knowne its power. And indeed to whom else, (save to your Highnesse) should I Dedicate this worke of mine, sith it was compiled for your dear Fathers sake, my most Gracious Soveraigne? the necessity of the times even requiring it of me, as a testimony of my unfeigned love unto my native Country, and to its onely father, to whom 'tis turned Apostate yea a parricide. A taske in∣deed not of much labour, yet of exceeding danger, in such times asthese; I doubt not but your High∣nesse knowes full well, that but to speake truth in England in these dayes, is now no lesse then capitale crimen. I would therefore most willing∣ly, if I could, have declined this taske, which I long forbore, expecting its performance, by some
abler hand; but no man would ease me of that labour. I held it therefore my duty to my God, to my King, to my Country, to admonish all such, who through misguided zeale or otherwise, engaged against our Soveraigne, either in this or the former War, to repent betimes, and to make their speedy attonement, both with the one, and the other: or else to let them know, that their destruction draweth nigh; that Astrologie is now cleare and positive therein; that Mr. William Lilly perswading them to the contrary, and en∣couraging them, with the assurance of successe; is a false Prophet, all which I doubt not (God willing) but to prove so clearely by the rules of Art; and to confute him so manifestly, that any man (though but of indifferent capacity) shall be easily able to discerne his predictions, to be meere forgeries, lyes, and delusions, mine to be grounded upon Art, and nature. Sir Christopher Heiden, a famous Scholler of this Kingdome, in his defence of judiciall Astrologie, proves this Art to have been deduced from God to Adam, to Sheth, to Abraham, that in all Ages, Emperours, Kings, and men of the greatest ranke, have not onely been favourors thereof, but Students also therein. I am therefore the more encouraged to present your. Highnesse with a piece of this nature, not doubting but your Highnesse will easily beleeve, that the Stars have influence upon all sublunary bodies: doubtlesse omniscient God, never made
any thing in vaine, and consequently did not oreate, all those glorious lampes of heaven, to be∣spangle the firmament: the Scripture tels us, that they were made for signes, and for tokens, and for dayes, and years; nay it goes further, and plainly affirmes, that the Stars in their course fought against Sisera; as I doubt not, but your Highnesse shall perceive them to doe, against yours and the Kingdomes Enemies. I have strong, yet humble hopes, (let them not be accounted presumptions) that your Highnesse will be graci∣ously pleased, to give these my labours, an accep∣tance, answerable to the ambition, wherewith he offers them, who is,

