



THe occasion was solemne up∣on which this Sermon was preacht, the age is censorious in which 'tis printed; that did not make me forward to be in the Pulpit; this made me backward to be in the Presse: But the concealing of my Sermon would have been the discovering of my dis∣obedience, and I rather chuse to be in Print then in such an opposition.

The season is stormie wherein my name puts forth, and who observes not Ship∣wracks in the Seas of this my passage, enough to make the sufferers pitied, and the specta∣tors warned? For my selfe, the wisdome of your Commands is embarqued in the same bottom with my name; you make by far the greater adventure, and should there prove a miscarriage, your losse cannot be inferiour: But why speak I of storms or losses? may my vessell but set Christ on shore, upon any soul, it matters not afterward what becomes of it or me. My aime was service, not safetie, I went not out upon pleasure, but employ∣ment: Sermons are but Machinae, scaffolds to set up Christ in the heart; they obtaine their end in the furtherance of his work, not in the firmness of their owne standing. Our conti∣nuing longer then'till Christ be erected, is up∣on favour, not necessitie.
The way whereby I desire in this Sermon the advancing of Christ, is principally I con∣fesse by destroying of that enemy which both hinders the setting of Christ up, and if let alone, will also cause our downefall; for the
sin I here strike at, is very improperly called self-seeking, he who is usually termed a self-seeker, neither attending upon that which is truely self, nor upon the right seeking of it. That cannot be said to be done for self, which is not done for the soule, whatsoever is other∣wise done being for lusts, or at the best for the moth, the theefe, the carkasse, rather then for ones self. The soule-seeker is the true self-seeker. Nor can this attending upon self be called a seeking, unles by it we understand a la∣borious painful toyling, and in that sense eve∣ry sinner is a true seeker, but in respect of any wise disposall, or right ordering of endea∣vours toward the thing principally desired, which is good & happines, it may more pro∣perly be termed a losing then a seeking; rather a going from, then toward the thing after which there is made a seeming enquirie. To seeke our selves by sinning, by distrusting Gods provi∣dence, by excessivenes in earthly industries, by deserting the Cause of Christ, especially by driving our owne unworthy designes under pretence of friendship to the Church, this kind
of self-seeking is in Scripture politiks no better then selfe-losing. This is the enemy against whom I bend the force of this ensuing Ser∣mon; wherein if I see me to charge him with too much adventurousness, let the hurtfulnes both of his nature and practise be my excuse; for though it would be most happy living when self-seeking were dead, ye who would not with Sampson even willingly die, so as but this one Philistine might bee killed also? God hath followed this Sermon with two o∣thers Preach'd of late by the mouth of the sword, in the very bowels of this Kingdome; The one was a punishment upon self-seeking by our losse of aLicester. Towne, the other a bles∣sing upon seeking him by our winning theIn that glori∣ous victore at Nasiby. Field; In the first hee taught us this lesson, seeking our selves and not God ruines us. In the second, this; Seeking God and not our selves revives us; Oh that hee would please to Preach once more, and that by the Sword of his mouth, the power of his owne Spirit; for otherwise, 'tis possible indeed to scatter Armies and overcome Cities,Pro. 16.32. but never will
this Spirituall and Beloved enemy self be vanquished; However, I have labou∣red to discharge my trust, and there∣by to quice my Conscience in discove∣ring the Destroyer. The Lord grant that England may voyce him, and think him to bee as that people did Sampson, when hee was brought before them, the Enemy and Destroyer of their Countrey and Kingdome.Iudg. 16.24.
In particular, I knew not better how to expresse my dearest respects to this fa∣mous City, whose Lord Mayor, with sundry of her Aldermen and Commons, have been formerly pleased to assist my now dear charge, in calling mee to the place of my present Ministery: Be∣sides this former love to my self, that of late to my plaine dealing, (more then which, I know nothing, that pro∣cured your approbation to this Sermon) deserves a larger expression in this kind, of my gratefull resenting your religi∣ous favours; However, this testimony, such as it is, of my desires to serve your
souls, I humbly present to your Ho∣nourable acceptance, beseeching God that Christ-seeking, and not Self-seek∣ing, may ever be your Honor, and Lon∣dons happinesse, as a Minister wherein I am even to humblest acknowledge∣ments

Christ-Church, London.
