


MY LORDS,
HOw great a Remora the seeking our selves is to the setting up the Temple, your Lordships heard when last you commanded my service in preaching before you; another enemy I here presente to your Lordships no lesse destructive to re∣formation then that, it is the spirit of slumber. The for∣mer was a sinfull working, this latter a sinfull resting; If both these have as deeply seiz'd upon our work-men as they, are directly opposite to our worke; my excuse is at hand for my endeavour in both Sermons more to quicken then to quiet you.
The matter of my Epistle to your Lordships, now I print, shall be the conclusion of my Sermon, when I preach't I shall preach that first to your eye which came last to your eare, and the rather, for that the conclusion of
my Sermon, had so much of an Epistle to my hand as that it concerned onely your Lorships.
My Lords, I beseech you to shake off this spirit of slumber.

1. As it is hurtfull to your owne soules.
2. As it is hurtfull to the kingdome.

For the former, labour for the quickning power of the spirit of Christ to awaken you that sleep,Eph. 5.14. and to wake you stand up from the dead; all rising to the hihes pina∣cle of honour, without this is but falling. The second death will not spare the noblest of you that have not a part in the first resurrection Entomb not your noble spirits in the sepulcher, of sin and rottennesse. Peerage may come by the first, Grace onely by the second birth. Nobles are borne without spirituall life, and grace as well as the meanest, My Lords, I beseech you remem∣ber, that hee that is but a meere man, or a meere Noble∣man, is a miserable man; and better you had never been either of them, then not to be more then either. The reason why you complaine not so much of your misery by nature, and of your Christ-les condition as others doe is not because you are lesse miserable or lesse without Christ then others are, but because you see it not so much as o∣thers do; nobility is no exception from those general rules, without holinesse no man shall see God,Heb. 12.14. and except a man be borne againe he shall not enter into the kingdome of God.Ioh. 3.9. My Lords, the sepulcher and the scripture know no difference twixt robes and rags, peers and pesants. If poore men bee holy for themselves and you too, they shall goe to heaven for themselves and you too: what thinke you of your selves, when you heare that men of low condition weep for and complaine of sinne, strive, and thirst, and wrestle for Christ, and you all this while remaine hard and secure, and regardlesse of Christ
and your own soules? oh that you would insteed of be∣leiving that you are too good for these things,1. Cor. 1.26. feare lest these things are too good for you; not many noble, is a dreadfull passage. And that none of the Princes of this world knew the wisdome of God.1. Cor. 2.8. The Lords spirituall (so call'd) grew too temporall, but the Lords temporall cannot bee too spirituall; temporall pragmaticallnesse ruind them, spirituall practises must uphold you; the power of Godlinesse is the onely means to save your soules and the best to silence your foes.
Shake off this spirit of slumber as hurtfull to the kingdome, and that in two respects, of

1. Insensiblenesse.
2. Ʋnactivenesse.

1. Bee sensible that the Church is wounded by the soule-stroying opinions of Antinomians, Armini∣ans, Anabaptists, Seekers Anti-scripturists, An∣titrinitairans. &c. All which with many more have been more propagated these foure yeares of Church A, narchie then in fourscore of Church tyranny.
Bee sensible that the ministeriall function is by some denyed, by others inuaded, by corner preachers, a company who divide their houre between blasphemy and nonsense.
Bee sensible that the government which you have set up among us is so imperfect, and discountenanced (I tremble to say by whom) that it is rather a scorne then a curb to men disaffected to holinesse.
Bee sensible that our sacred Covenant is common∣ly either refused, or abused; and lookt upon by many onely as a Politique Stratagem to bee us'd while our miseries lasted, The Lord who was the witnesse of
our taking it, will shortly bee our Judge for our break∣ing it. If wee will keep our covenant onely in our affliction; wee must looke againe for affliction to make  keep our covenant.
Bee sensible of the wants and poverties of learned and faithfull Manisters, let it never be said that they who under Bishops were overcome by batteries should under the Parliament bee overcome by starving.
Be sensible of the Cries of the Fatherlesse, the Wi∣dowes, the oppressed, the delayed, the maimed, the wounded, whose services have been your safties, and their bloods your Honours,2. Sam. 23.17. your Estates, your ornaments, your lives.
Be sensible of the taxes, and pressing burthens of the poore wasted Kingdome; The poore Countryman complaining that he is a long time sweating & smar∣ting to gather that which a little breath shall bestow by thousands upon those that are as farre from want as worke, and some say, as farre from worth at either.
Be sensible of this famous Cities love, care, cost, blood; Let her not suffer by protections or any other needlesse burthens, by her losse (or yours shall I say) of her faithfull Ministers; Your Lord-ships noble re∣sentment of her religious and loyall Petitions, hath several times refreshed her, goe on in answering them as you doe:
2. Cast off the spirit of sleep in respect of unactive∣nesse. Be active in reforming in the fore-mentioned particulars: sleep not away your summer seasons. The Lord grant too much of it be not spent already. Let not those richly laden opportunities which have beene safely brought through a raging Sea by vigilancy, be
cast away in the haven by sloath. Let it never be said that all are active but those that should be so. The a∣ctivenesse of particular men for themselves is rather noted then liked; God hath beene active for you and us; he hath given us more then ever we lookt for: we him, lesse then, nay contrary to what wee have cove∣nanted. What would become of your Honours if God lay you aside like broken vessels, and say I take no delight in using such for my service, or should Christ say to you concerning his cause, as once he did to his Di∣sciples concerning himselfe.Ma. 26.45. Sleep on now and take your rest, behold the houre is at hand, and my cause is betrayed into the hands of sinners; The pre∣vention of which as it should bee your Lordships care, so it shall bee the prayer, My Lords, of

