



THe Ornament where∣with I endeavoured to set forth my Sermon, was that of honesty, not curiosity, much less flat∣tery; I studied therein more to profit
 than please you, rather to shew you a right than a smooth way, and to shew my self (as Augustine speaks) rather Melius est cum severitate dili∣gee, quam cum lenitate deci∣pere. Aug Ep. 48. to love with severity, than to deceive with lenity. After I had chosen my Text, I remembred that I was long since certainly informed (pardon me, if I relate what is below so Honourable an Assembly to know) that my dear Formerly Preacher at Sudbury in Suffolk, where he died about 40 years since. Father (now with God, but once an Eminent servant of Christ in the Mi∣nistery) preacht his last Sermon upon this very Text, to which God also di∣rected my thoughts, Kiss the Son, &c. and truly the recalling hereof to my minde, caus'd an addition to my desire, that I might so preach to you, as if this Text and Sermon should also both have been my last.
Some few particulars may possibly here and there be added in printing,
 which the straits of time alotted both for studying and preaching my Sermon, permitted me not to deliver in the pul∣pit; But upon consulting my memory, my Notes, and the Copy of a faith∣full Amanuensis, I am not conscious of my forbearing to print any one sen∣tence, or any thing, which commonly is called a passage, delivered in preaching of my Sermon.
I shall onely add, if the things which I preached be false, you cannot be ex∣cused in commanding so much as the printing of them; if they be true, you cannot be excused from doing more, by adding to your command of printing them, your own exemplary care in practising them: And, as, if they be false, I am sure to be summon'd before the highest Tribunal for preaching them; so if they be true, it will be
 impossible for you to escape the terror and severity of the same Judicatory, should you (which I dare hardly sup∣pose) refuse to practise them.
The great Counsellor guide you in all your consultations to kils the Son, as you would avoid his anger. In his work I desire to be your faith∣full servant
Black-Fryers. Novemb. 3d. 1656.

