



YOu have (already) a double right to this Dedication; it is yours first as this ensuing Sermon was preacht, next as it is publisht.
1. This Sermon was preacht, as among you and to you, so concerning him who of late was your worthy Pastor, and by him who is (though unworthy, yet,) your Pastor.
2. This Sermon is publisht, though a∣gainst my own inclination (for I know no∣thing by any my services, but what more de∣serves my blushing for their weaknesse, then publication for their worth) yet at the earnest entreaty, as of many others, so of sundry of your selves.

But there is a third and (that) a better right which I desire you may have to this en∣suing Discourse, and that is a right to it by practising of the truths contained in the Sermon, and by imbracing the Doctrines, and imitating the graces of your late emi∣nent Pastor commended in the following Te∣stimony.
My Sermon slights not your patronage, but it earnestly sues to you for your practise. And tis my desire, that the unreformed who shall reade the Relation of Doctor Gouge's faithful pains among them, may with god∣ly sorrow for their unprofitablenesse under his ministry, say what Pharaohs Butler did in the apprehension of his ingratitude to Jo∣seph,Gen. 41.9. I do remember my faults this day. If the dust of a living Ministers feet, and the sweat of his brows, shall be a testimo∣ny against a gain-saying people, how loudly will the dust of a dead Ministers
grave cry against them! Tis but a sorry piece of devotion, with the Jews to paint the Sepulchres of the Prophets, and to com∣mend them when dead, with our lips, whom living, we discommended by our practise; and yet as Sampson could take honey out of that dead Lion, with which he fought, and which he slew, when alive, it roar'd upon him, so nothing is more ordinary then for the wicked to voice up dead Ministers for sweet and blessed men, whom in their life-time for lift∣ing up their voice against their sinnes, and labouring to rend them and their lusts asunder, they bitterly opposed. Though when Moses was dead, the people would have worshipt him as a God (and this the de∣vil knew and lik't when he contended to have had his Sepulchre made known) yet when he was living, they would have destroyed him,Jude 9 & he fear'd stoning by them. Even wicked Joram calls dying Elisha,Exod. 1 the Chariots of
Israel and the horsmen thereof. 2 Kin. 13.14. The Papists, and common Protestants, who now speak highly of Christ and call him their sweet Saviour, had they lived in his dayes, and heard him Preach against their sins, would have hated him more then now they hate the godly, for having but a drop of his Fountain, and but a faint reflection of that holiness which much more gloriously shin'd forth in him. As it may be a work of much credit, so it is a work of little cost to extoll the deceased servants of Christ. By their voices, sinners are not molested in the prosecu∣tion of their lusts, nor urged to any unpleasing duties. It is not then the crying up of depart∣ed Saints and Ministers with our words, but imitating of them with our works and the praising them with the Language of the conversation,Horo andi proptr imi∣tatioem, non ad an-di proper religionem. Aug de verr l. c. 55. which shews the sincerity of our love either to God or them; The bark of a tree may be carried away, upon a mans shoul∣der
without any pains or difficulty; but it re∣quires strength and labour to carry away the body of the tree; men may easily run away with the outward shell of good words and pro∣fessions, but the heart and life of Religion, which is that of the heart and life, men can hardly away with. The dint of this dilem∣ma, will not be shunned. If the Ministers doctrine and life were bad, why are they so much as commended; if good, why not more then commended, why not practised and imitated also? If Christ were not a good master, why did the young man call him so? if he were a good master why did he not follow him also?
You will not be offended with me for my plain dealing; If I be Jealous lest this holy man hath bestowed his labour in vain upon many survivors; they will (I trust) re∣member whose jealousie it imitates, Pauls;2 Cor. 11. and of what nature, he saith, his was, a godly
jealousie. If I fear the flattering of some more then of others, it is of those whom I love most: you have by calling me to be your Mini∣ster, laid a strong engagement upon me, to beware of soothing you into destruction, and to put you in remembrance of promoting more vigorously the power of godlinesse, and of set∣ting up Christ more throughly in your hearts, houses, and congregation, in the expectation of, and supplication for which, I rest, dear and much esteemed Friends,
Black Fryars, May the 8th. 1654.

