



Honourable,
I Have ever esteemed Honest Authori∣ty the most noble, potent, and approved Patron, to pitch on; The three King∣dom's Glory, and every particular Per∣son's best Security.

Now, That I might match my Principle with my Practise; The Compulsion of your many Civili∣ties, & the prevailing Voice of most of your Impor∣tunities, hath not onely conquered me to a concession to print these Mushroom-meditations; but made me, being conscious of the worthlessnesse of any thing that can be called Mine, (as liable to censure,) to fly to you for Protection; it being a Sermon formed at as great a distance from my Line and Level, and ordinary Instruments I make use of, as I am from my own Habitation, & therefore not framed to that degree of Perfection I could wish for your sakes, or any who may peruse it: Which I pray may be charitable in their Judgment. For the heaviest Cen∣sures come from men that speak their Interest, and without Judgment: And to them but a word. Why should you be violent for that, which, but by Violence and Oppression, you cannot hold, and whilst enjoyed is apt to torment your Souls with jealousies and fears, and hangs on the twine-thred of the wandring Judgments of the hurrying Vul∣gar, more multivarious than Nature's dalliances, which are every minute fluctuous and returning in their new Varieties? And why should they not ra∣ther
 acquiesce in the Reason and Determination of Righteous men in Authority, whose Guide is God's Will revealed in his Word? Take heed whilst you follow the guidance of your own Interest, though you should enjoy Mydas's specious Wish, yet, it pay you not with ruine at the last. Truly God will work a∣lone, & Man must not be of his Counsel: If we can be but patient, God will be profitable; but for Time and Means we must leave to him, not interpose our selves. Be tutored by the unexpected Actings of the Times, not to presume on any Interests, nor de∣spaire of God, for he can help thee or cross thee:
Nemo confidat nimium Secundis:
Nemo desperet meliora lapsus. Policy and Vowes have deceived us; let Righte∣ousness and Religion undeceive us, and let us take out this Lesson, that, Those Kingdoms flourish most, not where Vice-Royes govern, but the a Lawful Righteous King is personally pre∣sent; And, till you arrive here, you will be but vapours transported by unconstant blasts. And if this word of sincere and loving Counsel shall raise
 any storm upon me, it shall but cause me to put the Helma Lee, and pray for them: And pray, for next under God, protection from you: who are not onely Martially impowred, but Civilly invested, with the Sword of Justice, and divinely furnished with the whole Armour of God, both to defend his friends; and offend his, your, and his Church's Enemies. And ever know, that sanctified Wisdom, and true Grace, is a Sanctuary so safe and sacred, that even Princes dare not touch the man that is thus protec∣ted. Yours, Honourable, hath been, in varieties of difficulties, proved and approved; And, with∣out the lest thought of Flattery I hint it, You seem to me to be formed and educated of God, in the way and love of Righteousness, Truth, and Peace, attended on by Moderation, and yet a Christian Courage and Counsel, to act your parts in such a season as this is: I must till death crave leave to honour you, and di∣vulge to the World your Courage, and yet Christian-like Moderation, in the use of your Power very lately: Violent, rash, bloody Designs and Minds will never bless the owners with a setled Peace. Ty∣ranny borders near an inevitable ruine: Modera∣tion is a Spoke in the Wheel of Envy, nor is it safe
 to Tenter Authority, for that displayes men: And what bloody mischief was prevented, and what high-formed stormy Resolutions calmed, and what Peace was in a short space, to admiration, setled, will never be forgot (to your perpetuall honour) whilst Gloucester is a City, Enemies being Jud∣ges. By which means, though many of you being active in Counsel, enjoyed not a Liberty to hear a part of this Sermon, yet (I bless God) I enjoyed a peaceable opportunity to preach some of these Noti∣ons in the Publick Assembly, the latter part of the Day. Thus have your Actings added one Argu∣ment more to what I in Publick delivered, That when Righteous men are in Authority, the People rejoyce; Diligence and Moderation are the best steps whereby to climb to any Excellency: Go on and prosper; They that by righteous Actings acquire Honour, will hold it longer than they that have acquired it by Power or unjust Ʋsurpation. This will make you succeedingly glorious, that you shall need the Applause of none to add to your felici∣ty. This, this Righteousness will, in the Exercise of your Authority, Martial & Civil, attract the hearts of all that hear of you, to you, for Love, Ser∣vice,
 Admiration. I shall dress up no more words in these Paper robes, least I should seem to stand in need of your Pardon, as well as Protection, for my Impertinencies. I, knowing reall Desert desires more to deserue than to hear of it, shall, with Pray∣er to the Lord to make You and Magistracy at unity amongst your selves, zealous for God's Glory, and his Church's repairing and reforming, and the Kingdoms Settlement upon the Foundations of Righteousness, Peace, and Truth, presume ever to subscribe my self,

