


priviledges of Jacobs spirituall houshold, and to draw from you (in these hum∣bling times) expressions of sorrow most sutable to those who walk so unsutably to celestiall favours; (many priding them∣selves in an imaginary title to the bene∣ficium Jer 7. 9. 10 Putant eim Hypocritae si modo externas u'tus divini cerni quasan obser∣vent, tunc on∣nia tecte babe∣re, quamvis ip∣si in sceleribus praefrate per∣gu it Os and in loc. of the family, who are wholly neglective of the officium) this being of concernment to all Christians (to whom—are also some directions hinted) so chiefly to governours and all Reformers, that they partake not in other mens sins. 1 Tim 5 22.  Ne{que} te participem constitue ali∣rum peccat um. I have endeavoured to incite you who are Masters in our Israel, to improve your diligence in the discharge of that trust and office in this family, wherewith above others you are honoured by God; who ha∣ving 1 Sam. 2 30. manifested his bounty to this house∣hold no lesse, if not much more then to Exod. 10 23. s. 8 19. psul. 147 19. Act. 14. 16. those our forefathers, in vouchsafing light to us, when others of our Allies sit

in darknesse blacker then Egyptian, is pleased to direct us to our work and walk by a pillar at his own charges, holding forth to us a light so much the more ne∣cessary, by how much the Princes of this world, who know not the Gospel, cruci∣fie 1 Cor. 2. 8. to themselves the Lord of glory: And as those venemous serpents in Sardi∣nia, Solin. poybist. cap 9. Accendunt quo∣tidie lucernas, quib nulla lux est: illis cope∣tunt test imonis teebrarum. Tet. Apol 10. Igne fatunm qui sequmuntur in avia abdu∣cuntur & in prcipitia fossa que saepe numero runt. Kek Syst. Rhys. lib. 6. mentioned in stories, either hate and flie the light, or like those in Tertullians time, bear a lanthorn profession without light, or as another sort by an ignis fatu∣us, are led into dangerous precipices and by-waies, and with Ixion in the Poet, embrace a cloud for the true Iuno, sha∣dows in the room of orthodox and substan∣tiall truths. The scope of all is to unde∣ceive you in pointing to that only light of truth which is able to lead you to eternall light, and in the interim to afford di∣rection in managing the whole businesse of

this house, by which all other lights are to be examined, whereto if disagreeing, it is Isa. 8. 20. because there is no light in them. Lo Cook. ju∣risdiction of Courts. According to which that you may act to the houses welfare, Gos glory; and therein as your Noble predecessours, ap∣pear Doctum, pium & benedictum Parliamentum, and not otherwise, to your own comfort in the great day, when the great Bishop and King of heaven and earth shall appear clothed with the robes of glory, as it is the endeavour, so the prayer of

