




Shewing,
THat whereas your Petitio∣ner Jones, and another were committed and kept prisoners in the Fleet by the Ba∣rons of the exchequer, for execu∣ting Commissions under the Seal of that Court, and Teste of the Lord Wild for the discovering of diverse lands in diverse Counties forefeited to the Common-wealth, and con∣cealed from them: Which your Pe∣titioners have sound out by the
Oaths of lawful men, and returned as they were commanded, some of them to the said Court upon the expirations of their Commissions. And have another unexpired with the Inquisitions thereupon made & found in their hands, which Com∣missions and Inquisitions that were filed, the said Barons having no∣tice by the Lawyers hired to at∣tend them by the Concealers of the said Lands, that the Petitioner Jones wrot the book called Judges judged out of their own mouthes, and other books which he dedica∣ted to your honour and your Army, against corrupt Lawyers and their unlawful practises, for their own unconscionable gaines and extor∣tions contrary to all Law, Justice and Equity, & in subversion thereof, In their malignity to Jones, looked upon their own Commissions as erroneous and unwarrantable by Law (though presidented by learned and Judi∣cious Lawyers in former ages) which presidents, the now Barons and Lawyers disregarding for the respect aforesaid, have ordered all the said Commissions to be suppressed and no more such to issue. And those
that were together with the said In∣quisitions thereupon to be vacated, to the dammage of the Common∣wealth found & to be fined 100000. The legallity of which proceed∣ings is a matter of great concern∣ment decidable by Law, wherein (if the Barons have erred in their Commissions, and Commands) The Commissioners that did but exe∣cute the same, ought not to be in∣prisoned and condemned by such Barons, nor the Common-Wealths Interest be determined or waved by them, without Consent of Par∣liament and decision of the law up∣on the matter at large, being too much mischief to be committed or suffered to be done to the Common∣wealth in the general, your Peti∣tioners in particular, and to the Law it self by such dunstable Barons, as dare assume the chair of Judicature, upon the strength of their late un∣reasonable Statute for their excuse by way of misprision. Which is as much to say they may do what they lift under the name of mistake. And so they may mistake not onely the Law of England, but also the Law of God in both Testaments. In
all which it is an Infallible Scrip∣ture, Ignorance is no Plea.
The premisses tenderly considered, may it please your honours to mediat to the house that the commitee for the Regulating of the Law be im∣powered to examine the Petitioner Jones and all his proceedings, and the legallity thereof, according to the ancient practise of the funda∣mental Law of England; and al∣so the illegallity and present pra∣ctise of the now Judges and Law∣yers, contrary to the former, and to certifie their opinions therein to the house for Reformation to be had as to Law shall appertain. And that none of the Judges or pro∣sessed Lawyers, who have declared themselves, your Petitioner. Jones his adversaries, be admitted to be his Judges, though members of the house, or of the Committee afore∣said. And that the Warden of the fleet be required to Inlarge your Petitioner Jones upon Reasonable bayle to attend the said Committee, and the house, until his cause be determined. And that the Barons be Commanded forthwith to restore the said Commissions and Inquisi∣tions
to the file, which they have or∣dered to be taken off. And to issue more such Commissions to any that shall require them in the behalf of the Common-Wealth. And that the Commission & inquisitions re∣maining in the Petitioners hands be returned to the said Committee to be determined accordingly.

