



IT's very well known, that though the stumbling-block which some have cast in the way of Gods people (occasioned through the falling away of some stars from the heaven, or fellowship of the Churches, is now so gloriously removed, that divers Saints are return'd to their first love; and those that like Caleb and Joshua (the faithful Churches, which ne∣ver backslided) have kept their garments of Gospel-profession adorned with such meekness, truth, and moderation; so that they cannot shut out Christ, as though no Prophet could come out of Nazareth. And now though they may look home, and see some of their own plants so baptized into one body, 1 Cor. 12.14. and kept in such union with Christ the Head, and his Body his Churches, as not to walk a step, without a step of their forerunner going before them, 1 Pet. 2.21. Heb. 9.20. And that their consequences also will not uphold Pedo-baptism, though they should be granted them; being like the Old Cove∣nant on which they are grounded, waxen old, as ready to va∣nish

away: Yet for all this, you know, that all (the Election of grace excepted) must needs veie the Proverb, Can the leo∣pard change his spots? Jer. 1.23. And therefore they are so blinde, and cannot see; deaf, and cannot hear; and are so set on the lees of obstinate Resolution, that they Hate to be Refor∣med, until their fleshly confidence which they had in the Ser∣vice-book (the Treasure of some mens knowledge, and to which they stick) be crucified with an Order to the contrary: There∣fore it is to no more purpose to speak to such, then to few a piece of New cloth upon an Old garment.
It's to you therefore, ye successors of the noble Bereans, that will search the Scriptures, and try the spirit whether it be of God or no, 1 Joh. 4▪ 1 ye that prefer Conscience before Cu∣stom, and preach unto the people, Come out of Babylon; it's you that God hath stirred me up to perswade; and Oh that you may be perswaded to lay to heart, and to consider, That in the business of Infant-sprinkling, you do not onely contradict your own pretended ight:Sprinkling is not Ba∣ptizing. for Sprinkling is not so much Ba∣ptism, as the Picture is the man it representeth, though we should pretend, as we have been taught, that the childe should by its G—fathers and G—mothers believe all the Articles of the Christian faith. But for you to sprinkle (as some of you pre∣tend) onely the children of believers, and yet to sprinkle the children of all your Parishioners, &c. doth declare, that you have not either preached the Gospel within your Parishes,Christ truly preached, makes Pa∣rishes to be divided. &c. or that it hath not been powerfully received; for the true prea∣ching of Christ will separate your people to be called out of the world, to be gathered into the fellowship of the Church of Christ. Therefore as there is any love to Christs name, let us not, I beseech you, withhold (though it were the tenure of all our estates) the truth in unrighteousness, Rom. 1.18. For tell me, I pray, ought we to walk by the Glo-worm-light of Conse∣quences, or sparkles of our own kindling? Isa 50 11 (though the world be confederate, and comply with you) to uphold that darkness, against the known light, or command and example of the Word of God to the contrary? Or shall we exclude Bishops Government, and Service-Book, and by consequences contend for Infant-Baptism, the greatest obstacle to the reforming, ga∣thering,

and planting of Churches within your Parishes,Churches to be gathered within Pa∣rishes. that can be? for if we would not content our seve rather with he fleece then the flok; if we wre acquainted with the mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven, we might clearly see, That as Bishops Government was useful, to hold on a light of Profession to such as were altogether in he darkness of Romish Babylon; and as the Presbterial Wa is useful to reform Episcopacie,Episcopacy, Presbytery, and Inde∣pendency, compared. in respect of Goernment, Traditions, and Ceremonies, as Independency reforms Presbytery in the point of gathering of Church-mem∣bers; and all of them (as David i for the Temple) make prepa∣rations for the most glorious Apostolical Government: so that out of all the materials of Truth therein discovered, he golden Candleick of Christian profession may be molde, to vanish out the smoke out of the Temple. Let us but then abolish Infant-Baptism out of the Church, and the work of Unity, Truth,The abo∣lishing of Infant-sprinkling, in the union of all Chur∣ches. and Peace, will be fully compleated. For let Presbyterians gather what they can, if they gather in Christs way, to make none of their Church but such as they baptize, upon the profession of faith, as believers: And if the Independents gather none into their Church, but such as believe, and are then baptized; then they shall all be united, and centred upon one & the same foun∣dation of Christianity, in their observation of the Gospel-Or∣dinance of Baptism, with baptized Churches (commonly, though unjustly) called Anabaptists: so that as Christ in his wisdom fore∣sees but one way, to baptize all nations; so this is the only way, to make all Churches out of all nations, to be one in the profes∣sion of faith and obedience. It's no marvel then, if Antichrist stand so violently for Pedo-baptism; for as all darkness came in with it, so all light shall shine, as this darkness shall vanish away, in the administration of baptiing and governing of the Church of believers. And therefore though when darkness began to ap∣pear after the times of the Apostles, the brass and copper of In∣fant-baptism being double gilt over with glistering pretences, passed, like Bishops government, and other traditions, for currant Coyn; yet this being the time when every plant which our hea∣venly Father hath not planted shall be rooted up, whereby the Saints may be restored to the primitive profession of the Chur∣ches in the time of the Apostles; Therefore the double-gilded consequences which are or shall be produced, to make an Infant

a baptized disciple, can expect no better entertainment then Toittis the gray fryer found in Scotland,Book of Martyrs, p. 1451. Hen. 8. who endeavoured by consequences to prove that the Pater-noster might be said to the Saints: which though he did gloss over, pretending, in that we called aged men father, and that the Saints are in heaven, that therefore we may say, Our Father which art in heaven: and be∣cause their names are holy, we might say, Hallowed be their names, &c. But for all his wit, the time of light being come, the Popish Church was upon this absolutely divided, and the Fryer was much derided for his pains. The Lord make us seers and followers of his Truth; which, as soon as the Lord was pleased fully to reveal unto me, I was constrained to bear witness of it, as I was formerly acted to bear witness to the Truth in the time of Innovations, when too many were serving at the Altar; by which said power, I was stirred up to declare at the first, I do not say, the first that declared, for Reformation: And now I am also constrained to use this plainness of speaking (think of me as you please) wherein I beseech you to consider,See a Book intituled, the church Register. that Mr. Spering and Mr. Barrow, &c. could not enjoy this liberty to gather Churches, as we may do. This is our day, shall we not see it? or shall we be dead-hearted, sullen, or not willing to go about our Fathers business, except we were countenanced or backed out with common approbation? by which we may be thought rather to be driven to our work, then to be that people that shall be wil∣ling, in the day of his power, to worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness,Seed of Martyrs. Psal. 110.4. Alas, consider, may not our hearts bleed to see, that that seed which our Martyrs did sow with their blood, which did but then peep out with the head, is now white already unto harvest, and much of it almost lost for gathering into Church-fellowship? We must not now think to feed all the flock with the pap-milk of ordinary principles; nor will Tradi∣tions or Consequences, which shall contradict the command and example of Christ and his Apostles, as a strange voice, be possibly heard any longer. As we are therefore heirs apparent to all the light which hath shined, and have been spectators in the time of judgement, of the Lords overturning both of Church and State, because his fore-prophesied time is now fulfilled,New hea∣ven, New Earth. to have a New heaven, or a reformed Church, according to the very example of Christ and his Apostles; and a New Earth, or a people, through

opposing the old earth, or world, are reformed from Popery,See Mr. Brightm. Exposit. on 21 chap. of Revel. in part disco∣vering it. and af∣fecting civil righteousness; which I am able (though I have not here time) to make fully appear, without Allegorizing of the Scripture. Let then all that are Saints, in that the Lord is risen start fair, and see who can first run to the Sepulchre; let us see who will approve them∣selvesAurum igne proba∣lum, is est, cujus fides, rebus ad∣versis splendet. , tryed gold in the fire, that patronize not a partial, but a perfected inward and outward Reformation; that as wax and seal, so our faith & obedience may be found indeed agre∣able to the doctrine and example of Christ and his Apostles. The Lord ravish your hearts with the love of this Truth, and remove all preju∣dice, until you have read, and so may judge, whether I have fully and truely, as far as I have undertaken, answered these two men of parts, whose faces I never saw, and against whom (I bless God) I have not the least prejudice or acrimony nor do desire to put their light under a bushel, as far as it appeareth to be light unto me: but onely, as I have been much provoked, desired, and partly chalenged, I have used that liberty which Mr. S. hath done with Mr. T. &c. And therefore I desire you my dear friends, to commune with your own hearts, and see, upon examination on both sides, what ground you have for In∣fant-baptism: And, until the Lord in mercy open your eyes, despise not the counsel of Doctor Gamaliel, to let this alone: for if this be of God. But I have my check; for there is not an If in this business, Christ-like to go about our Fathers business,No diffe∣rence with the Chur∣ches of Saints, but in Infant-sprinkling. in submitting to the Go∣spel-Ordinance of Baptism: for, I hope, as soon as Truth shall be heard to speak, prejudice being removed, and the moderation of ga∣thered Churches, and their full compliance with all the Saints, except in the unwarranted tradition of sprinkling, being made to appear, the Election of grace (and further we cannot expect) will receive satisfa∣ction, to submit to this so much despised Ordinance of the Lord Jesus.
To conclude therefore,Jesus Christ could not in wisdome have exclu∣ded chil∣dren by name, more then in com∣manding to baptize be∣lievers onely. concerning this great matter in controver∣sie, which fills the ears of the whole Country with the report, and is so much scandalized, belyed, and opposed, by the profane and igno∣rant, this I have to hint unto you, That if Jesus Christ himself should come again, and were to reveal himself concerning the baptizing of believers onely, he could not in wisdom exclude children by nome, they being already excluded by Christ, in commanding to baptize a taught disciple: for without mentioning of the female, in comman∣ding the male to be circumcised, the female was expresly prohibited. For it is, I say, against the wisdom of Christ, to command to baptize

those that are caught, and thereby are discipled, and then to say. But baptize not an Infant; seeing in wisdom all men know, that a childe cannot be taught or profess the faith of the Gospel. And besides, God hath made man judge of Baptism, not to proceed as he pleaseth, but according to the express Rule and Commission which God hath ap∣pointed him. And therefore it is not in man, in favour to the world, and in opposition to the Saints of the most High, to raise Consequen∣ces, Allegations, and Reasonings, to interpret and wrest the express commission and command of Christ to the contrary: but Man if he will be faithful to his Commission, without gainsaying, he must ba∣ptize none but those that are taught. And therefore it being found, that a childe cannot be taught unless man will presumptuously (after due information) break the commandment, he cannot meddle with children, until they be called to the profession of the faith of the Go∣spel. And yet though the sun of Truth shine never so clearly, though there be no Truth more fully discovered, by express command, and many thousand examples of baptized disciples;None but a Saint will receive any truth, but as it is com∣manded by man, or re∣ceived by custom. yet in regard none but the election of Grace can faithfully receive any Truth, but as it is commanded by Authority, or received by Custom or common Ap∣probation, in regard the Election of Grace themselves are like a seeing man in a dark dungeon which cannot see, till the light of seeing be revealed unto them, in taking off their objection or scruples to the contrary; I humbly therefore refer you to the ensuing Treatise, to judge as the Lord shall teach you. And as for the Shining Stars, men of parts &c. that shall abet against the light of Christ, to up∣hold the tradition of Antichrist the Tayl of the Beast (which they will not have discovered) shall draw them,The tayl of the beast strikes down the stars. and cast them to the earth: for the seventh Vial being in part poured out Rev. 17.1. the smoak must vanish out of the Temple, Rev. 15. ult. Kick not then against this prick lest ye fight against God in his discoveries; but let us contend for the faith, and submit to the Old truth this step of Christ and Christian profession, that it may not seem strange in our days, which Christ in imitation of himself hath said to all succeeding ages,Matth. 3. expounded, with appli∣cation to all Christians. Thus that is, according to the example that I your Lord and Master was baptized; it becometh us; that is, as it was mine, so it is all Christians duty to be baptized to fulfil all righteousness. That grace therefore, that calleth out of Babylon, that takes away the envy of Judah and Jerusalem by which the Saints are baptized into one spi∣rit, be with your spirits now and evermore. Amen. Amen.

