


In the Name of God, Amen.
MY little Children, of whom I travel in birth, untill Christ be formed in you: It hath plea∣sed God, that the great Contro∣versie begun at your births, hath so long continued, that some of you might almost judge in the matter. However you know you stand unbaptized, and that it is your duty to pass the Ordinance of Baptisme: And now least in you the undenyable subjects there∣of, in whom the foundation is most clear: as in the days of the Apostles) any miscarriage, might by any means be occasioned.
I do therefore present unto you the unveyling of the 12 Articles of our Christian faith,
H. Nichol. Divin and Philos. dis∣sected. called the Apostles Creed: in allegorizingly contra∣dicting thetruths chereof. All these woful Errors, Heresies, and Schismes which you have, or may too soon see, have had their rise and conti∣nuance amongst us.
Which evils with the Divel and all other of his works, though you must Renounce in Bap∣tisme.

 Yet though I dare not prescribe with that ho∣ly Bishop and Father of the Church,
Gregor. Nazian∣zene. the thir∣tieth year for Baptisme; Or precipitate you as Turks do their children, to profess as soon as they can say, I believe in God, and Mahomet his prophet, at the time of their Circumcision: that though I do not also press the conformity to that Ceremony, which is used by some in standing up at the Apostles Creed: at which time they draw their swords, in token that they are resolved with swords to defend it.
Yet my prayer to God for you is that you may in God's Name be Baptized in the acknow∣ledgment of this Faith as soon as may be. And that if any of you shall be called to be the Lamb∣souldiers, that you would either defend the Word, out of which this Faith is collected, or suffer the sword to cut and mangle you all to pieces.
And yet is not enough that this be onely done, but you must be so deliberate, faithfull, hum∣ble and charitable, in this your undertaking, that you ought to judg it better not to know bap∣tisme, then that any pretended Church, or an Angel or Archangel from heaven should Bap∣tize you in the way of Separation, from the Communiou of any Saint in the whole world, that believs these XII Articles of faith, as they are explained by the All-Christian Protestants.

 For it is no light matter to be Schismatical; in that thereby spirituall murther against the body of Christ (through pride and uncharita∣blenesse) is too apparantly occasioned, where∣by the mouth of the wicked is justly opened to blaspheme God; as they see that saints that call God Father, shall not communicate toge∣ther and walk as Brethren, but rather as ene∣mies one towards another.
Of which sower grapes (though some of your Fathers have eaten;) you must not taste; which if God give you grace to refuse, all men will cal you Reformed Protestants; whereby the true Church is distinguished from Papists, and Schis∣maticks; And thereby you shall stand in the gap, and shall be called the Repairers of the Breaches; your baptisme shall be your Frontlet, yee shall keep the fire on the Altar, to be as ho∣nest as you are zealous. Yee shall shine indeed, and shall be called the Blessed Generation.
Remember, you are forewarued: This is the stretching of Gods Arm, to lead you in the way of salvation.
Grace be with you all, Amen.
Written by William Kaye, your fath-er like affectionate friend, in the Apostolical faith of the Gospel.
