


Dearly beloved Brethen.
YOu are the hidden ones, the low valleyes which in these halting-like days of Elias,
Esay 65.5. are over-clouded by such as say, Stand off, I am more holier then you are.
And you of the Election, which are
not yet called (as I have formerly seen in the late Innovations in which I was persecuted) as then; some of you are now renting the Church apieces through schisms, and eclipsing the light thereof by Errors and Heresies, yet no sooner shall the day of Gods power more clearly shine in mercy up∣on you in the establishing the Church-Government under the over-sight of the supreme Magistrate; but you shall be Hosea 2.14 allured to Esa. 49.23 lick the dust of the Church feet; yea, you shall be Ezek. 43.10.11. asha∣med, and Ezek. 6.9. loath your selves, to be any more acted with a private spirit of se∣paration, or to content your selves to live out of Church Order, by which God is most truly obeyed and glori∣fied in the union of his people; for if twelve Legions of Angels should de∣fire to have your private communion, thereby to make you schismaticall, or separate you from communion with the Catholick Church: It is your duty in zeal to Gods cause upon that account, to bid them be accursed:
for indeed, causlesse separation is the cursed Tree (as I know too much by experience) having never found any fruit thereof, but pride, disorder,
Schism is an evill al∣together to be avoided. un∣charitablenesse, &c. for which cause the Lord is so much displeased there∣at, that it hath provoked him to wrath, whereby he hath plucked up the hedge of his Vineyard, finding his sweet Grapes to become sower or de∣generated, which makes his soul ab∣horre them; He being the God of love, in which he is so much delight∣ed, or that he sets a mark or character upon his servants, or Disciples, that they may be known by the love that they bear one to another; for where there is no foundation for the Article of faith, I believe the Holy Catholick Church, the Communion of Saints, there is no pillar and ground of truth, in which we must be ingrafted through Christ the Head of all his Members;
1 Tim. 3.15 nor can they judge themselves, or so judge any others, if they do separate
from any Saints at the Lords Table,
We must communi∣cate with every Saint that will separate from no Saints, ow∣ning the 12 Articles of faith and Ordinances as they have at∣tained. or refuse to communicate with Saints at preaching and praying, &c. or obsti∣nately deny to administer unto them in all their necessities, and to bear with their infirmities; for how shall we love God whom we have not seen, if we love not our brethren (the image of God) whom we have seen: It may also shame us to pretend thereunto to love as brethren, and yet notwith∣standing to separate from them, by which our deceitfull heart doth either delude us, or, speak what we please, we run into an absolute contradiction, in that we set at naught our Brethren, whom God requires us to keepin com∣munion, the visible sign, and seal of Brother-hood,
Reasons why God e∣stablished the Go∣vernment of the Church in the Magi∣strates o∣versight. for the prevention of schisme: And as the Lord in his wisdome, well knowing how hard a matter it is, that an equality should be held up without faction; and that all rule without confusion and usurpati∣on, should be held in the Government,
either of the Pope, People, or Pastors, hath therefore established the Magi∣strate, to have the supream over-sight in Church Government, in which all other forms, as they have any thing of God in them, are owned.
And indeed, if our sins have not provoked God to deprive us of this mercy, this healing leaf of this Nation, &c. shall by the blessing of God more and more recover our right unto the title of Reformed Protestant Catho∣lick, which was expresly professed in the dayes of Perkins which sounds forth more of faith, Nashaniel-like honesty, and charity, then can be found amongst the Familists, Brow∣nists, Quakers, For-sakers, &c. shat deny Prayer, Sabbath, and all Ordi∣nances. And now least we should be but onely owned to discover this truth, as Moses had liberty to view the promised Land from a high Moun∣tain, or least we should be cast down as dispairing in our selves to see this ef∣fected,
let us fear nothing, onely let us do as Q. E. and Luther did in such times of straight, pray frequently and constantly; yea, devote, or set apart some hours for prayers every day for that service, and the Lord shall bring it to pass: Reformation is that which the Lord will have established amongst ns. He will not suffer us to go back in∣to Aegypt, though we have as it were cut our selves apieces with Schisms, and intangled and tore ourselves as in the wildernesse of thorny perverse disputations, in which way, or rather wandring out of the way,
Turk plagues Christians for their schism. the ancient Christians did not long continue; but God was provoked to raise the great Turk to dispossess the people of the Land of promise, where for the most part they were totally destroyed; and therefore I shall onely add the saying of the wise Heathen, which I pray God may be sanctified to all his Ele∣ction,
Li. —urgentibus Rempublicam fa∣tis, dei & hominum salutares admoni∣tiones
spernuntur. When for the sins of the Country, God is offended with a people, the wholsome admoniti∣ons both of God and men, are con∣temptuously dispised.
The Lord be with your spirit, Amen.
