



My dear Friend,
THE late sad dispensation of Pro∣vidence wherewith the Lord was pleased to exercise you, in snatching out of your bosom, the sweetest flower of your Earthly Comforts, put me upon preaching that to your Ear which is now presented to your Eye: The Lord print it upon your heart! I confess I should much more gladly have ser∣ved you in any other Office of love and la∣bout, had it seemed good in the eyes of the infinitely wise and all-disposing providence of God to have spared me this pains: which yet I very willingly undertook in complyance with your requests, though with a very sad and sorrowful heart.

I did not then more willingly preach it, then I do now unwillingly publish it, could I have resisted your incessant importunity; both because I have ever desired to shun that Trajan like vanity (as I may call it) of affecting to be a paper flower,
Constantinus Magnus Tra∣janum Impera∣torem ob asper∣sos passim titu∣los in aedificiis herbam paricta riam vocabat. Cluverius. Historiar. Epi∣tome. and especially also consi∣dering how much of the waters of the Sanctu∣ary run waste, even out of the Press as well as the Pulpit: Pasquils, Libels, and Ballads being more in use and esteem in this generati∣on then Sermons: God grant that this pre∣sent glut and surfeit be not a fore-runner of future famine and scarcity.
For my delay in detaining it thus long from your view, partly my absence from home, partly my employments at home, and especi∣ally my irresolution, till of late, to send it, may be I hope a sufficient Apology.
And now it is come, it has no other message to deliver save only to stir up your pure mind by way of remembrance,
2 Pet. 3.1. That you may be mindful your own Mortality, and that you your self are under this irrevocable Decree and indis∣pensible Law that is now executed upon your dear deceased Husband.
I know you are enough sensible that he is
gone; oh but remember that you must fol∣low! and be confident of this, that the joy of your meeting will abundantly out-balance the grief of your parting.
2 Cor. 4.17. These light afflicti∣ons, says the Apostle, which are but for a moment, work for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. And in the mean-time, two things considered might methinks abundantly support you under this trial. 1.
1 Cor. 10.13. That no afflicti∣on hath hapned unto you but that which is com∣mon unto men; and 2. That this affliction hath hapned unto you in no other manner; but that which is peculiar to children; for discipline, not for destruction; to chastise you,
Heb. 12.7. not to cast you off. The God of Heaven make up this loss to you and yours, in the more plenti∣ful communications of spiritual blessings, both graces and comforts; which is the prayer of

Abchurch. July 30. 1660.
