



In the Name of God, Amen.
My much beloved, and honored Brethren!
IN that the Lord hath now in his own good time and special mercy, in some good measure accomplish∣ed that Reformation which hee calls from heaven,
The second general vi∣sitation of God in his Church in this Centua∣ry. to be professed and established in this his second general Visi∣tation of his Church in this Centuarie. And seeing you are the chosen Ministers unto whom the over-sight of the flock is committed, with which we must walk in the Church as Aeneas out of Troy, when fired with the enemy, with zeal, and yet so compassionated,
We must not out-ace, or reject the weakest of the Church in publick profession. as not to out∣pace his little son Ascanius. Let it not then seem strange that I do present unto you, unto whom it most appertains to know the myste∣ries of the Kingdom. Some smal taste of the strong meat that our fore-fathers store-house affords us, which they gathered out of the Lords Vineyard, in conjunction with the milk which is provided for some Lambs of Christs fold in this Catechistical instruction.
But this is not all in which by some I may
be judged to be presumptuous, it being my peace and faithfulnesse to unburthen my spirit, In the name of God to beseech you to lay it to heart.
1. It ought to be laid to beart, that any that pretend to know God, should not worship God, or sub∣mit to God's order. That some of our flocks, like those in the Prophet Malachy, should through pride be stout-hearted to speak against the Lord, in contem∣ning the Order and Ordinances, and to have a design to famish their Pastors.
2. That though the Apostles Creed be the Symbol and garment of the Christians profes∣sion, or Catholick Church. Upon the profes∣sion of the Articles thereof Christ built his Church, which in the profession and defence thereof, is as the pillar and ground of the Truth, in which all particular Churches,
The Apostles Creed to be confessed in the congre∣gation, and professed at Baptisme. members of the Catholick, are harmoniously united, and as by a hedge protected and separated from all schisms and heresies; yet neverthelesse we are so negligent or supine to our former practice, that there are too few of us that are now found conformable to our standard-bearing brethren, that are comant in standing up at the confes∣sion of the Faith of the Apostles Creed in the publick Congregation, and in admitting of the profession of the same at Baptism.
Christ our sacrifice should bee held forth at the Lords Supper, rō which no Believer should be with-hol∣den.
3. That we may more and more be spiritu∣alized to day, as the Saints were yesterday, in evidently holding forth Christ crucified, as the onely once offered propitiatory sacrifice of our Redemption, which the primitive Churches did every Lords-day at least (as is within pro∣ved) commemorate: And yet that none might be suffered to receive, that refuse to communi∣cate
with other Saints, that believe the 12 Ar∣ticles of our Apostles Creed faithfully examined.
4. Presbyteri∣al Govern∣ment, or that Church govern∣ment in which Pastors Pre sbyters, and Bishops, are depen∣dently sub∣ordinated under the supreme Magistrate is Jure Di∣vino. That the Saints that professe the same Faith and Ordinances as they have attained, may strive to be unitedly presbyteriated, and submit to Scripture-bishops as members there∣of, being subordinated under the supreme Ma∣gistrate; that in the three-sold order, Pastor, Presbyterie, and supreme Magistrate the Church may be governed Jure Divino, as from the beginning.
5 That the good that did accrew unto the Church in the subscriptions Anno 1562, 1571, and in the 13 Q. Eliz. being prudentially con∣sidered, we might petition, that such a Presby∣terie that Paul joined with in the Ordaining of Timothie might be established; that none might in futurum be suffered to preach, but such are Ordained; in regard that presumptuous prea∣ching like Sauls presumptuous sacrificing,
None to be suffered to preach, not ordained. hath ever Corah like occasioned either the destructi¦on of themselvs, or of the Church and Nation where they have been tolerated, the high con∣tempt to Christs Commandment, and Holy order.
6. That we may zealously desire,
National Fast-days to obtain Gods mer∣cy, and di∣vet Gods judgment, may be use sully esta∣blished. and ac∣cordingly to the utmost of our power set down some daies apart every year for publick Fasting, to find out and bewail the sins, that may occa∣sion the with drawing of Gods merciful pre∣sence, or cause a National judgment.
7. That we may in like manner petition, that some may be qualified inevery parish, to be authorized where there is no Justices of the
Peace,
It were a mercy that some were qualified in every parish to see the sabbath day duly sancti∣fied. to sit every week upon the trial and punishment of Sabbath prophanation by all sorts of people.
That in these things which I have here mo∣ved, to put your pure minds by way of remem∣brance, you know better then my self, it is but to blow upon the live coals that ae taken from the Altar, by which means the truly zealous shall shine more clearly, that are best able to hear Christ speak in his members, and look up unto God to answer his mind, in his long for∣bearance and waiting for a thorow-out Refor∣mation, in which all the Saints may be united and gathered; which to see effected, how may we be incouraged with old Father Latimer, to devote some time of every day for to pray for the propagation of the Gospel; and that God would blesse the exalted power to be herein in∣strumental, that the threatned judgments of God may be diverted from this secure Nation.
The Lord rebuke Satan, remove prejudice, Prelat cal pride, Schisme, or Church-faction, with worldly compliance, and Serpentine wisdome, &c. The Lord visit us in mercy in this midnight time of darknesse, securitie, and causlesse separation, that we may be awake∣ned with oyl in our Lamps, to work in God's Vineyard.
Oh pray, that God would make his Saints one in these subordinate Nations; that Schism may be as much disowned in the Church, as Rebellion in the State: since the one may be
the destruction of the other. The Lord increase our Faith. The Lord make the Magistrate ac∣acknowledged by all Saints, &c.  Moses in the Church, and the people to be the Seal of the Mi∣nistry: The Lord be with your spirits, Amen.
Written by William Kaye, your brother in the Faith of the Gospel.
