



Madam,
I Have entituled this Treatise,
An Answer to the Marques of
Worcester. If it really
proves so, I shall be most glad;
for then, I know it will prove
an Answer to you, I mean to
your Desires, & those Desires I should extreme∣ly
rejoyce to answer, in this, or any other kinde
whatsoever. But prove that as it may, this is
my comfort, that it will be in some sort an An∣swer
to God for the time it stood me in, which
might have been worse imploy'd. It humbly re∣sorts
in this Dedication, Lady, to you, why
should it not? It is the Revenue the product of
your commands. To those commands next
God, I totally resign the glory may result from
the little I have done well, the many Imper∣fections
I shall file upon mine own account;
And as I have ever found in myself a Disabi∣lity

to resist your commands, so your com∣mands
never found my will in readier mode
and posture of compliance than in this Subject;
for had not they prest me into this service of
Truth, and this Church, my peculiar inclina∣tion
had listed me a Voluntier. For no little
impatience hath possest me, to hear Error so long
and so uncontroul'd, crow and triumph over
Truth in that his Lordships Paper, the great
pretenders to the Protestant belief (to their
shame be it spoken) or not willing, or not able,
or not daring to oppose her. Those whom it
more concern'd making thus default of their
devoir, resolved I was (though the weakest of
many hundreds) of this Churches Votary, to
become her Champion, and put my self into
the Forlorn; being most assured I should
thereby not onely in some measure, pay a tri∣butary
Vote to the Cause of God, but also in part
vindicate the Reputation of that side to which
I so constantly adhered, and to demonstrate
to the face of calumny, that amongst those so
decry'd and reproached as popishly affected,
some there are of that animosity and courage,
who dare tell Rome to her teeth, that that
thing which she calls her Religion is but meer
Policy, not founded upon Christ or his Apo∣stles,
but new modell'd in most, and those the
weightiest Points, within these last five hun∣dred
years. How my atchivement and perfor∣mance

hath answered my daring, it becomes
not me to judge. Suppose the worst, and that I
have made too publique my many failings, yet
have I not failed to publish a zeal firm and
cordial to the Protestant Profession. And that
zeal will, I trust, bid these unworthy Labours,
in some degree, welcome to God and his Church.
It is one and the same spirit, to defend the
Masters Interest, which animateth the smal∣lest
lap-dog, and which rouseth the stoutest
Mastiff. I have in this Work done what I
could, had it also been what I would, then
should this Tract, without the auxiliary al∣lowance
of favour and indulgence, have coun∣terpoised
the merit of this great Cause, and va∣lue
of your commands. As it is, it must beseech
your acceptance, as one Act of grace super∣added
to those millions of Obligations, which
consign me
Madam,

Ringsted,
June 1. 1650.
