



Right Honorable,
I Have not presumed to prefix your Name, with respect to any worth in this Work performed on my part, only I am desirous to express my singular Gratitude and Ob∣servance to your Lordship, and to your most Noble Family. My poor labours in expoun∣ding this and other Chapters of this Book (as I fulfilled the daily course of my Mini∣stery in your Lordships House) were not without good success, through the blessing of God; wch hath encouraged me, not only to offer the Exposition therof to your more deliberate and serious consideration, by the
 Reading of it, but also to publish it under your Lordships Patronage, for the benefit of others. In this mysterious Marriage-Song there be divers Persons bearing their parts: As first, the spiritual Husband, called the Chur∣ches Beloved. Secondly, a gracious Wife, called the Spouse of Christ. And thirdly, holy Children, called the Daughters of Zion. Will it please your Honors to assimilize this Houshold of God, by bearing your parts in this Spiritual Song? Then I do humbly beseech you, My most Noble Lord, let it be your part to con∣sider,Isa. 35.8, 9, 10. Revel. 14.1, 2, 3, 4. That as there is a Way (a new and li∣ving way) wherein none but the Redeemed shal walk, so there is a Song (a new and Spi∣ritual Song) which none but the Redeemed can learn. That new and living Way (My Lord) is Christ in the New Covenant, who is the onely way to the Father,Joh. 14.6. neither is there Salvation in any other.Act. 4.12. To beleeve in Christ,Prov. 14.12. & 16.25. and to live godly in Christ is the onely way to Heaven: There are other ways that seem right to Men, but the end of those ways are Death. And that New and Spiritual Song (My Lord) is the Song of the Lamb, which the Bride the Lambs Wife and Spouse of Christ doth sing,Cant. 6.3. saying, I am
 my Beloveds, and my Beloved is mine, &c. which may well be called, The Song of Songs;Eph. 5.19. For this Song sung in the Spirit by Faith, with Grace in the heart,Col. 3.16. maketh melody to the Lord; but all other Songs will end in sorrows,Lam. 5.15, 16. and all carnal rejoycing will at the last be turned into mourning,Isa. 65.14. when the Ransomed of the Lord shal return and come to Zion with Songs and everlasting joy up∣on their heads.
Madam, I well know that your Honor will most gladly bear a part also in this Mar∣riage-Song,Pro. 2.3, 4, 5. which you may doe with much spiritual delight, and no less profit to your precious Soul,Luk. 8.10. by searching into the pro∣found Mysteries thereof, which are veiled under various Metaphors,Ps. 25.14. and hid up in con∣tinued Allegories,Eph. 3.8. Col. 1.9-14. as being the most choyce Secrets, and chiefest Treasures of the un∣searchable riches of the Love and Grace of Christ.
Elect Ladies, You are also much concern'd to bear a part in this Spiritual Song;2 Cor. 11.2. for you are, first, Espoused Virgins to Jesus Christ: Secondly,Cant. 3.11. Revel. 14.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. you are Virgin-Daughters of Zion, to whom Christ hath given the gar∣ments of praise for the spirit of heaviness: And
 thirdly, You are of the Number of the hun∣dred and forty and four thousand Redeemed Virgins,Rev. 7.3, 4, 9, 10. who shall stand with the Lamb upon Mount Zion, having the Seal of the Spirit of God in your hearts,& 15.2, 3, 4. & 5.8, 9, 10. the Name of the Father written in your foreheads, and the Harps of God and golden Vials full of sweet Odours in your hands,& 19.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. prepared to sing, Alleluia, Salvation, and glory, and honour, and power unto the Lord our God, Alleluia, Amen, Alleluia: Praise our God all ye his Servants, Alleluia; For the Lord God omnipotent reigneth.
And now Right Honorable, if my small and weak endevours to unveil the Mysteries, to open the Metaphors; and to explain the Allegories of this Song, in Expounding and Interpreting the Historical, Prophetical and Spiritual Sense thereof; may but afford your Honors, and any other precious Souls, the least measure of light and understanding therein, I shall rejoyce in the Lord, and de∣sire God may have all the glory, whom I serve with my spirit in the Gospel of his Son; for whose sake I am

