



IT is well knowne to your Honours, that I endured a long and tedious bondage at Newarke, together with my godly Con∣captive and fellow labourer in the work of the Ministry, M. William Hewit, for the space of almost thirty weekes; and how God wrought our enlargement, by the worthy instrument of his glory, Captaine John Needham Governour of Killingworth Castle in Warwickshire. But at my returne to Nottingham from New∣arke, I found this Garrison much distracted by some Separatists in it, who desert our publike Assemblies and the Divine Ordinances, and have seduced too many to their way; In my conference with them, I found their Tenets unchristian, and themselves pertinacious in them; Their tenets were these, 1. The Church of England is no true Church of Christ. 2. The Ministers of this Church are not true Ministers, not called of God. 3. Baptisme of Infants is no true Baptisme, therefore not lawfull. 4. It is not lawfull to heare us Ministers Preach, least they should by their presence approve of our Popish calling by the Bishops, and because we preach in popish steeple∣houses, also because wee were Baptized in our Infancy, but if wee will re∣nounce our calling by the Bishops; Preach at the Market-crosse, not in the Steeplehouse; and be rebaptized, they well heare us, otherwise not. 5. Our steeplehouses ought to be demolished, neither is it lawfull to worship God in them. These their opinions too many in this Garison approve of, and follow, therefore I have breifely answered their arguments and published them▪ that I might hereby excite others more able then my selfe, to handle these points of

controversie more fully; and in the meane time I beseech your Honours to suppresse these errours offencive both to God and the godly, least these Schis∣mes turne to heresies, endeavour to extirpate all Popery, Scisme, and Pro∣phainnesse, as the Covenant enjoynes you; which you heard worthily expli∣cated and urged home to your consciences in St. Maries Church on Thurs∣day August 8▪ by that faithfull Minister of Christ M. Richard Whit-Church in his Lecture Sermon upon that Text, Jer. 50.5. Almighty God establish you in his truth, direct you ever by his spirit, secure you and this Garrison by his presence, or owne your designes with comfortable successe, to the glory of his name, and to the perpetuall happinesse of this Nation, Amen.

From my Study at Beeston,
August 16. 1644.
