



HOnourable Sir, should I be silent of the causes moving the publication of these less then weekly meditations, saving to your self, and some few, I should be rendred indiscreet, if not presumptuous, and more. I shall there∣fore hint the motives, (which duly considered) to a little charity, will justifie the action. I have in this Treatise couched together the ground, yea and the most of my positi∣ons, desired by many to be publique, which have drawn much ill Will, and dissatisfaction towards me; and made me condemned, not onely in private, but in publique also, as the most erroneous and destructive to truth, that speaks. O my God for give them, for I hope they know not what they say. Sir, tis well known to you, that I having delivered most of this Treatise in the Pulpit, the Minister desired the Congregation to stay; upon which request they did, and he had Christian-like attention from all: He endeavoured to pos∣sess the people that there was error in my Sermons; but be∣fore the picture, or sign of his confutation (I can call it no more) he granted the whole, and more then I fully affirmed; for Sir, you may remember, that at his beginning, he said I
had given the just and true sense of what was then my text, in my Exposition of it, which I said I had done, in the opinion of some few and late Divines; but not of the Iesu∣ites, and some others. After this, he said my doctrine ga∣thered thence, was sound and good Divinity; after all, he denyed faith to have any instrumental efficiency, as to our Justification in the sight of God; this being done, and a quarter of an hours discourse: he moved for a reply. The sum of what I returned to him, was a commendation of his zeal, and care to keep his people from error; promising him a Copy of my Sermons, that he might be better able with the assistance of his side, and the advantage of time, to confute me, if feasable. Now then Sir, is it not time to publish? should I not, how should my publick scandal be removed? my friends satisfied? or my promise to the Minister with con∣venience made good? Such is my confidence of the truth of my Positions, that should these Sermons come to a spiritu∣alized soul privately, they would bemone me (laden with such reproaches, as they have heard me) as David did Abners death by Ioab; dyed Abner as a fool dyeth? for as David said of him, I may say of my self; my hands were not as yet bound, nor my feet put into fetters: I remember not as yet my self ever shackled, either privately, or publickly, about these things, save with reproachful terms, which God hath ever made fall from me, like the chains of Peter. Tis not unknown to your self and many more, how vehemently and generally I have been opposed in these, and such like Positi∣ons, by inferiour Judgements; and they being silenced upon their attempts, though not converted, I have desired I might argue them, for their better satisfaction, or my own convi∣ction, with men of war from their youth, with the most emi∣nent men, both for learning and piety. There have been re∣turned
to this my request, that the times are not safe for opposition of them. I have minded them that brought the answer with the security of Mr. Iohn Goodwin, publick∣ly opposing this way of salvation; I have also assured them, that I would not in the least divulge what they should deli∣ver, as to this purpose, or questions under debate. All this, and much more, have gained nothing of discourse from them, but by a proxie, by Mr. Platers appello Evan∣gelium: which was commended to me by some, to set me right in my judgement; which book indeed hath wrought nothing upon me to that intent: it being a groundless condemnation of the opinions about pre∣destination, of Mr. Perkings, Whitakers, Beza, Piscator, the Synod at Dort, and many more: and a closing with Arminius, and others of that strain, as being in the way of truth.See page the 60. Of his appello E∣vangelium. The distinction of the knowledge of God, dividing it into the knowledge of pure understanding, and the knowledge of vision; being as himself confesseth, the ground and basis of his judgement; which if duly consi∣dered, is like many more of the School distinctions, (even more nice then wise.) Nay it hath rather been a means to confirm me in my former Positions; because that in Doctor Potters letter to Mr. V bound up with Mr. Plater;See Dr. Pot∣ters questions, in that letters in page of the book, 425. he hath in his questions there mentioned, asserted Positions, which can beget no less in my judgement, then all, or my present positions at least are.
I confess that sometimes there are strivings in my heart betwixt these and the opposite opinions: sometimes when I consider the multitude of men that way, the eminency of the persons in respect to learnings natural abilities, strictness of life, advancement to dignities in late past years, and other becoming conditions: as also having my thoughts some∣times,
taken wholly up about some places of Scripture setting forth God, providing future glory upon even terms of obedience here, not at that time minding the Free grace of God in Christ, nor heeding the power, dominion, and soveraignty that God in equity hath over his creatures, which speaks him right, just, and holy in all his wayes; nei∣ther blameable by, nor accountable to any, however he shall please to deal with his creatures, raised by him, of nothing, to what they are, or at his pleasure shall be: why, I confess I say, that whilest it hath been thus with me, I have almost said as they. Now to end Sir, and Christian Readers ha∣ving knowledge of my condemnation for these Positions; and finding none of those Judges so just, as to hear me plead for my self before my sentence: nor finding any so religious as to pitty me, or do good to themselves, so far as to endea∣vour my conversion, from those opinions, by them called damnable and devillish: I am I confess the more willing to expose my Judgement (in these plain Sermons) to publique view: to this end, that if my principles be truth, and the way to truth, there might more be brought in to my judgement: as also, that if they be erroneous, I might be dealt with for conversion, by them that are spiritual. If I can be annoin∣ted with their eye-salve, so as to be cured of this men think blindness, I mean by conviction; (I speak as in the presence of God) I will be as ready to desist, as Paul was from perse∣cuting Christ, at the heavenly vision. I will as publiquely, zealously, and frequently retract and recant what I have published, and preached: neither shall I miss (I hope) Pauls blessing, even the obtaining mercy; for as he said, I shall then say truly, namely, I did it ignorantly, being carried amain down with the unresistable stream of the principles inserted in the following discourse; but Sir, till then I desire
you to be as you are, and to defend truth, and me both, is being the end of this Dedication, as (I thank you) you have ve∣ry strongly done, I shall no sooner discover my self to be in error, but I shall break off from it, with abundance of tears, both of sorrow and joy, and shall speed to you, with my refor∣mation. Sir, I have no more at present, but to crave your pardon of my boldness, and to let you know that I shall never cease to Petition the great God, for the both spiritual and temporal welfare of your self, your sweet and vertuous daughter Mrs. Hanna, and the rest of your hopeful branches, till I shall be

