



SIR,
IN the publication of these papers, I could not but conceive you had some interest, as a friend to the cause and person most medled within them; nor to him onely, but to all theDr. Briaes. Dr. Grow. Mr. Basnet. three religious and learned Ministers of your City, wherein (methinks) you much resemble Geneva for number and quality, when it enjoyed an holy Triumvirat of Farellus, Viret, & Calvin, in that order Beza nameth them in the life of Calvin, and giveth them their several characters, so as of all three to make up oneSaepe mihi in mentm veni prfectum quo∣dammedo vide∣ri posse pasto∣rem qui ex tri∣busillis esset conflatus. Beza in vitam Cal∣vin. p. 8. perfect Pastor. I shall doe those renowned reformers no wrong, if I say of your Preachers, that each of them is complete in himselfe without his partners: Such hath been the proficience of the Pulpit (both by preaching and praying) since their times, and more in England then elsewhere; as divers Travellers (who have had opportunity to know, and ability to judge; and many forraign Divines, who understanding our language, have read our printed Ser∣mons, and compared them together with those of o∣ther Nations) have censured. I testifie this truth the rather, because, though there be some difference in judgement, (blessed be God it is not great) yet there is no dissenting in affection among them. Religious du∣ties are unanimously performed: Christian society and
Ministerial brotherhood sweetly maintained, and all offices suitable to such relations, mutually and affectio∣nately exchanged: to whose concord and communion, I shall make bold to apply His Highness Eulogium of the Army in his Narrative from Bristol, Sept. 14. 1645. inEngl. Reco∣very. part. 2. p. 118. these words; Presbyterians, Independents, all have here the same Spirit of Faith and Prayer, the same presence and answer, they agree here, and have no names of difference: Pity it is it should be otherwise any where.
Now as I have matched your City with Geneva for your Ministers, so I wish your City-Magistrates may match theirs in vigilancy, vigour, and good effects of Government, who (as Bodin, a famous French Papist, maketh the report of them)Ridiculum est ad legem esse bonos; allam censuram quâ nil magis ac di∣vinius cogitari potuit ad coer∣cendas hominū cupiditates la∣tenter primùm, & amicè, quam sequitur animadversio magistratuum. Jo. Bod. Method. Hist. c. 6. p. 245. Ita fit ut quae legibus nusquam, &c. igitur nullae meretrices, nullae ebrietates, nullae saltationes, nulli menaici, null otiosi in ea civitate reperiuntur. Ibid. holding it a ridiculous thing, to be good onely by good Lawes, follow Con∣sistorian Censures against the Contumacious, with ci∣vil Animadversion of the Magistrates. Hence it com∣meth to pass that those vices which no where else, are there restrained, so that there is no whoredom, no drunken∣ness, no dancing, no beggars, no idle persons to be found in that City.
My hopes come up the higher toward my wishes hereof, because you do not onely encourage your able, watchful, and painful Pastors many wayes especially, as the Apostle admonisheth, Heb. 13.17. by your Chri∣stian compliance with their holy Ministeries, (seconded by their exemplary practice) but you do the like to your learned, pious, and industrious Schoolmaster,Mr. Samu∣el Frankland. al∣so with the ingenuous and hopeful youths under his institution. This you manifested in a very eminent manner, when the last year Mr. Major, with your selfe,
the Aldermen, and many other subordinate Citizens, came in a venerable equipage to the Free-School, to grace their exercises with your presence and audience: & though I cannot say with intelligence, of all or most, because a good part of it was Greek, (a strange Tongue even to the Roman Priests, and that byGraecum est non potest legi. (Proverb) yet some did understand it; more the Latine: and the plea∣santnesse of their voices, the gracefulnesse of their elo∣cution and action, the fidelity of their memories, pre∣sented a gratefull experiment to such as were skilled in neither of them, and exercised no faculty superiour to sence and fancy.It is under consultation I heare hereaf∣ter to give some respe∣ctive enter∣tainment to such in their Native Lan∣guage. But that which the wiser sort of Spectators and Auditors of all ranks (I conceive) chiefly intended, was, to professe themselves opponents to the late illiterate Sects, who cry down Schools and Universities, and would have our Ministers no more learned then the Italian Friers of the order of S. Ig∣norance, who (as Luther writeth of them) were forced to solemn oathes that they would neither know, learn, or un∣derstand any thing at all, but should answer all questions with nescio Now if you had confined your beneficence to the Ministers and other professors of learning within your own City-walls; I should have held my self the lesse obliged to this publick acknowledgement: but, Sir,Luther, Collo∣quia mensalia, or Divine discourse at his Table. c. 40. p. 415. it is too extensive in this kind to be either personally or locally limited. So that if the Arminians had not rendred the expression suspected of heresie, I would call it Universall Grace, or Catholick charity. (to our whole reformed Tribe, and to all ingenuous Students their allies) if the Papists had not soiled that word with a savour of their Ubiquitary errour. I have this confidence by intelligence from such as (upon ex∣perience) own you as a Patron of their just causes,
in taking timely cognizance of them, and giving your efficacious countenance unto them: and to my self, you have been pleased, (though yet I have had none opportunity to be any way serviceable to you) to an∣ticipate my desires, in the offer of your favour. For all which (in my brethrens name, and mine own) I professe my self,
Sir,

