


IF ever Sermon met with disadvantages whereby it might be made unacceptable to an Auditory, this was it. For besides mine uttter disabilities to prepare any thing fit for so learned and dis∣cerning eares and Judgements; the two things that might spoile delivery when the child, such as it was, was come to the birth, were come upon mee, and those were strait∣nesse of time, and perplexity of spirit; for the sear of stopping your other occasions did so still lie before me, and the feare of mine owne poore Family in the inundation of the Enemy in the Association at that very instant, did so follow me, that in this strait between these two, I stood your Orator at that time.
Yet I see it is not in vaine, but a comfort and happinesse to labour to serve and obey you, seeing your acceptance che∣risheth and encourageth such poore endeavours.
The subject I fixed upon, I purposely chose, that the Mille∣nary

Opinion, which I cannot but judge erroneous, might not goe on altogether uncontrolled, and one man take it at ano∣ther for a truth without gainsaying; but that it might re∣ceive some check by the way, and it might bee shewed, that Posse vinci Hannibalem, that there is a faire possibility that that Opinion is but a falshood. Errors sometimes, and uncertainties often, doe get the repute of undoubted truths by going too long uncontradicted. As I cannot but challenge that opinion which is so current and common, and hath so long run from hand to hand for an unquestioned certainty, that now it is become unquestionable, and that is, that the supper mentioned in the 13 of Johns Gospel was the Passe∣over supper, and that Judas his going out after the sop, was his departure away before the Sacrament: wher as if it be not certaine, which to me it is, and I conceive may bee very well proved to others, that that supper was not the Passeover, but a common supper; and that it was not at Jerusalem, but at Bethany fifteen furlongs off, and that it was not on the Passeover night, but two nights before: If this I say, be not absolutely certaine at the first sight, as to convince of its certainty, yet is it very well worth the weighing, and the contrary opinion not to bee suffered to goe unexamined, whch among the most men it doth.
Your Honourable House weighteth all things, the Lord hold out and reveale his will to you more and more, and crown all your Vndertakings and Consultations with all prosperity and successe.
Septemb. 12. 1645.

