



Sir,
YOu were an hearer (as I have heard) of the Disputation at Killingworth betwixt Dr. John Brian, and John Onely, but (as he hath set it forth in print) it would be more suitable to say Dr. John Onely, and John Brian; so far hath the arrogancy of the man magnified himself, without due respect to the modesty of a Christian, the ingenuity of a Scholar, and the discretion of an ordinary rationall man; and so much hath he vilified the Doctor (in another book published by him since) whom all men (who know him, and are of any note for Learning and Religion,) highly honour for a very eminent degree of them both: and for his excellent faculty, and indefatigable diligence in Preaching and Catechising, there be very few who are com∣parable to him Nor do I know Mr. Onely his match among the Antipaedobaptists, (as he calleth his Assistants at the dis∣putation at Kill.) for insolence of Spirit, supercilious con∣tempt of such as are not taken with his Tenets. Some I am sure there are who though they have too much affinity with some of his fancies and opinions, shew much mansuetude and civility to those that steer their Ministeriall and Chri∣stian course by other principles; yea and they hold religious communion with them in publick ordinances not distinctive. But Mr. Onely, as he hath a name of singularity, so he is the fitter to be the ringleader of some notorious Schisme; like Primianus a Donatist in the Collation at Carthage, to
whom, if a denomination had been given him (out of a time of faction) according to his learning and manners, it must have been, not Primianus, but Ultimianus. This with my discourse of Disputations in matter of Religion, mine ani∣madversions on the printed Disputation hold at Kill. and on Mr. D. his second book, and my desired advice to Dr. Brian, (concerning it) whether to answer him or no; I have presented to publick view, with a particular addresse unto your self; that of a true and intelligent witnesse, you may become an equall and competent judge of the difference betwixt the Dr. and Mr. O. super tota materia as now it is drawn out in his second book: and I was glad of this oc∣casion to testifie how much contentment I take in the situa∣tion of my Residence, as in vicinity to yours, whereby I have the opportunity of enjoying your good neighbourhood, your friendly visits, and many other affectionate offices; whereto there shall be no want of any answerable returnes which come within the capacity of the hearty prayers, and best observance of

