



Right Honourable,
THe concurrent desires of people of all sorts, (ex∣cept of such as raise their owne particular in∣terests out of the common ruines) for recovery of our peace, and the pantings of many lying under the power of the oppressour for delive∣rance from warre, have of late by the good hand of God upon our publique counsels and forces, thriven up to hopes, and those hopes to presages, that it will be an Honourable note upon your Name in time to come, to have had the good hap within your view (before you give up to another the Ensignes of your Honour) which is the generall vote of all the true hearted Patriots of three Kingdomes, that is a well com∣pounded, and compacted happinesse, made up of three of the most de∣sirable blessings of humane society, which are consistent with the con∣dition of mortalitie; and they are these,
1. A sincere and through reformation of Religion, in Doctrine and worship of God.
2. A Discipline and Government established according to
Gods word, and the example of the best reformed Churches: whereby, with the assistance of Divine grace, we may be better (then heretofore) secured from relapses into irreligion, heresie, schisme, and profanenesse, which have beene the great crimes and curses of the last precedent, and present times, though (through the cunning workings of Satan) the evils now in course (with some degrees of improve∣ment from bad to worse) are taken by some to be the remedies against foregoing corruptions.
3. A third thing (which in order of dignitie is the last, though in most mens affections it be the first) is, that according to the prescript prayer of the Apostle, we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, 1 Tim. .1. he addeth in all godlinesse and honestie; but both these have beene virtually premised in the two precedent particulars. This will be of so much the sweeter tast to all, as either by actuall suffering, or by affectionate sympathy they have taken the deeper draught of the bitter cup of furious hostility.
That none of this hopefull expectation may faile of effect, it will be requisite that every one (for his part and to his power) endeavour to make it good by all the good meanes, and helps, which conduce to the comfort and safetie not of a few, but of the whole Common weale, in each of the Nations now so much shaken, and in danger also to be bro∣ken in pieces.
1. By making an holy Covenant with God, and by being stedfast in the Covenant when we have made it; so we may engage his fa∣vour, and power to our partie, to be not onely a friend, and Patron to us, but an enemie to our enemies, and an adversarie to our ad∣versaries, Exod. 23.22.
2. By being at union among our selves, and studying as much to uphold it, as the seditious Shebaes on the other side plot the setting of discord betwixt the dearest brethren; and if it be not to be looked for, that all, who are equally concerned in the same Cause, should unani∣mously consent in that course which may carry it on to desired successe; yet there may be a fivefold union among us, which may give strength unto, and maintaine the reputation of the great Designe it hand, viz. a through reformation both in Church and State.
The first union is of the two Sister Nations, according to our so∣lemne League and Covenant, which must be preferred before all either factions, or questuos interests of any particular party whatsoever.
For as no two Nations under heaven have more and stronger bonds of union, then we of England, and our Brethren of Scotland, being bounded, and surrounded by the Sea, as one entire Iland, united under one King, under one Title in the Kings Royall style [the King of Great BRITAINE] united yet more in Language, and Reli∣gion and most of all in our late Covenant for a generall Reformation of Church and State, and mutuall association and assistance against all malignant combinations; So nothing is more enviously observed by our common enemies then these many obligations of union betwixt us, nothing more cunningly contrived, or more seriously pursued by them, (and I wish some among our selves had neither hearts, nor heads, nor hands in the plot) then to dis-joyne us, and to make us, not onely perfidiously to fall off from performance of our common Covenant, but with the same hands which we have lifted up to the most High God, to fall one upon another, as the confounded and accursed Midianites, Iudg. 7.2. and when by such wickednesse we are brought to a weak∣nesse, which may be easily subdued (but God forbid, we should be both so bad, and mad as to act a Tragedie upon our selves, to set forth a Comedie for such malicious spectators, as would make their great∣est mirth of our most grievous misery) we must expect the execution of the bloody and destructive designe, resolved on in Ireland: which a knowing Intelligencer hath reported of the rebels there in these words:
The Irish Remonstrance. p. 31. This Kingdome, viz. Ireland, settled and peopled onely with sound Catholicks, thirty thousand men must be sent into England to joyne with thrench and Spanish forces; and the service in England perfor, then they will joyntly fall upon Scotland for the reducing of that Kingdome to the obedience of the Pope, which being finished they have engaged themselves for the King of Spaine, for assisting him against the Hollanders. Wherein, though they reckon without the Lord of Hosts, who onely commands both Peace and Warre at his pleasure, and swayeth the successe to which side he will, yet this discovers their designe of unpartiall perdition of the Protestant partie; and the discovery thereof should be a motive of more confirmed union among our selves.
The second Ʋnion is that of the Parliament and Citie; whereof we have had such happy experience, ever since the unhappy hostility betwixt the flatterers of the King, and friends of the Kingdome, that
we are bound to blesse God for it, and to pray for the continuance of it, both for our owne time, and for the ages to come.
The third is the Ʋnion of the Parliament and Assembly of Di∣vines; whose reciprcall, and proportionable respects, (which I mean not in an Arithmeticall, but in a Geometricall Proportion) give much countenance and authoritie to what is propounded to the people in their names; for so the command of the one will be more awfull, the advice, direction, and resolution of the other more usefull, throughout the whole Kingdome.
A fourth Ʋnion is betwixt the Assembly of Divines and the City Ministers; who may the more easily accord and agree together, be∣cause many of them be but the same men under severall relations; and most of them are swaid by the same principles of truth and pietie, and involved in a society and participation of the same duties, hopes, and hazards.
The fifth Ʋnion is betwixt the City Magistracie and the Citie Ministery, to which both ingenuous, and religious correspondence doth dispose them; for no where in the Protestant Churches (so farre as I have read or received by report) are good Ministers better ac∣cepted of, or more respectively used, then in this City, nor by any Citizens more then by those who are most worthy of honour; and is cannot but be the desire, as well as the duty, of godly Ministers, to ad∣vance them as much as may be in the estimation of the people; and to presse upon them obedience according to their duty, and dependence, for conscience sake.
And though it be obvious to common observation, how much the Magistrates favour maketh for the Ministers honour, and succour, it is not unknowne, nor unobserved by the wise, that the Ministers have been very serviceable to the Civill State, and to the Military too, not onely by their supplications to God, for good successe to all their publique undertakings, and their happy proceedings in all their warlike marches, and motions, as at the removall of the Arke. Numb. 10.35. Rise up Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered, let them that hate thee flee before thee; but by their informations, and so∣liitations of the people, to engage both their estates, and persons, in the Cause of God, and their Countrey: and I could name such at have b looked on by the blood shtten yes of professed enemies, and
fained by them (by way of most hatefull reprach) at the Authours of the Rebellion of whole Counties, that is, (in the true sense of their charge) the perswaders of them, not to betake themselves to a divided party, but to unite in the union of the King and Par∣liament.
And I am sure that some of them who have been envied, and revi∣led in Print (by libellous Schismaticks) as growing rich upon the re∣venues of fat sequestrations, (when by a just accompt they have come short of a competent subsistence) have been offered both riches and ho∣nour in the Kings name, by persons of eminent degree, to imploy their parts in his Majesties service (the termes were no worse, the inten∣tion likely not so good) and have modestly, and yet resolutely refused them, then when it seemed both most profitable, and honourable to a∣cept them, and not a little dangerous to withstand rewards, when there was power to call for observance by minatory commands.
And it was then an advantage visible enough, which the King had above the Parliament (as the Pope hath above a Councell) that the dispoall of Church dignities was held in right, and exercised in fact, as a branch of the Royall Prerogative; whence arose the Proverbe which made so many Ecclesiasticall Courtiers, No fishing to the Sea, No service to the King; and by the power and Court Countenance that such had over the inferior Ministers, both they by the Prelaticall Clergie, and the people by them were made more obsequious and ser∣viceable to whatsoever constitutions, and impositions, which came upon them, whether from the Civill or Ecclesiasticall Authority. And though wee have cause to multiply our benedictions, as David did, 1 Sam. 25.2, 33. Blessed be God, and blessed be the Parliament, and blessed be their advice, not only to themselves, but to all the Kingdom, that the heavie yoke of the domineering Hirarchy is taken off our neckes, yet betwixt the Magistrates and the people, the godly Mi∣nisters of the Kingdome (and ordinarily the Ministers of this Citie especially (for the Synod of Divines is an extraordinary Assembly) will be alwayes as least instrumentally profitable for the promoting, and upholding of a conformity and commodious correspondence on both sides, according to the Relations, wherein for the glory of God, and the publique welfare they are mutually obliged to each other.
In prposall of these particulars to your Lordship, I shall not be thought to present you with an impertinent discourse, by any thus will
consider bow much the union of three Kingdoms depends upon the uni∣on of this Metropolis, or mother Citie with the Parliament above it, the Ministry within it, and all the sister Cities, and daughter Townes and Villages round about it; and how much the union of this City now depends upon your Honour, and I doubt not but that by Gods speciall providence your Honour was reserved for such a time as this, when by a prudent, and zealous, and authoritative endevour for the cure of the manifold distractions among us, you may be a blessed meanes to keepe off the destruction from us, which is threatned by our Saviour to a Kingdome, (and there is the like danger to any either City or family) given over to division, Matth. 12.25. wherein your Lordship and your Venerable Colleagues may have the deepest share in suffering, accord∣ing to the measure of your eminent prelations in honour, and estate, above ordinary Citizens, if (which God forbid) violent and unruly spirits should not be circumscribed with the virge of your awfull au∣thoritie.
To this end though the Presbyterian Government may be very subservient, and the Ministers of the City will be alwaies ready, (as their faculties furnish them with abilitie, and their duties oblige them with diligence) to serve your Honour, yet since that is set up but in part, and for a good part subiect to dispute, (as your power is not, for it is wholly compleat, and no way questionable) the through refor∣mation of this spatious and populous Citie, next under God, and the Parliament, will more depend upon your head for counsell, your heart for affection, and your hand for execution, then on any humane helpe or meanes, whatsoever it be.
And if in regard of newly emergent mischiefs, (for Satan infu∣sth into his Agents new fancies, and devices, and stirreth them up to dangerous Innovations every day) you find not ready remedies for all present, or imminent evils, within the bounds of your municipall Charters, you are so neere the well-head, and spring of Civill Go∣vernment (the Legislative Senate at Westminster) that you may easily, and speedily procure a supplement of power, for any service that may conduce to the safety of the Parliament, and Citie, and (with both) by consequentiall operation, and virtuall influence, of many millions of subiects within the three Kingdomes, united in the most Sacred bond of our solemne Covenant; which may with more ige∣nuiti be desired, and with more facility be obtained, because thereby
the Parliament it selfe may be the better secured, both from contemp, and tumult, which may justly be feared from such an insolent, and violent generation of fanaticke, and some franticke Enthusiasts, and other fiery spirited Separatists, who account it the height of their E∣vangelicall zeale, to bring downe the highest and most eminent Wor∣thies of the State for true piety, prudence, dignitie, and power, under the feet of confused Anarchy, and popularity.
Wherein that they meane to make no reserves of reverence for the supreme Senate of the Kingdome, nor to allow any protection by pri∣viledges of Parliament, is clearly discovered in that most seditious Pamphlet (besides many others) called Englands Birthright. For notwithstanding the present, pressing, and imperious necessities of the Commonweale, requiring the raising of supplies in extraordinarie wayes for its owne support, and preservation from perpetuall ruine, and notwithstanding the exemplarie justice of the Parliament, upon their owne members of both Houses, (to which may be added to their glory, and the Kingdomes comfort, their most just and impartiall provision against oppression of the people, either by themselves, or their substituted Committees) the Libellous (and in respect of some passages of his Booke, I may say blasphemous) Authour, taking no notice of any thing that may be justly pleaded for the proceedings of Parliament, labours to represent them to the people as a combination of most grievous, and ngratefull oppressours.
I will set downe his owne words, but so as the Scripture doth the blasphemies of Satan, or Rabshakeh, and other such like
The word cometh of Sa∣raph, which sig∣nifieth to burne, and of that is derived the noune Saraph, (with the one∣ly difference of a long vowell for a short) which is used for a fiery ser∣pent, Isa. 14.29. Sraphicall slanderers, that they may be as odious, as their disposition is dangerous to all good men, if they had as much power in their hands, as there is gall in their hearts, their tongues, and pens; the Title of this out-lash∣ing Libell is set downe in these words.
For an Anti∣dote against such calumnies see M. Prinnes Booke entitled The Lyar con∣founded. Englands birthright justified against all arbitrary usurpation, whether Regall or Parliamentary, or under what vizor so ever. With divers Queries, Observances, and Grievances of the people, declaring this Parliaments proceedings to be directly contrary to those fundamentall Principles, whereby their Actions at fast were justifiable against the King, in their present Illegall dealings with those that have beene their best Friends, Advancers, and Preser∣vers:
And in other things of high concernment, to the Freedome of all the Free-borne people of England.
What ever the man is, the Bke is no hypocrite, for it i ths within, which it seemeth without. For page the 33. he putteth this Qure (and his Queres are implicit resolutions on the wrong side.) Whether is it not agreeable to law, justice, equitie, and conscience, that there should be a Parliament once every yeare, and more of∣ten if need require? whereby he meaneth that this Parliament hath sate too long already, for a little after he chargeth them, that many of the Members have betrayed their trust, and those that remaine ingrosse Law-making, and also Law-executing into their owne hands, contrary both to reason and to the true intent and meaning of the Law; and within a few lines, he goeth on thus: By which manifest abusing, negligent, and not true using the Lawes, oppres∣sions, mischiefe, and grievances are no lesse (if not farre more) increased then they were before the Parliament began; and many times by the powerfull Interest of a faction in the Parliament, to save some one, two, or three of their Members undeserving cre∣dits, they so violate the knowne, unrepealed, and declared Law of the Land, yea and their owne Votes, Ordinances, Declarations, and Protestations, as if they had never made them; I say all these things considered, ought not the Freemen of England, who have laboured in these destroying times, both to preserve the Parlia∣ment, and their owne Native freedomes, and birth-rights, not one∣ly to choose new Members, where they are wanting, once every yeare, but also to renue and enquire once a yeare, after the beha∣viour, and carriage of those they have chosen.
And having page 44. aggraed the condition of the times by taxes and impositions, instancing in the Trade of Hamakers, he con∣cludes with this enclamation (which may serve for an incentive to seditions tumult) O ruell, pitifull, and intolerable bondage, no longer to be endured, suffered, or undergone, the burden being heavier then the poore labourers can beare!
And that we may know of how lawlesse a Sect himself in, and those whom e plead for, he prfesseth himselfe a litter enemy to Lawyers, first  the writer of a loose sheete of paper, under the Title
of Advertisements for the new election of Burgesses for the House of Commons (by the name of a worthy Authour) as a Caveat against filling up elections with such kind of men, making the knowledge of the Law of nouse for making of a Statesman, since it is, saith he, a confined and Topicall kind of learning, calculated onely for the Meridian of Westminster Hall, and reaching no fur∣then then to Dover; for transplant a common Lawyer to Calice, and his head is no more usefull there, then a Sunne-Diall in a grave. Whereas it is notorious to the world that sundry
As the L. Ver. M. I. Seld. Will. Pr. (and some others) whose excellently learned labo praise them i the gates. professed Legists have been qualified with other learning, and that both with great va∣riety, and in an eminent degree, above other men.
Having impeached their heads, he cometh downe to their hearts, and hands, and taxeth these for ill conscience, as the other for igno∣rance. Lawyers (saith he) being a bold, and talkative kind of men, will intrude themselves into the Chaires of all Committees, where (being accustomed to take fees) they will underhand pro∣tect Delinquents, and their concealed estates with tricks and de∣vises. He knoweth sure very little of the manner of Committees; for no man can thrust himselfe into such an employment, but is thrust into it by the major part of the Committee; but there needs none A∣pologie, where the Antilogie is none other then a most rash and un∣reasonable calumny; and my present purpose is but to note how head∣strong and unruly, how refractory to Government, and Law, the Sectaries are already; to what an height of insolence would they grow, if (which they presse for) they should be permitted a toleration by publique Authoritie? It may be some among them in time would take upon them as the proud and rude Rebell Wat Tyler, in Richard the Seconds time, who presumed, among other most lewd and impudent demand, to
S. Daniel continuation of the History ad Rich.K 2. p. 5. propound this for one, That all Law might be abo∣lished, affirming with an execrable oath, before Night all the Law of England should passe through this strait, (clapping his hand upon his mouth.)
But I must take my hand from this Table, lest I trespasse against the publique Interest, in detaining your Honour too long in beholding this Sciographie or shadow-draught of pernicious Sectaries, sixce it is a time rather of action, then of speculation; and yet if your Honour have any spare houres for further information in the various, and dangerous turnings, and windings of the spirits of Errour, (whom
Satan in these last and worst times hath sent out, not by couples, as our Saviour sent out his Disciples, Mar. 6.7. but almost by Legions, to seduce simple soules, to trouble our publique peace, and to reproach and retard the reformation desired) I should make bold to offer to your view an
M. Robert Baylie his Dis∣swasive from the errours of the time; wherein the Tenets of the principall Sect of the Inde∣pend: are drawne toge∣ther in one Mappe: Printed for Sam. Gelli∣brand at the Brasen Serpent in Pauls Church-yard. exact delineation, or description of the whole body of Schismaticall, and Hereticall noveltie, drawne by a very skilfull and faithfull hand, and newly published to undeceive the English, espe∣cially the people of the City, of whom many are miserably misled, and more will be, if both Magistrates and Ministers doe not watch∣fully overlooke them, and seriously sot themselves to prevent their in∣crease: Wherein your Lordships prudence, and power, (beginning betime, and continuing your care in a proportionable tenour, untill your Office expire, (which is the expectation of all that know the soli∣ditie of your judgement, and stability of your spirit) may prevaile very much, though it be but for an yeare; for how great matters in how short a time have beene attempted and accomplished by that wor∣thy Generall Sr. Thomas Fairfax, undertaking, and prosecuting the warre (with a couragious and constant resolution) not as a Trade to enrich himselfe, but as a Remedy to deliver his Countrey, from partly present, and partly imminent miseries?
And for that purpose your Lordships Sword in the City may be of very great use, as his in the field; and that with both the Sword of the Lord may be associated, as with the Sword of Gideon, Iudg. 7.18. and his power may still support your state, protect your person, and promote your proceedings to most happy successe, is the hearty de∣sire, and shall be the daily prayer of

