



DEare Brethren, the Scripture giveth you the title of Watchmen, and o∣verseers, Ezek. 3.17. Act. 20.28. and these Titles admonish you of your office, which is to Watch and Oversee yourselves and others, Act. 20.28. Heb. 13.17. Open your eyes I pray you, and look first with∣in you, and then about you, and a∣bove you, that you may discover (if it may be) why God raiseth such swarmes of Adversaries, (so many thousand Petitioners) to storme you, and to starve you, why so many call you Priests in spight and scorne, who would be your Priests to sacrifice you, if that Gods providence by the civill & military sword, did not pro∣tect you, & Black coates who would (were it in their power make you like the Priests of Ceres, by aTunicam quam initiati∣onis die indu∣erant, novam nunquam erue∣bant, quoad tandem lacera gestari, ampli∣us nequiret. Lud. de Vi∣ves in Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 7. c. 20. ragged, or like to Bedlams, by a naked beggary brought upon you) while you have leave to wear them (though many weary of the contempt of them, and some fearing perill by them, have put themselves into other colours) let them mind you as (mourning habits) of your sad condition, first and most by sinne, and then of the bitter fruits, which God many
times serveth up, as a second course to those, who use to glut themselves with sweet meats.
Give me leave I beseech you (not as a Diocesan, or provinciall Inquisitor, to put upon you any Visitation Articles: or as a Cano∣nicall Informer, to present you for any crime or excesse which I knew by any one of you, I would rather cover it in charity, then discover it with Scandall, but to be your remembrancer, admoni∣tor, or (if that be too much) Petitioner, praying you to examine, and consider with your selves, whether you have not been too much addicted to ease and delicacy of life, whether you have so ordered your own, and your Wives and Childrens, and servants conversation (so farre as in you lay) as by them to set an imita∣ble example of sobriety, piety, modesty, and gravity before their eyes, whose eares you fill with instructions and directions in all morall duties, whether you have not been more remisse and indif∣ferent in publique and common concernements of Religion, then in your own particular interests, whether you have accounted your Parochiall Incumbencies as burthens, & Pastorall charges to bestow your vigilance and diligence upon the soules of your Peo∣ple, or as Benefices whereto you intentively apply your selves, for your Benefit and advantage in this World, taking the oversight of the flock, rather for filthy Lucre, then of a ready mind 1 Pet. 5.2.
Whether you have made your selves known to be the Disciples of our Saviour, by that Christian character of his Iohn 13.35. Of mutuall love one to another, and have not rather uncharitably censured and estranged your selves from your Brethren, for very small, and meere problematicall dissentings in opinion, whether with David Psal. 119.136. you have bewailed the wickednesse of o∣thers, especially theirs, whose duties and sinnes are of neerest affi∣nity and offence to your own, It may seem very strange, that an hea∣then Pharaoh, should be so favourable to his Priests, that in a time of extraordinary dearth, he would not suffer their lands to be sold, as the lands of his other Subjects. Gen, 47.26. That Jesabell should be so free and bountifull, as to feed 400 false Prophets at her ta∣ble 1 Kings 18.19.In his Apo∣logy for D. Featly called Sacra Nemesis Sect. 10. p. 163. That the Jewish Priests and Levites, (of whom many were more lewd, then I hope are most of you) enjoyed Tithes, and many other emoluments, amounting to a farre grea∣ter valew, then all the revenue remaining to the Ministers of Eng∣land, and were never deprived of them from Moses to Malachy (for the space of 1038 yeares) That in the time of the Bishops in every
Parliament since the Reformation (as a late Writer observeth) there hath been a Bill put in against double Beneficed Ministers, pursued with all vehe∣mence and eagernesse but ever stopt with a crosse Bill against Impropriations, that then the great scandall and aggrievance was Plurality, and Non-residence, and the great businesse of Religious Christians, to buy Impropriations, for incouragement and support of Incumbent Pastors, That now on the contrary, in this age (pretending an higher degree of reformation, and a greater zeale of propagation of the Gospell) the cry should be up so loud, to put downe all set and certain maintenance of all Ministers, even of those who out of conscience, have refused Pluralities, (when by the favour of Pa∣trons they were pressed to accept them) and by the Law of the Land were allowed to enjoy them, and who are most constant, and conscionable in discharge of their duty of Preaching twice a day to their single charges: and lastly, That Godly persons (such as many would seeme to be, and that may be divers are, though in this poynt exceedingly misled) should joyne with the prophane and covetous whom God abhorreth Ps 10.3. To make their portions fat with the spoyles of the Ministry, and that this should be so impe∣tuously pursued, by way of petition to the Parliament, as if it were the first and principall worke they had to doe. This is it, which may make us first admire, and then with Rebecca to inquire of the Lord why is it thus Gen. 25.22. May it not be, because the Lord lookes for, (but findes not) more proficiency towards perfection of us of this generation (according to our greater meanes, and clearer light) then he did of those who served at the Jewish or Po∣pish Altar, or of such Protestant Clergy men, who have alterd the office of an Evangelicall Minister, from fishing for men, Mat. 4.19. to fi∣shing for preferrement, and his conversation, from the simplicity and Godly sincerity of the Apostle 2 Cor. 1.12. to a subtle and ungodly plausibility, to humor and please men more then God, what ever that is (for which God hath raised this storme against us) let us beseech him to shew us the meanes whereby it may be calmed, and to help us effectually to apply them, that his displeasure may be appeased towards us, and that our waies may so please him, that our ene∣mies may be at peace with us. Prov. 14.7.
There be some of our Tribe who take it not for a Tempest but for such a favourable Gale of wind as may blow them some good, or at least not blast them or doe them any hurt: and of these I find three sorts. 1. Some have their portion of Tithes in such small
and Scattered parcells that they hope for more, but feare not lesse, by taking away of Tithes. 2. Some have the lesse need to be ga∣therers of Tithes, because having gathered Churches in Cityes or great Townes where many of their Church members are Rich and bountyfull to them, I have heard it from a very honest Citizen who (though none of the Richest) gave (for his part) 101 a yeare, and so many more joyned with him in such contribution to their Minister, as made up no lesse then 3001 a yeare, which was paid him with love and chearfullnesse, and this he had without any great expence either ordinary, or extrordinary, wherwith country Benefi∣ces (consisting most of Tithes) are heavily burthened. 3. Some who having an elder Brothers blessing in their portion of such re∣venues, are willing to give up Tithes upon fair hopes given them that a more quiet, & comfortable provision will be made for them for by some they be excepted against as causes of much contention betwixt a Minister and his People, to whom I shall say something which doth joyntly and somthing that doth severally concerne them. 1. That which is of common concernement is, that none should regard his owne particular interest, so as to preferr it before the common good of able and Godly Ministers in Generall and it for the common good both of the Generation present, and of posterity, that Tithes be continued (as is sufficiently prooved in the Resolution of a doubt concerning the Alienation of Tithes from Ministers added to Sr Henry Spelmans larger Treatise of that Subject, Printed by Philemon Stephens An. 1653.) 2. And severally I say 1. To the Minister who is tuck up to so short an allowance in Tithes, that by Tithes (more proportionably distributed) he may be like to have a more competent allowance allotted unto him, then any way els. 2. For those who are better maintained with∣out Tithes it must be consideed that the number of such is but small, and few places there are in these times (wherein many mens estates are so decayed and their opinions so diversifyed) which have a competent number of men, who for their Wealth are able and with good will would be ready to support a learned, and Orthodox Minister, with any congruity to his condition, in regard either of his worth or of his charge, & in some places they are gene∣either so poore, so prophane or so like these plundering Petitio∣ners, that a good Minister may be more like to be starved thē main∣tained among them, Yea there are some of those, who have refu∣sed Tithes, and cast themselves upon the Benevolence of their Peo∣ple
upon fair offers from them who have been put to com∣plaine not only of the cooling of their affections, but of their breach of promises made unto them for their covenanted pen∣tions.
Whereupon they have concluded that Ministers must have their maintenance by a legall right or else (for the most part) it is like to come short of the Levites allowance. Judge. 17.10. Thirdly to such as have sufficient subsistence by Tithes, which the Lawes allow and maintaine as their Right; I say they should not be willing to change it if they might have as much, or more, with more ease, and quietnes in another way; Naboth would not part with the Vineyard which was the Inheritance of his Fathers, though Ahab offered him a beter for it. 1 Kings. 21.2. For it is better to enjoy a revenue of an ancient and well grounded Title, then to take a new one of another kind, though of greater valew. It hath been a project of some men (where in some Ministers have acted their part)M. H. P. to re∣duce all Tithes to a cōmon stock, or bank, to be dispenced by Com∣missioners, and Committees, or some other publique Officers, from whose hands Ministers should receive yearely stipends in a propor∣tion, which they call a competency of which an eminent Preacher saith thus.
A Competency, what is that and who shall judge of it? now the good Lord keep his Clergy from the vulgar competency, I speake what I knowe, and I speake it with a wet face, and a bleeding heart. I know Preachers of excellent parts that spend their strength in the Pulpit, who cannot lay out 50s in 5 years upon Bookes, but they must fetch it off the Backs, or out of the Bellyes of their poore Children, call you this a Competency, well, if we deserve no kindnesse, yet do us justice, let us have what your fathers gave us.Mr Rob. Har∣ris now Dr Harris Presid. of Trin. Coll. in his Sermon on Isaiah. 38. called Hezck. Recovery.
Thus he Preached above twenty years agoe, when neither thou∣sands nor hundreds appeared in a Petitionary way to or for the taking away of Tithes.
And if then it were thus, how much worse would it be with the most of the Ministers of this Nation, if their own Right taken from them, they were to be stinted by some State officer, what they should have, and at what rate they should live.
In short, the inconveniences, and evill consequences of this change, from an Ecclesiasticall to a Politicall Title, are neither few nor small. For
1. It cannot be good for the Minister, to change either his pay∣master, or his payment, and it is sittest, that he whose worke he
doth, and whose servant he is, should pay him his wages, God is his Master, and the wages he assignes for his worke is Tithes, which he hath not only ordained, but every yeare by his blessing on the creatures provideth for him.
2ly Since Tithes are by the production of the Divine benedicti∣on, they make both a more Honourable, and more comfortable al∣lowance, then a money pension arising from trade and commerce can be, wherein there passeth much sinne betwixt the buyer and the seller Prov. 20.14. In this respect, the Country Minister hath somewhat to cheare him up against the disparities, betwixt his condition, and theirs who officiate in the Citty, which I have expe∣rimentally observed, having exercised my Ministry, both in Lon∣don and elswhere, in London I had much and comfortable commu∣nion with many worthy and well minded Citizens, many friendly and free invitations and entertainements, freedome from pub∣lique Taxes, the Parishioners of their owne accord paying my part as well as their owne; In the Country, I have found it quite con∣trary, yet there also I confesse is much difference; for in some places I have met with Godly & ingenious people, who have used me as well and respected mee as much as I could wish, in some others I have felt the worst of that wicked proverbe Pinch on the Parsons side in unjust and unproportionable assessements & other such injurious usages, as a Samaritan would scarce put upon a Jew, or a Jew upon a Samaritan.
3. The Ministers maintenance by Tithes being according to the Measure of Gods blessing upon the whole, is most equall in res∣pect of them that pay, and him that receiveth Tithe, whether the increase be great or small, they proportionably share in gaine or losse, and when there is a plentifull crop, as the quantity is advantagious to both, so when it is scant and short the valew of it by a dearer rate of the measure maketh some amends to both, and so it may best serve for all times (whether they abound or abate) which is not to be expected from a stinted Pention for
4. This Pention of the Minister must either be changed many times as Laban changed the wages of Jacob, changed not by diminu∣tion as his was, (for if he had encreased upon his changes, Iacob would not have remembred it as matter of aggrievance) but by augmentation, or it will be much to the prejudice of poore Mi∣nisters many wayes, in regard of the different rates of things in
severall ages whereof see many observiable instances with their proofes in the Resolution of the doubt forementioned as of 20 marke a yeare at one time enough honorably to main∣taine a studdent in the Innes of Court and this a charge only to be borne by the Sonnes of Noble men,Resolution of the touch of the aliena∣tion of Tithes p. 56. and 10 markes a yeare sufficient for a Vicar to maintaine himselfe, and to keepe hospitality when a quarter of Wheat at the dearest rate was twelve Shillings, and the lowest sometime but one Shilling, and a man might buy a Yoake of Oxen for a marke which whe∣ther we refer it to the Plenty of provision, or paucity of Peo∣ple or scarcity of mony wherein the later ages most abound, because it is continually digged out of the Earth, and seldome buried in the earth againe, (what ever might be the cause and sometimes altogether might concurre) it may reduce the Minister to streights, if those things he must necessarily use increase in price and his pention like a Dwarse growes not at all.
5. The change of Tithes into state pentions is like (though it be pretended to make for the Ministers ease and comfort) to proove extreamely troublesome and oppressive to him, for Ministers will be put in many places to take a part of their owne portion for a favour, which hetherto they might wholy claime and recover as their right: the charge of the new Offi∣cers of this designe will eat up a great part of the Tithes of each Parish and when a Minister cometh for his pay they will tell him perhaps money is not come in, or layd out to others that come before him or were worthy to be served before him, and will weary him by long & tedious attendances (with such an intent as Felix had when he sent for Paul the oftener before him, hoping that Mony should be given him of Paul that he should loose him. Act. 24.26.) That they may dispatch of his busines when it hath been dayly a great deale too long allready.
For such ill dealing some Ministers had just cause to complaine of some Committee-men of the late Parliament because when they had augmentations assigned them by the Parliament, they could not obtaine them without great diminution, by their charge of jornies, and long wayting upon them before they could get their due from them, which if the prises of corne and other necessary provisions, should rise and their pentions
should fall short or but be at a stand might halfe undoe them; of this kind I have heard strange relations, and those by such honest men that they are not to bee thought more strange then true. This I knowe that when I had an order by Au∣thority of Parliament to receive a summe of thirty pound from a Committee in London, and had as many friends and friendly incitements as I thought sufficient, to quicken them to expedi∣tious payment, I was so long put off, that having no Ieasure to wayt any longer, I left my suit to the solicitation of a friend, who after many addresses and disappointments but at last pro∣cured the payment but with the defalcation of six pence in the pound, which yet I tooke the better because I heard o∣thers had sped much worse with such crookt fingered Trape∣zites.
6. We have cause to feare as bad dealing by these new Pro∣jectors, for Mr H.P. hath told us, That by this checquer worke of Church Revenues the state may have a stock ready upon any great occasion of Publique affaires, and if the State please not to pay in the money they borrowed who shall com∣pell them? And what if the State should be behind with the Souldiers in their Pay, and they should seaze on these Ecclesi∣asticall Treasuries for their Arreares, As — how shall poore Ministers doe, if that be pleaded against the payment of their Pensions? By such a trick as this, were the Boores of Holland cheated by the Prince of Orange who told them,Phil. Trelayne in his Trea∣tise of the Undeceiving of the People in point of Tithes. p. 26. if they prospered in their Warre with the King of Spaine, they should pay no Tithes to their Ministers, and in the meane time that the Tithes should be taken up toward the maintenance of the warres, but when the Warrs were brought to a good issue, and they expected to be exempted from the payment of them to any; they were told they should Pay none to the Ministers as they had done for∣merly, but that they were such a considerable Revenue that the State could not well subsist without them.
7. But if we account it no credit for our country to be like those crafty Merchants of Holland, but meane fairely to manage the maintenance of Ministers (cheifly for their ease and Benefit (and if the intent be so, we despaire of the event to be answerable to it) though at first the Trustees of this Ecclesia∣sticall Treasury may be chosen for their prudence and integrity, or may in pollicy (to gaine reputation to this ne Project) in∣deavour
to give as much content as they can in such an office to Plundered Ministers, yet in after times the Trust may be put into their hands, who have as hard hearts to Godly and Orthodox Ministers, as these two troopes of Petioners against them.
8. If we looke abroad into other Churches of the reformed Religion, we may observe (besides that we now noted of Hol∣land) their sad condition by taking Tithes from them, and their just and passionate complaints of their penurious pentions, as of Luther in Germany, Calvin in Geneva, Knox in Scotland. For the first Luther saith I have only Nine old sexagenas, besides these there comes not an halfepeny out of the City to me, or my Brethren, There is need of the elloquence of Pericles to wrest litle more from them, which (if as all) is paid with a Malignant minde.Ego pro me Stipendio an∣nuo tantum novem anti∣quas Sexage∣nas habeo praeter hos ne obulus quidem aut mihi aut fratribus e civitate accedit. Luther. Tom. 2. Epist. Fol. 131. B. Periclea Eloquentia opus est ut vel pauxillum emumgas quod tamen satis maligne praebetur Luth. in Gen. 31. Tom. 3. Operum at. Fol. 33. A.
2.Verisimile est etiam tune neg∣lectos fuisse doctores & ver∣bi Ministros, quae tamen turpissima est ingratitudo quam indignum est enim fraudare victu corporali eos a quibus animae pascuntur non dignari terrena compen∣satione a quibus caelestia bona accipimus. Calvin. comment. in Epist ad Galat. cap. 6. v. 6. Videbat Apost. ideo negligi verbi Ministros quia verbum ipsum contemnebatur fiert enim nequit si verbum habetur in pretio, quin Ministri quoque honeste & liberaliter tracta∣rentur deinde his astus est satonae alimentis fraudare pios Minisros ut ecclesia talibus desti∣tuatur. Ibid. See more of this in his Coment on Gen. 27. v. 32. Calvin saith It is like that then (that-is) in the Apostles time the Doctors and Ministers of the word of God were too much neglected, which is a most vile and filthy ingratitude, for how unworthy a thing is it to defraud him of Corporall dyet who feeds their bodyes with Spirituall, and not to vouch safe a terrestriall recompence for celestial receipts. — The Apostle saw that the Ministers of the Word were neglected because the Word was contemned for it. It cannot be (saith he) (if the Word be held in good account) but the Ministers will be Honorably and liberally dealt withall, Besides it is the subtilty of Satan to withhold from Godly Ministers sufficient meanes that the Church may be deprived of the fruit of their Service.
3. For Mr Knox, of his discontented mind, at such a muta∣tion of Ministers maintenance, to that which I have observed
elsewhere, I will adde only this.M. Knox in his Epist. to the Bishops & Ministers of Scotland added at the end of S. He∣nry Spelmans larger Trea∣tise concer∣ning Tithes. Print. 1647. How a competence may be provi∣ded (saith he) except by restoring the Church to her Rights (that is quite contrary to taking away of Tithes) I doe not see what this Right is, if I should stand to define and justify it, here I should exceed the bounds of an Epistle, many of this time have cleared the point sufficiently. I could adde much more of his sort, but his example is mine admoniti∣on not to exceed in that kind.
Let their misery, be a monitory to all Ministers, which may be three-fold.
1. Not to give any consent or countenance, to deprive themselves and successors, of that salary for their service, which in the wonted way they may receive, rather as the blessing of their heavenly Father, (for such is their maintenance by Tithes) then as any Beneficence of man, though he be at paine to till the ground,Mr Knox in hss Epist to the Bishops & Ministers of Scotland. Aug. 3. 1571. and at cost to sowe the seed: If men will spoile (as a Godly and Famous Minister of Scotland said to the Ministers his Countrymen) let them doe it at their owne perill, but communicate yee not with their sinnes of what strate soever they bee, neither by consent nor silence, but by publique protestation make this known to the World, that yee are innocent of such robberies, which will ere long, provoke Gods judge∣ment upon the contrivers thereof.
2. To commend this cause to God, with prayer and fasting, that he would be pleased to guide the spirits of the Committee and Parliament, so to debate and determine this great doubt (and yet no great doubt if it were not for great concupiscence, of the World, and great slighting of an Orthodox and regular Ministry) as may be most agreeable to the gratious will of Al∣mighty God, and to happy progresse of the Gospell.
3. If any of you single, or by associated counsells, and en∣deavours can in any warrantable way, hopefully set on foot and prosecute any likely meanes, to incline the minds of the Committee and Parliament to establish Tithes, (ratified by so many Parliaments, and never yet condemned by any) that your delay not to doe it, since they that are on the destructive part are vigilant over all advantages, if not violent to advance their project to speedy effect.

Ob. But have their not been many acts of Parliament, where∣in the Rights and Revenues of the King, Bishops, Deanes and Chapters have been confirmed, and notwithstanding that, are they not now all confiscated, alienated, and put into other hands.
Ans. They are so, but that is, because they have taken away the Offices of Kings, Deanes and Chapters, on which those Rights and Revenues were founded, and the foundation digged up, the superstruction cannot stand as before: But yet the State hath declared none intention to put downe the Ministry, and I hope never will doe.
Ob. But if we appeare zealous in this cause, it will be said we are covetous, and as we have been accounted contentious with the State, for the settlement of them.
Ans. If not content with the 10th, we should incroach upon any of the nine parts of the Parishioners, they might call us covetous, as we may call them, f they deny or detaine the 30th from us: But it is no covetousnesse for a man in a just and reasonable way to require his owne, but rather a matter of du∣ty, because if he have not his due, he cannot maintaine himselfe and his Family, and if he be not carefull to provide for them, the Apostle judgeth him a denyer of the Faith, and so worse then an in∣fidell, 1 Tim 5.8. Nor is the fault of contention to be imputed to Tithes, more then to the purchasing of Lands, taking of Lea∣ses, making of Joynters, or other conditions of Marriages, or then to borrowing and lending, or any other civill contracts, concerning which more suits are raised then about Tithes, and if there were not, it is not the fault, either of Tithes or of the Minister, but the Peoples, there being of them (in most places) tenne who would covetously detaine them, for one that will conscientiously pay them. And if a man be put to goe to Law, as the Lender to sue the wicked borrower who payeth not againe Psal. 37.21. He is the contentious person, who will doe no wrong, or will doe no right without suit, not he that being ne∣cessitated to it, flyeth to the Law, or Law-makers for refuge
and protection. Besides as the provocation to that is not the Parsons, but the Parishioners fault, so it is the greater, because he can have no fairer probably occasion for it. And therefore it was the manner of a ReligiousCapt. R.W. Captaine, (a true Cornelius of mine acquaintance) when some of his Neighbours entreated him to goe with them to their Minister, as a Mediator for composition of their Tithes, to tell them, there was no need of any mediation for this matter, for the Par∣son neither will, nor can doe you wrong, unlesse by taking any part of your nine parts, and if he will not compound with you, at your rate, give him the tenth in kind, and so shall you be sure to give him no more, then his due.
Ob. But when we have done what we can the Parliament will doe what they pleaseSo said K. Iames in his Speech in the Starre Chamber. An. 1616. p. 553. Operum in Fol. for (as the old Treasurer Burleigh was wont to say) he knew not what an Act of Parliament would not doe in England.
Ans. Though they have power to doe what they will, and so much is said of a King, and somewhat more, Where the word of a King is, there is power, and who may say unto him, what doest thou, Eccles. 8.4. Yet we must hope in the exercise of the su∣preme Authority, they will make their Justice, and goodnesse, as apparent unto us, as their Power and Greatnesse.
Ob. We might hope so, if there were not many thousands, who solicite them against us, as was noted of the former Petiti∣on, subscribed with many thousands of hands.
Ans. Though there be Thousands, who (being as opposite in their principles, as new light, and old darknesse, like Herod and Pilate, reconciled against Christ) combine against us, the one sort out of an erroneous antipathy, to a standing, fixed, and Or∣thodox Ministry, the other out of an impious contempt of the power of Godlinesse, both out of an unconscionable concupis∣cence of having more then their owne, yet if the case of Tithes were rightly stated, the drift and scope of the alienation of them from the ministry generally nnderstood, and a course ta∣ken to procure hands to a Petition for the continuance of
them, according to their antient Right, and countenance would be shewed by them, who are in Authority, to such as subscribe it, I doubt not but the greater number of the most true be∣lieving, and Godly living Christians of all rankes, and states throughout the whole Nation, would appeare against the many millenary complaynants, and every thousand of those, worth ten thousand of these.
Ob. Yet it may be in the Committee concerning Tithes, (who thereafter as they represent the cause, with favour or of∣fence towards us, will have a great influence upon the Votes and determinations of Parliament) we have but a few friends and among them, are many military men, two Major Generalls, eight Colonells, and one Captaine, who will be like to slight us, because they have obtained so many Victorious successes, by Sea and Land.
Ans. First, Though we know not of many friends, we may have more then we know of, and shall (we trust) have yet more, when our case is throughly known, and duly conside∣red.
2. For the Military men, I can say somewhat upon mine owne certain knowledge: at the Committee for Plundred Mi∣nisters,Colon. Fleet-wood now commander in chiefe o∣ver Ireland. I found more favour from one Colonell (whose name I then knew not, and I thought he had not known mee) then of any, yea or of all the rest, (one ancient friend excep∣ted) though at that time they met in an extraordinary num∣ber.
3. They are too wise (seeing though they have had ma∣ny glorious victories, their work is not wholly done, and yet perhaps may be long in doing) to slight the whole Body of the Ministry, and those who adhere to their just Interest in this particular.
4. That their advances against their enemies may not re∣move
them from the solid basis of holy humility (besides which, they can find no sure or safe footing any where) I shall make bold to mind them of what a zelot of theirs hath written of the Army in his Hist.Mr. I. S. in his Epist. to all true Engl. men prope fi∣nem. Anglia Rediviva, Or Englands recovery. But we would least of all be thought by this History of things done, to fixe unconquerablenesse and unvariable successe upon this Army, that were to dare providence to undoe us, we know we are as soon broken as made up, as soon flying as conquering, we desire therefore friends not to belieue the Army shall doe more, because it hath done so much, and that it cannot be conquered, because it hath conquered, but that it shall be still victorious, while God is in it, and no longer. And he will be in it and with it, so much the longer, as they keepe the closer to the Military rule of the Emperour Aurelianus, as Flavius Vopiscus re∣lates it.Si viris Tribunus esse, imo si vis vivere, manus militum confine nemo pullem alienum rapiat, ovem nemo contingat uvam nullus anterat. Sege∣tem nemo deterat, oleum, sa∣lignum nemo exigat; Annon suā coutentus sit. De praeda hostis, non de lacrymis pro∣vincialis habeat. Flav. Vo∣pis. in Aureliano. If thou wilt be a Tribune, nay if thou wilt live, containe thy Souldiers in their duty, Let no man take so much as a sheepe, or a chiken from another, nor let him tread downe the Coun∣try mans corne, or exact of him oyle, or salt, or wood, but be content with his stipend, and if he adde to it, let it be by the spoyles of the Enemies, not by the teares of the Provinciall Subjects. Yet was this Emperour though so precisely in it, but an Heathen, would it not then seeme a prodigi∣designe ons of injustice and Impiety in Christian Governors, whether Civill or Military, if they should make no scruple to spoyle all the Ministers of their own Nation, of their due main∣tenance, whence they are most antiently, and most Lawful∣ly possessed, and that not for the present only, but for perpe∣tuity,  Rom. 3.31.

And if that hitherto we have said, albeit it seemeth very good and most just in our eyes (though not in ours only) should in theirs seeme otherwise who are to judge our cause, and so their determinations should dash all our hopes into de∣spaire of helpe from them, we may yet comfort our selves, if wee have done our endeavour to uphold the right of Religion, in the maintenance of the Ministry, (for their poverty will breed contempt of the word of God, and that contempt Athe∣isme.) For mine own part, what ever the issue be of this great debate, it shall not repent me to have done something, (as the suddennesse of the occasion would permit) towards the disco∣very and prevention of this grand sacrilegious oppression of us, and I shall not cease humbly to supplicate, and importunate∣ly to sollicite the Almighty Majesty, with my heartiest prayers, that he will be pleased to cleare his clouded countenance to∣wards us, and to cheare up our hearts, by making our cause, and our persons more gratious in the eyes of our Gover∣nours.
And if after all this our God see it good, either to cha∣stise us for our errors, or to exercise our patience and humility by poverty and contempt (according to that of David, I am a poore man and lightly esteemed. 1 Sam. 18.23.) We may yet in respect of men hold up our hearts, and our heads with the Heroick Aphorisme of Luther,Insultat No∣bilitas nostra miseris Pasto∣ribus Ecclesi∣arum. mihi autem dubium non est futurum esse, ut unus pius & fidelis Pastor, centum talibus Nobilibus ante∣feratur. Luth. in Psal. 121. Tom. 4. op. Lat. Fol. p. 429. Our Nobility (saith he) insult o∣ver the miseries of Ministers, but I doubt not but a time will come, that one Godly and Faithfull Pastor, will be better accounted of, then an hundred such Noble men.
Wee feare not any such disdaine from any either Noble or Ingenuous Gentleman; the scorne wee may expect is
rather from such as have so little worth in them (either for wit or Grace) that wee might be more displeased at their respect (as Antisthenes was when hearing that the Wicked men commended him he said he was afraid that he had done somthing ill, that such as they speake well of him,) then to be troubled at their con∣tempt (especially for poverty) since even Heathens by the light of Nature and experience have observed that those who have deserved best have had the least part of the wealth of the World.
But for us as wee have more pretious Promises. 2 Peter. 1.4. as we are Christians then ever the Heathens heard of, out of which we may draw comfort against every crosse, so as we are Ministers if we be reduced to an indigent condition wee must (though we doe not monopolize the word Cleros or Clericus) make especiall use of that title to our selves which common use rather then peculiar Right hath appropriated unto our calling as Hierom expoundeth and applyeth from the word   in Greek which signifieth lot or portiō are men call∣ed Clerkes (saith he) either because they are the Lords lot and portion, or because God is theirs: Grece, sors La∣tine appellatur: propterea vo∣cantur clerici vel quia de sorte sunt domini vel quia dominus sors (i.e.) pars Clericorum est: qui autem vel ipse pars est domini vel dominum partem habet ta∣lem se exhibere debet ut & ipse qui possideat dominum & possideatur à domino. Hieron. ad Nepot. de vita Clericor. Tom. 1. p. 13. he then who is the Lords portion or hath the Lord for his portion (saith he) must shew himselfe such a one as possesseth the Lord and hath the Lord for his possession.
If the Lord be our portion we may be as Paul saith as having nothing yet possessing all things. 2 Cor. 6.10. For God is all in all. 1 Cor. 15.28. And if we be his Portion we must be admoni∣shed, and may be comforted with the words of the Apostle Heb. 13.5. Let your Conversation be without Covetousnes and be con∣tent with such things as ye have, for he hath said I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. And so with him I leave you who is Almigh∣ty to Protest you, and Alsufficient to furnish you with
what his Wisdome knoweth to be most convenient for you.
From Oxford Aug. 9. 1653.

