



Sir,
THough I have been thin∣king a good while with my self, what returns to make for that great civility and respect I have received from you, yet I could never meet with such a fit opportu∣nity to express my acknowledgments thereof, as this present Discourse hath furnished me withall. Which I as∣sure you no sooner offer'd it self, than I most readily embraced, being ex∣ceeding
glad that I was now in a ca∣pacity to testifie in a publick manner that high resentment which I have of all your kindness, and to remove all occasions of suspecting, that I was as insensible of your favours, as I con∣fess my felf undeserving of them. Assoon as I perus'd the Sermon, I concluded immediately it would prove a Present very suitable, and by consequence acceptable to your self, because it bears your own Image, and describes your Character, and not on∣ly so, but sets likewise a Crown upon that head which is encircled with those golden Letters, and beautified with those goodly Lineaments. Here, Sir, you will read your self by reading the description of a good man and a good Christian; And for your greater encouragement to continue and per∣severe
in a due exercise of all those moral Virtues and Perfections, by which you so much illustrate your place, and adorn your station, you will here likewise meet with your great re∣compence of reward: A Scepter ready to fall into your hands; a Crown ready to environ your brows; an everlasting Mansion opening wide to receive you; a City above the reach of flames, a building of God, not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. This is the true Christians most sure and certain Re∣ward; and faithfulness unto death, that is, a constant and sincere obedience to the Laws of Christ, is his most sure and certain Character.
This Sir, is the Present which with all humility I lay before you, desiring your acceptance of it, as a testimony of that great respect and service which
I deservedly owe unto you. I con∣fess it had been more satisfaction to me, to have offer'd something that was purely my own, though but a bunch of Myrrh, and a little Frankin∣cense, than to bring with me leaves of Gold, which I have not so truly bor∣rowed as indeed extorted from a more able hand, the Reverend and Learned Author of this Discourse. Which (to tell you the truth) had seen the light many months before, had not the Parents excessive modesty, and the mul∣titude of Affairs, which he hath hi∣therto been incumbred withall (as well before the conception, as since the bring∣ing forth) caus'd him to detain it in obscurity, and contrary to the piety of the Levites Daughter (Exod. 2.3.) to cover it with flags and Northern dust, not to preserve his own production,
though fair and goodly, but to stifle and destroy it.
But I shall spend no time in making an Apology for it; and that for this reason only, because I know it needs none. If it doth not sufficiently re∣present the natural Parent, you may please to remember, that it comes to you by a second hand; which wanting skill to dress and trim it, hath rather sullied the brightness of its complexi∣on, and stained the beauty of it. Much I could speak in commendation of it, as it appears before you, but more I dare not, lest I displease my Friend, who though I have spoke but little, will judge it too much, whereas all that had the happiness to know and un∣derstand him, must needs know and understand this likewise, that his real worth deserves a great deal more.

I have still one Argument in re∣serve, which makes me more than con∣fident of your favourable acceptance of this present address, and that is drawn from the subject of the dis∣course it self, or that which gave occa∣sion to it, your worthy Friend and my honoured Kinsman, who is gone before us to enjoy that Crown, which from all eternity hath been design'd to in∣circle the Heads, and adorn the Tem∣ples of all true and faithful Christians. The memory of your ancient Deputy must needs be precious to you, though after his death, to whom his person was so acceptable (because so service∣able) during his life. And indeed there was nothing in him that could render him otherwise than singularly acceptable to all sober and considera∣tive men: For he was of a truly brave
and manly spirit, such as had no∣thing of the  in it: He feared nothing so much, as to commit any unhandsome or dishonest action, to offend God or injure his Neighbour. For my own part I must confess, that J have took more pleasure and delight in conversing with him, and in the enjoyment of his excellent society, than ever I did in that fair Revenue which he hath left behind him. For though he was naturally a man of a solid and serious temper of mind, yet it was so handsomely checker'd with such a becoming modesty and gravity, with so much courtesie and affability, such an obliging carriage and deport∣ment, and many times with such plea∣santness of discourse, that I have rarely met with such a happy conjunction of moral Virtues, as were visible in him.
He was noble and generous with fru∣gality; civil and sociable with sobriety; just and honest with mercy and clemen∣cy. He fed the hungry, and cloth'd the naked: He was eyes to the blind and feet to the lame, and he made the widows heart to sing for joy. And though sometimes the impertinencies of some that were rash and inconside∣rate, and the unreasonable desires of others that were religiously perverse and obstinate, might make him break out into a little heat and passion, yet it ne∣ver was of any long continuance; like a flash of Lightning, it vanished with its appearance; and though it rose ma∣ny hours after the Sun, yet it was quick in motion, and (according to the Apo∣stles directions) was always set before it.
But as it is not proper for me, so nei∣ther is it my design to bestrew his earth
with violets and roses, or to illustrate his Marble with gilded banners. As to this, I am very happily prevented by a more skilful hand in the conclusion of this Discourse. Though (to say the truth) he himself hath done it much better than either of us both. His ex∣cellent life and conversation hath per∣fum'd his memory, and made his name to send forth more fragrant odours, than all the precious Ointment we can cast upon it. By his prudence and charity (of which he had very large proportions) he rais'd a Monument to himself more durable than the framed Stones of Paros, and by continuing faithful unto death, hath shrin'd his Ashes in an immortal Urn.
But I am affraid I have tired you too much already with this tedious E∣pistle, and therefore do humbly crave
your pardon; which I have but little reason to doubt of, considering your excellent temper & disposition, which I understand so well, that I verily be∣lieve I can do nothing to displease you. And though the strength of my affe∣ctions hath carrried me out into a short Panegyrick of our deceased Friend, yet for this I hope I shall not meet with a∣ny rigid censure, seeing it is but a just return of civility to him, who both li∣ving and dying did always abound in all imaginable expressions of love and kindness unto me. And now, Sir, J dare assure you, I have but very few things to add, before J kiss your hands and bid you Farewell.
One thing J desire to acquaint you withall, before you come so far as to take notice of it, that in all this Dis∣course there is no mention made of our
Friends Pedegree and Extraction. Nei∣ther was the Reverend Author, when he Preach'd the Sermon, desir'd by me to enlarge upon that subject. For though he was descended of worthy Ancestors, who for several years liv'd in good credit and repute at a Coun∣trey-Village called Boughton in Not∣tingham-shire, yet methinks all that honour and glory which we derive from our Progenitors, is not so much to be priz'd and valued, as personal worth and acquired eminency. The Spaniards have a Saying amongst them, which comes now into my mind; Al hombre bueno no busques abo∣lengo, i. e. Never trouble thy self to en∣quire after the Pedegree of a virtuous man. His own excellency is enough to make him esteem'd in the world; and a good name purchased by vir∣tuous
actions, shall far out shine all those great and glorious Titles, which an ancient House, and a renowned Fa∣mily can convey unto us.
And thus it was with this worthy Person; His own wisdom and pru∣dence made his countenance to shine, and whilst he liv'd advanced his fame and reputation in the world, and having serv'd his generation for several years, conducted at last his gray bairs with honour to the grave. He did not so much receive a lustre from his House and Kindred, as added of him∣self a remarkable light and brightness to it: Not unlike the Sun, which makes both the Heavens and Earth to glister and shine, not with any borrowed Rays and reflected Beams, but with his own naked Splendor.
I shall not trouble you here with a
Catalogue of his charitable works at his decease, because they have long since been publickly divulg'd, and the persons concern'd, already in actual possession of them. Not that I would conceal any thing out of any by re∣spect or reservation to my self, but because I look upon it as an unnecessa∣ry performance. For as for my self, I have been so far from falling short of a most punctual execution of his will and pleasure, that in sundry particu∣lars (especially where love and kind∣ness and charity were concern'd) I I have far outdone it. And so con∣scious to my self I am of my own faithfulness and integrity, that I dare publickly bid the world defiance to tax me with any one particular action, that may in the least bespeak me either Ʋncharitable or Ʋnjust. That which I
can tax my self withall, and which doth still afflict my spirit, is principally this, that the great care, diligence, and circumspection, which I used in the ma∣nagement of these secular affairs, did eat up so much of my precious time, and unavoidably drew me from the exercise of my Function, in which I always took so much contentment and satisfaction. But now having dis∣charg'd that trust which Gods provi∣dence hath laid upon me, I am ready to return to my Masters service, to which I doubt not in the least but that his goodness will speedily restore me, as his wisdom thought fit for a season to draw me from it.
But, Sir, I forget my self, and much more you.
That I may not beyond all mea∣sure abuse your patience, I will choose
rather to break off abruptly, with this short, though duplicate Petition.
First, That the world may daily abound with such worthy persons as your self and our deceased Friend, men  clothed about with abundance of wisdom, understanding, justice, and integrity, that by this means virtue and true goodness may be encourag'd, and vice and wicked∣ness may be discountenanc'd, though it bear it self out with a brazen brow, and a conscience many times of as course a metal.
Secondly, and to conclude, That for all your respect and kindness to me God may reward you abundant∣ly, and return it a hundred and a hundred fold into your bosom: That peace, and plenty, and length of days, may be your portion here in this
world; and glory, and honour, and immortality, in the world to come: Which is the earnest prayer, and hearty desire of
Sir, 
Morefields, August 2. 1671.
