



Right Worshipful and Reverend!
IT hath pleased Divine Providence first to wean mee from my Native Coun∣trie, then from the World, and now lastly from my self: So that I who am naturally of an infirm and crazie Con∣stitution, subject to compliance with the stream, and to turn with the Helio∣tropium, am supernaturally elevated above common prin∣ciples, Spiritually engaged to plead for Christ, even in such Malignant times, wherein Christ is opposed in his Name, Person, Offices, Word and Works; when most men rather wag their heads against him, then truly vail their bonnets and bow their knee before him.
There have been times wherein this Subject might have fallen into the bosom of Nurses, but now it is like to fall into the hands of Step-dames. PRESBYTERIE is coun∣ted Marah, though indeed shee bee a Naomi; and every man will crie up the Diana of Licentiousness, not becaus it is a right way, but the common Rode both for Libertines and Atheists.

Elijah, John Baptist, Luther had their times, which though perilous to themselvs, yet they accepted as advantageous to their Master: and Paul consulted with the Spirit and Faith, while Flesh and Blood would have made him a Renegado to Christ and the Gospel.
But so weak are wee, that there is need of reasons to whet our Zeal as well as examples to strengthen it; let us consider that not onely the Caus but also the Success is God's. Ieremie and Luther died in their beds, while Balaam the fals Prophet die's by the sword: and Tecelius die's wounded with grief by his own Partie.
Moreover it is a considerable truth, that God look's not onely at the substance of the dutie, but at the circum∣stances that attend it: and that hee delight's in Adverbs more then in Neuns; and love's bene better then bonum it self: Therefore though it bee well taken that Christians fol∣low Christ when all men crie Hosanna; yet it is most sea∣sonable when all men crie Crucifie: though it bee most sweet to follow Christ when the Crown is on his temples, yet it is most meet to follow him when the Cross is on his back. It is good to own Christ on Mount Calvarie, as well as Mount Tabor: when hee is spit upon by an adul∣terous generation, Mark 8.38. as Moses and Paul did, the first whereof preferred the reward of Christ above the Trea∣sures of Egypt; the other was not ashamed of the preach∣ing of the Gospel when all men cast shame upon it, Ro∣mans 1.16.
This Kingdom is too like Israel in blessing, and in bar∣renness; and therefore may bee called Jidsreel disper∣dendi à Deo, divided, scattered, ruined by the Lord, ra∣ther to bee styled Jezrelites then true Israelites as Jacob and Nathanaël were.
God had given us a wise, zealous, active, glorious Parliament; but mee think's the beauty and splendor
fade's as a woman doth after many throwes, and as the body doth after many aguish Paroxisms: no doubt all this for our sins.
Mee think's the Scene begin's to change; the Scale which ere while was lowest now mount's to a consider∣able height, and all this too for our iniquities.
But I had rather discuss the Cure then the Diseas. Two things must recover England, and two things must pre∣serv it.
1. The recovering consist's in intire repenting and re∣forming.
2. The preservation 1. In the holy Union of King with Parliament: 2. In wholly and entire submission to the Go∣vernment of Christ. Now our Lord Jesus Christ hath a four-fold Government;

1. Internal, that of the Spirit.
2. External,

1. Preaching the Word.
2. Administration of the Sacraments.
3. Ecclesiastical Discipline, which is the present subject now in hand.


And for the opening whereof I have don my endea∣vor in this ensuing Compendium, and have made bold to dedicate it to you who are the Right Worshipful and most Reverend Elders of the Classical Assemblie.
Magistrates and Ministers are the duo magna Luminaria; which two great Lights God made to protect and govern his Church, as the Sun and the Moon to govern the World: how happie shall the Church bee in so noble and sacred a conjunction? no less beautiful then Tirzah; no less terrible then an Armie with Banners.
The causes which first engaged mee to write was no supposition of abilitie in my self;
Hoc tantūm scio me nîl scire. Soc. but first I desired to ex∣tract an Epitome of the Government for my private sa∣tisfaction;
then I faw it necessarie to give answer to som scruples of wise and wel-affected persons under mine own charge, unto which this present Treatise hath som re∣lation: and lastly I perceived (which was the main motive) that the greatest obstacle why it was not generally em∣braced was, not becaus it wanted splendor in it self, but becaus men wanted eies and illumination.
It was Ignorance made the Norvegian the first time hee saw Roses, not dare to touch them, for fear of burning his fingers; and it is no less ignorance that make's common people fear a Government. Must wee (say they) com to the touch-stone? just like little children, afraid of Gob∣lins in the dark; therefore they often turn, and return with Solomon's door upon the hinges, before they can ei∣ther bar their hearts against it, or set them open courte∣ously to give it entertainment.
Such as these must learn by example, and by experience; Your's, (Noble Patriots and Magistrates!) will do much; you are the great wheels must set the lesser on gate.
Give mee leave a little to withdraw the curtain that stand's before it, and it will discover it self amiable to you upon an exact survey: I shall onely mark unto you six particulars. 1. It is a Primitive. 2. Pure. 3. Spiri∣tual. 4. Safe. 5. Prudential. 6. Aristocratical Go∣vernment.
1. It is Primitive. Peter call's himself not a Bishop, but a Presbyter,
. 1 Pet. 5. who am also an Elder. Paul 1 Tim. 4.14. bid's Timothie neglect not the gift which was given by imposition of hands, (not of Episcopacie but) Presbyterie.
Totum hoc magis ex consue tudine quàm ex dispositionis ve∣ritate, Hieron. Ep. ad Evang. et Com. in Tit. Hierom tell's us that the distinction of Bishops and Presbyters is of small use, of different Order rather then Authoritie: Like power to that which a Super-intendent or
Prolocutor hath in a Synod or an Assemblie, all this whatsoever Authoritie they usurp is more out of custom then Divine ordination.
And as for Lay-Elders (if I may so style them) Am∣brose expounding these words rebuke not an Elder,
Doctorum de∣sidiâ aut magis superbiâ, Ambr. Tom. 5. on 1 Ep. Tim. cap. 5. com∣plaine's, that the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction-of knowing causes was degenerated from the Primitive use, and de∣volved upon the Ministers. First, saith hee, the Synagogue, after that, the Church had Elders, without whose coun∣sel nothing was don in the Church; by what sort of means it went out of use I know not, whether by the idleness, or rather the pride of the Doctors.
Tertullian,
Mox praesident probati quique seniores, Tertul. utì Grotius in in Matth 18. as Grotius recite's his words on his Comment on Matth. 18. Wee go into the Congregation, there are exhortations, praiers, chastisements, and anon approved Elders take their place. Cyprian saith, I received writeings from the Presbyters, Donatus, Honatus and Cardius, but alone could not rescribe, since I determined from the be∣ginning of my Office to do nothing of mine own head without the consent of the
Sine consensu plebis nibil, &c. Cypr. l. 3. Ep. 10. in fine. people.
Eusebius also lastly record's that Natalius who was se∣duced by Asclepiodotus, having seen his Errors,
Euseb. Eccles. Hist. lib. 5. besought the Church with waterish eyes and wet cheeks to com∣passionate and pardon him.
For further satisfaction in this particular, notable is that confession which was ingenuously acknowledged by Episcopacie it self: for as Mr M. relate's in his explicati∣on of the Covenant, the Arch-bishops, Bishops and whole Clergie of England declared to King Henrie the 8th and subscribed it with their own hands, that PRELA∣CIE was but a HUMANE POLITICK DEVICE of the FATHERS.
2. It is Pure. The Scepter of Christs Kingdom is a
righteous Scepter, it vindicate's the Word from irreve∣rence and contempt, hedgeth in the Sacrament from pro∣phanation and promiscuousness, while Spiritual railes keep back notorious offenders that Christ may not the second time bee betraied into the hands of Sinners; with this the Church would bee as foul as Augea's Stable; it would bee with Austin Porcorum hara & colluvies rabido∣rum Canum, a Swine-stie, a companie of mad dogs; or as Christ saith, a meer den of Theeves.
2. It is Spiritual, both in respect of the

Office.
Officers.

1. Of the Office, which consist's
1. In Admonition. 1 Thes. 5.14.
2. Rebuke, Luc. 17.4.
3. In Censure, Matt. 18.19. Joh. 20.21. Tit. 3.10.
2. Of the Officers, which are
1. Pastors. Eph. 4.11,
2. Elders. Acts 14.23. 1 Tim. 5.3.
3. Deacons. 1 Tim. 3.8.
4ly. It is safe, for there bee two things which extreme∣ly hazard the Church,
1. Want of the Lord's Supper which Christ command∣ed to have often in remembrance of him.
2. Fals Brethren who lye in wait to seduce, Gal. 5.12. the tolerateing whereof was dangerous to Galatia, Perga∣mus, and Thiatyra.
But som may say can not the Lord's Supper bee admi∣nistred without Government?
Yes; but if the people press in as profanely to the Table as the Tavern, not so much hungring after Christ, as the Elements, that is not to discern the Lord's bodie: or sur∣charged with surfetting or drunkenness, as in Paul's time; or with wrath and malice, as in our times; are these wor∣thie
to receive? are the Seales, Seales, of life or of death to such? and where there are many such will they bee sta∣ved off by a Minister alone without thoughts not onely of disdain, but of revenge?
For my part I am resolved on the negative, and lest a∣ny should think it to bee Juvenilis Calor, a flash rather of youth then of maturity, let him read what Chrysostom and Calvin determine in the like kinde.
Chrysostom saith, it is neither Diadem, nor Purple,
Major his nobis est poteflas. Chrys. Hom. in Matth. nor Magistrate shall move mee to give the Sacrament to an ungodly Person; wee have more Power in the Church then they.
Juravi mihi po∣tiù statumesse mrtem oppetere quàm ut scram Dominî Caeuam &c. Cal. Epist. ad Virct. p. 164. Besides the example of Theodosius the Emperor ex∣communicated by him for his slaughter at Thessalonica fully declare's it.
Calvin that famous Divine, who is by Zanchius called Galliae Apostolus, the Apostle of France, saith, I have sworn, I have determined rather to die then so vilely to pro∣fane the holy Supper of the Lord, as by giving it to un∣worthie Members.
5.
† Hac disciplinâ adeò nemo exi∣mbatur, ut prin∣cipes quoque unà cum plebeis ad eum ferendam subjicerent. Cal. Instit. It is Impartial: Ministers and Elders are subjected to the Government as well as others, the Judges them∣selvs are subject to judgment, as Trajan nobly spake in the Knighting of a Souldier, If I do well, use this sword for mee; if not, against mee: the Government is for the prais of all that do wel: for the discouragement of those that do evill.
6. It is Aristocratical: I call it so not in respect of
Christum si re∣spexeris, Monar∣chia dicitur; nam ipse est Rex no∣ster, qui sangui∣ne sue Ecclesiam acquisivit. Sunt verò in Ecclesiâ qui legatione funguntur Pres∣byteri, Doctores & alii qui prae∣sunt, quorum respectu meritò potest dici Aristocratia. Pet. Maryr. loc. com. Class. 3. lib. 5. pag. 783. Christ, who is a Monarchical head, but 1. in respect of us who are Ministerial Officers; Councels and Parliaments are Aristocratical: 2. by way of opposition to all Papal and Lordly preheminence counting with Gregorie in his Epist. to Maurice the Emperor, that hee that name's himself uni∣versal Bishop is the forerunner of Antichrist. Let the best
men bee ruleing-Elders, and the best Ministers Preaching-Elders and this will produce the best effects.
Thus (honored Gentlemen, Patriots and Magistrates!) I have endeavored a little to possess you with a candid Interpretation of the present Government; and to blow your zeal to an higher flame. If the caus bee God's, leave the success to him: do but look on and stand still if you dare not advance and go forward, and see the work of the Lord over in it, and by it God is never wanting to his Church if shee bee not wanting to him and her self. Wee complain of sins and corruptions, and crie out, O the times! but as fondly as the Mother of her childe, which will not use the Rod a sanctified means for recoverie: 'tis not for us to say with Lot Nay my brethren do not so wickedly; nor with Eli It is no good report I hear of you.
If a garden were over-spread with weeds; if a Common∣wealth with Theevs; if a Familie with stubborn Sons and Servants, what must bee don, think you? would you not as the Lord command's, bring them out to the Congrega∣tion and make them examples, that all may hear and fear, and do no more wickedly: Bad men brought forth bad times; let us begin to reform the men and the times shall bee innocent, els the times like the ground are accursed for our sakes.
Gentlemen! Center not your actions upon your self, bee not emptie vines and self-bearing trees, build not your own houses and let the hous of God lie waste; do som∣thing for Christ, for his Church, for the Common∣wealth, that both Church and Common-wealth may know yee live not onely a vegetative and sensitive, but a rational and spiritual Life.
I confess I am plain with you, but I may say with David
Is there not a caus? hath hee not don the like, Psal. 2.10. Hee take's notice indeed that the Heathen rage, and the people imagin vainly, yet the totall application of sub∣jection to Christ is pressed home to Kings and Rulers, bee wise now therefore. Ministers must bee like bees; pain∣ful, profitable, carrying their stings about them as well as honie. Christ gave his Apostles Tongues, but they were fierie; a Sword, but 'twas two-edged. John was not onely a shineing but a burning Light: Paul's presence was contem∣ptible, but his Epistles powerful. I might indeed have qua∣lified som expressions, in respect of that great respect and reverence I bear to all of you; but becaus dutie must prevail above interest, and the discharge of Conscience a∣bove Courtship, I have therefore set an edg upon the Go∣vernment, intending by the sincere performance of my own Office to oblige you all to the serious and speedy ac∣complishment of your new engagements; and thus I commend you to God, and earnestly beg a blessing on your favorable assistance to the Caus of Christ, whose unworthie Servant I am, and for his sake

