



Right Worshipful,
THe Book of Job (saith Au∣gustin) is
the afflicted mans Scripture: Tirinus thinks, it was first writ in
Syriack, afterwards turned into He∣brew by Moses for the comfort of
the di∣stressed Jews at that time in the house of bondage that they
might lay before them this holy man, blessed Job (another Angel,
as a Father calls him) a man of sorrows,Christ. Hom. de
patientia Job. as a lively pattern of almost invincible and
impregnable patience. Amongst the many memorable passages of that
precious Saint, may it please you to consider how sutable that is to your
present state and condition,This Text was fully opened
at the Fune∣ral of the hopeful and much lamented Heir; who was interred about
ten daes after his honoured and
deceased Father. chap. 16.14. and thence learn, That
God doth sometimes break his choicest
and eminentest Saints, with breach upon breach; Instances are at hand, of
David, on whom troubles came thick and quick, as waves rolling and
riding one in the neck, or on the back of another: Heman and
Pauls state and fate you have, with Bills and Cata∣logues of their
disasters and sufferings; but Jobs is in stead of all, hee was
whipt and stript of all, hee lost all his Sheep, Oxen, &c. all his
children; ten children, ten sud∣denly; ten children, in the prime and flower
of their age, ten vertuous, gracious chil∣dren, as Chrysostome
speaks,Vide Chrysost. Hom. 5. de pat. Job. and
that by a violent death; This is not all, you finde him full of pains, and
blains, byles, and sores from head to heel.
Pineda thinks all kinde of diseases were in
Jobs maladies;Pineda in Job 2.8. p. 48. An uno
tantum morbo labora∣vit Job? resp. Neg. Ulcus pessimum,
le∣pra, lues venerea, &c. Hee was a great man; some of the Fathers
say, hee was an e∣minent Prophet, and therefore numbred with Noah,
and Daniel: Bolducius saith, before his long afflictions hee was a
Captain,Aug. Bold. Praelud. 7. in lib. sobi & Didac.
Stun. in cap.  v. 2. Non dubito
quin Iob fuerit Rex. and after his pressures and tryals, a King, a
supream Governour, a petty Mo∣narch within his own territories; it is
pro∣bable hee was; yet was hee broken with breach upon breach: As in some
sinners there is a legion of Devils; so on some Saints there is a legion
of troubles every man hath his burthen: The Saints have many and mighty.
If a reason of these his dispensations bee 
 searched for, or inquired after: May not wee return and
say?Rev. 3.18 It is for the tryal of their graces:
the Graces of the Spirit are tryed Graces, and shall not such have
their Tryal? as natura vexata, so gratia ten∣tata
prodit seipsam: It is to approve, and to improve their graces, their
Faith: Sa∣tans batteries are placed principally against this grace; by it hee
is most resisted; and by him therefore it is most oppugned: Their
patience, whether they will blesse, or curse; how they will deport
themselves in the fur∣nace: Their integrity, painted pot-sheards shine
till they come to scouring: Breach upon breach discovers the sincerity or
hy∣pocrisy of the heart; whether wee bee right, or rot at the core; how low
the foundation is laid: Batteries upon a wall try the stabi∣lity and
strength of it, and breaches the ba∣sis of it; an unsound heart may
stand a sea∣son, while troubles come singlely and slowly: renewed
troubles are great tryals: Their weanednesse from the comforts of this
life, how they can live without them, whether they do live above them; how they
will car∣ry in the privation of them: Many can live without God in the world,
who know not how to live without Gold, and Silver, and children, in the
world.
It is to humble them: Pride is the shirt of the soul,
which it puts off last when it shifts: The heart of man is the proudest
little peece in the world: Lest I should be exalted, above measure
there was given mee a thorn in  the flesh: An
humble soul is Heavens de∣light: It is worthy our observation, Gen.
22.1. After these things God tempted Abraham. After these things, what
things? Solemn intercourses, twixt God and him: Expresse Assurances
from Hea∣ven, that God was his God, and would bee the God of his seed: After
these things Abraham is tempted, and pride preven∣ted.
To refine them, waters are clearest when they are in
motion;Dan. 11.35 so are the Saints in
af∣fliction.
Isa. 26.16 Hos. 5.15To awaken
them to duty: Grace ever acts like it self, gracious men not so; they have
need of awakening Ordinances, and providences: In trouble they will visit
him, and morning him.
To subdue the stubbornnesse of their will; children
will not alwaies bee wrought on, or brought to do their Fathers will with one
lash; as stubborn Oaks, so stubborn hearts and wills, must have many
blows before they bee brought under.
To make them more modest in their de∣mands; desires of,
and prayers for tempo∣rals, when men are low in condition, they are low in
petition: A drop of water was all Dives desired in Hell: Breach upon
breach makes men more modest, and mo∣derate.
To work us more into love with, more highly to estimate and
think of his precious Ordinances: Many of Pauls Epistles can∣not 
 bee understood well without the Crosse; the
sweetest Scriptures were penned in, and are prized most in times of
afflictions: then is truth precious indeed.
To inlarge their comforts: It is the Me∣thod of Heaven to
bring his Saints first in∣to the Wildernesse, then to Canaan;
every child of God is not taken up into the third Heaven, till they have been
cast as it were into the third Hell; the tree is more firmly rooted by
shaking, and the true Christian by suffering; notable is that prayer,
1 Pet. 5.10.
To increase his own glory; hee made all things at first,
and doh all things to the last
for his glory; then shall his name which is above every name, bee more
exalted▪ when hee shall make up those breaches in his Church, or in
your families: Notable is that, Psal. 102.16. When the Lord shall build
up Zion, hee shall appear in his glory.
The Case is yours Right Worshipfull: Hee hath broken you
with breach upon breach: Within the circuit of ten daies, you have laid in
dust the Head and Hope of your family: The delights of your
eyes are taken from you with a stroak from Hea∣ven:Ezek.
24.16 To help you to a right improvement of this great affliction; I
humbly crave leave to leave two or three words of Counsel with you.
First, Patiently bear the indignation of the Lord,
acknowledge his Righteousnesse; open not your mouth to murmure, or
repne against him. Lt these Considerations stay with
you.
1 There are no more breaches made,
than there was need of; I dare not say with him in Theocritus.

—
It is enough that ones dead out of a fami∣ly: No, There is not
one dram more in the potion, nor one twig in the Rod more than there was need
of: Notable is that, 1 Pet. 1.6. Now for a season (if need be) yee
are in Heaviness, if need bee; breaches are not made, but as there
is need, and if there bee a need: Were wee made Arbiters of our own
afflictions, it is more than probable, wee should not award our selves the
tenth of our corrections, yet the most High, whose wisdome is wonderful,
and understanding infinite, knows he should wrong us much, should hee
whip us no more.
2 The Lord hath done it, and who shall gain-say
it,Psal. 39.9. or bee displeased with it:
Righteous are all his doings in our hearts, and in our houses. His dealings
with Da∣vid; Job and Heman were sharp, but never chargable
with injustice; as the Word, so the Work of the Lord is good.
3 Have not you and wee deserved it; hath hee not been
highly provoked by us to take them from us? wherefore shall a living, a dying
man complain; since hee suffers for his si: This is mans sin, and Gods won∣ders: Nay, hath hee
not punished us lesse than our iniquities have deserved?
4 They were none of yours, whom hee  hath taken from you; they were his before yours, more than yours,
his, and none of yours;1 Cor. 6.19 when wee are not
our own, what can wee call our own? may not the Lord do what hee will with his
own? and call them home at his pleasure?
5 His End is good in all the Breaches made upon your
comforts; It is to break your heart more for sin, and from sin; from the
pleasures, profits, and honours of the world; to make you partaker of his
holinesse; Now, finis dat amabilitatem & facilitatem me∣diis;
Wee are content to lose some of our blood for the health of our bodies; why
not the best things in our houses for the health of our souls?
6 You will by acknowledging his hand, and
submission to his Rod without grumb∣ling, advance the Lords honour; and
crosse Satans expectation: It was the Devils de∣sign not to make
Job a beggar, but a blas∣phemer, unlesse the way to make him a
blas∣phemer, was first to make him a beggar, but Jobs blessing
of God crossed and amus'd the Devil: For Job not to miscarry
after all those sad tidings; This was a patience that honoured Heaven,
justified Gods testimony of him, made hell ashamed, the whole world to
wonder, and still to talk of the patience of Job: Hee saith
not,Vide Chrys. Hom. in lo∣cum. the Devil hath
taken this or that; had hee said so, the speech had been true enough,
though not good enough for so holy a man; but the Lord hath taken away.
7 It is a fruitlesse and
bootlesse thing to contend with God; nothing is got by mur∣muring; it is no
wrangling him out of his way; besides, this would argue much pride, and
sullennesse; nothing of a self-denying, humble spirit, which you have
a large share of.
8 Your noble soul is not yet lost; and your Redeemer
yet lives. There is no breach made twixt God and your soul; and Christ is
better to you than ten Husbands, Sons, &c. Seneca checks the folly
and vanity of murmurers under pressures: Bee it suppo∣sed (saith hee)
a man hath a princely pallace to lodge in with gallant Orchards, pleasant
Gardens, surrounded with tallest Cedars, or other Trees for Ornament, or
Muni∣ment; what an unreasonable thing were it, for this man to whine, repine,
and com∣plain, if a few leaves bee gone by the boyste∣rous winde, the fruits,
the trees, the house remaining: If the Lord take houses from us, estates
and friends from us; dearest re∣lations from us, yet if not himself, nor
his Son,Senec. ad Po∣lyb. Plut. nor his Spirit from
us, Fas non est de fortuna conqueri, &c.
9 As many children are remaining with you,Ep. 234. . as
are removed from you: I may say to you, as Anythus did of
Alcibiades: ; hee that
took one, had power to have taken all: Photius on this account
comforts his Brother Patri∣cius,
, &c. Three are left, though
three bee lost; nay,  they are not lost; non
amisimus, sed prae∣misimus; only the number of Jobs
children remained the same, when all things else restored double to him,
of which some give this reason; his other possessions were quite
gone, but his children remained alive, and were in peace with God.
10 Their times (as ours) were in Gods hand, not in the
hands of their friends,Psal. 31.15 then they
should have stayed here much lon∣ger; not in the hands of their enemies,
then their stay had been shorter: It is best to do what God would have
us, and to die when God would have us.
Prepare for future Breaches, who can say when the storm is
over, hee shall not see another; you are yet on the Ocean, not in the
Haven▪ Dis-ingage your affections, take off your heart from those
which are left behinde; your injoyment of them shall bee nothing the
shorter, and it shall bee in∣finitely sweeter; they are certain cares,
but uncertain comforts; In sorrow they are brought forth, and up, yea and out
unto the grave: On them wee often fix too much of our affections; from them wee
often have many of our afflictions: When you think on them whom you have
interred, withal bee it your indeavour; to meditate on death more, by which you
were so suddenly parted. To love Heaven better, where wee hope they are
arrived: To minde this world lesse, whence they are, and you shortly
shall bee trans∣lated.
Hold on in the service of the Lord,
not∣withstanding the breaches in your family: Of what stock or lineage
Job was I am not able to determine,Tost. Super
caput. 22. Gen. R. Salomon (as Tosta∣tus reports)
confidently asserts that hee was a Chananean, and dyed but a while before
the Jews entred into, Chanaan; and this hee builds on, Numb.
14.9. others as boldly say,Aug. & Amb. Vide
Peter. in Gen. 36.33 Cajet. in cap. primum Jobi. hee was that
Jobab of whom wee read in Gen. 36.33. Pererius disputes the
que∣stion, whether Job was of Esau's Lineage, and
concludes hee was; Cajetan thinks none can tell: It is certain hee was
a graci∣ous person, and this hee did, notwithstand∣ing All his
losses, chap. 1.20. Then Job a∣rose, and rent his robe, and shaved
his head, and fell down upon the ground, and worshipped: There are
some duties of great difficulty: As to love God when hee runneth upon us like
a Gyant, and shews himself as an enemy:Credere
invi∣sibilia, sperare dilata, &c. To have our spirits
lowest, when our imployments are highest: And (to name no more) to have our
obedi∣ence then at the highest; when our comforts are at the lowest; yet it
is no pleading diffi∣culty against a known duty; though hee kills us, yet wee
should trust in him, and wor∣ship before him; they who are not
faithlesse, cannot bee fatherlesse, nor friendlesse; they are never
at a loss; When afflictions put us to it, then by a lively faith wee put God
to it, and wee know God can do every thing, Job 42.2.
Record the gracious dealings of God with 
you in your saddest losses, and breaches: Keep a book of Remembrance
for every pas∣sage of his Providence; and improve former and present
experiences in this hour of try∣al: When Moses went up to the Mount
to pray, hee took the Rod of God in his hand; and why that Rod? by that Rod the
Lord had done wonderful things for his people,Exod.
17.9 and against his, and his Churches enemies; by it hee turned water
into blood, brought Froggs, and Lice upon the Land; divided the waters of the
Red Sea, &c. the sight of that Rod did incourage Moses to pray
to God, to confide in God for future delive∣rances; you can apply it.
Weep not immoderately for the death of your dear Relations;
They shall rise again, and you shall see them again; their bodies now
laid in the dust are mellowing for immor∣tality and glory; the
businesse of a wise man, (said a wise man) is not to bee without,
but above passions.

—Flagrantior aequo,
Non debet dolor esse tuus, nec vulnere major.Juvenal.
Sat. 13
Poverty made Fabritius famous, Rutili∣us was
made excellent by his banishment; Scevola by fire, Cato by
his death, Socra∣tes by prison, and you by patience.
It were easy to say more, but enough is better than all:
One thing yet remains which I humbly crave, I have half promi∣sed 
 to my self, viz. your candid acceptance of this short
and plain discourse: it is below others envy and observation, so is its
Author, and therefore craves no protection: Hortensius was weak in
writing, but pow∣erful in speaking; Albeticus was weak in speech,
but notable with his pen. I am in both very weak; you will however take it in
good part for HIS sake, whose death gave life to these unpolished
line; the mantle of your charity
will cover most of its infir∣mities: Bradwardin once took small
plea∣sure in reading Pauls golden Epistle, hee thought hee had not ingenium
metaphysi∣cum; the like is said of Augustin, and hee
ingenuously confesseth, Dedignabar esse parvulus, &c. It
is not your humour to censure, but your practice is to practise: If these
lines which bee in your hands, finde a room in your heart, if they work you out
of Love with life, to a serious and seasonable preparation for death. I
have my de∣sign.
I could say very much of you, but I am writing to you, and
therefore shall say no more, but pray for you, that if the Lord will not
shew you what hee will do with you, and yours, yet that hee would shew you
what hee would have you, and yours to do, and inable you thereunto: The good
Lord make up this sad breach to your af∣flicted Family, and this
distressed Coun∣try: Fit you for, and fill you with those divine
comforts, which in the multitude  of your perplexed
thoughts will rejoyce your soul: This is, and shall bee his prayer, who
humbly desires a room still in your memory under the title of
 February 14.
1655.
