


TO THE Right Honourable John Atherton of
Atherton Esq High-Sheriffe of the Coun∣ty Palatine of
Lancaster. And his eminently vertuous and Religi∣ous consort,
Mris. Mary Atherton. And also to my much honoured Brother in Law,
Mr. Humphrey Chetham, son and heir apparent to the Right
Worship∣ful George Chetham of Turton, Clay∣ton, &c.
Esq. Grace, Mercy, and Peace, from God the Father, through our
Lord Jesus Christ, bee multiplied.
Right Worshipful,
AMongst Salomons pious Parables, sacred
Apho∣rismes, divine Apoph∣thegm's, and golden Sen∣tences, more excellent
infi∣nitely than those of Plutarch, Pithagoras, and
Hippocrates; it is noted, chap. 20.6. 
Tolerabile est semel in anno insanite.
Sen. Most men will proclaim every one his goodness; but at your
command I have dis∣covered my folly and weaknesse: which (ght Rawleighs instruction to
his Son bee observed) should, and would have been my greatest secret:
it is an observeable passage in Epictetus,
Epict. Ench. cap. 69.; yet, as I seldome grant, what in
reason I ought to deny; 
Quod est po∣tentissiuum imperand:
ge∣nus, rogabant, qui juere
po∣terant Auson. Nostra non findimus ae∣quor sponte sed audace co∣gimur esse me∣tu. Ovid so now I shall
not deny what in rea∣son I ought to grant, viz. The notes of that
Sermon upon the subject by you desired, and delivered in the place by you
appoint∣ed.
The subject of this Sermon is well worthy your eyes to
peruse it, and your hearts to imbrace it; they are verba vivenda,
words to bee lov'd, yea, liv'd; they are of vast ex∣tent, of catholique
concernment: To Adam in innocency, yea, to the Angels before their
fall and Apostacy, it might have been given in charge, 
TAKE HEED WHAT YEE DO.
Therefore Ly∣curgus would not permit the
Lacedemoni∣ans to marry, if very young or old. Ze∣noph. Most
Worthy, for weighty and momen∣tous considerations, is this subject of
your cars; but too high for his tongue, who is so raw and young, not having
seen so many years, as a month hath daies: What the Philosopher saith
of marrying is most true, of preaching, young:
, and in another chapter,
,Arist.
Polit. Lib. 7. cap. 16. & 9.  in young persons
there is most strength and ability, in the ancient most wisdome and
solidity: 
Ast tempora certe virtutem non prima
ne∣gant, non ulti∣ma donant. Iscan. de bello Tro. lib. 1. Nam facilis cuivis
rigidi censura cachim∣ni, & pueri na∣sum Rhinoce∣ots habent.
Juven. sat. 10. Martial. lib. 1. Ep 3. Aug. Epist. 1. ad finem. Such
as the discourse is, 'tis intirely yours: I challenge no more in this book,
than Au∣gustine did in that bastard boy, Adeoda∣tus, of
which you read in lib. 1. confes. cap. 9. Ego nihil in illo puero praeter
delictum habeo; may it lye by you as an humble monitour of your duties,
and hearty memorial of my dutifulnesse, it is sufficiently honoured,
though both it and I shall bee by others censured, or stigmatized; you
will finde it at leisure to bee read, when you can have leisure to read it;
nec onero∣sum sit praesens, quod cum voles poni∣tur, cum voles
sumitur, as Augustine speaks to his Volutian.
That it is so short and plain, your wor∣ships I hope
will excuse: God and you commanded the one, the weighty affairs re∣quired the
other; they say, ; not that
which is much is e∣ver well; but that which is well, is ever much: what could
bee said in an hour; to which I was confined, though I some∣what
transgressed without a check: Lessius tells us the Italians
have a Proverb; hee that will eat much, must eat but little; it is true of,
and applicable to speaking. Of this second transcription, I may say as
Phy∣sitians do of the second concoction, it doth not amend the first,
except in what is extra∣lineary little, very little is superadded.
Nihil tam conveniena Deo
quam be∣neficenta; nihil autent
tam ali∣enum, quam ut sit ingratus ho∣mo Lactan. de ira dei ad Do∣nat. cap.
16. Senec. de Be∣nef. lib. 4. cap. 10. Saepe & non rediturus gratus est,
& ingratus qui reddidit. I cannot but with much thankfulness to
God and you, record your many noble fa∣vours to mee, and my family:
Seneca would not do good to such, as hee thought would only do good
again to him; but to such as would bee thankful; for (as hee truly) such as
can return again the like, are not ever grateful; but such as are grateful,
could they, they would ever return again the like; therefore (saies hee) I
will passe by the rich, and give unto the needy; erit enim in summa
inopia gratus, & cum omnia illi deerint, super erit animus: The Lord
shew mercy to the ancient and eminent house of Atherton, and grant
that you, and yours may finde favour with the Lord at the great day; how
eminently instrumental, and use∣ful you have been in times of war and
peace, both to Church and state, each tongue can tell: I remember that
excellent passage of Erasmus to Alfonsus Fonseca, ut
est modestiae non agnoscere▪ laudes hominum, ita gratitudinis est
non tacere viros, per quos numinis benignitas tan∣ta commoda humano largitur
generi: But it is not my purpose now to praise; may I not bee your
Herauld to the World, yet I humbly crave leave to bee your Oratour to God; and
from him (having your noble souls, your heaven-born spirits committed to my
charge) give this word of advice, that something may bee said, which
concerns you as Christians here, as well as something to your more publick
imployments, relating  in the discourse following: It is
humbly offered, and ushered in with that of holy Augustin: Attende
regis humilitatem, non respuit David verba praecipientis, non dixit, Nathan,
Audes mihi loqui Regi? rex sublimis Prophetam. audit.Enatrat. in Psal. 51. mihi p. 583.
1 Labour to improve the afflictions and weaknesses
upon you, to the glory of God the inflictor, and the eternal good of your
selves the afflicted: indeavour to see Gods hand, and end in them;
corrections are not ever for one and the same end, but they are ever from one
and the same hand: 
Quid de pa∣narum acerbi∣tate querimur?
unusquis{que} nostrum ipse se punit. Salv. de Gub dei. lib. 3. p.
113. there is no penal evil in Court, or Country, in Ct, or Family, but God owns it; on whomsoever, and whensoever the
od falls, it must bee
ac∣knowledged. God did it, man deserved it: it is from him providentially,
from us procu∣ringly: There is in the least twig, (if san∣ctified) a double
vertue: ; a preventive,
preparative, preservative, and sanative virtue: his design in our
corrections is the subduing of our corruptions, to make us white; 
Daniel 11.15. Heb. 12.10. not for his
pleasure, but our profit, to make us partakers of his holiness: It is to
cause us look more
Inwards, suffering times, are searching times; 
am 3.40. Amos 9 9. O that the diseases upon us, and the
distractions without us, might have this influence on us, to make us search
what's amiss in us, and also to minde who and what's above us: 
Psal. 10.1. upwards, when wee are at the lowest, wee should
look highest, and 
 last are worst: 
Rev. 22.11. Gen. 6.3. Ambrose be∣ing in
the house of one who boasted that hee never had any cala∣mity in all his
life; come saies hee, let us make haste out of this house, lest some
remark∣able vengeance of God fall up∣on us. This is the last of all
wee read of in his Word, which shall seize up∣on wicked wretches in this
world: Not to bee corrected, is one of the greatest correcti∣ons; such a
permission is the most direful, doleful affliction: It would bee the
saddest day that ever your eyes saw, the most dreadful voice that ever
your ears heard, should the Lord say; Let them alone, my Spirit shall no
more strive with you: Ne∣ver did gracious heart say in cold blood; 'Tis ill
for mee that I have been afflicted.
Secondly, Bee frequent and fervent in those high and
holy duties of Praise and Prayer.
Of Praise: It is due to God from every creature in the
World, and from every corner of the World; it waits only for him in
Sion: True Saints will as soon cease to have a being, as a
blessing from, and for their God: Sicknesse is Gods servant; as the
Centurion said to his souldiers; so doth God to sicknesses: 
Matth. 8,9. Go to such a family, or
person of quality, and they go; return, and they return; are your
pressures in measure removed? Let the mercy of God in this bee remembred;
and his name, which is alone excellent, bee praised; excellent is that
ob∣servation of Chrysostome.
Job foiled Satan more when hee praised God, than
Satan did Job when hee plundred him., &c.
Job was more illustrious▪ when hee sat a 
 upon the Dung-hill, with the cross in his hand, than when
hee sate upon the Throne with a Crown on his head. God hath dealt with you in
much mercy; not in wrath and fury: I dare say his dispensations are not, 

According to the fiercenesse of his wrath:
 Nor according to the strictnesse of his
Justice:
 Nor according to the greatness of his Power:
 Nor according to the demerits of your sins:
 Nor according to the extensivenesse of your
fears:
 Nor according to the malicious desires of
Satan:

What then remains, but that you love him, and land him as long
as you live; yea, though your daies shall end, yet this duty shall never
end: An endless eternity will but serve the turn for you to praise him:
when you was at the neediest, was not hee nearest? Cum duplicantur
lateres venit Moses:
Alsted. in Ex∣od. cap. 5. Ubi deficit
humanum con∣cilium, ibi in∣cipit divinum auxilium. Al∣sted in Exod. cap.
14. When Moses came, the bricks were doubled; and when the
bricks were doubled, then Moses came: 'Tis observed by
Alsted out of Philo; when the help of man faileth, then
comes help from Heaven; in the Mount the Lord is seen: God can
comfort us by the same Rod where with hee corrects us. Thy Rod, and thy
staffe, they comfort mee, saith holy David. In the midst of his
Judgements hee hath  remembred to bee merciful: It is
our duty and discretion at the remembrance of his mercies, to bee thankful;
had God mer∣cy on Paul, restoring Epaphroditus to health?
certainly hee hath shewed no less mercy to us in restoring your worship
to health: Let us therefore unanimously ma∣nifest our thankfulness for
this mercy, by our dutifulness to his Majesty: The Per∣sians so abhor'd
ingratitude, that as Zeno∣phon tells us;Zenoph. de
Instit Cyri. pag. 4. they had actions against un∣thankful persons,
and would call them, for this only, into the Court:
, &c. Blesse wee him with
our lips, and with our lives; 
Aug. in Psal. 145. for thankful
hearts, and thankful lives, they are the life of thankfulnesse: 'tis
excellent advice which the Father gives. Noli can∣tilenae bonae tuae
obstrepre malis mori∣bus, plus
ille attendit, quid vivas quam quid sonas: you might have suffered
se∣ven times more but hee hath punished you less than your iniquities
deserved: Deo gratias, bee that your name, and work: 
Augustin writ his 49. Ep. to one, called
Deo gratias. Thou art my praise, said weeping Jeremi∣ah:
Paul in sufferings more than any, in doxologies above all, Christ
under the cross and curse: Father I thank thee: And comes not help
from Heaven to draw our hearts towards Heaven? 
Prayer.Prayer is a Christians great
ornament, and muniment, his very aliment, and element; his great advantage, top
priviledge, fealty and ho∣mage▪ 
Ephes. 6.18,19 'Tis matura armaturae Christi∣ani:
 And hath a special influence upon all the other peeces of
our spiritual Armour: it keeps the girdle of Truth upon the loins; 
Vide Aquin. in Ephes. 6. Deus bone, qualis
est haec exhortatio quam plena
terroris, quam vehemens, praesertim si quis ponderet illa; per om∣nem
orationem in omnium tempore, in omni instantia & tamen ple∣ri{que} nostrum ita se gerunt. ac
si ne{que} o∣randum, &c. Bellarm. de Ae. Faelic. lib. 5. p. 370. it ties together the
breast-plate of Righte∣ousnesse; it keeps on the shooes of the
prepa∣ration of the Gospel upon our feet; it keeps the shield of Faith from
breaking, it in∣livens Hope, and acuates the Word, the sword of the Spirit:
Certainly mans in∣vocation of God, will immediately follow Gods vocation of
man: Every child of God can speak as soon as hee is new born; Hee can, and
will ask his heavenly Fa∣thers blessing: Better wee had never been born
into the World, than to go still-born out of the world: Hee that makes Religion
his businesse, will pray daily, as for daily bread, so for daily grace:
A man of much prayer, is a man of much grace, commonly: if you observe it,
prayerlesse Families, are gracelesse families: Sin will bring down
duty, or duty will bring down sin: By Prayer the course of Nature hath been
stopped, the waters of the Sea have been divided; burning flames have been
quenched: Devils have been ejected, dis∣possessed. Luther,
with others of Heavens Favourites being in prayer (as I once heard from a
judicious Doctor,Dr. Hill of Cambr. and since have
read the Story) recovered a young man out of Satans Jaws, who had given his
soul to him, and sealed the indenture with his own blood: The Indenture
sealed, was thrown into the house at the window,  as
they were in prayer: 
Luther. vincit invincibi∣lem,
ligat omni potentem: By it journies have been shortned, mountains have
been levelled, temptations repulsed, diseases re∣moved: 
Psal. 50.15. 2 Chron. 26.5 The
prayer of Faith shall save the sick; the sick person, or Nation;
most pro∣per therefore for you, and you are like to bee most prosperous: As
long as hee, (viz. Uzziah, a King, a man of quality) sought the
Lord, God made him to prosper:
Solus est Deus qui nunquam frustra
quaeri potest; nec cum invenire non potest; melius est Deum non
nvenisse, quam non
quaesivisse. Bern de Con∣sider. ad En∣gen. lib. 5. I have lately
hinted, yea handled this more fully, from another Subject, Ephes.
6.18. In which, to say no more, was opened the Christians daily task, of
Praying alwaies, why alwaies? How in the Spirit, alwaies; (but to
hint) because wee are needing al∣waies; they who have tasted most, have
had but some tastes at most of the Lords graciousnesse in his
Ordinances, Providen∣ces, Promises, &c. The world is alluring alwaies,
Satan is tempting alwaies, as the Lord waits that hee may be gracious, so the
Devil watches to destroy, because he is mali∣cious; and wee are sinning
alwaies; his people love him alwaies, and it is not a principle of pure need,
but of pure love, that draws the Saints (in whose hearts the Love of God is
planted) to the Throne of grace, and which is the sum of all: Our God is
giving alwaies, when wee are not at leisure to ask; 
Compare Gen. 18.32. with Jer. 5.1.
hee is at leisure to give, hee doth not suspend, and cease bestowing,
when wee cease begging: First, Abraham ceased to ask, then God
ceased to grant: Hee that came from fifty  to ten, 'tis
ten to one, would have come from ten to one; had Abraham still
continued, though some of the learned say otherwise.
Deus cohibuit mentem animum{que} A∣brahae, ne pergeret
ulterius deprecari pro Sodomitis. Tostat. & Perer. in Gen. 18. pag.
603.
O pray! pray then; you have greater mercies than others,
greater opportunities than others, greater ingagements upon you than others;
all which are obligatory: di∣stresses are renewed from Heaven, to re∣new
your humble addresses to Heaven: In their afflictions they will seek mee
early, and earnestly: A child of God would not for a world bee a meer
stranger to the power of, and comfort in this great Ordinance: the most and
best good is got upon the knee; the Scholar studies well, that prayes well:
the Magistrate rules well, that prayes well: 
Bene oasse, est bene stu∣duisse. Luther. Doctor
Ames got his learning by praying, and Solomon his wisdome;
Bona∣ventura (that Doctor Seraphicus) being asked by
Aquinas from what books and helps hee derived such holy and divine
ex∣pressions and contemplations; hee pointed to a Crucifix, and said,
Iste est liber, &c. prostrate in prayer at the feet of this
image, my soul receiveth greater light from Hea∣ven, than from all study
and disputation: of this Monkish tradition and superstitious fiction,
some use may bee made: The soul∣dier fights well, that prayes well, and
there∣fore Constantine commanded that his 
Effigies or Portraicture should bee drawn, not as other Emperours in their
Armour, leaning; but as in a praying posture, kneel∣ing: O pray again:
Christ must ask, if that hee would have: Can wee expect to have,
especially mercies in mercy, and yet not ask? Hee is good, but to the soul
that seeks him, Bonus quaerentibus, said the Father: Hee is good
to all that seek him; better to them that finde him, best of all to them
that have full fruition of him: 
Lm. 3.25. Take heed how, and for what you pray: you may ask
and miss, if you ask amiss: strive more for ferven∣cy, than for fluency:
you may know if you pray in and by the Spirit: if you have the Spirits
assistance, you shall bee sure of the Fathers acceptance: The
Spi∣rit, if it help you to pray, it will help you to practise; it will help
you with working af∣fections, as well as with winning expres∣sions; it will
humble you in, by, and after duty, if it help in duty.
Thirdly, Do your indeavour to set on foot that
precious Ordinance of the Supper a∣mongst us: Peter observes in
his Epistles, that there are four things very precious; they are the most
precious things in the World: non patiuntur hyperbolen:

Precious Faith, 2 Pet. 1.1. a dram or grain of
this, is better than a tun of gold.
 Precious Promises, 2 Pet. 1.4. with∣out
which, were not the Saints of all crea∣tures most miserable?
 Precious Christ, 1 Pet. 2.4.7 and
also
 Precious Blood, 1 Pet.
1.19. O the vertue in it, the value of it: through this Red Sea you must
pass to Heaven: May, you have, and injoy this Sacrament some∣times abroad,
why not at home in our solemn Assembly, who is contented, though hee
finde bread in his neighbours house, to bee without in his own? who can sit
down at his own Table, and not think of Christs? How can wee expect good by
the Word of Christ, while wee are without the blood of Christ:
 The Albigenses despised Sacraments,
defa∣ced the Bible with their urine and excre∣ments; 
Aug. Ep. 5 but the vengeance of God followed them; an hundred
thousand of them were slain at one time by the sword of men on earth, and
by fire from the God of Heaven: Julian was so met with. Calvin
in Act. 20.7. Aug. in Joan. Tr. 26. 'Twas anci∣ently had every Seventh
day, yea, every day of the seven; not now in many places once in seven
years: Who can forbear smiling at the School-mens seven Sacraments; or
weeping at our one alone: Woe (not) to it that is alone, but to us that
suffer it to go alone, is the necessity of them, and ver∣tue in them.
Vide Aq. p. 3. qu. 60. & 62. de
Numero. Abs{que} dubitatione tenendum est Sa∣cramenta Novae
Legis septem esse, nec plura, nec pauciora. Est. lib. 4. Dist. 1.
Paragr. 13. Biel. lib. 4. Dist. 2. Quest. 1. So great with them, and
of none with us? Precious in the sight of the Lord is the blood and death of
his Saints: and truly precious  in the sight of true
Saints is the blood and death of their Lord Jesus: Shall I trans∣cribe the
passages of two learned men, an ancient, and a modern writer: 
Gabriel Alba∣spin. Obser∣vat. lib. 1.
Observatio. 17.20. p. 146.Quanti de∣bet esse hominibus
sanguis & crux Do∣mini nostri Iesu Christi, cum Deus in hoc &
altero saeculo tantam mercedem reponat iis martyribus, qui vel unius
sanguinis guttam profuderint, &c.—Et∣si gratia Dei non est
alligata Sacramen∣tis, ea tamen cum offeruntur, non sunt respuenda,
negligenda, sed inquirenda, &c.
P. Martyr in Sam. p. 128.By this,
grace is increased, comforts are inlarged, experiences are acquired, the
Covenant is sealed, the infinite love and free grace of God is discovered;
the suffe∣rings of Christ manifested, life eternal as∣sured, &c.
The damned spirits in Hell, know now in great measure the preciousness
of Christ whom they contemned, the use∣fulness of this high and holy
Ordinance, which they sleighted, and prophaned, the nobleness and
transcendent excellency of their souls, which they have eternally damned;
this they know, and the knowledge hereof increaseth their anguish and
horror: Let us now in this day of grace, labour for this, and improve all means
of grace: change but the word, and I may say, THEN shall wee not
bee ashamed, when wee are fitted for, are partakers of, have due respect
unto, and make good im∣provement of all his Sacraments.Alluditur ad Psal. 119.6.
Estius in Sen.
lib. 2. Distinct. 16. & 17.Fourthly, Meditate frequently of the
superlative excellency of your precious souls, and diligently labour to
secure and assure the salvation of them to your selves: A rational
soul is of more worth, than all the world; they are great losers, who gain
that with the losse of this: It were easy to demonstrate the
transcendent preciousness, of our souls: but to convince, or to
perswade men to walk up to this conviction, especially persons of quality;
hic labor, hoc opus est: I hope and know better things of you,
though I thus speak: I crave your consideration however; that
Heb. 12.9. Zach. 12.1. Vide Photii Epist.
133. Ta∣raso Patricio. Aug.
Steuch. Eugub. de pe∣renni Philoso∣phia lib. 9 cap. 10, & 11. Zenophon
Me∣morab. lib. 4. pag. 634. Plotin. Enne ad. 4. lib. 7. c. 10The most high challengeth a more
pecu∣liar relation to them, and interest in them: Therefore hee is stiled
the Father of Spi∣rits, and hee is the Physitian of Spirits, and hee accounts
it a special part of his glory to form the spirit of man within him: the
soul, it is the breath of God, the beauty of man, the wonder of Angels, the
envy of Devils: It is , as
Plato calls it, a coelestial plant, and of a divine Off-spring:
, saith Zenophon,
speaking of the nobi∣lity of the soul; I shall pass by what
Ploti∣nus hath in his Enneads all along: besides the soul
of the world, at which hee once and again hints; how excellently doth hee
pour∣tray the Origen, and discover the nature of  mans
immortal spirit: It is a Deo, though not, de Deo, as the
Gnosticks thought and taught: To this adde, The soul is under the
command of none but God alone: In conscientiam dominari creaturae non
est competibile: this speaks out the excellency of it. The soul is
in a capacity to injoy communion with God, and to receive the communications of
those divine excellencies which hee hath to communicate: 
Dan. Heins. Exercit. Sacr. in cap. 4. ad
Ephes.It may bee said of man, as Jerome doth of
Pauls Epistle to the Ephesians: It is Epistola
media, homo est creatura media: As Jesus Christ stands 'twixt God
and man, so man stands twixt God and the creatures: 
Fecisti nos Domine pro¦te,
&c.Again, the soul cannot bee satisfied with any thing, or
saved by any thing, God excepted; there is in every gracious soul a holy
pride, most pleasing to the God of Heaven, to scorn all the world in
point of satisfaction or salvation; or consider them in relation to the
Angels, souls are of an An∣gellick nature, most true is that of
Co∣mineus,In his Philo∣soph. repurg.
Ange lus est homo nudatus, ho∣mo Angelus vestitus: An Angel is a
man stripped, a man is an Angel, cloathed with clay: Again, weigh well the
, the incomparable price which the
Son of God payed for the redemption of the soul; 'twas not the spoil of
richest Provinces, not the price of Cleopatra's draught, not
silver, or gold, but the precious blood of Jesus Christ: 
Vide Plot. ubi supra; & Vos∣sium
de anima separata. The immortality, and im∣materiality of it speaks
forth the transcen∣dent  excellency of it; as also the
rich and rare endowments, and noble operations of it: The excellency of the
case, or cabinet, viz. the body, intimates a more than ordi∣nary
excellency of this watch, or jewel: though in some respects the body of man
bee called, a vile body, as being subject to vile diseases, to vile
abuses, in comparison of what it was in its primitive constitution, and
of what it shall bee at the great day of the resurrection, yet is the body
of all materi∣als the most excellent, as Pererius well
ob∣serves:Perer. in Gen. 2.7. pag. 128. Cal. lib. 12. de
usu partium. & lib. 9. de plac. Hip. & Plat. When
Galen saw the Anatomy of a body, hee cryed out, The God of
Na∣ture: Abdala the Saracen, and Phavori∣nus, of whom wee read in
A. Gellius, admi∣red at nothing in the world, but man; at no∣thing in
man, but only his soul: This is (said Augustine) a greater
miracle in man, than all the miracles wrought amongst men: the body is
comparatively vile; it is, Jumentum animae, sperma faetidum, saccus
stercorum, esca vermium, &c. but the soul is a
demi-semi-God, dwel∣ling in an house of clay: 
Senec. Ep. 31. & 41. Anima
vero vi∣cina est substantiae Dei, &c.Aug. in
Psal. 144. as Augustine excellently asserts the
nobility of it from its operations: But once more, it is the mea∣sure of all
other excellencies; as thus, every thing is accounted so far forth excellent,
as it is subservient to the soul, and conduceth to the felicitating of
it: Now, who will cast Pearls and Jewels as chips at his heels; who dare,
consideratis considerandis,  curare cutem, magis
quam animam: minde his bag, his back, his belly, his body, his house and
horse, neglecting his immor∣tal soul, which is by nature incomparably more
noble; of our cares, fears, prayers, tears, means, and pains, the greater part
should bee for, and about the better part.Merito poscit
studia majora pars melior.
Excellently Epictetus a Stoick Philoso∣pher; it is
a sign of a sottish, blockish man, to bee long about any thing which
concerns his body; to bee long in exercising, in eat∣ing, in drinking,
&c. These are to bee done by the by; but all the care is to bee imployed
about the soul.

Euchirid. c. 63. per totum.
Quis suror est, viles a vobis a∣nimas
vestras haberi, quas etiam Dabolus putat esse pre∣tosas? quis fu∣ror est, viles a vobis haberi, quas etiamlle charas vobis debere esse
di∣cit? qui viles facere conaur,
ac per hoc, qui∣cun{que} animas suas negligunt, etiam infra judicium
Dia∣boli se amant. Vide Salvian. lib. 3. ad Ec∣cles. Cath p. 431.In
the eyes of God: Angels, Devils, and men, Christian, and Pagan, it is
pre∣cious: Let not us dishonour that by which wee are so much ennobled, and
advanced; and which by the glorious Angels is so much admired; and by the
apostate spirits envy∣ed: 'Tis dishonoured in a word; when wee think to
satisfie it with riches, honours, or terrene things, with any thing, God
ex∣cepted: It is as if wee should entertain a King at our Tables with chaffe,
dung, or bare bones to pick: when wee contaminate and pollute it; it is worse
than to cast dung  in the face of a Prince: when we
suffer Satan to possesse our souls; it is to lodge Wolves or Bears
in royal palaces: when wee make more provision for our bodies, than for our
souls; it is as if a man should dandle his Dog, and bid, out with the
child; serve his Swine, and starve his Son; as if a man should prize the
Cabinet above the Jewels; or the Gold-smith weigh his drosse, but throw
away his gold; or as if the Hus∣bandman should gather the stubble into the
Barn, but leave the corn to bee devoured by the beasts of the field, and
fowls of the Air: and when wee act not rationally, re∣ligiously, as if there
were no more in us than sensitive souls: when wee indeavour not to
understand the wants of them; and to have thoss wants supplyed.Si recte qui∣dem carnem famulam, ani∣mam vero do∣minam esse
dixerint, non oportet poste∣riori loco nos dominam po∣nere, ac famu∣lam
iniquo ju∣re praeferre. Euch. ubi su∣pra. It was Eucherius
his sad complaint in an Epistle to Valeria∣nus: Multus corporum
curationi im∣penditur usus; multum huic oprae in spem medelae datur; nunquid medici∣nam anima non meretur?
&c. and then do wee dishonour it: When wee give no di∣ligence to bee
sure of the salvation of it: Shall I present you with some
perswasive considerations, to close with that: to give all diligence to
secure, and bee sure of the salvation of your souls?
It is a peece of choicest policy to secure that which is
worth all the world: Our souls are such things.
It is the greatest equity to do this for the soul, since
all wee do, wee do with the soul;  the body is a
livelesse lump: it is the soul in the eye, that inables the eye to see;
in the hand, that inables the hand to work, &c. Nothing else can bee made
sure, but this may: 
Chrisost.
.Ergo, riches
cannot, they are lying, and flying vanities:
, &c. nothing more unfaithful;
they are as de∣ceitful, as delightful, yea more: the world
like water, the more wee graspe at it, the lesse wee hold of it; like
sands in our hands, the faster wee gripe, the faster it will goe: Honours
cannot: 
Psal. 49.12. The Courts of Princes
are paved with Ice; a fall is soon catcht, and proves fatal: What are
earth∣ly honours and applauses but magnum nihil the lightest
plumes of worldly honours (said one) are tossed up and down, and down and
up, by the lighter puffes of popular hu∣mours: the very aspects of the Moon
her self are not so changeable, and variable, as the respects of most
men: Relations can∣not: 
Ezek. 24.16. Hos. 9.11. Job
1.10.Ezekiel may lose the delight of his eyes,
Ephraim his glory: Never was any surer of his posterity than holy
Job; not a child, nor a chicken of his but was hedged about on every
side, yet hee lost all on a day: Life it self cannot: 
In Psal. 29. Mihi pag. 189.Non
est diu (saith Augustine) quod habet extremum,
that cannot bee counted long, which shall have an end: wee must all die,
and bee as water spilt upon the ground.

Paulin.Humanis opibus
sperare salutem
Nulla salus, nec enim mortem mortalia
pellunt.
But assurance of our salvation may
bee obtained: this may bee made sure, and it is worthy the most solemn
consideration: There may bee a controversy about our souls: Others may
question our interest in Christ, and that redemption purchased by
Christ: wee our selves may draw sad conclusions, especially in the
hour of temptations, and day of desertion against our selves: Sa∣tan
certainly will challenge the greatest right to them: if hee cannot cast our
souls into Hell, hee will cast an hell into our souls: And at the last
day there shall bee a final decision of the controversy to whom our
souls belong; God will determine it: I say no more, but that it is the very
life of this present life, to bee assured after this, of a better life:
The denyal of the former Truth (saith Luther) were there no other
errour in their Doctrin, is cause sufficient why wee desert the
Roman Church.Luth. in Gen, cap. 41.
Christus meus, &
omnia.Fifthly, Study Jesus Christ, his preci∣ousnesse and
usefulness more: precious hee is, in respect of what hee is, in
himself, or in relation, whether to God the Father, or to the true Beleevers;
in respect of what hee doth, as Prophet, Priest, King, Head, Husband; in
respect of what hee hath: and also in respect of what hee suffered: 
Nihil mihi sa∣pit, in quo non sapit
Iesus Christus.By your apprehensions, and appretiations of him;
your affections to him, your desires and breathings after him; your
undertakings for him, your unsatisfiedness without him, your conversings
with him, and your de∣lighting  in him, you may
understand if hee bee so to you.
None ever felt the bur∣thensomeness, saw the
dangerousness, or tasted the bitterness of sin, but they acknowledged
his preciousness.Cui Christus in∣cipit dulcescere,
necessum est a∣marescere mun∣dum, peccatum & omnia
sublu∣naria.
Hee is useful to all ends and purposes; no redemption, no
reconciliation, no justifi∣cation; no sanctification, no consolation, no
salvation, no grace, peace, glory, without him: Augustine
excellently asserteth this saying,
See Predeaux praelect & Da∣ven Dterm. Acosta. lib. 5. de procuranda
Judorum salu∣te. cap 3. Dr. Tuckney in Act. 4 12. Maldon in Mat. 11.21.
Gentiles poe∣tant,
&c.He who teacheth that a man may be saved with∣out Christ (as
some of the schoolmen do) I doubt whether that man can be saved by
Christ.Qui dicit homi∣nem salvari pos∣se sine
Christo: dubito an ille per Christum salvari potest.
Hee is all in all to them, who see they are nothing; can do
nothing, and have no∣thing at all without him; but of this you have lately
heard so much; now therefore no more.
Sixthly▪ Commune with your own hearts; allow mee
the least skill in divinity, and I will say, a great deal of true
Christianity consists in this, and our sincerity is much dis∣covered
by this: 
In Psal. 49. Revel. 4.8.It is the
holy Counsel of Augustine, and the Saints daily practice;
Ascende tribunal mentis tuae, esto tibi judex, dic Deo tuo,
&c.
Vide Marlora tum in
locum.In the Apocalyps you read of four living creatures, full of eyes,
before, and behinde, and within: The first was like a Lion; The second like
a Calf; The third had the face of a man; The fourth like a flying Eagle:
Various are the glosses on that Text; some understand, and say, they
betoken Christ, who was born of the Virgin, as a man, suffe∣red death as a
Calf, rose again like a Lion, mounted up as an Eagle: Others thus; the four
Creatures hold forth the four sorts of Officers in the Church: 
Mr. Cotton.The Lion the ru∣ling
Elder; the Oxe the Pastor; the Man the Deacon; and the Eagle the Teacher: But
they were Angels, and are said to bee full of eyes, because of the
vastnesse and clearnesse of their knowledge: 
Tom. ad. Qu. 58. Artic. 6, 7. p. 1. q. 106.
Ar. 1. Vasquez speaks much of their Matutin, and
vesper∣tin Knowledge; and Aquinas of their light of Nature, Grace,
and Glory; of their con∣created, revealed, and experimental know∣ledge:
Gregory compares holy men on earth to those blessed Angels in
Heaven: The Saints are now Evangelical, anon they shall bee Angelical: they
are full of eyes within, they look within, and without, a∣bove, and about, but
they fix chiefly on Christ, and their own consciences: It is sad to see
near and dear relations (as Hus∣band and Wife) sit down together, rise up
together, walk out together; come in toge∣ther, and yet never change word with
each other; but O how sad! to see a man and his heart such strangers
one to another: Hoc:  Hoc nos pessimos facit,
said Seneca;Epist. 83. this is it that
makes us so vile; and therefore prescribes in another Epistle,Vide
Senec. Ep. 28. & 80. Quantum potes teipsum coargue, inquire in
te, accusatoris primum partibus fungere, de∣inde Judicis, &c.
Franc. Suar. Nullum ma∣jus, nullum melius
negoti∣um est, quam ire in interio∣ra mentis, & Secretaria cor∣dis. Aug.
in Psal. 33. Conc. 2.The little time which that acute and profound man
spent every day in the search and examination of his own heart, and
conference with his own con∣science, was more dear to him (as I have read of
him, and beleeve it would bee found most true, would wee bee perswaded to
try) than all the rest of the day which hee spent in controversals: It
was Constantines constant practise, as Eusebius
reports of him, to shut up himself in a secret place of his Palace, where
hee had his Soliloquies: You are persons of quality; look upon him, and do
likewise: It was the practise of one better, and greater than hee is, that
writes or reads this: 
Psal. 77.6.In the night I
commune with mine own heart, and my spirit makes diligent search: how
sutable, sa∣voury, seasonable, how sweet, advantagious, and
profitable this may bee to you in your present condition: I cannot tell you
before, but do it, and you will tell mee hereaf∣ter.
On this day read and pon∣der, Psal.
143. ult. Psal. 36 7,8. 87.2,5. 133.3
 Cor. 5.4. Ezek.
46.4.Sixthly, Continue your constant atten∣dance upon Gods Ordinances
in our solemn Assemblies on the Lords dayes, and exer∣cise dayes:
whilst others (of the Gentry, as well as others) like Owles, not able to
in∣dure the light and power of Gospel Truths,  forsake
the assembling of themselves toge∣ther: Offer you unto the Lord the
Lambs, and the Rams without blemish: it is the Lords command:Vide
Calvi∣num in Psal. 27.8. Seek yee my face: (i.e.) seek yee
God among his peo∣ple in his Ordinances, there is Gods face: Whilst others
prize one day, elsewhere a∣bove a thousand in the Courts of God: you give
us demonstrations, that you prize one day in his Courts, above thousands
else∣where: There hee shews himself most beau∣tiful, and most
bountiful: There hee puts that upon his people, which makes them lovely, and
that into his people, which makes them lively.
Never did General so much delight to see his souldiers
together marching order∣ly, or fighting valiantly, as the Lord doth to see
his servants together, praying fer∣vently, and hearing attentively: 
Psal. 50.5.then his heart is
inlarged, and hand opened to∣wards them; yea ravished with them; 
Cant. 4.9.when the dead and drie
bones lay in the field dis∣persed; they were not all that while enliven∣ed;

Ezek. 37.when they were congregated,
breath and life came in: when on other daies persons are scattered, they
are in great measure deaded: but on the Lords day, and in the Lords way
assembled: how are their droop∣ing spirits revived? their languishing
souls refreshed: Excellent is that passage of
Chrysostome: , &c. If
you step into Courts of Judicature, as at the last Assizes, what
pleading, pocketting,  swearing, &c. if into the
Market-place, nothing but buying, selling, lying, couzen∣ing, cheating: plain
dealing is a Jewel, and they will tell us, hee that useth it shall dye a
Beggar; but may not wee tell them, they that do not use it, live fools, and
dye knaves: . Step into private
families, nothing but cares, as the Epigrammatist well expes∣seth it. 


If into Princes Palaces, the discourse runs smoothly of
honour and majesty,, &c. and terrene glory,
, not a word of God, or Heaven:
Enter now (saith the Father) into the house of God, and there
you shall hear something of God, of Heaven; the bliss and felicity of
separate souls; of such things as eye hath not seen, nor ear
heard: Here is the most comfortable meeting, and cordial closing of
Gods Spirit, and our spirits.
In the Turkish History I read of Huni∣aes, a valiant Captain, now a dying
man, who said: It was fitter for the servant to go to the house of his
Lord; than for the Lord to come to the house of his servant: How few
persons of quality, especially un∣der such weaknesse and maladies, are
so ob∣servant of the Lords day: a day separated from all other daies, a
day elevated above all  other daies:Oratio Domi∣nica est omni∣bus aliis excel∣lentior, in 16. Vide
Tostatum in Mat. 6. Q. 121. pag. 78. As there is no prayer like the
Lords Prayer; no supper, like the Lords Supper, so no day like this day:
this is the Queen of daies, as Ignatius stiled it in his Epistle
to the Magnesians: Go on, you and yours to keep it holy, and God
will make you happy: prevent future prophanations of it: a frown of yours may
do very much; ve∣ry much: It is the Lords day, it is the Lords due; if hee have
not his, can wee expect ours?
Seventhly, Labour by all your afflictions,
instructions, Ordinances, and Providences to grow in grace; Let all your
 bee
, your nocuments,Vide Estium in Sent. lib 2. Dist. 14. parag. 3. your
docu∣ments: In the close of every dayes work (the second excepted, for
which variety of conjectures are offered) this approbation is suffixed: God
saw that it was good:Aug. in Gen. 1.31. but viewing
them all together; then they were very good: It is Augustins
observa∣tion: even to every grace; yea, of the least degree of grace; hee
saith, it is good,Traxisti ani∣mum meum ad te; et
Solomon. Rapuisti ani∣mum meum; juxta Ab. Esram. Incor∣diasti me
al∣mud. Copu∣last cor meum cum
u Baxt. x con. p. 384.
in Cant. 4.9. but when hee beholds the graces of his Saints, fresh and
flourishing, your faith acted and strengthened; your repentance daily
re∣nowed, your humility increased, &c. then, very good: If the Lord
Jesus Christ bee even ravished with one of his Spouses eyes, with one
chain of her neck, with the least grains and drams of true Grace: O how is
hee taken with abundance of grace: I be∣seech you therefore, that yee
increase more and more; out-strip others not in Riches,  or honours, but in spiritual watchfulness, heavenly-mindedness,
heart-inlargedness: Compare your selves, with your selves, and strive to
excel your selves: Should not the Oxen in your stalls,Vide Salme∣ron, in 1 Thes. 4.10. the Fish in your
ponds, the Grasse in your fields, grow in the Spring, you would bee much
perplexed: It is a sadder affliction,Vide Seneca de vita.
cap. 1. when Grace grows not: whilst others are desiring to bee
happy, not indeavouring to bee holy: Bee it your indeavour to bee holy, you
shall then assured∣ly bee happy: Excellent is that of the Ancient;Et Aug. in Psal. 119.1. Quis unquam vel potest, vel
potuit, vel poterit inveniri, qui esse no∣lit beatus, quid ergo nobiscum
agitur, ut velimus, quod nolle non possumus, ni∣si quia omnes
beatitudinem concupis∣cunt, sed quomodo ad
am perveniatur, plurimi
nesciunt: Satan is compleating his skill and wrath; and therefore there
is need of much grace; it is subject other∣wise to decrease: wee are
dying daily, in our relations, in our qualifications, or in our graces: the
exercise of grace is al∣waies attended with new increase of grace; though
both Arms grow, yet that which a man most useth, is the stronger, and
bigger: in Birds, the wings which have been most used, because
sweetest, are most de∣sired: the Apostle urges this adding of grace,
to grace, and assuring our salvation, with notable Arguments; it is
preventive, and preparative; it will prevent a very great evil,2 Pet. 1. v. 5, 10, 11. viz. Apostacy; it will
prepare  you for a very great good: The more Grace is
exercised, the more God is honour∣ed, and the Rod sweetned, and Judgement
prevented:Exercit. in Mark. 11.13.
 non
 Accentus spi∣ritus{que} &
di∣stinctiones negligebant veteres. the reason why Christ cursed
the Fig-tree, was, because it was barren in a time and place of
fruitfulnesse, as Hein∣sius observes,
: Ubi enim erat, tempus erat
ficuum: It is a difficult work to recover the activity of grace once
lost, to revive a duty in dis∣use: besides, Satans advantage is great,
when grace is weak, or not in exercise:Fateor me
Catechismi Discipulum. To this end, read much: Let not a day
passe without a Bible, nor a week without a Ca∣techisme in your hands:
Luther himself was not ashamed to bee found with that in his
fist.
Eighthly, And which concerns one of you especially:
Honoured Brother; im∣prove the present opportunity and place for your growth
in Literature: you have the ad∣vantage of many thousands; a Father able and
willing to accommodate, and furnish you with choicest helps: A Tutor,Mr. Sam. Birch. Oxon. religi∣ous, ingenuous, and
industrious, and in the University, where learning grows, and flows:
Another Athens; Diogenes reports of Thales, that hee left the
affairs of State to become a Philosopher:Diog. in vita
Thaletis. Anacharsis ra∣ther desired to bee a Disciple of
wise Philo∣sophers, than a Ruler over irreligious Na∣tions:Ep. ad Crae∣sum. Ar. Rhet. l. 5.
Aristotle reports of Alexander, that hee
was very bookish: What shall I relate  of Julius
Caesar, M. Censorius Cato. Justinian, Julian, Hannibal: Cornelius
Celsus; all great men, and great Scho∣lars: Homines quo magis &
ignari, & a bonis literis alieni, eo propinquius ad belluinam vitam
accedunt, si enim illas animi potentias, quibus a belluis distin∣guimur,
liberalibus scientiis non exco∣lamus, omnis earum virtus perit; & bru∣tis
animantibus similes,Vide Pits. in proaemio relat.
rerum Angli∣caum p. 23.
immo in mul∣tis deteriores evadimus: Pitseus well: The more others
in this wretched age de∣spise learning, and learned men: the more will
ingenious spirits prize and honour it, and them that have it; how unlike is
this to former ages?
Dionisius the Tyrant sent for his Master
Plato, in a royal Vessel, and rode to the Sea side, to meet him
in his tryumphant Chari∣ot, brought him into the City, not like a
Philosopher, but like a conqueror: Alex∣ander highly honoured
Aristotle,Naturam non tollit, sed ex∣tollit non
in∣terficit, sed perficit Philo∣sophia. Vide Sen. Ep. 76. 90, 72. non cum
va∣caveris, Philo∣sophandum est, Omnia alia negligenda, ut huic
assidi∣mus, &c. and
Pho∣chion: Trajanas his Plutarch; Nero his Master
Seneca and Burrus for a season: and Anthony de
Guevara tells us, that Scipio Major dying, ordered by will, that
the Effigies of learned Ennius the Poet, should bee put upon his
Tomb, as judging it more honuourable to have that monument and memorial of a
learned man, than the Trophy's and Epitaphs of conquered Africa: That
check of Socrates excellently intima∣teth the virtue and influence of
true Philoso∣phy: Zopirum ne ridete; hujusmodi 
nim naturae essem,Philosphia est partus rectae rationis; res Dei ratio.
Ter∣tul. nisi naturam Philo∣ophia superassem: Plato,
Pithagoras, Aristoxenus, Democritus, and others, for the love of
learning have wandred to the utmost bounds of the Earth:
Clitomachus, above forty years old, came to Athens to learn
of Carneades: I shall spare to trans∣cribe what I have read of
Ptolomy Phila∣delphus,Quomodo re∣pudiamus.
sae∣cularia studia, sine quibus di∣vina esse non possunt.
Ter. who had in his library five hun∣dred thousand books; or
Xenophon that great scholar, how hee conducted ten thou∣sand
Greeks over the Fords of fifty Rivers, and through the midst of an hundred
thou∣sand enemies, from Persia into Greece: So∣lon was
used to say, 


Melchior Adams relates of D. Chytrae∣us,
that as hee lay upon his death-bed,Jucundiorem sibi
decessum sore, si mori∣bundus etiam aliquid didi∣cisset. pag.
694. hearing some disputing by him (with a low voice, lest they
should disturb him) lifted up his head, and desired them to speak up;
for hee should die the more chear∣fully, if hee died learning somewhat:
Si∣gismund the Emperour, at the Counsel of Constance,
lamented this, that neither hee, nor any of his great Courtiers and
Counsellors were able to answer a forraign Embassador in the Latine
Tongue; and told his Nobles that had no learning, that hee preferred before
them some of obscure Pa∣rentage, meerly for their polite learning,
saying, that hee had good reason to honour  scholars
above all men, as those that wer singularly graced and gifted of God
Knights and Lords I can make in a day, as many as I please; but scholars
God only can make:Vide Corn. Agr. de vanit. Sci. &
Calvin. in 1 Cor. 13.8,9. It is not great estates and pla∣ces, but
great parts and graces that makes truly noble: Augustin Bishop of
little Hip∣po by his learning, became more famous infinitely, than
Cecilius Bishop of great Carthage: Yet I make bold to minde
you of a common saying of your grave Father it is better to bee an
honest man without learning, than learned, without ho∣nesty: As
Agrippa, the noble Counsel∣lor, and Favourite of Octavian,
told him; Vertue makes men equal to the gods: Let us not for the tree of
Knowledge lose the tree of Life:Surgun in∣docti & rapi∣unt coelum, &
nos cum do∣ctrina nostra detrudimur in Gehennam. I cannot but tremble
to read that of Augustin: The unlearned arise, and take Heaven by
force, when we with all our learning are turned into Hell: Accomplished
and accoutred with learn∣ing and grace, you may serve your own Generation by
the will of God, before you fall asleep, bee laid unto your Fathers, and
see corruption.
Non potest esse verus
Christi∣anus, nec reci∣tare orationem dominicam.Ninthly, Bee fitting
and preparing your selves every day for your dissolution: Looking for,
longing after, and hastening to the comming of the day of God: Hee cannot
(said Luther) bee a sincere Chri∣stian,Ioh.
Gerard. Vossius. de Extr. Jud. nor can hee pray over the Lords
Prayer, who with all his heart desires not this dayes approach: It were very
profi∣table,  could wee hear each hour what they say
Jerome did (though learned Vossius say's, it is not
found in his works.) Arise yee dead, and come to judgement: Death is
strong, it conquers all, the grave is cruel, it spas none: Hannibal never slept in the camp
without his armour: wee dwell in houses of clay, our foundation is in the
dust: thrice happy are wee, if wee bee ready for the grave,Job 17.8. by that time the grave is ready for us: I shall
not praedict yet I humbly conceive, if some of you live long, I
shall not: My care shall bee (as Seneca said his was) now being
young, how to live well: and if old age come, then how to dye well.
Once more:Psal. 31.19 Heb. 11.2 2 Cor.
4.17. 2 Tim. 4 8 Meditate frequently of the greatness of those good
things, and the good∣ness of those great things, reserved for such as
fear and love God: Our Lord Jesus had them in his eye, so had Moses,
Paul, and others: This will help you to walk more thankfully, work more
chearfully, suffer more patiently, fight more valiantly, repulse
temptations more strongly, lay out your selves more freely, live with what
providence hath cut out more contentedly;An mercedis intuitu
Deo servire liceat. Vide Estium in Sent. lib. 1. Dist. 1. parag. 3. lit.
D. E. F. to leave the world more willingly, to im∣brace death joyfully:
it is too large to dis∣pute that question, and weigh those
school-distinctions: Set some part of every day a∣part, to admire the
Lords graciousness, not only in present protections of us; but future
provisions for us.
, &c. Epict. Enchir. cap. 65.No
more; That of Isocrates, shall bee my Apology for this
boldnesse, : Freedome of
discovery what bee our thoughts, is the greatest signe of true
af∣fection:Vide Plut. in Cat. Uti. I shall not
transcribe Cato's grave advice to his son; it may bee worth
perusal; you have it in Plutarch, to whom I referre you.
When God bestowed on Abram a new name, hee gave him
a new blessing; bee it so with you: When the time of your Shre∣valty is
expired, and your health perfectly restored; if you shall bee reinvested
with magisterial power and authority; I humbly beseech you, and the God of
Heaven for you; not to bear the sword in vain; put on Righ∣teousnesse,
let it cloath you: Let judgement bee your Robe, and Diadem; bee eyes unto the
blind, legs unto the lame; the blessing of him who is ready to perish
shall come upon you: The Lord who brought you together, blesse you
together, and fit you for Heaven in life, and admit you, and your hopeful
pro∣geny after you, to Heaven at death. This shall bee the prayer and
breathings of his soul, whose all is but to serve you in the Gospel of
Christ,
 August.
24. 1655.
