



REVEREND SIRS,
YOu are those whom I honour and love
in truth, for the truths sake that dwels
in you, and is so faithfully promoted
by you. Many besides my selfe rise up
and call you blessed, for that Serious
Representation of your judgments,
&c. and seasonable Vindication of
your persons and Ministry, which were lately published in
print; Tis true, 'tis your lot, that you who are Embassadors
of peace, are now lookt upon as men of contention, they who
once counted your feet beautifull, say now the mark of the
Beast is on your forehead yea they who would have pulled out
their eyes to have done you good, are now so filled with pre∣judice
and passion, that they would pull out your eyes to doe
you hurt; this is the best requitall, the more you love, the
less you are loved of them; though the people are in such a
distempered Phrensie, yet I know this provokes your pity,
not your fury. I perceive you are made the But of Satans
malice, because you make the glory of God, and good of
souls the mark you aim at in the course of your Ministry; the
Devill will not let you be at rest, because you will not suffer
the sins of the times to be at quiet. Since the publication of
your Letter and Vindication, there are many scurrlous
Pamphlets spread abroad, which labour to stain the integri∣ty

of your hearts, and the truth of your testimony; among
the rest there is one written by John Price, which is stuffe
with such falsities, absurdities, tautalogies, calumnies and
animosities, with such railings and revilings, as if he were
of the race of Rabsekah, or the linage of Shime: the Lord
rebuke him, and clear you. He presents you to the world as
guilty of malignity, perjury, hypocrisie, as wanting Mini∣steriall
abilities, and void of the ingenuity that becomes
Ministers of the Gospel, as men of falshood, deceit, dissenti∣on,
and what not? but what you are? It may be your comfort
to consider that so persecuted they the Prophets who were
before you; Elijah was called a troubler of Israel in the Old
Testament, & Paul a mover of sedition in the New. When I
considered what August. said,Mi quidem sufficit conscien∣tia mea, vobis autem necessa∣ria est fama mea Aug. ad frat. in em Serm. 53. that a Ministers good consci∣ence
is sufficient for himself, yet his good name is neces∣sary
for others: I thought fit to endeavour the Vindicati∣on
of your names and Ministry from those unjust aspersions
cast upon you by many sons of slander; your names, which are
as precious oyntment poured forth (spreading the sweet
savour of the knowledg of Christ in many places) will not
want sons of Belzebub, as so many flies to corrupt them:
yet this may be your confidence, that although they make
their mouths as open sepulchers to bury your names and re∣putations
in, yet there shall be a resurrection of names as wel
as bodies at the last day, at which time all your reproach
shall be wiped away, and your Revilers made ashamed, who
have fasly accused your good conversation in Christ. This
is the prayer and confidence of him who is 

Dated this 13 March, 1648. from my
house about the middle way be∣tween
Whitehall and Whitechappell.
