



Right Worshipful and Honoured Friends,
I Shall crave your favour, to give you a short account why I put this Treatise in∣to your hands in this publick way. It is not that the works of this worthy Au∣thour need any Patrociny, the grate∣full acceptation which many of his books already pub∣lished, have found with sober and experienced Chri∣stians; bears abundant testimony to the profitablenesse and usefulnesse of his labours, and that his precious name, shall be had in everlasting remembrance, and is still unto those that feare the Lord, a sweet and pre∣cious oyntment: But indeed, the reason of this Dedi∣cation (besides the publick expression of my respects to you both) is the consideration of that special interest you both have to any thing of Master Loves. Your interest, Sir, is undoubted to this Treatise, as having
married his widow, whereby God hath made the solita∣ry to dwell, and rest in the house of her husband, and hath caused a mournful widow to forget her sorrows. And your right (deare Mistresse Bradshaw) is very great to the works of this worthy man, as having had the honour for several yeeres to be the wife of this eminent servant and Ambassadour of Iesus Christ.
And my hope is, that as your coming together in this dear relation, was the answer of many prayers: so you will in the strength of prayers, still comfortably live together, 1 Pet. 3.7. as heirs of the grace of life.
To help you forward in the wayes and practices of real godlinesse, I commend unto your most serious per∣usal this, and other useful and practical Treatises of this reverend Authour; which though it cannot be ex∣pected, that they should come forth with that exactness and accomplishment as they would have done, had the Authour lived to publish them himself; yet I do assure you, that these Sermons have been diligently compared with his own papers, and notes taken from his own mouth, by the pen of a ready and intelligent writer.
The world,  confesse, is now filled, even to satiety, and surfet with unprofitable Pamphlets, 2 Tim. 2.13. whereby ma∣ny foolish questions and disputes have arisen, which do ingender strifes; 2 Tim. 2.16. & many opinions have been vent∣ed which do increase unto more ungodlinesse; but this book now presented unto you, is plaine, practical, and spiritual, and will, I hope, be of great use unto Christians, to help them to a right understanding of their spiritual estate. These Sermons (as the date of them will shew) were preached by Mr. LOVE, but a few moneths be∣fore his imprisonment and death: his gracious heart it
seemes, being to the last, much upon that great work, of advancing the power of Godlinesse in the souls of his hearers; and therefore, I hope will be the more accepta∣ble, as being some of the last and ripest fruit of his grow∣ing and improving Ministery. These are the Sermons which he gave his consent should be published, and besides all these considerations, they are the rather printed, be∣cause so long expected, and earnestly desired by many, whose souls have cause to blesse God for Mr. LOVE'S faithful Ministery, to all eternity.
Here you will meet with antidotes against that cursed opinion, which under pretence of advancing the Spirit, undervalueth both the Scripture and Ordi∣nances of Christ, fathering their most blasphemous, and Atheistical Tenets upon the holy Spirit of truth, God blessed for ever. Here you will finde what a woful thing it is, when Gods Spirit withdrawes his presence and influence from the Ordinances; Oh that Professors may be hereby warned not to grieve the Spirit, nor quench the Spirit, lest he withdraw from the soul, and so leave it without life, grace, and comfort.
Here you may also learne, how precious and power∣full the influence of the holy Ghost is, when he is plea∣sed by his presence to make Ordinances effectual; Cant. 4.16. let this therefore be your prayer, Awake O north-winde, and come thou south, blow upon my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out: let my beloved come into his garden, and eat his pleasant fruits.
Here you will finde comfortable directions to walk in the Spirit, nd how to follow the guidance of the holy Ghost, who is able to lead you into all truth.
Lastly, here you will see notably described that contra∣riety
which is between Flesh and Spirit. Every Chri∣stians heart (like Rebecca's womb) having two con∣trary parties strugling in it; but our comfort is, The el∣der shall serve the younger; corruption like the house of Saul, shall by degrees grow weaker; and grace like that of David's, stronger and stronger. I will conclude with hearty prayers to God for you both, that by the consciencious reading of this book, you may gain much soul-advantage, and be built up in your most holy faith; and live many happy dayes together, walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the holy Ghost. Act. 9.31. This is the unfeigned desire of
 London, Jan. 25. 1653.
