




WORTHY SIRS;
IT's no intent of mine in prefixing your Names to the ensuing Treatise, to en∣gage you in the patronage thereof. Let it stand or fall at the bar of right Reason. What the Learned Wotton, in his Epistle before his accurate book de Reconcil. peccat.
saith to Kings Colledge, that do I mean to you in this thing; Reum apud vos agere (viri ornatissimi) non clientem, & vos mihi non patronos qui pro me dicant comparandos, sed qui de me sententiam ferant, judices constituendos esse decrevi. Nor do I thinke so low of you, or so highly of my discourse, as to judge it de∣serving of this joynt dedication. But considering I am not likely to appeare againe in print, I judged it ho∣nest, to divide these my goods (though never so small) among you, rather then to appropriate them to any of you singly; having cogent Reasons for this Address to you all in this businesse.
To you the Renowned Aesculapius of our Coun∣ty, that I might hereby publiquely testifie the en∣gagements of my selfe and family to you both as a Friend and Physitian; more especially that I might signifie a grateful sense and remembrance of your long continued, succesfull and carefull (though un∣feed) Advice for the health of him whom I was en∣debted to for my being and wel-being. And your ur∣ging mee to this service had no small influence upon mee, so that you may rightfully challenge a share in the fruit of my paines therein.
And you deare Sir, a bright Star of the first mag∣nitude in the Metropolitan firmament, may not be ex∣cluded hence. For when I call to minde your former Respects to mee in both Universities; the precious precepts and fervent prayers you favoured me with, at and in mine Ordination; And the most endeared, cordial, long continued intimacy which you had with my Father (of blessed memory) who ever bore you upon his heart with the greatest tendernesse; and who before he was taken from us, in commending the ser∣vice of this booke to mee, forcibly commanded me
the same: (These things, I say, considered, not to mention other,) I finde my selfe deeply engaged, as the heire of your most loving Friend, as well as upon my own account otherwayes, to testifie here my sin∣gular gratitude to you, with submission of these my studies to your grave, quick and judicious, yet most candid Censure.
And yee my Bosome Friends and Brethren of that Classical Association, wherein my lot is fallen (at present) to make up a number, are not only concer∣ned in my cause, but injuries also. Would it be be∣leeved if I should tell you the Gentleman I have to deale with, intends you the contemptuous language he bestows on me? Yet such is his brow, that he hath taken up a conceipt, (ask me not whence, I am not of Councill with him who taught him it,) That my Associated Brethren were accessory to the paper he endeavoured to disgrace. These are his words to me; Your notes (probably) were not of such private con∣cealment, as you would make us beleeve; but were shew∣ed to divers Divines of your own party, for advice and approbation. Thus it is reported. And there is strong probability for the truth of this report. For its not like∣ly, you would pass a businesse of that nature to a profes∣sed Antagonist, without consultation first with your As∣sociates, whom the grand designe of your notes concerned as intrinsecally as your selfe. The falsenesse of which his self magnifying and insolent conjecture, is known to your selves, and may appeare to others by the Ac∣count given, Digress 21.
And truly, Gentlemen, As this his affront to you, ministred just cause of a greater indignation against his incivilities, so the publishing that he intended you as well as me, I account a sufficient disparagement to
his calumnies; which will not be fastened on your Names, how ever they might more easily have stained mine, if I had been singly bespattered by him. Yet in making this advantage of your company under his abuses, I do not in the least attempt, to shelter the weaknesses and defects of my paper, or its defence, under the covert of your protection. The interpel∣lation of you in these lines, designeth only a publique testimony of the precious esteeme I have of you, whose unanimous and studious persevering in the work of the Lord (notwithstanding the sad and never too much lamented losse we have lately sustained in the decease of that paire of most grave, venerable and unblemisht Divines, as also of a third, though not so ancient, yet very usefull and able Minister, who were lately the strength and ornament. the Horsemen and Chariots, not only of our Classis, but County and Province also; I say, notwithstanding this discourage∣ment, your continued pious endeavours together and apart) are and shall be no lesse the joy of many, then they seeme to be the envy of some.
And you my much honoured Fathers and Brethren in the Ministry of this County, I cannot omit in this Dedication, as having been moved by many of you to the work here undertaken, which now I humbly lay at your feet; obliging my selfe to be thankfull for any of your learned faithfull Animadversions, you may be pleased to afford me, in what I may be con∣ceived by any of you to have erred: assuring you that such oyle (if not inflamed with passion) shall be of most precious account with mee for the healing the wounds you may discerne in my head.
This Controversie which some have enlarged by the introducing of many things not conclusive here∣in,
is here reduced to this point; wherein, indeed the stress lyes, viz. Whether the word of God gives any warrant to administer either to such as are visibly in the wayes of wickednesse, inconsistent with the exer∣cise of justifying faith? Or to such as have not in their own persons understandingly, and before competent witnesses, professed their owning of their baptismal engagements, which in their infancy were layd upon them? In this the whole controversie is contained; the former being asserted and proved establisheth sus∣pension, the latter non-Admission, as is shewed in the third Digression about Examination. All acknowledge beleevers only have right to the Lords Supper. But then the Question will be, whether all beleevers who are so called in any sense, particularly in regard of their having been baptized, and positively engaged to beleeve? This cannot be granted, for then no Apo∣state, though excommunicate, could be debarred of necessity, therefore we must allow some qualificati∣ons necessary, to make one capable of the Sacrament, over and besides his baptisme, and having been posi∣tively engaged to the Christian faith. And this the Brethren for generall admission seeme to confesse, when they in stating the Question still limit it to per∣sons adult and intelligent, and that in respect of the usuall exercise of understanding, and actuall freedome from drunknnesse, &c. which should make them unca∣pable of exercising reason during their intoxication. Their Antagonists have often urged them to give a Reason, why these may be debarred who have not the foresaid qualifications, and not the notoriously pro∣phane? It hath been answered: 1. In respect of the drunk, that they are fit for no ordinance, and so not for the Lords Supper; which is a satisfactory Answer
in it selfe. But not upon their principles, who 1 plead for an actual right in all to receive whose duty it is to receive; and 2. that Church-membership entitles (or proves a title) to all Ordinances in the Church. For the drunken Christian is not disobliged from his duty in reference to this or other ordinance, nor dismem∣bered, by his drunkennesse at present. 2. In reference to Minors, and the unintelligent, as to the ordinary ex∣ercise of Reason; it is answered, that they come not under the command to receive, as being innocently unable to examine themselves; but the prophane are unfit only through their own fault: and so they say, there is as much difference between these, as betwixt [will not] and [cannot]; the latter excuseth, not the former. This I confesse is somewhat, but it reach∣eth not the matter wherein the knot lyes. For the Question is not intended only, why Minors and the unintelligent are secluded from the Lords Supper? (to which the Reason given is an Answer.) But also, why they are secluded from the Lords Supper, when they are not secluded from other ordinances of publique prayers and preaching in the Church? And this the foresaid Reason toucheth not. For if innocent incapa∣city as such, excuseth and so secludes from the Sacra∣ment, it would according to our Brethrens principles excuse and seclude from other ordinances of equall sanctity (as they speake) and wherein as much know∣ledge and other graces (they say) are necessary to be exercised to an acceptable performance, as in cele∣brating the Lords Supper. And therefore the Reason of excluding the innocently uncapable from the Sa∣crament, will lye in this, because they are visibly un∣capable, in generall, as some prophane persons may be; not in this in particular, that they are innocently un∣capable;
And then the exception stands still in force, viz. that they produce no Reason for debarring the unintelligent from the Sacrament, whiles they are ad∣mitted to other Ordinances, which will not serve us for debarring the prophane from the Sacrament, though they are not debarred the prayers and hearing the word in the Church. But the Gentleman I have to deale with in this reply, seemes more liberall in this matter. For he describes his positive beleever, that is, one who is positively obliged to Christianity, who is with him capable of the Sacrament, by many other qualifications, p. 50, 51, 57. which I have mentio∣ned in the Treatise following, Ch. 8. §. 3. As 1. that he is one who is professedly of the Christian perswa∣sion. (But what if he be an Arrian, is he no Christian? then he is no heretique? so we are at a losse, how far this qualification will be extended, to be professedly of the Christian perswasion.) 2. That he frequent our As∣semblyes. 3. Heare our doctrine with reverence and attention. 4. Visibly submit to the outward meanes of reformation and amendment. 5. Not justifying his mis∣carriages. 6 One who gives us visible testimony of his assent to our doctrine. Now if the absence of these render a person debarrable; It will not sinke into my dul head, that Mr. W. or any one else can gratifie us with any scriptural Reason, for the same; (as to debar him who comes not to Church ordinarily,) which will not debar any prophane swearer, drunkard or unclean person, notoriously appearing so to be. And if any would favour me with a cleere Reason from Scripture, why an unintelligent person (though baptized adult, &c.) may be debarred the Sacrament, as they hold he may, although not debarred other ordinances: I say if any would give me a proof of this, without mani∣festly
overturning thereby, the maine props of that structure, which the Brethren for general Admission have layd, I shall pawn my promise before you, to be much engaged for such a discovery; which I must pro∣fesse is not within the reach of my present under∣standing.
There hath bin much spoken in the discussion of this subject, about polluting holy things, casting pearles to swine, not distinguishing betwixt the precious and the vile, &c. which the other party will I think yeeld are pertinent, if first it be proved, that the persons pleaded for are unwarrantably admitted. And unlesse this be soundly evinced, they who use those passages must acknowledge they have no edge against their Antagonists. For certainly to dispense Ordinances to them whom the word warrants us to dispense them to, cannot justly be loaded with any of those aggravati∣ons. For Scripture is the Rule of purity. And so, on the other hand, the Arguments for the general admis∣sion contended for, taken from Christs command to administer to Disciples, Beleevers, that the Sacrament is a converting Ordinance (in some sense) &c. will, I suppose, be granted by those who make use of them, to have no force against us, if this be once cleered to them, that the Disciples and Beleevers to whom the Lords Supper belongs, are not all such Disciples or Be∣leevers, as are so called in respect of their professed en∣trance into Christs school, and positive engagement to beleeve in him, (which no Apostate Arrian, nor Ma∣hometan can loose or put off from him) but those on∣ly who are such visibly in regard of serving Christ and abiding in his wayes: the proving hereof is the designe of a maine part of the Treatise following. And though herein I may seeme too strict; it may be I shall be cen∣sured
on the other hand, by some when they read how favourable my judgement is in the judging and discer∣ning who are visibly in a way of disobedience inconsi∣stent with the exercise of justifying faith. For there I thinke charity hath its place; not in widening the Rule, but in application of the Rule to particular persons. But I shall not anticipate your perusing the booke, (as you may have leasure) by a tumultuary mentio∣ning of the contents thereof here. But I most earnest∣ly desire your serious studying the Question, which is weighty and of practical continuall importance. And this I crave, not only in reference to your selves, and those to whom you are guides in your particular Con∣gregations, but also with some respect to my selfe, who may hope to receive benefit by the imparting your digested apprehensions concerning this Argu∣ment. For by a brotherly, private, impartial discussion of a controverted point, I should think peaceable Dis∣senters from each other, may most probably and effe∣ctually receive satisfaction; which then might be made publique (if they saw cause) by mutual consent of both parties, all impertinencies and mistakes on each hand discovered, being first lopt off. Whereas Discep∣tations in print at the first dash, are usually full of mis∣takes, and great Temptations to the Authours there∣of.
From you therefore, my much honoured Fathers and Brethren, wherein any of you do or may dissent from me, I shall readily receive rational correction. And if I approve my selfe to you truly studious of truth (without bitternesse to such as may be of diffe∣rent judgement from me herein;) I shall have little cause to be sollicitous about the Rejoynder to mee, which my Gentleman Publisher hath already talked
of, in his printed Apology. If he rationally convince me of the faultiness of the main parts of my discourse, I shall endeavour to let you and others know my sense thereof: if not, you may conjecture by my silence. Controversies must not be endlesse; and I will not contend with him for a scowlds prize, to have the last word.
Some of you and others may (perhaps) think this Treatise too long ere it came, and now too long when it is come forth.
In reference to the latter, I desire the weightinesse of the subject, which in the main is treated upon, may be considered, and the necessity of taking in some extravagancies mine Antagonist had with much noyse cast in my way. At least comparatively, I hope I shall be excused. For since Mr. W. spent 9 sheets in answe∣ring my one; If I had taken a proportionable liberty, I should have taken up 9 times 9 (81) in a reply to his. The like may be considered for some satisfaction to the former complaint. If those monthes he had for his answer to my sheet, be multiplyed by 9 times so many monthes, due to me for returning a reply to his nine, I shall be found much to have prevented the day I might have taken on that account. But its known to Divers, that I was long before I could be perswaded to entertaine a resolution for such a businesse, consi∣dering how unhandsomly he had proceeded. And when I began to look more seriously on it, I must ac∣knowledge it was not quickly, that I could read his book without disturbance; which necessitated me to lay it aside, till I perceived my selfe composed to per∣use it calmely, as if I felt not my selfe scarce at all per∣sonally concerned therein. And then the heavy af∣fliction which befell me June 1. 1657. (which I doubt
not, many of you had a share in) will easily be suppo∣sed by you a great discomposure of my studyes for such a service as this. I mention not my other im∣ployments, ordinary and extraordinary. The Treatise was ready before Michaelmas, and sent up to London the week following. Let the rest be imputed to my dulnesse and slownesse, and if you will to (that Mr. W. hath spyed in me) my timorousnesse.
I deferred the dispatch of this Epistle till I saw some sheets of the book printed, which I did not till the last week.
¶ And now you will expect I should cease to be further troublesome to you. And such of you as are already tired, have the law in your own hands to help your selves by leaving off here if you please. But pre∣suming that some of you will afford me your patience a little longer, I shall make bold (at the urgent request of some whose judgement is not to be sleighted) here to annex a short discourse concerning the privacy or publiquenesse of administring the other Sacrament, viz. of Baptisme, which will not be unsutably joyned with the main subject of the discourse following. And this challengeth its place here, because it so particu∣larly concernes the Ministry, and is therefore to be submissively presented to your serious consideration, and candid censure. Let this then be the Question to be discussed before you, viz.
Whether (or if at all in what cases) Baptisme may be now administred privately not publiquely?
To publique is sometimes opposed in Scripture that which we render, from house to house, especially in that text, Act. 20.20. But I humbly conceive the phrase so rendred, viz.  and  is not equiva∣lent to private or per singulas demos, as Erasmus in Act. 2.46. renders the phrase, for which he is justly
blamed by the Learned Beza. The phrase and the im∣portance thereof is worth a strict enquiry. In Pauls farewel speech to the Elders or Bishops of the Church of Ephesus, Act. 20. (for to them only he there speaks, and if [from house to house] be to be understood of private houses, its manifest it must relate only to the private houses of the said Bishops, not the private houses of the people) he avoucheth his integrity in the discharge of his Apostolical Ministry, as in other In∣stances thereof, so especially in that he saith, ver. 20. I have kept back nothing from you that was profitable for you; But have shewed and taught you publiquely and from house to house, (or at the houses, ) testifying both to Jewes and also to the Greeks re∣pentance toward God and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. This adverb  (as also ) seemes to signifie not only publiquely but openly, popularly, and agrees to an action exposed to open view and cogni∣zance of the people and multitude, without distincti∣on of Christians from Jewes or Heathens (and that with or pretending to the State authority, Act. 5.18.) the word is translated openly, Act. 16.37. They have (saith Paul) beaten us openly, i. e. exposed us to open shame before the promiscuous multitude, Act. 18.28. Apollos mightily convinced the Jewes, and that pub∣liquely (in their Synagogue, vers. 26.) that Jesus was the Christ. And being here opposed to the Christian houses, it denotes, the Temple, Synagogue, Market pla∣ces, or such open conventions, to which persecutors and enemies as well as Christians had a free accesse; and then  signifies not meere private houses, but the Church Assemblyes which used to convene in severall houses appointed for that purpose; which are therefore opposed to [] because they were not built nor appointed by any publique act of the State;
and 2. because here was not a reception of the people, friends & foes promiscuously (at least not at all times) but of the brethren joyned together in ecclesiastical Christian society. For the cleering hereof I shall shew, 1. that this phrase  in the N. T. (though sundry times there used) is ever appropriated to the signifying of the Church meetings in their houses; 2. And always (I take it) some other phrase is used to denote such as are in a meere private house. This latter may be seene in Act. 16.32. , 1 Cor. 11.34. & 14.35. , Gal 2.2. , &c. The former I shal more in∣sist upon; for the demonstration whereof I shal pro∣duce all the places of the N. T. where the phrase is u∣sed. Rom. 16.5. Greet the Church in their house, . 1 Cor. 16.19. Aquila and Priscilla salute you with the Church . Col. 4.15. Salute— Nymphas and the Church which is at his house . Philemon vers. 2. to the Church . That this phrase in these Texts signifies the Church meetings, and Christian Assemblyes is demonstrated already by the learned Mr. Mede above all contra∣diction. I shall only quote one passage or two of his for this, which he hath in his discourse called Churches, i. e. appropriate places for Christian worship, p. 22. Unlesse (saith he) this should be the meaning, why should this appendant be so singularly mentioned, in the salutation of some and not of others? and that not once but againe, if the same names be again remem∣bred, as of Aquila and Priscilla. Had none in those catalogues of salutation christian families, but some only who are thus remembred! It is very improba∣ble; nay if peruse them well, we shal find they had, but otherwise expressed, as in that prolix catalogue, Rom. 16. we find Aristobulus and Narcissus saluted, with their houshold; Asyncritus, Phlegon, &c. with
the brethren which are with them, &c. Others with the Saints which are with them, 2 Tim. 4.19. the houshold of Onesiphorus; this therefore so singular an appendix must meane some singular thing, not common to them with the rest, but peculiar to them alone: And what should this be, but what I have shewed; thus that happy Interpreter. There are on∣ly two more places where  is used in the N. T. both which comply with the forementioned sense of Church meetings in houses, Act. 2.46. Breaking bread  (compared with ver. 42.) referring to the love-feasts which they had in common, (to which the celebration of the Lords Supper was sometimes annex∣ed) in several houses appointed among them for that purpose; see Beza on the place. Act. 5.42. the Apostles dayly in the Temple and  ceased not to teach & preach Jesus Christ; where preaching in the Temple promiscuously is opposed to the preaching in Church meetings of the Christian brethren, as it was in the text last quoted, and therefore is fairly interpreted to the same sense here as it was there. I shal only adde one thing more, which makes it probable that  in Act. 20.20. should denote the Church Assemblyes, ra∣ther then the private houses of the Ephesian Elders as such; One designe of Pauls speech appeares to be the confirming the Ephesian Elders by his example of con∣stancy and boldness in the Christian faith, and his fun∣ction, notwithanding all persecutions, v. 19. Yet saith he, v. 20. . I have not through fear or cowardize withdrawn in any thing needful (see the im∣portance of the word as its used elswhere, Gal. 2.12. Heb. 10.23, 25. comp: with ver. 38.) his boldness is in∣stanced in preaching both publiquely or openly, before friends and foes, and at their Church Assemblyes, not∣withstāding the danger of coming thither; which made
some to withdraw themselves, Heb. 10.25. Now to in∣struct privately in Christian families, was no such in∣stance of boldness, as this was. — The perusal of this phrase may be otherwayes useful, (which hath invited me to this strict consideration of it.) At present this use is to be made hereof, that when we speak of private Baptisme in private houses, it is not to be understood according to the sense of the phrase , as its used, Act. 20.20. though it seeme there to be accord∣ing to our translation opposed to publiquely.
But as publique baptisme is that which is now per∣formed in the publique place, where publique ordi∣nances are usually administred, the accustomed signes being given for the assembling of the Congregation there, at such time when it is to be celebrated; so pri∣vate baptisme on the contrary, is that which is done either in the place of publique Assembly, when no publique notice is duly given for the Congregation to resort thither, or in a private house, where although many are present, yet it is not free, or at least its gene∣rally supposed it would not be civil, for any Christian that will, though uninvited, to come to the ordinance of Baptisme there administred.
Now that we may better discern what is incumbent upon us in reference to this circumstance of admini∣string Baptisme, we shall peruse Scripture instances, and see what direction they may afford us herein, in these following Theses.


The Baptisme of John was not privately administred, according to the senses of private before mentioned, Matth. 3.5, 6. Then went out unto him (viz. to the wilderness of Judea) Hierusalem, and all Judea, and all the region round about Jordan, and were baptized of him in Jordan confessing their sins. So saith Mark. 1.5. And
there went out unto him all the land of Judea, and they of Hierusalem, and were all baptized of him in the river Jordan, confessing their sins. And v. 7. And he preached, saying, there cometh one after me mightier then I, &c. Ver. 8. I indeed baptize you with water, but he with the holy Ghost Luke saith, Ch 3. ver. 2, 3. The word of God came to John in the wilderness, And he came into all the Country round about Jordan, preaching the Baptism of repentance for the remission of sins. And v. 7. Then saith he to the multitude (which Matthew saith he said to the Pharisees and Sadduces that came forth to be bapti∣zed of him, Mat 3.7.) O generation of Vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come? Its related, Joh. 1.25, 28. They asked him why baptizest thou, if thou be not that Christ, nor Elias, neither that Prophet; John answered, I baptize you with water, &c.— These things were done in Bethabara beyond Jordan, where John was baptizing, &c. From this harmony we may observe, 1. That he baptized where he preached ordinarily, and as openly. 2. That multitudes came to him to be bap∣tized, to whom he preached, expostulating with them; and they confessed their sins, when (probably before) they were baptized. Now this was not confession be∣fore John alone, as our Divines shew against the Pa∣pists, who would hence inferre auricular confession; but it rather was an open renouncing of former wic∣kednesse, as those did, Act. 19.18, 19. who being con∣verted to the christian faith, confessed & shewed their deeds, and some brought their books of curious arts, and burned them before all men. There is no other pas∣sage concerning Johns Baptisme which seemes to inti∣mate privacy, or that it was not done according to the tenor of the former Scriptures; but rather comply therewith, Luk. 3.12. Mark 11.30. Joh. 3.23. & 4.1. Luk. 7.29 Act. 1.21, 22. Act. 10.37. Peter in this last
Scripture speaking of the Gospel, saith it was that word which you know was published throughout all Judea, & began from Galilee, after the Baptisme which John preached. Which phrase further cleeres it to us, that John first preached to the people concerning the nature & use of his baptisme, before he baptized them; which hints his baptisme as publique as his preaching. There is only one instance more to be considered con∣cerning Johns Baptisme, & that is his baptizing Christ. Mat. 3.13. Mark 1.9. In this, 1. there's nothing against the publiqueness of it, and therefore it may fairly be supposed to be administred as publiquely as in the for∣mer Instances. 2. Yea there's probable proof of the publiqueness of it. For 1. Christ was pleased to come to John at Jordan, Mat. 3.13. (at which place John was preaching to, and baptizing the multitudes spoken of in ver. 5, 6. of that same chap.) Christ did not send for John to some private place (as some now would have Ministers come to their houses) and Luk. 3.21. relates Christs & the peoples baptism as done together. 2. At this time Christ was to be solemnly inaugurated unto the manifestation of his office (as our Divines say) and that declared by a voice from heaven. Now it was of infinite concernment and use, that his baptisme should be publique, and that there should be many witnes∣ses thereof; whereby also it might publiquely appeare that Christ approved of Johns Baptism, that by his ex∣ample others might be moved to submit thereunto.



The baptisme administred by Christs disciples before Christs death, seemes rather to have been publique as their preaching was, then private. Job. 3.22. After these things came Jesus & his disciples into the land of Judea, and there he tarried with them and baptized (although Jesus baptized not but his disciples, Ch. 4.2.) where∣upon
Ch. 3.26. Johns disciples tell John of it, that Je∣sus baptizeth, and all men come unto him.



The examples after Christs ascension are divided, some administred in publique, some privately, and one doubtfull to which sort it is to be referred. I shall be∣gin with the publique. We have a notable example of publique baptisme, Act. 2.41. when the same day (that they had heard Peters Sermon, and probably of other Apostles) there were added 3000 souls who were bap∣tized. Act 8.12. When they (viz. of Samaria) beleeved Philip preaching the things concerning the kingdome of God, and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized both men and women. Here baptizing was as publique as preaching. Now the preaching was publique where all had free admission, ver. 5, 6. At this same time one is particularly mentioned, ver. 13. Simon, who beleeved Philips preaching and miracles, as the former persons did, and was baptized at the same time, so Act. 18.8. Another example occurres, Act. 10.44, 47, 48. in like manner described. That's a notable one, Act. 16.13, 14. On the Sabbath (saith the text) we went out of the City by a river side, and we sate down and spake to the wo∣men, which resorted thither, and v. 14, 15. Lydia was there converted, and its probable, baptized and her houshold. For after she & her houshold was baptized, she invited the Apostles home to her private house, ver. 15. Now if it had been the use to baptize ordina∣rily in private, its likely she would have invited them to her house before, that she and her houshold might there have been baptized.



There are two manifest Instances of private bap∣tisme, the one of the Eunuch, Act. 8.35, 36. the other of the Jaylor and his houshold, Act. 16.33.



That of Pauls baptism is more doubtful, Act. 9,
11, 17, 18. & 22.16. The probabilities me rather to cast it among the Instances of publique baptisme, accor∣ding to the opportunities of those times; which appeare by laying these circumstances together. 1. Paul was mi∣raculously converted in his going to Damascus, & struck blind neer to Damascus, to which place he was led. 2. In Damascus there was a brotherhood of Christians, (a Church) at this time, Act. 9.19. 3. This miraculous con∣version of Paul could not be concealed from these bre∣thren there; For there were divers with Paul, when he was miraculously converted, who heard the voyce from heaven, who were likely to speak of it: the very novelty and wonder of the matter would make them divulge it: besides also they being Pauls companions on his jour∣ney, and probably assisting to him in his persecuting de∣signe, could not be insensible of their concernment, in the voyce speaking, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? which would be an obligation on them to give God the glory of the vision by declaring it. And what story could they make in Damascus to satisfie them who should enquire concerning Pauls blindnesse who was led by them; but they must tell the truth? the weighti∣ness and strong influence of the present providence, not permitting a dissimulation of the matter. And the same may be said over againe, much more to shew that Paul himselfe was not likely to conceale this thing. 4. Paul was three dayes blind at Damascus before Ananias came to him. 5. Its very probable Paul after his con∣version being now under the terrour of his former cru∣elty against Christ in his members, and at present blind, would desire to be conducted to the house of some dis∣ciple at Damascus, or at least send for some disciples to him. 6. And as probable it is, that many disciples would flock in to him, hearing of the mighty work of God done on him. 7. Its also noted that he fasted the three
dayes and three nights of his blindnesse; and that (like∣ly) for a religious end, and then he would joyn solemn prayer therewith, (to which I suppose the voyce speak∣ing to Ananias especially refers, which saith of Paul, Be∣hold he prays, i.e. now he is praying or joyning in pray∣er, having set himselfe seriously to be humbled for his former sin.) 8. And now its not likely he spent 3 dayes in prayer all alone, Its probable therefore there were the Disciples in Damascus gathered to him, into the house of Judas, whither Ananias was instructed to goe to Paul, and where he baptized him. Neither may it be forcibly objected, that because of his former rage against Christianity, the disciples in Damascus would not so soon trust him as to come unto him. Upon which ac∣count, some time after, the Church at Hierusalem durst not receive him into their company. For these at Da∣mascus who heard of his vision, & might see him hum∣bled under his blindnesse, would hereby be made fear∣lesse of receiving hurt from him. And yet the Disciples at Hierusalem, who wanted those advantages of confi∣dence, might prudently scruple at a suddain admission of him into their society. If all these taken together wil not amount to a probability, that here were with Paul a considerable number of Christians, and a free invitati∣on of them hither (which in those times might be such an assembly as used there solemnly to joyn in publique ordinances) who might be present when Paul was bap∣tized by Ananias, yet I thinke more will hardly be said for a probability of the contrary; and so I leave it.



It appears then, that in all cases it was not unfit, much less unlawful to administer Baptism privately; yet there seem to be but two cleere undoubted examples thereof in Scripture, when as all the persons baptized by John, and so probably those baptized by Christs Disciples be∣fore
Christs death, seem to have been openly baptized. And we have perused 5 Scriptures which speak of ma∣ny, multitudes, thousands, baptized after Christs ascensi∣on, whose baptisme, was as publiquely administred, as was the preaching of the word ordinarily in the Christi∣an Churches. Hence I think I may reasonably conclude,



That publique baptisme is according to the ordinary common Rule, & private is the Anomalon, or an excep∣tion in some peculiar extraordinary Cases. These two conclusions are to be handled distinctly; and first of the first.



Its according to the ordinary common Rule of the N. T. that baptisme be administred publiquely, i e. as is a∣foresaid, according to the opportunity of the times, and so that it be as publique as ordinary preaching in the Church assemblyes is. This I shall further illustrate and shew in these Reasons hereof ensuing.
1. The nature of this ordinance, is a publique seale of the covenant of grace, and so annexed to the Gospel; therefore its fit it should be annexed to the preaching of the Gospel, and be as publique, as that is ordinarily, Matth. 28.19, 20. 2. One effect of Baptism, is the so∣lemne admission of Christians into the visible Church, 1 Cor. 12.13. Therefore its fit to be done ordinarily in the face of a Congregation. I say solemn admission, (for they are Christians before) now the solemnity re∣quires publiquenesse so far as may e. 3. The great use and benefit of having this ordinance publiquely, pleads against the private administration thereof, where it may be publike. (1) In egard of the person baptized, to have the prayers of  Congregation. (2) With respect to the parents, that they may be more quickned by the so∣lemnity of the ordinance, in renewing their covenant with God on this occasion. (3) For the whole Congre∣gation
to be minded of the nature of this ordinance, and the engagements which have been layd upon them herein, for themselves and their children they have for∣merly in baptisme devoted to God. (4) And lastly, the Minister herein hath opportunity to approve himselfe publiquely in the administration hereof, in a right man∣ner, and to subjects capable of the same according to Gospel Rule. 4. The horrible abuse formerly and now in some places, making many baptismes private trans∣actions (with a few women only present besides the Mi∣nister & Father of the infant baptized;) as also the ob∣servation that this is generally the imployment of scan∣dalous Ministers; should make us lesse free in comply∣ing with them herein; least we bring contempt on our persons, function, and Ministry. 5. The contempt in our dayes cast on this sacred ordinance by many, and the aptness we see in divers of our people to make it a mat∣ter of state & formality for the entertainmēt of friends, not regarding the prayers of the Congregation, rather then a business of serious devotion, should provoke us to labour after a greater solemnity in the administrati∣on hereof. 6. The exceeeding great snares and incon∣veniences which private baptisme brings on the Mini∣ster, when he baptizeth some privately and not others, may disswade us from gratifying any herein, unlesse we would comply with all who may desire it; and then I thinke (in some places) we should have few baptized in the publique Congregation. What grudges and surmi∣ses of partiality this may beget, we cannot be ignorant. 7. Either baptisme is a private or publique ordinance; If private, then it needs not at all to be administred pub∣liquely. If publique, then it ought not to be administred privately, where it may be publiquely and that fitly. I say fitly, for sometimes even solemn preaching may be in private places, but not when it may fitly be in pub∣lique:
so is the case here. 8. If private baptismes be ad∣mitted, I see not how private communions in the Lords Supper will be rationally avoyded: which yet are now exploded, and I think justly according to 1 Cor. 11.22. For which see also Mr Medes discourse of Churches for Christian worship in the primitive times, p. 4.9. Private baptism would be too neere a symbolizing, with the Pa∣pists, who lay the stress of salvation upon baptisme, Ne∣cessitate medij; and with the Separatists, who leave our publique Assemblyes & retire into corners for the per∣forming of publique ordinances. 10. Lastly, The judge∣ment of the Churches of God, especially the Church of England, may disswade from private baptisme. Zepperus de polit. eccl. l. 1. c. 12. saith; Baptismum in primitivâ ecclesiâ Catechumenis adultis qui e gentilismo vel Ju∣daismo ad christum transibant — non nisi ferijs pascha∣libus, pentecostes & natalitijs Domini administrari so∣litum, id{que} magno cum apparatu, & solenni omnium pio∣rum laetitiâ, ex illorum temporum monumentis manife∣stum est. Nunc quia alia ecclesiae ratio est, illa{que} ex chri∣stianorum parentum liberis ferè constat & colligitur, quotiescun{que} publici ecclesiae Caetus ordinariè haben∣tur, christianorum parvuli testimonio & sigillo Baptis∣mi, christo ejus{que} ecclesiae inferentur, & quidem patre ipso ad Infantis sui baptismum praesente at{que} astante. This is evidenced by the ancient custom of sponsors, who were to make promise before the Church for the in∣struction of the baptized in the christian faith; Fidei∣jussionem (saith he) & sponsionem, susceptores apud bap∣tismum coram Dei & ecclesiae ipsius facie sacrosanctè praestant. The learned Beza in libello Quaestionum & Responsionum christianorum, speakes home to this busi∣nesse; Q. An de loco baptismi nihil statuendum putas. R. Imo, quum omnia decenter & ordine fieri in ecclesiâ o∣porteat, sit autem evangelici Ministerij pars Baptismus,
eundem locum & verbi & sacramentorum ministerio at∣tribuendum censeo, ut in coetu Ecclesiae, & communibus precibus adjunctis Baptismus administretur, ne{que} istos nescio quos necessitatis casus temerè admiser.
I shall only hereunto adde the determinations of the English Liturgy, and the Directory. Though in some cases of great necessity (as the Common prayer book speaks) it permit private baptism, yet if the child live, it is to be brought to the Congregation, where the Spon∣sors shall make solemn professions, as in the order for publique baptism; and the Congregation being so sa∣tisfied, the child is publiquely to be declared solemnly received into the Church. Now how shamefully do ma∣ny of our corner Baptizers, who pretend much for the Episcopal Government and Common prayer book, offend against this Direction?
The Directory (which I suppose is owned as a con∣siderable Authority humane, especially in a doubtfull case, in this County, most of the Ministers names where∣of then resident here when the Presbyterial Govern∣ment was first commended to us by the Parliament, I have by me, subscribed with their own hands, to a pro∣fession of their judgement for that way, and resolution to put the same in practice) it orders expresly thus: Baptism is not to be administred in private places, nor privately, but in the place of the publique worship, and in the face of the Congregation. There is but one, I know of, professing the Congregational way, who comes to private houses in the Country, and with the parents and a few women, baptizeth, and this I think is offensive to the Ministers of the same way he profes∣seth, as well as to others of us his neighbours. Now we all profess to be studious of peace. But how shall we make it appear, if in such a thing which all I think ac∣knowledge lawfull, we comply not with the Directions
of the former constitutions of the State and Church of England, and the present Rules commended to us by the Parliament, with the assistance of so Reverend an Assembly, as they had herein? which yet respect only our uniform practice, and tie us not to an opinion of necessity, that Baptism should be ever administred thus publiquely. Should not those Scriptures, Rom. 14.19. Phil 3.15, 16. and such like, have some impression up∣on us, as to this matter? I leave it to the consideration of the peaceably Judicious. Now I come to my second Conclusion I deduced probably from the perusal of the forementioned examples of Baptism, viz. That



From the ordinary Rule of publique Baptism, there is some exception in some special cases. That there is such an exception is already proved, by the Scriptures produ∣ced. But to set down a perfect enumeration of such cases wherein that exception hath place, I dare not professe ability to undertake; but I shall endeavour somewhat herein according to my poor measure, 1 Negatively. 2. Affirmatively.



Divers things are pretended as of weight, when they occurre, to challenge an exception from the common Rule of publique Baptism, which I humbly conceive are of no validity for the same. 1. The childs weaknesse, and danger of death, is no sufficient reason for private Bap∣tism, (this is the only exception allowed by the Com∣mon prayer book.) Indeed this seems rather a reason for the denying of private Baptism, then granting it, least they who demand it should be strengthened here∣by in the conceit of the necessity of Baptism for salvati∣on of the infant, ratione medii. They should rather by our preaching and practice be informed in the right doctrine of the Sacraments. It's true some of the An∣cients
in the heat of their opposition to the Pelagians, who denied original sin, went so far, as to lay stress of salvation upon Baptism. But others were more sound, who teach, that not the defect or want simply, but the neglect of them is the crime. Now there is not a neglect, where the first opportunity is taken for solemn publike Baptism, no more then there is a neglect of the Lords Supper, although it be not received by him who cannot come to the Congregation, who yet is ready and desi∣rous to lay hold on the first opportunity he can, to joyn himself in the publique Communion of the Church in that Ordinance. 2. Nor is the gratification of mens (or rather womens) humours, a sufficient reason for private Baptism. For then it should be denied to none who de∣mand it on that account, one mans humour being of as much validity as anothers; and this will not weigh down the Disswasives from a private celebration, before re∣hearsed. And then again, a sick mans desiring the Com∣munion should be a sufficient reason for our private administring of the Lords Supper unto him in a private house, where the Church hath not free accesse, of which there is no footsteps (that I know of) in the holy Scri∣ptures. 3. Nor is the pretence of a custom to have feast∣ings and entertainments (which may not fitly be on the Lords day) a sufficient reason for private baptism; for that custom ought rather to be altered, then the ten former inconveniences of private baptism should be ad∣mitted. And it is altered easily in some places (by the Ministers perswasion) that they have their feastings on a week day (where they are of ability to have them) when the baptism is on the Lords day. But it's known experimentally, that many invited to such entertain∣ments (in Country Villages) do not use to come to the Church to be present at the baptism, as making this the least part of their businesse at such a time. And upon the
same pretence last mentioned, two or three (perhaps more) Lords daies, or other opportunities for publique baptism are neglected, till they be prepared for their dinnerings, which I suppose is a fault in the Parents; agreeable to what the fore-praised Zepperus in the Chapter mentioned, quotes out of Augustine, in his Ser∣mon, de immolat. Isaac. Rogo vos fratres, ut quicun{que} filium aut vernaculum suum baptizari desiderat, jam nunc Ecclesiae eum offerre non differat (that phrase suits best to publique baptism) Quia non est justum, ut res quae tam magna, tam praeclara creditur, negli∣genter aut tardiùs quam expedit, requiratur. I now proceed to speak positively to the point under conside∣ration, by laying down this Rule.



Private baptism then hath place when the case is such as the expediences thereof for the general good of the Church do over-weigh the fore-mentioned inconveni∣cies. More particularly, as 1. In the first gathering of a Church, since they who are to be members thereof, are to be solemnly made disciples by baptism, there may be a necessity that some who are the first fruits of the place must be baptized privately: for Church order supposeth a Church existing, wherein it should be exer∣cised and observed. But where a Church is constituted, there this hath no place. 2. In times of persecution, when there cannot be set solemn Assemblie, but Chri∣stians, as they may catch at an opportunity of conve∣ning; It's a greater inconvenience to the Church that Baptism should be omitted, then that it should be cele∣brated privatly. But I did not need to put in this case, unlesse the persecution be raised against this Ordinance, rather then preaching, for as I have stated the Questi∣on, baptism is not to be called private, which is as pub∣lique as the ordinary preaching in the Church is at that
time. 3. A like case hereunto is that, in times of grosse defection and Idolatry in the Church, where this ordi∣nance cannot be publiquely administred, without super∣stitious or heretical mixtures, as in Popish Countryes. 4. There may possibly occurre some Instance, wherein, an eminent respect to Gods glory, propagating the Go∣spel, and the good of the Catholique Church, may war∣rant private baptisme; that being to be preferred to the advantages of a particular Congregation in some re∣spects. This I suppose was the case of the Eunuch, to whom Philip was directed by the extraordinary dictate of the Spirit, who being on his journey to his own (re∣mote) Country, was converted, and then instantly bap∣tized: of whom Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical history. lib. 2. c. 1. (according to Hanmers translation) saith; He was the first of the Gentiles, which obtained of Philip the holy mysteries, by the inspiration of the heavenly word; he was made the first fruits of the faithfull throughout the world. And as it is reported, after his return unto his native soyle, he preached the knowledge of the Universal God, which giveth life unto men, and the coming of our Saviour, whereby the prophecy was fulfilled, which said, Aethiopia shall stretch her hand before unto God: so he. And so this in∣stance falls also under the first case for private baptism. That example of the Jaylors baptism and his houshold, comes under the first and second case; that being a time of persecution, and Paul and Silas then imprisoned, and knew not when they might hope to be released; much lesse when they should have an opportunity of assembling the Church in that neighbourhood. And its not altogether improbable that many other Christian prisoners might be there, and then there might be a so∣lemn assembly agreeable to the allowance of those troublesome times. What other cases there may be of
like exigence as to private baptisme, I refer to the dis∣quisition of better judgements.



None of these singular cases wherein baptisme was privately administred, do (for any thing I know) occur in the present times among us. If there be conceived to be some analogical or proportionate to these, as to this matter, it concernes them who think so, to name them, and to prove the same; the three fore pretended ones I have already shewed not to be such. And I know none else pretended, except, (1) the gratifying Separatists, some whereof would suffer their children to be bapti∣zed at home with a select company of their own only present, but separate from our publique Assemblyes, as no rightly constituted Churches: (2) And very rarely (perhaps) one convinced of the errour of Antipedo∣baptisme, who hath been tainted therewith before, seemes inclinable to have his children baptised at home, but is loath to honour God so far as publiquely to ap∣pear in the devoting his seed to God in this ordinance. But if we comply with the former we wrong our Chur∣ches, and seem to take upon our selves the disparage∣ment they lay upon us in their unwarrantable separati∣on. And the humouring the latter, seems to be a wrong to baptisme it selfe: the honour whereof had need to be carefully preserved in these times. And the Question in this case seems to be, whether the real honor of Gods holy ordinance, or the imaginary supposed though in∣deed) false honour and credit of these people should be most respected
I have now plainly layd down before you my appre∣hensions in this matter, & shall add nothing more here∣in, save that upon a review I conceive it may be need∣ful to expresse my selfe more fully, in one thing which hath been hinted already, viz. What we shall call pub∣lique
baptisme? to which I have answered, that such a place & convention of Christians as is judged meet for the ordinary exercise of ministerial publique preaching, is a place and society to administer baptisme in, if we would have it to be publique baptisme. According to which rule, more particularly I say. 1. Baptisme in a pri∣vate house is not publique though many be there pre∣sent, because this would not (in times of freedome) be counted a fit place for ordinary conventions of the Church for preaching. 2. Baptisme on the week day, at the place of publique assembly, where there is not so considerable a number present, as it would be counted expedient for a publique Sermon to be made to, is yet but private baptisme. 3. I suppose it also requisite that the Congregation on the Lords day before have notice of the time of a baptisme intended there, the week fol∣lowing (unless there be some known lecture or exercise there at that time, or at least we may probably expect a considerable number of Christians then) that they may freely repair unto the Word and Sacrament then to be dispenced; the usuall signes being given for warning a publique transaction. 4. Yet if it be judged unfit, fre∣quently to call an assembly of the Church, I suppose at such time when we cannot urge a considerable number of our Congregation to attend in publique, nor blame their absence, we may not appoint a publique ordi∣nance for them to be present at. For this seemes little better then a prevaricating with them. 5. To conclude, Hence it follows, that its not this or that number pre∣sent, which is necessary to the making a baptismal ad∣ministration publique in the place of publique Church meetings; For then we should be at a losse, what should be the least number necessary: But the administring it at such a time, and in such a place, where and when the Congregation may freely and is obliged to attend. We
may (in some Parishes or Chappelries) suspect somtimes on the Lords dayes, and upon other special and impor∣tant occasions for preaching on other dayes, when we call an assembly, that few wil be present, yet do we then preach publiquely though to never so few, because its not our fault that the Church is so empty. But if it were our fault that so few are present, by taking inconvenient times, either of the dayes of the week, when their occa∣sions call them another way; or of the houres of the day, which are not usuall nor commodious for an assem∣bly; or lastly, if we should call them to attend preach∣ing so frequently, that we could not reasonably expect the attendance of a considerable Congregation: I sup∣pose in these cases we should offend in pretending to the exercise of publique preaching before so small a number. And the same should I say concerning publique baptisme. For this is my maine direction, that these or∣dinances of publique preaching and administring Bap∣tisme ought to go parallel one with another, in regard of the publiquenesse of dispencing the same. ¶.
It remaines now, much honoured Sirs, only to crave your pardon for this overtedious interpellation of you, your courteous acceptance of my unfeined respects to you, and your earnest prayers at the throne of grace for me, the which I hope you will be more fervent in on my behalfe, by your observing of the many weak∣nesses clogging me in this present service. And now its my humble petition for you who are called to the weighty function of the Ministry, that the Father of mercies may ever direct and prosper your precious la∣bours in his vineyard, for the honour of his name, the edification of his Church, and the joyfull refreshment of your own spirits! And for you Sir, who are honou∣red to be an Instrument for preserving of natural life in many, my hearty request at the throne of grace is; that
your soul may live the life of grace here, in the exercise of godliness in the power of it, (which you have seene in a precious instance most neerly related to you, is the sure and unshaken foundation of unspeakable comforts and peace passing all understanding in life and at death) that so you may live the life of glory hereafter.
In testimony of which my cordiall and uncessant prayers for you all, I subscribe my selfe with all readi∣nesse;
Decemb. 15. 1657.


