



BEing now upon a review of this small Treatise, to send it a second time to the Press, I thought it a fit season to dedicate it to you, both particularly to com∣mend to you the practice of the Rules therein contained, and likewise that I might here take occasion to give you some Directions for the right improvement of that affliction under which it hath pleas∣ed the Lord of late to exercise you. And although it may be said, that this might have been done rather in the car, then thus on the house top; yet I have chosen rather to do it thus publikely, both for your sake, that you might reckon your self the more oblig'd to observe them, while the
world is witnesse that you wanted not ad∣vice and admonition; and likewise for the sake of others, that (if these Directions be of any use) others may have the benefit of them. I was much induced here to by the complaint which I heard you make, when God had brought you back from the gates of death, and Patience had had its perfect work, in bearing that heavy burden which you lay under, viz. that your great∣est work was yet behind: reckoning it an harder matter to improve an affliction then to undergo it. And indeed so it is, as ap∣peares plainly by the instance of Hezekiah, who was a good man, and did much good in the beginning of his reign, as we may read 2 Chron. 29. and he had the comfort of it when he came to lye on his sick-bed, Isa. 38.3. And how did he plead for the continuance of his life? Vers. 19. Doubt∣lesse upon a good intention, and hope of living (as he had before done) to the glory of God, and doing good in his ge∣neration: But he turned aside as a broken bow, Psal. 78.58. He missed the mark which (without question) he sincerely aimed at. We read of his pomp and worldly greatnesse (through the abuse of which he entail'd a curse upon his peo∣ple whom he lest behind him) but little
of his goodnesse, only that he repented and humbled himself, and so saved his own soul, 2 Chron. 32.25. &c.
Now these things are written for our instruction, that we might not fall by the same example of ingratitude. It is an ob∣servation of a Learned man (the Lord Ve∣rulam) that prosperity belongs to the Bles∣sings of the old Testament, adversity to the Blessings of the New. Something indeed there is in his observation, but I am sure, correction accompanied with instruction, was then a Blessing, Psal. 94.12. And with∣out this it is not yet a Blessing, Heb. 12.11.
Now that we may know what use to make of affliction, or what lesson we are to learn thereby, we must understand that God sometimes sends affliction on some special errand, with respect to some parti∣cular sinne. And this is evident, either when God dealeth with men by retaliati∣o, as in the case of Adonibezek, Judg. 1.7. or by punishing men in such things as have been the instruments of their sinne, as he made Jeroboams arm wither which he stretched forth against the Prophet, 1 King. 13.4. and many Instances there are of this kind. Sometimes God makes that which is the natural effect of mens sinne, to be the moral effect, or punishment of it. Thus
he punisheth luxury with diseases in the body, Job 20.11. Idlenesse with poverty, Prov. 23.21, &c. and fills men with the sruit of their own doings. Sometimes God bringeth some special sin to remembrance, and awakens conscience to smite them for it, as in the case of Josephs Brethren, Gen. 42.21. Sometimes God saith (in effect) to us, as Christ to Peter, What I do, thou knowest not now, but thou shalt know, Joh. 13.7. At present we may not know the par∣ticular meaning of an affliction, but may understand it better afterwards. But (as the Schoolmen observe) to speak strict∣ly and properly, God hath no end with∣out himself. But when we say, this or that is Gods end in such a passage of his providence which he exerciseth us with, or in such a gist which he bestows on us, the meaning is, that it doth of it self con∣duce to such an end, or is to be improved by us thereunto. Wherefore till it be more evident, what is the special use of any af∣fliction, we must consider what improve∣ment in general may be made of it. And there are five things which I shall pro∣pound to your consideration for this end.
First, Consider what was your greatest comfort, and stood you in greatest stead
in the time of distresse, that so you may know what to put the greatest price and value upon, and how to prepare for what trials may befall you in time to come: for the remedies which you have found effe∣ctual at one time, will be usefull to you at another; and we keep the receits of those things by us which we have found to be good by experience. Was it any worldly enjoyment? These I am sure you com∣plained of as miserable Comforters. Can you not rather say with David, Psal. 94.9. In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts, O Lord, have refreshed my soul! Oh let not the consolations of God, be small with you! Job 15.11. Labour for more clear evidence of his loving kindness; prize it more then life. And though you should want many other comforts, blesse him for this as long as you live, Psal. 63.3, 4. Was not the Word of God your chief stay and support? Say with David Psal. 119.93. I will never forget thy Precepts, for with them thou hast quickned me. See vers. 49, 50, 54, 97. Was not the testimony of your conscience concerning your sincerity, your great comfort and rejoycing? 2 Cor. 1.12. Exercise your self continually to have a con∣science void of offence in the sight of God and man, Act. 24.16.
Secondly, Consider what was your greatest trouble in your affliction, that so you may take heed of providing sorrow for your self against the time to come. Was it a sense of the neglect of your duty in any thing, or of any thing wherein you have exceeded? Job. 36.9. (For who is it that can say they have herein made their hearts clean? Say unto God (through his Grace) You will do so no more, Job. 34.32. Was it the leaving of any worldly comforts? Be loosing your affections from these things every day by the study of mortification, and take heed of letting your heart cleave to these things, for then you will have the greater trouble at part∣ing. Was it the thought of leaving any that are dear to you, in doubt of their state and condition? labour the more ear∣nestly (by your Prayers, Counsels, Ex∣amples) to have Jesus Christ formed in them, Gal. 4.19. and learn to cast all your care upon the Lord, 1 Pet. 5.7. that so you may with more comfort and satisfaction leave them hereafter.
Thirdly, Consider what special expe∣riences you had of the goodnesse of God in your affliction. Had you not received the sentence of death in your self, 2 Cor. 1.9. and yet God was 'intreated for you,
resolve with Divid, Psalm. 116.1, 2. that you will love the Lord for it, and that Prayer shall be your constant resuge so long as you live. Did you not find that really verified, Deut. 32.3. that when your strength was gone, the Lord repented him∣self concerning you, and was the strength of your heart, Psal. 26.37. Never distrust his power or gracious care and providence whatsoever straits you may be brought in∣to. Did you not find his Grace sufficient for you? 2 Cor. 12.9. How oft have I heard you say formerly, That it is an easie matter to believe when our Faith is not put to it; or to cast our selves upon Jesus Christ for salvation in the time of health and pro∣sperity? but the tryal of Faith would be when we come into straits, or draw nigh to the King of terrours. Were you not in your own apprehension even stepping in∣to the grave? Yet then (through grace) you were able, with as much quietnesse and confidence as ever, to venture your soul upon a Promise, and to stay your self upon Jesus Christ. This is one precious fruit of affliction. Tribulation worketh pa∣tience, and patience experience, and experi∣ence hope, Rom. 5.3. The trial of Faith is much more precious then gold, 1 Pet. 1.7. In the Greek it is , agreeing
with , not with . Or if (as Glassius thinks) the words are to be ren∣dred proata fides, the former Substantive being put for an Adjective, yet the sense is the same, viz that it is a tried Faith, that is more precious then gold.
Fourthly, Consider the smart and hea∣vinesse of afflicton, and learn hence what sinne is, that brings forth such bitter sruits. Remember the wearisome nights and daies which you spent, and consider how hell will be endured; if affliction on the body for a few daies be so grievous to be born; and learn to pity those that are in the like condition. You know the heart of those that are in affliction, Exo. 23.9.
Fifthly, Consider your own promises and resolutions which you made in your affliction. When Sigismund the Emperor, asked the Bishop of Colen, What he should do to be happy; he bad him live as he promi∣sed to do the last time he had the gout or stone. Jacob promised what great things he would do, if God would be with him in his journey, Gen. 28.21, 22. but God must put Jacob in mind of his promise, when he had answered his prayer, Gen. 35.2. We should learn of David to pay our vows to the Lord, which we make in the time of our distresse, Psal. 66.13, 14.
Now for your help in this work, first write down these things which I have here proposed to your consideration. We have the writing of Hezekiah when he was sick and recovered again, Isa. 38.9. And so we find many other godly men in Scri∣pture, leaving such things on Record. What they said in their affliction, what they suf∣fered, how they praied, how God answer∣ed them.
Secondly, Be oft reading over these things to revive the remembrance of them, that you may keep your heart duly affected with them. David hath some Psalmes to bring to remembrance, Psal. 38. and Psal. 70. that is to preserve the remembrance of such things as I have here set down.
Thirdly, Pray with David 1 Chron. 29.18. that God would keep these things in the imagination of the thought of your heart alwaies, and incline your heart to him.
And for the fastening of these things, consider,
1. It is a provoking sin, and a sign of an evil frame of heart, not to be bettered by affliction, Isa. 1.4, 5. Jer. 2.30.
2. We lose our sufferings, and are most miserable (as Austin saith) if we be ne∣ver the better for them, 'Its sad indeed,
to suffer so much in vain, and to have no advantage thereby, Gal. 3.3. It would trouble us to take a great deal of unplea∣sing physick, and pay dear for it, and get no good by it.
3. Where God intends good to any, if lesser afflictions will not serve turn, he will lay on greater; as we may read at large, Lev. 26. and if he give over any, while they are incorrigible, it is in judg∣ment, and severe displeasure, Isa. 1.5. Hos. 4.17.
Now my hearts desire, and earnest Prayer to God for you, is, That he would long continue you to be a blessing in the place wherein he hath set you, that your Family may be as it hath long been, a Se∣minary to the Church of God, that Religion may still thrive under the shadow of it, and that the same Faith may dwell in your Children, which hath dwelt in their Pa∣rents, and Parents Parents; that they may stand up in their Generations, to fill up their places, and to be followers of them in their integrity and usefullnesse: For this would be the joy and crown of rejoycing of

May 30. 1659.
