



SIR,
I Received yours, desiring my advice for the pub∣lishing of your Brothers Letters. Truly Sir, I should be very ungrateful to him, unkind to my self, and injurious to others, if I should disswade you from offering those to the publick, which in the communication may be pleasurable to all. Many of them being written to my self, and the rest (as I sup∣pose) to his correspondents, tis possible that in some of them the freedom of his Pen, and Interest with the person to whom he writ, might in some places make his expressions not so compact, or so clear, as the critical Peruser expects. But doubtless he knew what he writ at the time when he writ, but was not ob∣liged to circumscribe his fancy, either to his own con∣tinuing, or the Readers transitory understanding: yet meeting with one indued with a reasonable kindness and temper, he will find nothing but what may be interpreted without any Interpreters. I remember there were some other passages in some of them, con∣cerning the Transactions of that age wherein he writ: subjects too subtile for a private Pen, I wish them ra∣ther expung'd then expos'd; for (besides the danger of treading upon the heels of truth) there is State, that connexion between the secrets and acts of State, that we (as private persons) cannot, ought not, to censure
one, unlesse we knew the other. There are so many necessary mists cast before our eyes, so many umbrages before the light, that it were more safe for us to draw our Curtains, and take a nap, then to search about (as Diogenes with his Lanthorn and Candle) to find out truth.
We are so partiall in our Interests and self-concern∣ments, either of mind or body, or both, that mostly we account those things neither good, rationall nor commodious, which do not concur in all circumstan∣ces with our intire judgement, or individuall advan∣tage.
I wish I had leisure to peruse the whole Packet, be∣fore you sent them to the publick; but in earnest, Sir, I cannot spare so much time from my Intrustments. It is my desire therefore that you will advise with such friends as have an affection to his repute; and if they be of my acquaintance, tell them (as an incouragement to their expense of time) my opinion is (so farre as I retain the memory of them, and I believe the rest are suitable) that they are very choice descants, Theologi∣call, Ethicall, facetious and solid. The volatile part shewing the art of the Chymist, as the fixt matter: there is something to please all Tempers, masculine and feminine, martial and civil, curiall and rurall, saty∣rick and amorous: and I doubt not but if he had lived the compleating of his Translation of Cleopatra, or Loves Master-piece, I know not whether he would have done greater right to France or England, by making French English, or English French: the accomplishments of his Pen therein were so clear and genuine, as if his private had consulted with the publick Genius of both Nations: however, I dare say, by accustoming his
Pen to these, and things of an higher nature, he would have proved an English Balzack.
I confesse I wish we were restated in our primitive Innocency, when all our actions were naked, and yet not ashamed; and when our thoughts were imparted either by an universal Character, or the harmless Hieroglyphick of a Dove or a Lamb; but now how are we involved in the perplexities of our scribling! So that well may the word Litera be etymologiz'd Litis aera, the Epoche, or beginning of all contentions; we began modestly with the bark and rind of Trees, till the fol∣lowing ages having thus destroyd their shady Groves, tore the skins from harmlesse sheep, that their impure Volumes might be countenanc't by those innocent Velumes; and not contented to deprive these creatures of their intire sepultures, they have perverted their bodies to gluttony, and their skins to impostures; and the latter Age hath even robb'd the poor of their raggs, torturing them with Mills and other Engines, till in paper they are made Legatives to most of our humane affairs; and no sooner are they fitted with the colour of innocency, white, but compounds of poisons, Vitriol, Gall, and Vi∣neger (emblemes of commotion) do again die them with the sad and sable tincture, which occasions so much disorder and unquiet to the World.
And now at last we seem distracted with the num∣ber & weight of devices, so that an Index Expurgatori∣us hath been practised by the learned, and more fierce∣ly executed (without distinction) by the inrodes of the ignorant.
Yet Seneca's and Cicero's Epistles have escap't, may Loveday's have the same successe and estimate; and
then after-ages will not blame me for incouraging you to their exposure, especially if they please to read and imitate his leisurable imployment.
I shall onely add this (being diverted by some o∣ther approaches) that I well knew your Brother vali∣ant, faithful, and discreetly industrious in all the con∣cernments of body and mind. I was his Friend, and am
May 14. 1657.

