



May it please your good Lordship;
AFTER I had taken a reso∣lution to apologize for my departed friend, and make a kind of hedge to his Via tuta, I seriously bethought my selfe, who would maimtaine the fence, by one so made; and patronize this pa∣tronage of that his worthy worke. For though the cause in hand, be the truth of God; and the person whom I undertake to defend against the Calumniations of
his Adversarie, be now , out of the eye ofHorat. Od. 14. l. 3. Subla∣tum ex ocu∣lis quaerimus invidi. Ovid. l. 3. De Pont Pascitur in vi∣vis livor post fata quiescit. Et Iuvenal. Sat. 1. Nulli gravus est percussus Achilles, aut multum quaesi∣tus Hylas. envie, and the reach of malice; yet I well know, that neither the consi∣deration of the one, nor regard to the other, will prove any Amulet against the poyson of theAristoph. in Plut. , id est, annulis me∣dicinalis aut antidotus. Sycophants tooth, or venom of the Detracters tongue. Death I grant, which sets a period to all suits in Courts, should grant a Supersedeas of Course, against all Arrests and molestati∣ons of them who have taken Sanctuarie in the grave; and thereforeBrusonius facet et exemp. l. 1. Solon legem condidit, quâ prohibuit in de∣functos maledi∣cta consicere. Et Theodorus Chius cen∣suit Pom∣peium in aegypt, admittendum addens Mor∣tuos non mor∣dere. Erosm. Apoph. p. 374. Selon ena∣cted a Law, whereby, under a great pe∣naltie, he prohibited any to cast any foule aspersion on the dead. AndBruson. ibid, Asinius Pollio cum orationes condidisset in Plancum quas post mortem ejus legendas serabat audlit à Planco, cum mortuus non nisi larvas puguare. Plancus sharply reproved the folly of Asinius Pol∣lio (who threatned to stigmatize him af∣ter his death, by publishing his declama∣tions against him) saying, None but Hob∣goblins fight with ghosts. Notwithstanding this privilege granted to the dead, even by the Law of Nature; I cannot remem∣ber
without horrour, nor expresse with∣out griefe, what the Acts and Monuments of the Church, present to the view of all men, concerning Popish malice survi∣ving life it selfe, and committing in∣humane (not onely unchristian) outra∣ges on the corpes, and not lesse upon the workes of Orthodoxe Professors now with God. The blessed Martyr, SaintCypr. de lap. & Ep. l. 2. Saevitum est in plagas, saevi∣tum est in vul∣nera: & in servis Dei non jam membra torquebantur sed vulnera: manabat pro fletibus san∣guis & pro la∣chrymis cruor e semiustulatis visceribus deflu∣ebat. Cyprian, setting the cruelty of the hea∣then, as it were, upon the Racke, could straine no higher after hee had said, These Salvage Persecutors wreake their furie on the brused, and battered servants of Christ; and torture not so much their members as their wounds. Yet there is a Plus ultra in the enraged malice of our Romish Ad∣versaries, Saevitum est in cadavera, saevitum est in ossa, saevitum est in cineres. For theyVide hist. de mort. Spala∣tensis. M. S. Arraigne the dead, they sue against them an Ejection out of their long homes, and interre them inActs and Monuments, volume 3. pag. 778. The body of Peter Martyrs wife, at Oxford, was taken up by Doctor Marshall out of her grave, in the Church of Saint Frideswids, and buried in a dunghill. Lestals; nay they
burne theirActs and Monuments, vol. 1. p. 606. The body, and bones of Iohn Wickliffe, by the Decree of the Synod of Constance, were taken up & burned, 41. yeares after he was buried, in his owne Pa∣rish at Lutter∣worth, and his ashes taken & throwne into the river; and so was hee re∣solved into three ele∣ments, Earth, Fire, and Wa∣ter: thinking thereby, utterly to exstinguish and abolish both his name and Doctrine for ever. Acts & Monuments, volume 3. pag. 771. The Vice chancellor taking with him a publike Notarie, bound the Parishioners with an oath, to digge up Paulus Fargius his bones: and received the like oath of Roger Davis, and William Ha∣zell, for doing the like with Martin Bucer, when they came to the place of execution, the Chests were set up an end, with the dead bodies in them, and fastened on both sides with stakes, and bound to the post with a long on chaine, fire being forthwith put to, as soone as it began to flame round about, a great sort of bookes that were condemned with them, were cast into the same. bones, and strew their ashes on the rivers.
Tantene animis coelestibus irae?
Loe the bowels of them who most boast of workes of Mercie,(i) Edmund Camp. rat. 10. Clavinum & has principes unum coelum capere non potest. Et Fishers resp. to Doctor White, and Doctor Featley. c. 2. p. 152. Out of the unity of the Romish Church, no salvation. Et Coster resp. ad refut. Osiander proposit. 8. wisheth himselfe damned with Lucifer, if ever any Lutheran were saved. towards the bodies of true Professors, whilome, Temples of the holy Ghost: yet their charitie to their soules, exceeds this; for these they pe∣remptorily exclude out of heaven, and send them pell-mell, without Baile, or Mainprise, to the dungeon of hell; and there sentence them to more exquisiteCoccleus hist. Hussit. l. 2. Multo graviora esse crediderim Wicklefi tormenta quam sint apud inferos, vel scelera tissimorum hominum Iudae proditoris Christi, & Neronis Christianorum perse∣cutoris. torments, than either Nero the monster of men, or Iudas the betrayer of Christ himselfe, indure. Of this
straine is the KnightsFlood, Spect. c. 17. per tot. Papists dying in their Reli∣ligion saved, Protestants damned. Alastor, with whom I am to deale; whose perfect cha∣racter your Lordship may see in Sozimus, drawne to the life by Isidorus Pelusiota,
,as your Lordship may find likewise, an exact Emblem of his booke in Plinie his description of thePlin. nat. hist. l. 9. c. 36. Beares whelpe, Jn∣formis caro sine oculis, sine pilis, ungues tan∣tum prominent? In which consideration,(n) Ben. Syr. Apoph. , Satns nutu stultus fuste Drus. in Alph. vt. sap. . I thought it most needfull to make choise of a Patron of eminent qualitie, who with his Authoritie, might stoppe the mouth of such railing Rabshakah's; and if need be, lend them a smart blow with his Crozure, asHom. Is. s. . Ʋlisses did Thersites with his golden Scepter. Now, although the Knight vvanted not many Noble and vvorthie friends, and some of your Lordships Sacred order, who honoured him living, and would willingly have afforded him their protection being dead. Yet two reasons were prevalent with me, to dedicate this Apologie to your
Lordship. First, because none of your Lordships ranke now living, to my knowledge hath so often entered into Lists with the Romish Adversaries, nor served so long in this sacred Leguer as your Lord∣ship; in so much, that at my aboade in France, now 25. yeares agoe: where I saw theFitzg: Hector Romuli∣dum cecidit sub Achille Iuello. Rhemensi Han∣nibali Scipio Fulcu erat. Tum cor papico∣lis Rainoldus fregit in Hatto. Alba Stapleto∣num jugera de∣inde premunt: Ac edes nostris prerium De∣ringe payris. Net gemmae Renues Annu∣lus ire comes. Abfuit Elysiis tantum sua Laurea lucis. Te Deus in lu∣os tranflulit er∣go suos. Armes of other Champions of the truth blazoned in a Latin Epigram, I descried your Lordships among them in an apposite Anagram, made by a re∣nowned Pastor of the French Church.
THOMAS MORTONIVS  homo Martis notus.
With this, or the like Euloge.
Quassanda est istâ Pelias hasta manu.
The other reason was, your Lordship in your last, no lesse unimitable, then un∣answerableMort. in∣stitut. sacram. l. 3. c. 3. p. 158. Of Rom. Tran∣sub. This sen∣tence I have seene lately can∣vased by a Ie∣suit against a judicious and religious Knight, falsly imputing unto him diverse falsities, &c. And l. 7. c. 7. pag. 545. Your Iesuit in his booke of Spectacles made in confutation of a judicious and religious Knight, among many other of his Paradoxes and Ab∣surdities &c. masterpiece, held up your buckler over the Knight then living, more
then once, and ward off the Iesuits blowes; and therefore I doubt not but that your Lordship will now bestride him being dead, and save him from all further injury. For my selfe, as nothing induced me to make this supplement to his Apologie, but the love of Gods truth, and the truth of my friends love: so I hope that all who love the truth in sincerity, upon the impartiall perusall hereof, will doe the Knight honour, and me right. For envie it selfe cannot denie that he hath much advantaged the common cause, both by convincing the Adversaries, in all the maine points of difference betweene us, out of their owne mouthes, and disco∣vering more at large then any the mystery of their Indices expurgatorij; wherein though they professe to correct onely their owne writers, and that but from the yeare 1518. yet the Knight hath tra∣ced them upwards, and detected their corruption of all sorts of Writers in all former ages: whereby the judicious
Reader may observe such indirect dea∣ling in our Adversaries towards us, asMelancth. orat. Tom. 1. de Od Sophist. Cum triginta Tyranni, legem tulissent, ne quis è suo Ca∣talogo in dict â causà necaretur Critias tamen Therammenem collegam suum, cujus nomen in Catalogo scrip∣tum erat, in dict â causâ in∣terfici jussit cumque The∣rammenes legis occiliū peteret, respondet, legem scriptam esse de iis quorum nomina sunt in Catalogo, se vero jam The∣rammenes no∣men in Catalo∣go delevisse. Critias in the Athenian State practised against Therammenes: there being a law enacted in the time of the 30. Tyrants at Athens, that none of them should be put to death without a legall tryall, whose names were written in a certaine Cata∣logue, Critias bearing a spleene to The∣rammenes, first blots his name out of the Catalogue, and then proceeds to sentence him to death; and when Therammenes pleaded the priviledge of the law, as be∣ing one of the thirty Governours, whose name was set downe in the Catalogue; Critias answered, that the benefit of the law was restrained to those whose names were in the Catalogue; but that he had newly strucke out the name of Therammenes. Let any that hath a single eye, judge whether the proceedings of our Romish Adversaries against us, are not altogether as injurious as this of Critias towards his Collegue Therammenes. First,
they raze out our Records, and burne our writings, and then nonsuit us for want of Evidence. Secondly, they blot and cut out by their Indices Expurgatorij, the most pregnant testimonies of Antiquity for us, and then charge us with false Allegations, because, forsooth, they agree not with their castrated Copies. I freely confesse that if any man shall search all the Knights quotations, especially out of the Romish Writers, in the latter corrected, or rather corrupted Editions of them, or looke up∣on him through the Iesuits Spectacles un∣rubbed, he will thinke him very foule in some Allegations at least: but let him in∣quire into the more Auncient and uncor∣rupted Copies, or looke upon the Knights writings without the Iesuits false glasses, and glosses, or even through those Specta∣cles he hath fitted for him in this last Pam∣phlet; as they are now wiped and clensed by me, he will finde him a most faire and ingenuous Writer.
There is no text of Scripture among


many scores, no Allegation of Antiquity among many hundreths, vellicated by the Iesuit, which is not here vindicated: no argument seeming to be blunted, which is not sharpened, and a new edge set on it; no paint, colour, or varnish layed by the Ie∣suit on the rotten Pillars of Popery, which is not here scraped out, or washed away. And thus at the length the Case for the Spe∣ctacles begunne by the Knight is finished: on which I crave leave to imprint your Lordships Name and Armes; entreating your Lordship to accept this Dedication as an indication of my sincere love to my de∣ceased friend, and withall an acknow∣ledgment of that great debt of thankes I owe your Lordship for your Lordships many undeserved favours, which I am a∣ble no other wayes to discharge, then by underwriting my selfe,

