


Worthy and Christian Friend.
THis Sermon, which was lately preacht to your Ear, is now, at the request and im∣portunity of some Friends, humbly presented to your Eye. I hope by this time, your prudence, faith, patience, have well di∣gested your late just sorrows: and that the ten∣der of these Notes will not cause your Wounds to bleed afresh: They were first intended, and are now offered, as a Lenitive, not Corrosive; to al∣lay, not aggravate, your Griefs.
'Tis true, the All-wise Soveraign of Heaven and Earth, has thought it fit to deprive you (at least for a while) of such eminent enjoyments, as but few Mothers in our Israel are blest with. A pru∣dent, faithful, affectionate, pious, charitable Husband: Another Enoch, for of a truth, he walkt with God: One that was eyes to the blind, feet to the lame; whom not only the lips of the hungry, but the loins of the naked, did bless; a man rich in faith, rich in good works. And two daughters the one, credibly reported, the other known, to me to be so humble, obedient, modest, discreet, devout, that she fully proved her self, the genuine Issue of so precious a Father: a Branch worthy such a Stock: These are now taken from you, whereof the one was your self divided, the others, your self multipli'd. such strokes, when they come single, cannot but sharply afflict us, but when double, tre∣ble, are apt deeply to astonish us. And here me∣thinks, your condition bespeaks us, as once Job his
Friends, Job 19.21. Have pitty upon me, have pit∣ty upon me, Oye my Friends, for the Hand of God hath touched me. We do, we cannot, but pit∣ty you; and how freely could we sit down and min∣gle tears and sighs with you, weep till we could weep no more, but that my Text must be remem∣bred, which strictly forbids, both you and us, im∣moderate mourning for those that are fallen a∣sleep in Jesus; and certainly, without the least strain of charity, we may so conclude concerning your late Relations: they are not dead, but sleep in Jesus: and if so, why may not you reply with Austin concerning Monica, what cause have I to over-grieve for a mother— an husband, daugh∣ters, of whose happiness I am and justly may be so well assured. I need not ask you, whether you lo∣ved them: And could you love them, and not wish they might be perfectly happy? And could they be perfectly happy and not die? and are they dead, and do you, can you, dare you, think them less than perfectly happy? True, your loss is great, but their gain is greater. oh grieve not so much at your loss, as rejoyce at their gain. If you do, and your tears exceed your joys, you will by these bewray a love indeed, but 'tis of your self more than them. Go then, Christian Friend, and since you cannot here enjoy their persons, imitate their graces: live more and more like them, since you cannot, as yet, live with them: and let this cause you to love and long for Heaven so much the more, because so much of your self, even more than half, is there already. Which that you may, as it is the serious advice, so it shall be the ardent prayer, of

