



MY LORD,
WHen the Ilienses visited Tiberius Caesar somewhat out of season to condole with him the death of Augustus, he smiling∣ly answered, Et ego doleo Hectorē vestrum, and I am sorry for the loss of your Hector: who was dead many years before. Even so, perhaps, it may be my portion, (if not by you, for your goodness sake,) yet by some others out of malignity, and evil disposition, to suf∣fer a hard censure, if not a scornfull flout, with the Trojans, that I present to you, and the world, an Embrio of my brain, born out of due time, as the Apo∣stle

said of himself, 1 Cor. 15. 8. But give me leave to answer for my self, and that stinking vapour will easily be shaken off from the skirts of my gar∣ments. For first, I did appear in season, and offered to the Press some of them, within a few dayes after the fall of our good Josiah: but was disswaded to the contrary, for some reasons best known to my self. Secondly, it is Gods promise, Prov. 10. 7. The name of the wic∣ked shall rott; But the righteous shall be had in everlasting remem∣brance, Psal. 112. 6. And that our good King may ever live, and live in the living pictures of himself, and in the hearts of his people, and never be forgotten (like May Magdalen) for the good ded she had done, Mar 14. 9. I conceive it not unseasonable to speak

something of his life and fall. Vivit post funera virtus. Thirdly, although it may be counted civil policie to be si∣lent, yet my inward prompter tells me, it is uncivil duty, not to anoint the dead with the oyntment of my dearest love and honour. Dum spiritus hos regit artus. To love the living, may be Pa∣rasitical, as more, propter sua, than se: but to love the dead, when they can do neither good, nor harm, is verus amor, true love indeed: and such is mine, and so I am free from the aspersi∣on of ambitiousness, covetousness, and vain-glory. The first text speaks of an unnatural rebellion, and a civil, or rather uncivil War, raised by a child against his father, and King father. The second of a deadly treachery and conspiracy, to bring down to the ground

a Prince, and a great man, whereof the World was not worthy, Heb. 11. 38. The third of a horrid treason, not only against the father, the King fa∣ther, but even against his children, that as the Husbandmen spake one to another, Mark 12. 7. the Inheritance might be theirs. So that as Protoge∣nes in his absence, finding at his return a line drawn upon his board in his shop, with much exquisiteness, presently con∣cluded Apelles had been there: Even so, by the monstrous conception, birth, and carriage of all, or either of them, it may be imagined (without an Interpre∣ter) who was the father of them, Jo. 8. 44. and he that set them on work, will, or hath paid them the wages of Balaam, 2. Pet. 2. 15. If you will be pleased to over-look with a Candid eye

the following Treatises, you shall find the condition of the Church of God, to be as a Lillie among Thorns, Can. 2. 2. and her greatest enemies to be of her own houshold, as Christ fore-told, Mat. 10. 36. Gog and Magog, (like He∣rod and Pilate) will combine against Christ, and his Members, to dethrone, and extirpate them; but such is Gods over-ruling providence, that, Sanguis Martyrum, semen Ecclesiae, he pre∣serves her from falling into ashes, and after a black Cloud, and waterie tem∣pest, sends forth the brightest, and clear∣est beames of his favour, and never-dying love, to warm her, refresh her, and make her last daies better than the first, like Jobs, 42. 12. Here again you shall find, with what a Gospel-face, rebellion and treason are painted, able

to deceive the very elect, Mark 13. 22. but being unmasked, how mort deformed, more ugly do they look than Pharaohs lean kine, when they had devoured the fat, the full, the fair, the well fleshed of the Land? But lest it be said of me, as once a flout∣ing Critick said unto the Citizens of Mindus, who having great gates to a little Citie, he bade them to shut the gates, lest the Citie run out: even so, lest the bead seem bigger than the bo∣dy, and the Proem larger than the O∣ration, I shall only desire, that God may be Glorified, your self Contented, and confirmed in those Principles which you have hitherto professed with zeal and courage, I conclude,

