



Beloved in the Lord,
HEre is a Treatise presented to your view, which stands in much need of your favour∣able consideration, as to the weakness, and imperfection in the writing thereof; but if you can over∣look them, the Truth endeavored to be held out thereby is worth your studying, and en∣quiring after; It is a Truth that hath many Hangers-on, but few faithful Servants; many Gospel Merchants have been trading for this goodly Pearl, but few have been

willing to go to the price of it; they have had Peace in their mouthes, but War in their hearts, like those Micah speaks of chap 3.5. They bite with their teeth, and cry peace; but if thou wouldest obtain the precious u∣nity of Saints, thou must not onely seek peace but pursue it, Psal. 34.14. not stand still, and call it to thee; but follow after the things that make for peace, Rom. 14.19. If the peace of God once rule in thy heart, it will guide thy feet into this way of peace; this work of peace will surely attend thy soul with the comforts and joy of peace; nay, the Lord himself shall give you peace always by all means, as in 2 Thess. 3.16. If thou wouldest have thy soul prosper, Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall pros∣per that (so) love her; nay, if thou wouldest have Sion prosper, say Peace be within thy wals, and (then) prosperitie shall be with∣in her Pallaces (and therefore) for thy brethren and companions sake say, Peace be within thee; (and) because of the house of the Lord our God, I will seek thy good, as in Psal. 122.6, 7, 8, 9.
If after you have perused this Discourse

you shall observe there are many considerable Objections against the thing prest unspoken to; that I admit; I do not expect these few weak Lines should answer all Objections in a controversie of this weight, neither do I judge my self able to answer them, but am assured there are well wishers to this Truth, that are able to proceed. Therefore if these Lines may but tend to awaken and stir up the people of God to enquire after this Truth; and to allow that the laboring after Saints Union, is not only a Dutie, but a great and weighty Duty, and to be numbered in the first Rank of Christian Duties, I have my aim; for that would prepare the hearts of Saints for Unity, and make the work of re∣moving obstructions, and resolving parti∣cular cases, much more easie.
For many of Gods people do already, and more will be daily discerning the inconsist∣ency of the principles they walk by to Gospel-prosperity; unity doth as naturally fore-run Glory to Christs Church, as health doth strength, or light heat.
Therefore the main design of Satan at this day is to prevent Gospel-Glory, by obstruct∣ing

Gospel-Unity; but the more the spirit of strife and division struggles against this work, let it provoke you the more to set to all your strength to promote it; the Lord doth not onely require that his people should be faithful unto, but valiant for the Truth up∣on earth.
Shall Quakers and such like rigid censo∣rious dividing principled people compass sea and land, and consume their estates to make common purses in order to the promo∣ting and carrying on their ridiculous princi∣ples of division and confusion? and shall those who pretend the Espousing the universal in∣terest of Saints as such, be Ephraim-like, a silly Dove without heart? as their dili∣gence and painfulness do now upbraid us, so I fear it will in the great day rise up in judg∣ment against us.
It was good Mr. Burroughs complaint in his time, when the spirit of division was but in its infancy, That there were many would cry Loe the Thief, but who stopt him? So saints are many at this day will be∣moan such divisions, and make sad com∣plaints of it one to another when they

meet; but how few have set themselves to study and propagate uniting principles; which I trust the Lord will set upon the hearts of some who he hath so eminently principled and qualified for the work; that the friends of this precious Truth may not have cause above all the rest of Truths Favorites to complain with the Prophet in its behalf; There is none to guide her among all the Sons whom she hath brought forth, nei∣ther is there any that taketh her by the hand, of all the sons which she hath brought up, Isa. 51.18. Nay, is there not rather cause for this Truth to take up the Lords complaint, Isa. 1.2. I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me.
This Principle hath been dealt withal by some of its Favourites, as Saul dealt with David, who honoured and imbraced him in his camp, and hated and banished him his Court; yet blessed be the Lord there are some Jonathaas to stand up and say, What evil hath he done? whose souls are knit to this principle, as the soul of Jonathan was to David, who will not be afraid to answer

imposing and dividing principles as Moses answered Pharoah, Exod. 10.9. We will go with our young and with our old, with our Sons and with our Daughters, with our Flocks and with our Herds will we go, for we must hold a Feast unto the Lord.
Pharoah would have put off Moses with the liberty and freedom of some part of Gods people, Go you that are men to serve the Lord (saith he) ver. 11. No saith Moses, Church deliverances from bondage & opres∣sion must be universal deliverances; other∣wise how should we hold a feast to the Lord? can part of us rejoyce in our Liberties as long as other part is under bondage and oppressi∣on? No, we must either all go together, or all stay together; all rejoyce together, or all mourn together; therefore we will not leave a hoof behind us, ver. 26. Now this spirit in Moses, is the true nature of this Gospel-principle; it will not own any deliverance from oppression and imposition of conscience contrived and proposed by men, to answer the design of Gods deliverance to his people, untill it include the common Gospel Liberty due to all Saints, and that in all their necessa∣ry

concernments, though it may out of tender∣ness with David, 1 Sam. 30.10. leave some of the weak and feeble behind in the work of War and danger, yet all must have an equal share of the spoil, whether the Sons of Belial will or no, as in ver. 24.
It's the faithfullest and impartiallest Stew∣ard to trust with the Saints common stock that can be found on earth: there shall be no cause of complaint so far as its power reach∣eth; every one of Sions children shall have an equal share of those common mercies and priviledges their Heavenly Father appoints for them: And therefore whatsoever opini∣on or way thou art of, consisting with so∣briety and holiness, this principle, if thou dost promote it, will take equal care, and make equal provision for thy Christian liber∣ty and encouragement, that if thou beest a favourer of Saints prosperity, labor to be ac∣quainted with this common friend of theirs, it will teach thee how to observe and own the shining beauty of grace in Saints through the darkest cloud of those common errors and mistakes that the opposite principle ren∣ders them so unlovely and deformed one to another by.
And let not the homely and mean attire this Truth salutes thee in, make it less accep∣table; if the Author had had better, it should not have worn so bad; but Beauty is Beauty though clothed in rags. The ensuing Dis∣course is rather intended to tell thee there is such a Principle accommodated with such ex∣cellent Qualifications, and to provoke thee to enquire after it, and endeavor acquaint∣ance with it, then to give the an exact de∣scription of it; But I shall submit what fol∣lows to thy favorable censure, and close with the words of Paul to the Philippians, c. 2. v. 1, to 6. If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fel∣lowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mer¦cies: Fulfil ye my joy, that ye be like minded having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind: Let nothing be done through strife or vain-glory, but in lowliness of mind let each esteem other better then them∣selves. Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of others. Let this mind be in you, which was also in Chrst Jesus. In whom I rest

