



Worshipful, and Beloved!
WHen this Piece is once come into your hands, there needs nothing be spoken further, either by way of commendation of the Work, or upon the account of its Dedication to you. The Author and his Labours having been of that worthy Estimation amongst you, and his Memory still so precious, as a Commendatory Epistle from us would be less. And for the Right of what∣ever may be call'd His, whose Name this bears, it undoubtedly resolves on

You, whose he was, both by your free Choyce, and his most willing Service. Moreover, the Subject here presented, besides its own uncontroverted Excel∣lency and Necessity, which commends it to all, comes singularly commended to You upon a double Respect; partly, as that which was the largest and choycest part of his Labours with you; partly, as what of all other was the Vote of his last Bed to have made pub∣lick for your use. Had himself sur∣vived to have compleated his own Pa∣pers, as he had began in his weakness to revise them, the whole surely had been more semblant and exact: yet as it is, it is his own as he left it; not lame, or torn, though here and there undrest (especially towards the begin∣ning) and such as nevertheless speaks

a sufficient worth, even without its due dress.
And now two of your eminent Lights have shone before you,Mr. S. Ward and the Au∣thor. especi∣ally in this one Tract; and have left behinde them a clear and large Path∣way for you, of Living by Faith. Whose Faith, and Works of Faith,Heb. 13.7. O that you may be found as eminently to follow! their combined Light be∣getting in you the stronger heat. Sure∣ly, God expects of you an exact Hand in this Work, whom he hath grac'd with so fair Copies. Others in other places have travell'd likewise in this Theme, but we dare say, None more compactly and lively than the for∣mer, nor copiously and distinctly than this latter of yours; Of which the one may have seem'd to have given

the Text, the other the Commentary; so as the Furniture of both makes you complete in this kinde.
Possibly the Work comes forth much later than your desire and expe∣ctation; and truly, than ours too: not one or two, but more years having pass'd since the Authors death. But so it hath hapned through some cross and unavoidable occurrences. May the Benefit of it at length recompence the Delay, which we both hope and pray. We shall adde no more by way of Pre∣face, but commit this so useful Trea∣tise, and your diligent perusal of it, to Him,1 Cor. 3.6, 7 who alone, while Paul plants, and Apollo waters, gives the increase.

