



SIR,
IT is blamed in our Englishmen, that they are apt too much to admire Foreigne Countreys and Commodities; and exotick Fashions also, because they are either igno∣rant

of, or do not sufficiently prize the Excellencies of their own native Soil; and herein the old Proverb of the English is verified, They never know when they are well. VVe have little cause (I thinke) to envy any other Countrey, if we rightly understand our own happy condition. I have in my Prolegomena written encomiastically of this Nati∣on; and in the Book have spoken snccinctly of each Coun∣ty. Were the Subject well

handled, I suppose it would be a pleasing Argument to you who have seen a great part of England. However you will (I hope) excuse my boldnesse in prefixing your Name to this worke, since I was willing to testifie here∣in, how much I am beholding to you for your many great Civilities and Courtesies to me and mine. I have heard you often say, Though you had a great Office many yeers, and was Executor also to three eminent Persons of the Nobi∣lity,

yet you scarce ever had any complaint against you for Miscarriages in your Place, or a Suit at Law with any (one excepted) in your whole life. These, with a plentifull Estate, and a healthfull Constitution of Bo∣dy are mercies, and lay a stronger Obligation upon you, to be carefull to please and honour that God, who hath been so propitious to you.
Your exciting of others, and your own munificence also to so good a VVork, as

to the edifying of a specious Chappel, for the solemn worship of God, and setling also a compe∣tent Maintenance for a Mini∣ster, is laudable. Your prudent avoiding Suretiship (though you were solicited by two Royal Per∣sons to be bound for them) is consonant to Scripture-Rules. But (Sir) in your declining Age, it will be your wisdome now, and comfort hereafter, to lay up your treasures in Heaven, to mortifie all inor∣dinate affections, and to secure your interest in Christ. Nus∣quam

tuta foelicitas ubi periclitatur aeternitas. A man is never safe, till his everlasting condition be well provided for. I shall not en∣large herein, but subscribe my self,
Sir,

