


TO you, who are despised, and the Out∣casts, and the off-scouring of the World in many, too many mens opinions; to you, who are adjudged of most not fit to be entertain'd into Society or conference, are these few lines directed and dedicated, who though soiled and sullied with a long af∣fliction, may yet return to him that hath smitten you, and finde rest, consolation, and refreshment to your souls and bodies, by the infinite mercy and love of God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ blessed for ever.
You cannot but know that your Adver∣saries are many, both for Tongue and Pen, you see few or none appearing to plead for you, yet amongst those few this Authour hath exposed himself in your defence, he weighs not the reproaches of men, so he may do you good, and be serviceable un∣to you, for your gathering and grafting in again.
Two things are offered to you; the first is of comfort, the second is of direction, both necessary, that of comfort shall be
first, because you stand in most need of it, and few or none afford it to you.
Know therefore that God hath not cast away you his people, he that Exod. 3. said I have seen, I have seen the affliction of my people that are in Egypt unto your noble Progenitors, sees also all your affli∣ctions through the whole world.
Gods Rod lay upon them 430. years in Egypt, and 70. years in the Baby∣lonish Captivity, yet he forgot not his pro∣mise to Abraham, but did bring them out of both; and though this hath continued almost 4. times longer than the longest of them, yet a 1000. years are with the Lord but as one day, he will for certain, he will yet redeem and deliver you.
And therefore lift up your heads, for the time of your Redemption draweth nigh, yet a little while and he that shall come will come and not tarry, with healing in his wings; Malac. 3.
Secondly, know what a change you shall partake of; beauty for ashes, joy for mourn∣ing, the Garments of gladness for the gar∣ments of sadness, he will gather up his Jewels, and you that have been tost, and given for lost, will he imbrace and honour
and Crown with everlasting love and glory?
To stir up and kindle mens affections to regard you and shew honour and love to you, and to keep up your spirits from fail∣ing to wait upon God; I manifest four things tending to your glory, the first is your noble Pedigree and extraction. The second, your honourable Titles. Thirdly, your eminent Prerogatives. And fourthly, your exceeding Priviledges: of each suc∣cinctly.
First, for your extraction and pedigree, you have been studious to search about Ge∣nealogies, now according to the Scriptures, your Original is from the first of Men, this is evident in the first of Chron. the nine first Chapters, and so in Luke 3. from the 23 vers. bringing your descent even to him who was the joy of the whole earth, and the Glory of Israel, from whom you had the truest, highest, and greatest Nobility that ever was given to men.
Secondly, for your Titles, illustrious and stupendious. Called Hebrews from He∣ber Son of Salah Noahs grandchilde, Gen. 11.14. which name signifies passage or in a passive signification, passing passage,
you being as it were an Intermedium for the conveyance of Grace, God giving you his Ordinances to receive as it were by the first hand, the Gentiles by a second; Actively taken, you were more near God in your services; and therefore, surpassing in the truth and purity of your Religious wor∣ship of the true, pure, and everlasting God. You are call'd Israelites from Israel, an name of Honour given by the Angel to Jacob, Gen. 23. v. 28. Prince of God, or Prevailer or Conqueror of God, who was a chief Patriarch of, and amongst you, pre∣vailing in prayers, sacrifices, and services; therefore are you stil'd commonly the Children of Israel, Deut. 33.1. And fre∣quently the people of Israel; St. Peter is ve∣ry desirous to ingratiate himself with you, for he cals you the Men of Israel. Acts 2.22. You are the people who properly are call'd a chosen Generation, a holy Priest-hood, a holy Nation, a peculiar people, 1 Pet. 2.9. you are call'd Jews from Judah, Jacob's, fourth son, Gen. 29.35. which signifieth praise, you being the praise of all Nati∣ons, yet the Scripture gives you higher and more honourable Titles than these, more relating to the Deity, as his peculiar
treasure Exod. 19.5. the people of the Lord, Deut. 29. the Lords Children. Deut. 14.1. his first-born, Exod. 4.22. his Inheritance. 1 Kings, 85.1. the Lot of his Inheritance. Jer. 10.16. you are call'd Gods Vineyard, Psal. 80. Isay 5.1. Jer. 2.21.
3. For your Prerogatives large and wonderfull indeed, God chose you out of a people to be a chosen people to himself, Deut. 6.7. To make you high above all Nati∣ons of the Earth, in praise, and in Name, and in Honour, Deut. 26.19. He is said to be more nigh to you than any Nation, Deut. 19.7. you received Gods word before any Na∣tion He hath not dealt so with any Nation. Psalm 104.19.20. In Judah is God known, his Name is great in Israel; in Salem or (Hierusalem) was his Taberracle, and his dwelling in Syon; the mount whereon Solomons Temple stood, Psal. 76.1.2. And John, 4 22. unto you did Christ preach, called you Children the Gentiles Dogs; Christ would not let his disciples preach the Gospel to the Gentiles, or to any Cities of the Samaritans, till they had begun at Hierusalem, Matth. 10.15. Luke 24.47. Which precedency belong'd to you by right of Covenant, to you and to your seed, Acts 2.39.

Fourthly, for your Privileges, exceeding many and high ones, God himself will be known by this, I am the God of the He∣brews, Exod. 3.18. He promiseth to set you on high above all Nations, showring down all blessings upon you, Deut. 28.1, 2. and to make you a Kingdom of Priests, and an holy Nation, Exod. 10.4, 6. Unto you did God commit his Oracles, Rom. 3.2. But above all, is that, that Christ was born of you, and made his first profers of grace and love to you; amongst those eight several Privile∣ges God bestowed on you: St. Paul ends all in this, Who are Israelites, to whom ap∣pertaineth the Adoption, and Glory, and the Covenant, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the Promises, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, Rom. 9.4, 5. And when as the Apostle Paul would defend his Apostleship, and keep up the Dignity and Honour of it, he useth Arguments from his Privileges, as he was a Jew, Are they Hebrews, so am I? Are they Israelites, so am I? Are they of the Seed of Abraham, so am I? 2 Cor. 11.22. accounting these Privileges the great∣est carnal blessings that were given unto men. To these add, that you were Holy
Brethren, Partakers of the heavenly Cal∣ling, Phil. 3.1. Of you it was that Saint Paul spoke and thought such things as ac∣company salvation, because of your work and labour of love, which you have shewed in ministring to the Saints, Hebr. 6.9, 10. These are those comfortable, honourable, and excellent Titles, Prerogatives, and Pri∣vileges, that are ascribed unto you above all other Nations and People, and are high Incentives and deep Ingagements to make you walk worthy such excellent Endow∣ments and benefits, and to raise up your drooping spirits, even in the midst of all your long and deep Visitation; for as the Prophet, Though you have layn among the Pots, yet shall ye be as the wings of a Dove covered with Silver, &c. Psalm 68.13. and God will bring again his own people, even as he did sometimes from the depth of the Sea, Psalm 68.22. (i. e.) beyond all mens help and expectation, with a mighty hand, and out-stretched Arm, and then shall Jacob rejoyce and Israel shall be glad, that for your comfort. The second thing premised:
2. Is for your direction, and that shall be brief: First, Hate and leave off that
sin which procured this your suffering by repentance, that your sins may be blotted out when the time of your refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord, Acts 3.
2. Be incessant with God in Prayer, that he would be pleased to remember the time, the set time, to have mercy upon Sion, for it pitieth her Servants to see her in the dust, and that he would open your eys, and give you understanding hearts to believe in and know him whom God hath sent, Jesus Christ, John 17.3.
3. To search the Scriptures, and in reading them, to pray God to take away the vail that is upon your hearts, for the Letter killeth, but the Spirit giveth life. And consider the Ministration of the Spirit is much more glorious than that of the Let∣ter, and old things are passed away, and all things are become new, and that though the Law was given by Moses, yet grace and truth came by Jesus Christ, John 1. and that now there is no difference betwixt Jew and Gentile, Barbarian or Scythian, bond or free, but we are all one in Christ Jesus.
4 Wheresoever you shall come, to be carefull of your carriage, to give no of∣fence,
but to walk worthy of the excellen∣cy of that high Calling in Jesus Christ.
To conclude all, I have discharged my conscience in your behalf; God is able to bring great things to pass by small Instru∣ments, though I be the least, yet I am one that wish well to Sion and do heartily pray, that God would give you favour in the sight of the Nations, and that all those that keep you captives may pity you, and that the Nations seeing your conversion may glorifie God on your behalf, and say, What hath God done? This is the Lords do∣ing, and it is marvellous in our eys. So be it.

FINIS.
