


SIRS,
I Am very glad I have applyed my self during the time I was in France to some work useful to the English Nation, even before his Majesty of Great Britain had done me the honour and been graci∣ously pleased to call me unto his Royal service. For in this Treatise of Chymistry you shall finde a Chapter of Vegetables and their preparation, which contains several specifical Reme∣dies, to oppose and root out Scorbutical Diseases, which are but too frequent and connatural to the Clime of this your Country; so that with a very earnest and sincere heart and affection I do impart unto you, not only that which I have declared of most abstruse and secret particulars in the matter of Vegetables, but all the Contents of this whole Work also, both touching Ani∣mals and Minerals, where you likewise will meet with a consi∣derable Harvest of Antiscorbutical Remedies. I wish all may succeed to the common good and advantage of your Nation, and to your own in particular; since it is the chief aym, and sole in∣tention of our Great Soveraign. You shall know by the sequel of this Discourse, that I have now, and shall alwayes have for you and the improvement f your knowledge, the same tendernesse I have had for the French Apothecaries; I shall then advertise
you, that 'tis near five and thirty yeares since I was first addicted to Pharmacy, and that by a Father that was in his profession most exact, who employ'd himself particularly in the curious searches into things necessary for the Election, Preparation, and Composi∣tion of Medicines, which he kept in his Shop, to dispose of ac∣cording to the precept and orders of the Physitians. I may say, as he was my Father, so he was my Master, from whom I received the first Elements of Pharmacy and Chymistry; who likewise in the first place enjoyned me to observe that excellent principle, viz. to exercise my Profession with Fidelity, suffering nothing to discredit the dignity of this Art: But above all, to follow punctu∣ally the directions of the Physitians, which ought to be the Foun∣tain from whence all first receive the Noble knowledge of true Natural things, and the manner of preparing them well.
But this excellent Patron, by whom I ought to square all the Actions of my best life and Profession, soon forsook me, leaving me full of nothing but grief for his losse, and a true Prognostica∣tion of the decay of Pharmacy. For he foresaw that the body of the Physitians was divided in such a manner, that the branches were separated from the Roots, and that the nourishment necessary for their subsistance must fail them, without question, if he did not effect a good reunion, that might oblige the Physitians to continue their studies and searches into Naturals, and so communicate them to the Apothecaries. And these ought to receive them with due respect and gratitude, to the end that they might jointly dedi∣cate themselves to the Publick good, without farther rending them∣selves by partialitie and particular interest, which hath ever been the ruin of those that are willing to indulge themselves from their due endeavour. Now when I saw my self deprived of the instructions of a Father and a Master, I applyed my self wholly to follow his last precepts. Whereupon I searcht among the dead for those Physitians that had written best of Pharmacy, and a∣mong these living, those that did practise best, and did labour
daily to imbellish it by their new doctrines, and supplyes of good and wholsome Remedics. 'Twas my good fortune to finde at Se∣dan (which was then the place where I was setled) one Dr. Du∣han deceased, Dr. of Physick, and professor of Philosophy, who did me the favour to instruct and shew me much; 'Twas of this great Man that I confesse I receiv'd whatever did by degrees promote in me that good design of diligent searching into Phy∣sical verities, because those notions are absolutely necessary for our Apothecary, that would acquit himself well in his profession with requisite fidelity; and I can say in commendation of his admi∣rable Genius, that France hath suffered much by his untimely death; for he was designing then to publish some Writings, which would have much illustrated the knowledge of things Natural, Medicine & Pharmacy. He had Anatomised Nature in General and particular sufficiently to acquit himself honorably of what he had undertaken, had he not been ravisht hence so soon to the infi∣nite losse of the Common-wealth of Learning. Afterwards at Paris, I had the happinesse of liberty to converse with M. du Clos Dr. of Physick, who did me the favour to correct my de∣faults, and lead me as by the hand of his judgement and experi∣ence, through all that which I have undertaken in my endeavors to advance the dignity of Pharmacy, which now lies bending to∣ward its ruine, if it be not upheld by its true Arches and Pillars, those faithful, learned, experienc'd and curious Physitians. This Excellent and rare Physitian denyed me none of those lights, or illustrations, that are necessary for the well-doing of those that ad∣dict themselves to the legitimate preparation of Pharmacy; so that I am indebted to Him for the well-being I have acquired in my Profession. Thus I have continued, till at length I was cal∣led some years since by the favor of Mons. Vallot, the most wor∣thy and Chief Physitian to our most invincible Monarch, as Apo∣thecary and Distiller in ordinary to the King, to perform by his pre∣cepts & order lessons and operations in a course of the true Phar∣macy;
which is Chymistry, and that in the Garden which his Majesty prepared in the Suburbs of St. Victor. 'Twas there truly that I found wherewithall to satisfie the appetite of my curiosity, not only by the profuse expence with which this True Father and Restorer of Medicine and Chymistry furnisht us vessels and materials withal, for the demonstration of those operations which I was commanded to make yearly, as well after the Ancient as new wayes; But likewise by those unfathom'd depth's of Learning and Experience which he possest, and which he communicated to me for the application of it to my self in particular, and the im∣parting of it in pulick Lessons so in general, (I finde I come in my expressions beneath my desires) that I thought I could not do lesse then to let Posterity know, how much I stand indebted to the bounty, learning, and sole generosity of thir great and illustri∣ous Mecenas.
I have given you this account of the progresse I made in Pharmacy, to the end that you may see the method of making your own advantage, and to discover to you the reasonable submis∣sion that you and we do, and alwayes shall owe to our illustrious Masters. You must know then by this that I am about to say, that I give you nothing here but what hath been received from the Physitians, so that it is to them only to whom you owe the obliga∣gation. And as for my publishing this Tract of Chymistry in French, 'tis because I would imitate the most eminent Authors of Germany, who thought themselves obliged to write of Chymi∣cal Pharmacy in the vulgar Tongue, that it might likewise be useful not only to the Apothecaries, but, that it might likewise be serviceable to men of other professions. For as much as is impos∣sible to write with order and method of that which is necessary to Art, when we declare not, nor illustrate at the same time the principles of things Natural; and moreover, because we disco∣ver not the order of the generation, and corruption Physical, from which all the effects of Nature do result which are the subject of the operation as well of the one as the other Pharmacy.

I have likewise publisht it, to contribute to the publick good in general, and yours in particular; For as I have never had a greater ambition then to see Pharmacy practiced in its true lustre, which I now see vilified and neglected, and as I am fix∣ed in this profession under the protection of one of the chiefest of all Physitians, one that entertains the highest and most generous design for its establishment; so likewise will I guide and con∣duct you by the Theory and practice of this Treatise of Chy∣mistry to a fair, exact, faithful and veritable profession of our Art.
You will learn hence Readers, as in other Tracts of Phar∣macy abundance of things, their true and legitimate prepara∣tion, from whence must follow necessarily a good and agreeable Composition. I have undertaken this labour for your use, because I have never yet found one that hath taken the paines or care to shew and discover punctually the manner of operating upon things to preserve their vertue, and correct their defaults.
Moreover, You may observe the difference there is of the cor∣rection of those Medicaments which are made according to the opinions and directions of the Antient Pharmacy, with that which is shew'd and commanded by the Modern.
You may observe likewise the envy and malice of those that carp at and rail against Chymistry, and how ignorantly they averre, that this admirable Art is not occupied by its followers, but on poysons, when you will finde the Treatise of the Chymical prepa∣ration of Animals as well as Vegetables. Lastly, You will finde the difference that there is in the modus faciendi of the Ancient Pharmacy with the judicial, intelligent and reasonable government of Chymical Artists, for the separation of the pure from the impure, and for the preservation of that which causes the efficacy and the vertue in things.
You may and ought to believe, Readers, That though I have not made all the preparations that are described in this Tract, yet
neverthelesse I have tryed the greater part, and may therefore judge of the possibility of their operation and the liberality and vertue of things by the practice and experience in other works which daily passe my hands. If you do but examine those Authors that have given you the description of some things, I will leave it to your discretion to judge the paines I have under∣taken to denote to you those little observations which are necessa∣ry for operating, and without which it is impossible to avoid failing. I have followed the Method and Order of that know∣ing and expert Physitian Schrederus who is yet living and a Sti∣pendiary to the City of Francfort, to whom all Apothecaries are greatly obliged for the excellent Chymical Dispensatory he hath publisht. I Recommend to you likewise the Auspurge Dispen∣satory, illustrated by the Remargues of that Great, brave & Artist Mr. Zwelfer, Physitian to his Imperial Majesty, as likewise to the Appendix joyn'd to it, to the end that you may have greater knowlede of those Noble Lights which these two excellent per∣sons have communicated in publick, and from whence I have drawn many things that will serve for your instruction if you please to give your self the trouble to read and practice them.
Lastly, Readers, I desire with the greatest passion that this may redound to the glory of Medicine, to the advancement of the one and other Pharmacy, but above all to your good and parti∣cular satisfaction.
