


To whom can the Prophets more properly belong to the sons of the Prophets, the Lords Clergie, or chosen singu∣larly from amongst many Brethren, to minister imme∣diately to him in his Sanctuary? But if the Reader shall marvel, why I put this Title (My Brethren) upon you, I would wish him to have recourse to 1 Tim. 5. 17. The Presbyters or Elders that rule well are worthy of double honour, especially they labouring in the Word and Doctrine, , although the world now saith, the most con∣temptible of all other sorts of men; and some most audacious Prognosticators of late, call them a company of prating Priests, and an Antichristian Ministery, because exclaiming against their Heathenish Astrological Art, by all the most Culpep. per Lilly. godly and learned Theologues that ever have written, and cried down as Ars nugatoria, because the main ground hereof, the Position of the heavenly Bo∣dies in their various Aspects and Houses, is only imaginary. And Astro∣logers never hear or reade any thing spoken well, but alwayes ill of them by the Prophets of old, whose word we know, is a sure word, whatsoever the Astrolo∣ger 2 Pet. 1. 19 boastingly prateth of his being for his skill of more worth then all Sion-Co∣ledg, but they shall one day answer to God for this their Rabshakeh-like language against his Angels; when as Michael the Archangel durst not bring a railing accusation against that evil Angel the Devil of hell, as Jude testifieth. And Jude epist. for the Commonalty of this Land, who joyn in the same sinne, as they are blindely lead by a new generation of Preachers, I would wish them to look into 2 Chron. 36. 15, 16. where the miserable end to which the Jews came by the Caldees is ascribed to this, That they mocked Gods messengers, and de∣spised his words, &c. But to return to the Text alledged, hereby it is mani∣fest, that such as vilifie the Ministry of Christ, as hath been said, or com∣bine together against them to deprive them of their dues, oppose God in his Word, standing for the honouring of them with double honour, which what is it, but The honour of estimation as it is set forth, 1 Thes. 5. 13. That ye highly esteem of them that labour in the Lord for their works sake. 2. The honour of maintenance, as in the next verse, Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treadeth out the corn; and the labourer is worthy of his hire; whereby if it shall be thought some stipend only can hence be pro∣ved to be due unto them, this is checked Gal. 6. 6. Let him that is instructed make him that instructs him partaker, or communicate to him in all good things; and if in all, then surely he that imparts but a little towards the rai∣sing
 of a mean stipend, fulfilleth not Gods will; but if he giveth Tithe of all his increase, as God of old ordained it should be done to the Levites, which served at the Altar, he doth fulfill it, as may also be further gathered from 1 Cor. 9. 13. as they that serve at the Altar partake of the Altar, and they that mi∣nister about holy things live of the Temple; so God hath ordained, that they who preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel, which is a compa∣rison added to many others made before taken from Oxen, Souldiers and Hus∣bandmen, Shepherds, Herdsmen and Planters, lest it should be thought, that as all these have stipends for their labour; so nothing else is hereby meant, but that Preachers of the Gospel should have stipends; but that it was not necessary to give them Tithes, is the Levites of old bad: for against this it is said, as they so these must live of Tithes and Offerings; for why doth the Apostle add this com∣parison to all the rest, but particularly to denote, what the Preachers maintenance ought to be, of which he had spoken before only in general? And if yet there be any doubt hereof, consult with Heb. 7. 4, 6. where Abraham the father of the faithful is said to have given Tithe to Melchisedeck the Priest of the most high God, thus doing him the greatest honour that could be, as hereby intima∣ting, that he was greater then he; and that being by him blessed after that he had done so, he was blessed indeed, and in his example teaching all the children of Abraham that would be blessed to do likewise, and so is confirmed that of Mal. 2. 8, 9, 10. Bring all your tithes into my house, and I will pour out a blessing without measure, &c. And how a Nation should look for Gods bles∣sing, and not rather for his curse, as is there said, that takes Tithes away, I cannot tell. In Germany and the Palatinate, what judgements followed after the taking away of them, who is such a stranger in Israel as that he knoweth not, although Ministers had good stipends allowed them? For if part goeth toother men, as it must, if put into Treasurers hands, and lesse be paid then the full value to Gods chosen Tribe, God is robbed of part, and his Ordinance is trans∣gressed, which is, that if any man would redeom his Tithe, he must adde a fifth Lev. 27. 31 part thereunto. Lastly for further proof, that the old Ordinance of God herein is still of force, appears, because that when all Ordinances ceremonial are shew∣ed under the Gospel to be repeated, Circumcision, sacrificing, divers washings, counting some meats unclean, and Sabbath-dayes; nothing is said in any place of the repealing the Ordinance of Tithes.
Touching the Elders, said to be worthy of this double honour, they are much mistaken that from hence infer two sorts, Ruling Elders, and preaching Elders; for the very reason yielded v. 18. sheweth, that none other Elders are meant but Preachers, because the Church of God was never charged with main∣tenance giving to any other but them; Neither is it any where spoken of the ordaining of them, as of preaching Elders, yea and of Deacons also; therefore if Act. 14. 23. Chap. 6. 1 Tim. 3. Tit. 1. there had been any such Officers in the Primitive Church appointed by God, the ordaining of them should not have been passed over in silence any more then of Bishops and Deacons; so that if there were any in after times, as some gather out of Ambrose, they were not set up by God, but by men; unless it shall be thought SMEC∣TYMNUS that Deacons had also the name of Elders and Rulers, because they ruled in mat∣ters concerning the poor. And thus both the distinction of Elders imagined first by Calvin, into two sorts, Ruling and Preaching, is taken away: and 1 Cor. 12. 28. brought to prove Governments besides these of Pastors and Teachers, is an∣swered, Those Governments were none other but Helps, such as the Deacons were
 to the Apostles and Pastors, to denote which they are placed last of all others, and put to helps by apposition, as being the same. And for Rom. 12. 8. He that gi∣veth, let him do it with simplicity; he that ruleth, with diligence; that sheweth mercy, with chearfulness; no other Officer can be found here, but the Deacons, who was made the instrument of distributing the Churches treasure to the poor, and set to rule over and order them, that every one might work what he or she was able, and none might eat the Churches bread living in idle∣ness, which is also prohibited, 2 Thes. 3. 10. and the same in doing these things faithfully and carefully, are said also to shew mercy, and these now are Over∣seers of the poor, being changed often, and made without Ordaining, contrary to the first Institution; and the Office of a Deacon, where any such Office is, it is turned into a Degree to the Ministry. And thus much touching imaginary ruling Elders, to satisfie all that will be satisfied.
Touching the Preaching, they had both the Keys committed unto them, be∣ing Matth. 16. 16. Matth. 18. 18. the Ensign of Government, and were encouraged in using them, and as the seventy two Elders joyned of old with Moses, had some of his spirit put upon them to inaugurate them to the governing Office, so had they when Christ breathed upon them, and said, Receive the holy Ghost, whose sins ye re∣mit, Joh. 20. 22 they are remitted, &c. And therefore not only the prime Preachers, cal∣led Apostles, but all preaching Elders are called Rulers, Heb. 13. 7, 17, 24. amongst whom, although some may be superiour to others, yet others ought to have a stroke in the Government together with them, as Assistants, otherwise how are they called Rulers?
Now for the last words, wherein these Rulers merit of honour chiefly lieth, chiefly they labouring, or because they labour in the Word and Doctrine, which words if they be supplied thus, will make this sense plain, and that one sort of Presbyters only is spoken of, chiefly are worthy of double honour for their labouring, &c. To labour in the Word, what is it, but in reading to give the true sense of all parts thereof, that the hearer may hear and understand the most obscure passages thereof, so farre forth as any Expositors old or new have gi∣ven light thereunto, or by study can by the Preacher with their help and pray∣ers be attained? as Ezra is said to have read and given the sense, and Timothy Neh. 8. 8. 2 Tim. 2. 15. is bidden study to shew himself a workman, that needeth not to be asha∣med, dividing the word of truth aright, that is, shewing those places to be mystical that are, and the mystical sense thereof, and which are to be under∣stood according to the letter, which are figurative, and which not, and freeing the truth every where from false glosses put thereupon, thus giving sincere milk to nourish, and not corrupt to poison the hearer. A great and necessary task, but for the labour that belongeth to it too commonly bawked: what the excellency of him is that studieth thus to do, yet appeareth by that which is said, Job 33. 23. An Interpreter is one of a thousand, and therefore this should prick us on to this study, and to constancy herein, and in the practising of this faculty I have known some to have been these many years, but alas they have been, and are still too few even of the learned that labour this way, and some without labouring expound so, as that it may be said, as good never a whit as never the better. By constantly going on in this way in a few years, ye may make your and it ours acquainted with the sense of the greatest part of the Scriptures, which otherwise by your Doctrine they shall never come to know in all your life time, although ye should attain with Socrates to eighty years of age, or with
 Isocrates to ninety. If it be objected, The Priests then did nothing else but expound. Sol. If they did not, yet by this place the doing of both is commend∣ed to us, and in Christs example, Luk. 4. and in Peters Act. 2. and in Pauls Heb. 7. 8. 9. 10. To labour in Doctrine, is in raising Observations out of the Word, first expounded, and hence arguing to the convincing of gainsayers, re∣proving, exhorting, and threatning, and comforting as occasion serves, pre∣ferring rather to edifie the hearers hearts, then to tickle their itching ears, not sparing the greatest for fear or hope, as the Prophets did, not even Kings or Captains living in sinne; as the Physician to whom the Kings son is committed to be cured, spareth not to give him bitter pils for any displeasure that he takes thereat: for it is his healing that he intends, and not the pleasing of him, be∣cause that if through any default in him he dieth under his hand, such a Physici∣an should incurre the danger of his life; as the King of the Persians is said to have done to Manes the Authour of the Manichean heresie, undertaking to heal his sickson by his prayers, who died under his hand: So if the Preacher, the spiritual Physician, that he may please and not offend, doth so, that any son or daughter of the King of Heaven, deth by his default, he will cut him off as a traitor by a terrible death. And that young Students in Divinity may the more readily attain to the faculty of rightly expounding the holy Scriptures, and other Theologues of more years, who for want of improving their time wll hi∣therto to get this theological knowledge, are too defective herein, might be henceforth furthered more then they could hitherto be by reading any one Au∣thor whatsoever upon the whole Book of God, consisting of the Old and New Te∣stament, I have by Gods singular assistance and enabling me the least of many of my Brethren, done and brought to a full period this great Work, even beyond my strength, being alwaies valetudinarious, travelling herein no less thn thirty four years. In all which time I have not spared for any pains in perusing all the best Expositors, both old and new, that have written before me; so that I think there is scarce any thing of worth in any of them that might make for il∣lumination in every particular that hath escaped me. And in this long tract of time, although I have been encountred with a thousand Headaches, and some other grievous maladies, yet I have not been without Joy of the light ari∣sing and encreasing in my understanding mixed with my sorrows, and making them to seem light unto me. Now what is my request unto you (my learned Brethren) but that none of you would prejudge these my Works, as some are apt to do, not once vouchsafing to reade them, as deeming them to be such as contain nothing but what they have met withall in other Expositors before, for if I had only made a collation of divers, as Marlorat, Lippomannus and Thomas Aquinas have done, Nihil egissem, nisi quod prius factum fuisset, although to do this by adding more lights also, could not but be acceptable for the useful∣ness of it to the frequent Practitioner in Divinity. But before ye judge reade all or upon some Book thorow, and then I doubt not, but that ye will be so fully satisfi'd and end with such pleasure-taking herein, that ye will cry out as Ber∣nard touching the holy Scriptures, as they are barely in themselves, but much more presented with multifarious Expositions, Scientia scientiarum omni pane suavior, omni melle dulcior, omni vino hilarior.
Now before I conclude, that nothing may be wanting which I have since met withall, which might seem to enlighten the Reader further in some passages of the Prophets now shortly to be accomplished, I have thought good to propound a
 new Interpretation upon Ezek. 37. 38, 39. of an anonimous Authour, who will have by God and Magog, with their innumerable Armies there spoken of the Turks and Tartars to be understood, as alo Revel 2. against these an Ar∣my shall be raised up out of dead and dry bones, spoken of Chap. 37. that is, the Jews when they shall be converted to Christ, which shall be within a few years after Romes and the Popes overthrow, which shall be Anno Domini 1666. according to Revel. 13. where the number of the Beast is said to be 666. the number of a 1000 being cut off for brevites sake, as we use to say of the Spanish invasion 1588. 88. and of the Gunpouder treason 605, not mentioning the number of 1000, and this is said to be the mark of his name, not only because this Mystery of iniquity shall then have an end, but also because it began an. 666, or thereabout, Pope Vitalian setting up the Latine Service in all Church∣es at that time, contrary to 1 Cor. 14. And if the Kingdom of Antichrist shall then have an end, the great offence of the Jews being taken away as it then shall, viz. Image-worshipping, against which they have been as zealous ever since the Babylonish Captivity, as ever they were prone unto it before, it is very probable, that they shall soon e converted that now live amongst Chri∣stians in these Western parts of the world, and not long after all the rest of the ten Tribes, which were sometime placed in Haba and Habor of Assyria, and 2 Kin. 17. 6. in the Cities of the Medes. All of them are spoken of as dead and dry bones, be∣cause being dead so long ago by sin and infidelity they hitherto continue so, for which both Dan. 12. 3. it is said of the Jews, Many of them that sleep in the dust shall awake; and Paul cals it life from the dead. For the time Rom. 11. 15. when this shall be the fore-named Authour out of Grebner the famous Swevi∣an Astrologer saith, that it shall be anno 1679. and anno 1684. then the Jews and Israelites shall return, and reinhabit the Land of Canaan, their bounds being enlarged more then ever in the time of the greatest Kings that ever reigned amongst them, according to all that God promised by Moses, but was not all fulfilled in Joshuah his time by reason of their sins, but then shall ac∣cording to Obadiah his Prophecy, vers. 17, 18, 19, &c. Of this their turning also see Hos. 3. 4, 5. Zech. 2. 2, 3, 4. &c. Chap. 14. 7, 8, 9. &c. to the end, Mich. 7. 15, 16, 1. Isa. 2. 2. and of the house of God then to be re-built farre reater, implying larger bounds, Ezek. 40. 4. to the end. The Turks and Tartars then set forth under the names of Gog and Magog, shall with very great Armies go and fight against them in the holy Land, and be destroy∣ed in so great numbers that they shall be a long time in burying them, and a far longer time in burning their spears and arrows, &c. making of them fewel for the fire seven years. But touching the year when this shall be done, the foresaid Author is so variable that I think what is said hereof is meerly conjectural; and the rather, because our Lord being asked, When he would restore the King∣dom Act. 1. to Israel, answered his Apostles, It is not for you to know the times and seasons, and if not for Apostles, verily not for Astrologers in these times, whatsoever they boast of their seeing things to come in the book of the stars, the Scripture fore-telling that they shall be, and they by their Art finding out when; and one in particular touching the Papacy, that it shall suffer greatly in the year 1654, yea and an. 655. the fatal Catastrophe thereof. But one more skilful then Culpepper he, That the Pope shall not fall till 1666, as I have already shewed, and the Jews shall begin to be converted thirteen years after, thus protracting the time still unto anno 780. Another whose Prophecy was found in the study of Justus Lipsias, saith thus,


Post mille expletos à partu virginis annos,
Et post sexcentos rursus ab orbe datos,
Nonagesimus octavus, mirabilis annus
Ingruet, is secum gaudia loeta feret.
Corruet hoe anno Turcarum invisa propago:
Roma, tuum in libris fabula nomen erit.
Omnia tunc ibunt mundi sursum atque deorsum
Imperia, ut populos sceptra novella premant.
Utque suum cunctas verbum diffundat in oras,
Christus & imperitet nomine ubique suo.

And another Prophecy written in Hebrew saith, This nameless Author was found in parchment wrapped in lead in the from of an Heart under the ground in the Church of St Dennis in France anno 1616. by the Sexton digging for the erecting of a Mounment for the Lord Teligni. He gave it to the Popes Nuntio, from whom it came to the Cardinal of Bruges, and from him to Lewis 13. King, the numeral Letters setting forth divers years of our Lord, being placed all along on the side thus,

Anno Christi

1661. Obruit Italiam saevo Mars impius aestu.
1665. Unica sint Christo Pascua, Campus, Oves.
1666. Totum operit mundum terror & ira Dei.
1667. Pauci Jehovam venerantur.
1678. Inclitus exurgit factis heros.
1686. Europatremit, Asiam urget metus.
1693. Generalis terrae motus ruit.
1699. Agnoscunt omnes gentes Deum.
1700. Flumina siccantur ubique.
1710. Pastor & Ecclesia unica.


Thus the conjecture of this Astrologer falleth to the ground, and either he 1 Chron. 12. 32. must not be one of the Wise-men of Issachar, that knoweth the times, and of so great worth as he speaketh of, or else the credit of others both Astrologers and Pro∣phets before him, famous for their Prophecies and Predictions, must be crackt. And for the understanding men of Issachar, whom he thinks to have been of his own profession, when he shall make it appear, that there was a company of Astrologers of the people of God in those uncorrupted times, I shall believe him: but till then I shall hold them to have been only rarely studious of the will and word of God, and diligent hearers of Samuel the Prophet, who fore∣told that David should be King, and to this end annointed him. For it is only said, That they understood the times and what Israel ought to do, that is, according to Gods will in receiving him for their King, and living under him in the fear of God, to promote which David set himself with his whole heart. There were others also doubtlesse many in those dayes, who did the like, but the Tribe of Issachar was singular in this, that all their Elders were not onely as Rulers but Teachers of piety to all their brethren of that Tribe, and herein pre∣vailed so farre, that when the Heads of other Tribes are said to have brought with them certain thousands, it is said of these, that all their brethren were at their command, and therefore are not numbered, as the rest be, intimating that piety so farre prevailed with them, that they in obedence to Gods will came all, not a man of them being excepted, whereas of other Tribes some only came, and others stayed at home. Of Israels not knowing the times; thus the
 Lord speaks by Jeremiah by way of reproof, Jer. 8. 7. and Luk. 1. 44. they are by Christ threatned likewise, because they knew not the time of their visita∣tion. But of knowing the tims as Astrologers take upon them to know them, it is more Mnasseh-like, 2 King. 21. 6. who is said to have observed the times, and to his further disgrace, to have consulted with wizzards and familiar spi∣rits, then Issachar-like: which I speak not against looking at the signs of hea∣ven yet, to be warned either by this to come March 29, or that greater to come An. 1654. when the whole body of the Sun shall be eclipsed above two hours, be∣cause these are fearful signs of grievous judgments; or at blazing stars, when they appear, or burnings, or other terrible sights shewing themselves there, as over Jerusalem before the destruction thereof, for these are immediately given by God, summening to repentance, that the evils to come may be prevented. But from conslellations for any man to take upon him to foretell that the Clergie shall go down, and that the people shall be so knowing, that they shall need no more teachrs, but every one shall be taught of God, is so far from acting the part of awise man of Issachar, that it is turning such as we call in derision Wise∣acres: The meaning of Joel being nothing less then what he would wrest it to, as I have shewed in my Expositions. And therefore I would advise them, (if they give not more heed to the books of Ptolomy, Haly and Albumasar, thn of Prophets, Apostles and Evangelists, as this man would not be thought to do, as seems by his frequent alledging of the Scriptures;) to do as some exerci∣sing curious Arts, are by the Evangelist Luke said to have done, viz. consess Act. 19. 19. their works, and burn those books, whereby they are so fascinated, as not to obey the truth, which saith, The secret things of the Lord belong to the Lord, Deu. 29. 29. but his revealed to us and our children. And be not wise, saith Paul, above that which is written; And to be moved the more, see Isa. 47. 13. Jer. 10. 1. and this Commentary thereupon.
To return again from this digression: What times God hath appointed to do the strange things before-spoken of, I confess yet we may lawfully search into so far as he hath given us any light thereinto in his holy word. For he hath not on∣ly foreshewd great judgements and great deliverances, all things being first ds∣ordered, and then put into a better order again, and more durable then before, but somewha touching the time how long such confusions and impious doings shall last, his people being without King, Priest, or Sacrifice, or Ephod, as Hosea Hos. 3. 4. speaketh, and addeth, That it shall be to the later dayes, when they shall return and seek the Lord and David, that is Christ of the house of David their King. Vers. 5. And Daniel saith, In the dayes of those Kings, God shall set up a King∣dom Dan. 2. 44. that shall never have end, and it shall break in piees and destroy them; whence it is apparent, That the Kingdom of Christ, which he will rule by his peculiar people of Israel, shall both be all over the world, and to this end they must be converted, and that whilst the last Monarchy of the four, that is, the Roman standeth, and their conversion must be Romes destruction, and of all other Kingdoms also, which were sometimes appendices thereof, or of any of the other three Babylonian, Persian or Grecian, there being no Kings any more over any of them, but the Saints swaying the Scepter in them all; of which Saints, that is, convert Jews and Israelites, it is spoken again Dan. 7. 18, 27.
Now for the time more particularly when this shall be done, we must look in∣to Dan. 12. 11, 12, 13. where the time from the cessation of the daily Sacrifice is said be 1290 dayes, that is, so many years, as is not unusual in holy Scripture
 to set times forth, both in Ezekiel, where it is expressed, a day for a year; and Hos. 3. 3. Many dayes for many years. Hereby then 1290 years are meant from the ceasing of the daily Sacrifice by some thought to be meant of the time when the City and Temple were destroyed by the Romans An. Dom. 71. for ex∣perience hath taught the contrary long ago, because that this number being put to 1290, the total will amount but 1361. Therefore another beginneth the reckoning An. 363. or thereabouts, when Julian the Apostata exhorted the Jews to sacrificing again, as of old they were wont to do, and they replying, That they might not sacrifice, but at the Temple in Jerusalem, he licenced them to go thither and re-build their Temple, and to sacrifice there, only to confound Chri∣stians, who were confident from the words of Christ, That till the Jews con∣version it could not be. The Jews then in great multitudes went theither to re∣build it, that they might there do sacrifice daily, as was in the Law appointed, but they were soon deterred from this attempt by an earthquake, not only casting down in the night what they built in the day, but also making the earth to vomit up the old foundation thither to lying hid in the ground: So that now was first fully accomplished the threatning of our Lord, That a stone should not be left upon a stone, and their renewed hope of sacrificing here again was quite taken away. And if from hence we reckon putting to 1290, we shall come to 1653, or thereabouts. So that we may now upon very good ground very shortly expect somewhat to be done as touching the Jews conversion; and whereas he is said to be blessed that attaineth to 1335, if we adde this number of years to 1653, be∣ing 45. the total will amount to 1698, the very time before-spoken of: so that in 45 years after the first beginning of Romes overthrow, and of the conversion of all Israel, both they that live amongst Christians, and in remotest parts, and all other Nations that yet are Heathen, and know not Christ, shall be convert∣ed to the faith, and then shall be the time of the universal peace prophesied of Isa. 2. and ch. 11. before which nothing but wars, and Nations fighting against Nations, and some making intestine wars amongst themselkves, is to be expected; and of these the two great eclipses of the Sun now at hand, and divers more, as one saith, after them to An. 163, are the sings. Now that that Prophecy of Daniel is not to be restrained to the time when Antiochus his rage had an end put unto it, but belongs to that which shall be done about the end of the world, appears both by the rising out of the dust, spoken of Dan. 12. 3. that is, the rising of the Jews, when the life of grace shall enter into them, otherwise called the Spirit, Ezek. 37, (for both as take it set forth the same thing) and from Dan. 12. 4, 5. where it is said to be sealed up to the end, when knowledge shall be en∣creased, that is, the knowledge of these things, which were as a book shut up and sealed in times past unde the Old Testament, and a long time under the New, although revealed to inspired Apostles Paul and John, but not to many more, till of late, which was the cause that the ancient Doctours of the Church conjectured that the Antichrist should be one singular Person, and not a succes∣sion of proud superstitious men usurping all Authority in the Church of Christ, the contrary to which is now by many clearly known.
Touching the state of the Church which then shall be, because it is said, The daily sacrifice shall cease till then, but then the Temple shall be built again more ample then ever before Ezek. 40. 41, &c. and they shall have a Prince, Ezek. 45. 7. c. 46. . and sacrificing of a Lamb every morning, ver 13, 14. it may be be conceived, that the Monarchy of the world shall not be so in the Saints hands,
 but that they shall have one Head and Prince to reign over them, and that in the Temple, which then shall be re-built, there daily communions of the body and bloud of the Lamb of God, Christ Jesus, which are set forth by the name of Sacrifices, because that hereby that all-sufficient Sacrifice is representea, and to the faithfull exhibited to be fed and feasted withall. There are also that ga∣ther the time, when these things shall be, and the Turkish Empire shall have an end put thereunto, from Rev. 19. 15. where it is said, The four Angels, who were bound at the river Euphrates, were loosed and prepared for an hour, a day, a moneth and a year, a day being put for a year, a moneth consisting of 31 dayes for so many years, a year of 336 dayes so many more, which being put toge∣ther, make 398, and these being added to 1300, when the Ottoman Empire of the Turks began, we come to 1698, as before, when the Turks shall be utterly destroyed, as hath been before said.
By all which it appears, that not the stars, but the holy Scriptures give us some light into the times, when these great and long expected things shall be brought to pass; with which I having now done, return to you again (my beloved Brethren) upon whom I would not that these phantastical self-conceited star-ga∣zers, or other malevously affected Coridons, should have their expectations of your being put down, fulfilled; it standing more with the piety of a religious Par∣liament a thousand times to put this cursing new-upstart company down, though fawning and adulatory towards them, then Gods Priests, that be  and , although opposite to them in some of their wayes, because it is said, Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm: And again Ps. 105. 15. when Hosea would set forth wickedness come to the full, he saith, This people Hos. 4. 4. are as they that strive with the Priest; and again of the Tribe of Levi, of which the Priests were, Bless Lord his substance, and accept the work of his Deut. 33. 11. hands, smite throw the loins of them that rise agianst him, and of them that hate him, that they rise no more. And that we for our parts may not bring this judgement upon us, nor any way be a cause of the peoples contemning our holy order, as now they do, and that not through default in some of us, Let us sericusly consider, what may be the cause hereof, and whether it be not (I will not say scandalous vitiousness in any kinde, or idleness, for the Church hath been of late well purged of such blots and spots) divisions amongst our selves into Presbyerians and Independents, or a judgement befallen us for turning Heralds of war, and Incendiaries hereunto of late, from Embassadours of peace, to which our Office alwayes binds us. For I fear, that our setting of others together by the ears hath brought this judgement of schisms and divisions amongst us. And to speake of the natural causes hereof, what can they else be but pride and an over∣weening conceit of our selves, an affectation of superiority Diotrephes-like, a Jer. 6. 16. sleighting of the precept bidding us to enquire after the old way, which is the good way, and a willingness to please the stricter sort of people discontented with Episcopal Government, as it stood in the Church of England? Therefore and because that lord-like, and not Apostle-like Government was grievous to some of our selves also, we rashly gave all Episcopal Government for Antichristian, not doubting soon to finde out a better: but having gotten it down, O into what a maze or labyrinth of divers wayes are we brought, there being no possibility that I can see of agreeing about any! This, this is it chiefly that makes the Ministry in this Land contemptible, some going one way and some another, and that about no meaner things then the Lords-Supper, Lords Prayer, and the Lords Birth
 day, outward reverence in the publick service of God, private praying in Gods house, and the ordaining of Presbyters before they officiate. And how may we be again reconciled to think and speak the same things? Verily by no means, but by considering quid antiquissimum, id enim verissimum. How was the Church of God governed in the Apostles dayes by them and by some singular men, appoin∣ted to execute this Office for them in their absence, as Timothy and Titus, and all this by commission first had from the Lord? And to this must we endeavour to return, letting all the pontifical Government go, which was not introduced till 300 years after Christs birth, and since more corrupted Then shall we have Unity and Honour again, but till then be in contempt and disgrace, we being then only a sweet odour, and acceptable every where, when as we are Brethren, so we live together in Unity, Ps. 133. 2 Cor. 2. 15. That the spirit of love and peace therefore would unite all our hearts in one, let us uncessantly pray, and that the Supream Power upon earth, now by Gods providence ruling over us, may be bent, not by tolerating any schism or faction, or new way to hinder it, but unpartially enquiring after the old way walk, and cause others to walk therein, to the great praise and glory of God, the vindicating of his Ministers from contempt, the stopping of the course of sin and errour, and the more facilitating of their account at the great and dreadful day of judgement before him with whom there is no re∣spect of persons.

March 1. an. 1651.
