


Right Honorable,
THE Prince of Peace and the Lord of Hosts, are two of Christs Titles in Scripture: Sometimes He comes forth in much meeknesse, as He rid to the great Cit∣tieupon a Colt, the fole of an Asse: and sometimes Hee ap∣peares dreadfull in battle, treading the wine presse, and dy∣ing all his rayment in the blood of his enemies. He ownes both Peace and Warre, neither is there any foundation in truth of either but in him: and shall we not complie with him in both, take either with him? If Christ speak peace, those that pray for the peace of Jerusalem shall prosper, blessed are such Peace keepers: and if Christ be in the Head of an Armie, those that come not up to the Help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord a∣gainst the mighty shall have Meroz Curse: Observe the Lord there∣fore in every administration of his that you may live upon it.
You are now one of those who gather willingly unto him at the sound of his alarme, and lifting up of his standard for the rescue of his great name and cause in Ireland: there are that have wisht you over long since, but for this end that you might appeare an Exile frrom hence, but we trust your departure is no other then that of Abrahams from his house, when he went out after the foure Kings for the rescue of his brother Lot, who retur∣ned with much glory and triumph home: So may your returne be with all aboundance of Peace and Joy, to see the Temple in more glory here then when you left it, and to sing the songs of Sion in this Land againe, after a while that you have tun'd the Irish Harp unto them.

 You are called to a good work, onely goe forth in the uprightnesse of your heart about it, that you may not miscarry. Let not your desires he after hou∣ses, and fields, & Vineyards there, as after the advancing of Christs throne in that Kingdome againe, and enlarging his dominion thitherward. Feare not your enemies, their owne guilt hath weakned them. You are sent over not to harme and oppresse the innocent, but to subdue and chastise the rebel∣lious, and take an account of the cruell massacres and aboundance of blood of the Lords owne deare ones, which they have shed. Your Commission is not to invade and disinherit those that are fairely possest of their right: those that are there, have either forfeited their own right, or usurped other mens: Feare them not, though you cannot match them in numbers, trust You in the Lord your God by Faith, which is the most that he requires from you: He can shake the hearts of your enemies, as the trees of the Forrest are shaken with an East winde, and make them fly when no one pursues them.
I have set this word before you, that I may arme you with Faith; for by this you shall attaine unto high and noble atchievements. Take with you but a few, a strange word, when most call for many thousands, and say, where is the number that can equall our enemies? But have you not taken notice all this while for the strengthning of your Faith, how God hath pre∣served a few in that Land unto this day: surely the power can be no lesse in preserving a few against so many, then in destroying so many by you few. Thinke any of you, that the Lord doth stand in need of your great multituds to doe his work? Read this word over that I set before you that you may be convinced. And as for encouragements, God hath afforded you many: suffer me to minde you: First, behold the Lord Christ in a warlike posture through out Christendome in the Reformed Churches, and hath beene so these ma∣ny yeares: who would not engage himselfe in his quarrell, though he be one of those that must fall before the victory be wonne? Next remember you have seaven yeares prayers of the Church sent before you, which will meet you upon the Borders of that kingdome, and welcome you and those that goe with you. Again, consider & be truly sensible of the cries of those that are un∣der the Altar untill their blood be avenged on those that dwell on the earth: if the blood of one righteous Abel would not suffer heaven to rest, how think you is the full stream of blood like to prevaile with God of so many thou∣sands? I will be short, add unto all this how much of Gods honour lies at stake on your side for the fulfilling of his promises to his Church, and up∣holding the work which he hath begun: which though it may be hindred
 and set back yet never can be quite everthrowne, but though carried on through many difficulties must be finished in due time. And lastly, lay a∣gaine to heart what large experiences You have already had, as so many pledges to hearten You in future exploits. And now say at length, or ra∣ther let those trembling hearts among you speak out, what should damp your zeale for the recovery of Ireland? Is not the time of Irelands delive∣rance yet come? We have long expected and prayd, and doe you yet want an opportunity? Shall jealousies and feares prevaile to keep you at home, when the cries of Orphans, and Widdowes, and besieged call you abroad? Dare You not trust us with God in Your absence, who can trust You with God in this service? Not that we want more love, but that You want more Faith. Or tell us must you goe far about to get thither, because of obstructions in the way: we trust there are not many, howbeit sure we are, God hath not discovered himselfe in a little glory lately, in checking and suppressing, both in this and the neighbour Nation, the Remora'es that would have retar∣ded Your motion, as if he would plainely speake his minde thus unto you: goe on these shall not hinder the expedition for Ireland. Wherefore (Right Honourable) I must beseech You zealously, and I thought it my ty upon this occasion to plead with You (as also some Ministers of Christ before me) in the behalfe of Ireland, that nothing that is not of God may divert Your Resolutions from that Noble and good service: & if any thing shall intervene, my prayer is that the Lord would rebuke it, and make a pro∣sperous way for You through it; and when you have fulfilled Your Work which he hath ordained You unto, and served Your generation, You may as the Elders here specified, obtain a good report in the Church of Christ Mili∣tant, and a waighty Crowne of Glory and life in heaven with his Church triumphant, which is the hope and prayer of him
SIR,


