



SIRS,
YOU are Welcome unto the History of a Tedious War, and unto a Period of that War so far in prospect, as to ren∣der its History Seasonable.
Every Reasonable man will readily allow, that t is a Duty to God, and a Service to the World, or to preserve, the Memory of such matters, as ave been the more Memorable Occurrences in the
 War, that ha's for Ten Years together, been mul∣tiplying Changes and Sorrows upon us. And the Author, in whose Historical Writings, the most Inquisitive Envy, ha's never to this Hour detected, so much as one Voluntary and Material Mistake, or one farthing paid unto the Readers in the Coin of Candia, ha's now chosen to preserve the Memory of these matters, while they are Fresh & New, and one hath not Fifty years, which is the Channel of the River of Oblivion, to pass over un∣to them. This Expedition is used in the publica∣tion of our Decennium Luctuosum, in hope that if any mistake, worth Noting, do appear in these Writing, it may, Like and perhaps With, a Second Edition, be Corrected and Amended.
He Expects no Thanks for his Essayes to Do Good, in this way, or any other, unto any part of his Country, to whom he would gladly devote all his Talents, if he were a Thousand Times bet∣ter Talented than he is; and though the most Ungrateful Treas Imaginable (which are too well known by the Name of Country-pay) should be given him, he would still be of that Opinion, Recte fecisse Merces est, If a man may Do Good, it is enough.
All the Favour he desires of you, is, That you would not Enquire after him; or ask, who he is? but that, as he is at best, but an Obscure Person, he may continue in yet more Obscurity: which will be a greater pleasure to him than to be
 placed among the Great men of Achaia.
For indeed, He hath often thought on a pas∣sage written by Holy Mr. Row, to his Excellent Son, I pray, That God would make use of my self and you, in such a way, as that God only may be seen, and we not be taken notice of at all; that He may have the Glory, and we may not be seen.
Could he have invited His EXCELLENCY unto such a glorious Table, as that in a certain Cabinet at Florence, which is furnished with Birds and Flowrs, all consisting of Nealy polished Jewels it laid into it; a Work Fifteen years in making, and worth an Hundred Thousand Crowns: or could he have written a Book, wor∣thy to be laid up in the Cabinet of Darius: the Author might have been under a Temptation to have had his Name Engraved upon his Work. But a little Boild Indian Corn in a Tray, is as much as our Best History of an Indian War, compos'd perhaps in fewer Dayes, than there were Years in the War, may presume to be compar'd unto And since our History will not afford such a Di¦version unto His Excellency, under the Indispositi∣ons of His Health, as those of Livy & Curtius did unto the Princes that Recovered their lost Health by Reading them; nor can any any passage here be so happy, as That which cured Laurentius Me∣dices of a Malady, by having it Read unto him it wil require no more than a Nameless Writer, to Assure that Great Person on this Occasion,
 That all the Good People of New-England, make their Fervent Vows unto the Almighty, For His Excellencies Prosperity, and the Welfare of His Excel∣lent Lady, and of His Noble and Hopeful Offspring.
And the Naming of the Author, is as little Ne∣cessary to Qualify him, that he may pay publick Acknowledgments unto the Honorable, the Lieu∣tenant Governour; not only for his Cares about the Publick, while it was Tempestuated, with the Indian War, which now makes an History; but chiefly for his more than ordinary Tenderness of that Society, which ha's been the very, Decus ac Tutamen, of New England. The Nameless Writer of this History, may Report, that with a Greater Expence, than that of the First-Founder, this Ho∣norable Person proves, that he Loves our Nation, by Building us another Edifice, for the Supply of all our Synagogues, and STOUGHTON-HALL, out shines HARVARD-COLLEDGE: and he speaks Kinder Language, as well as Better Latin, than that Eminent States-man in Flanders, whose Answer to a Petition for the priviledges of an University there to be restored, was, Non cura∣mus vostros privilegios. This Report may he give, without being obliged for to Confess any other Name than this, which he Readily Confesses; One that was once a Member of Harvard-Colledge.
I pray, Sirs, Ask no further; Let this Writing be, like that on the Wall to Belshazzar, where the
 Hand only was to be seen, and not who's it was. The History is compiled with Incontestable Vera∣city; and since there is no Ingenuity in it, but less than what many Pens in the Land might Com∣mand, he knows not why his Writing Anonymously may not Shelter him, from the Inconveniencies of having any Notice, one way or other, taken of him. Though among his other small Furni∣ture, he hath not left himself unfurnished with skill in the Spanish Language, yet he never could bring himself to the Belief of the Spanish Proverb, Quien no parece, perece; i. e. He that appears not, perishes; He that Shows not himself to the world, is undone. At Milain, there is an Aca∣demy of Sensible Persons, called The Nascosti, or, Hidden men; At Venice, there is one of such persons, called, The Incogniti; and at Parma, there is one of them, called, The Innominati. If there were nothing else Disagreeable in them, the Author of this History, would be glad of an Admission into such an Academy.
The History is indeed of no very Fine Thred; and the Readers, who every where Fish for no∣thing but Carps, and who Love, like Augustus to Tax all the World, may find Fault enough with it. Nevertheless, while the Fault of an Untruth can't be found in it, the Author pretends, that the famous History of the Trojan War it self, comes behind our little History of the Indian War;
 For the best Aniquaries, have now confuted Homer; the Walls of Troy were it seems, all made of Poets Paper; and the Siege of the Town with the Tragedies of the Wooden Horse, were all but a piece of Poetry.
And if a War between Us, and an Handful of Indians, do appear no more than a Batracho∣myomachie, to the World abroad yet unto us at home, it hath been considerable-enough, to make an History. Nor is the Author afraid of promi∣sing, that of all the Thirty Articles which make up this History, there shall not be One, without something in it, that may by our selves be justly thought Considerable.
Should any Petit Monsieur complain (as the Captain, that found not himself in the Tapestry Hangings, which Exhibited the Story of the Spanish Invasion in 1588.) that he don't find himself mentioned in this History, the Author has his Apology. He has done as well and as much as he could, that whatever was worthy of a mention, might have it; and if this Collecti∣on of Matters be not compleat, yet he supposes it may be more compleat, than any one else hath made; and now he hath done, he hath not pull'd up the Ladder after him; others may go on, as they please, with a compleater Com∣posure.

If the Author hath taken Delight, in this Hi∣story, and at all Times, to Celebrate the Merits, of such as have Deserved well of his Country, [which he has here done it may be, for some that never could afford him a good word!] Especially, if he do Erect Statues for Dead Wor∣thies, when there is no Room Left for Flatte∣ry, [for who will bestow paint upon a Dead Face!] And if he do all this, with all possible concern, to avoid casting Aspersions upon others: Why should any betray such Ili Nature, as to be angry at it? My Good Country, forgive him this Injury!
Huic Uni forsan poteram Succumbere culpae.
But, whatever this History be, it aims at the Doing of Good, as well as the Telling of Truth; and if its Aim shall be attained, That will be a sufficient Reward for all the Trouble of Writing it. When he Desires any more, he'l give you his Name; In the mean Time, as a far greater man once was called, Ludovicus Nihili, which you may make, Lewis of Nothingham; so the Au∣thor will count himself not a little favoured, if he may pass for one of no more Account, than a, No body; which would certainly make a very Blameless person of him.
However, that the History may not altogether want a Subscription; the Author, finding it a Custome among the Christian Writers of the Orient, when they have written a Treatise, to
 Subscribe it after this manner; Scriptum per Ser∣vum vilem pauperem, omnibus Justitiis privatum, peccatorem magis quam omnis Caro; Or, Scripsit hoc pauper N. N. Or, Est Scriptura servi pauperis, et qui Benevolentia Dei indiget, et miserationibus; he will accordingly Subscribe himself, The Chief of Sinners. Nevertheless, he will humbly Lay claim to the Words, used by the Nameless Au∣thor of a Treatise, Entituled, The Faithful Stew∣ard: Tho' I am worse then they speak of me, who cast Disgrace upon me, and I can Espy Ten Faults in my self, where they can discern One, yet I can, thro' Grace, Appeal to Thee, O Lord, with some Comfort, that I am Dis∣pleased with my self for my Sins, and would fain please Thee, in all Things, at all Times, in all places, and in every Condition.
