


THe saying is true (Right Honourable) in divine things, of that which is good we cannot have too much, and if a light in a dark room be good, the accession of more light is better and more delightfull. My hope therefore is, that to you, who have expressed your desire to have the Church of England furnished with Books in this kinde, the addition f another will not be unacceptable. This work of mine, both in this part and another that should have come out before it▪ from the beginning of the Bible hitherto, was well nigh, if not altogether finished, before any other speaking in the English tongue in this kinde, upon so many Books of Scripture together▪ but there were enemies like To∣biah and Sanballa, who envied the coming out of any thing,
 whereby the Laitie might attain too much light of knowledge, that hindered it, till some years expired under worthy Darius, who set his minde more upon the building of the Temple, then any of his predecessours the Kings of Persia. For although under your auspicious government, the Presses have been open for publishing any good Books for illumination and edi∣fication, yet the times have been troublous almost hitherto, so that there hath been little encouragement to publish Vo∣lumes in this kinde, however they have swarmed with Pam∣phlets of all sorts. Therefore having now by Your meanes through Gods blessing, more tranquilitie, which he for his mercies sake establish and perpetuate, and through tranqui∣litie, opportunitie to set up our lights before hid under a bu∣shell, how can I, but in gratitude for so great a benefit, through which mine comes now forth, inscribe it to so Honourable and worthy a Senate; and so devote it first to your use and service, and then of all well-affected Christians, who I know upon your approbation, will be excited the rather to look after it for their own good. Be pleased then (Right Honourable and Worshipfull) at your vacant times to reade it, us a piece, wherein haply yee may see more into the Oracles of God, then in any one Book yet extant, and if King must by Gods pre∣cept Deut. 17. be daily in reading the Book of God, whereupon David made it his continuall meditation, and Alphonsus King of Aragon and Sicilia, read the whole Bible with the ordinarie Glosse 14. times over; Yee must not think it beneath your greatnesse, but that it stands well with i, to sequester some time daily, to reade both the text and glosses, which ye have as helps to more illumination, that Ye may the better know, how all things ought to go according to Gods will in Church, and Common-wealth, and order them accorlingly. Wherein if this of mine may be any help unto You, orto build You up, or any of Gods people in knowledge and grace, I shall much re∣joyce, and that it may be so, shall not ceise to pray to Him who is able to make you abound in all wisedome and spirituall knowledge more and more.

