



Right Honourable, Right Worshipful, And Well-beloved,
I Cannot but reckon it as one amongst the ma∣ny remarkable Mercies, that God hath un∣deservedly and unexpectedly, with a liberal Hand heaped upon us, in our late wonder∣ful Revolutions; That a Day of solemne Fasting and Humiliation, was set apart by Restored Autho∣rity, for the lamenting that Barbarous and bloody Regicide, which mans Injustice, and Heaven-da∣ring Impiety acted, And Divine Justice, and in∣censed Severity inflicted, as an heavy Judgement upon the three Kingdoms: And that the many thousands, who then abhorred, but could not hinder it, might in a publique manner, with free∣dome and safety, wash away that blood-guiltiness with their tears, the springs of heretofore restrain∣ed griefs rising up, (as Rohoboth without anyGen. 26. 22.

stoppage of Philistines) and running along the Channel of a Religious and Penitential Mourn∣ing. Craesus his Son seeing some bloody Assassi∣nates offering violence to his Father, in a sudden vehemency of passion cryed out, (though dumbe before) It is Craesus, O do not kill him: We have with sorrow seen the death of our Civil Fa∣ther,Amo 5. 13. And the prudent kept silence in that time, for it was an evil time, (though there were that spoke with more Loyalty, then safety) but God hath now opened our mouths, to express before himself, and the world, our sad resentment of that prodigious and unnatural Paricide, after a twelve years tongue-tyed silence. How much enclined, rather then enforced I was, to contribute my poor help in the work of that Day, (in submission to this Ordinance of man for the Lords sake)1 Pet. 3. 13. needs not be declared; Nor will your chearful con∣currence need further evidence, then your ready, diligent attendance upon, and earnest attention to (as other holy exercises so,) this plain, unpolished Sermon, which, upon the joint importunity of ma∣ny of your selves (whom I could not well gratifie with the grant, but much worse disoblige with a denyal of their Request) is now exposed to pub∣lique view.
The Argument I still judge, as I then did, fit

for the Pulpit on that, and necessary for your pra∣ctice upon every day; And further Apology I make none, for sending abroad these blotted Papers: I am so fully satisfied in the truth and Scripture evidence of the matter herein handled, and so justly charitable to my Christian Hearers, as to presume none were dis-sat is fied with the hearing of them∣selves pressed to a long discountenanced Loyalty: And Did we not live in an age, wherein for a Minister of the Gospel to indemnify himself from the Ordeal of a captious and over-critical ear, and calumniating Tongue, were next to an impossibility, I might with more security rest satisfied, that though possibly I had profited but a few, yet that I had at least displeased none. If any unapt and mis-becoming expressions shall occur, (which would better bear the slight and transient touch of the ear, then the more fixed and deliberate scruti∣ny of the eye) I therein beg your candid and cha∣ritable indulgence, being desirous, that the Ser∣mon might now appear in the same dress of Phrase (so near as the frailty and slipperiness of my Me∣mory would permit) as when at the first deliver∣ed.
I cannot let slip this Opportunity without a pub∣lique and grateful acknowledgement of your many and great Favours conferred upon, and continued

unto my unworthy self, and particularly your ac∣ceptance and encouragement of my weak Endea∣vours, for the space of eight years fully finished on the very day of my Preaching this Sermon. And if God hath used a worthless Instrument for the spiritual good of any souls among you (the high∣est Honour of a Gospel Minister, and I hope, my greatest ambition) I desire that he who hath been the principal Agent in the work, may be the sole Object of the Praise. I have herein pressed you to an Honourable esteem of, and Loyal, dutiful Affections towards the Kings Majesty, And am not apt to distrust some measure of Fruit an∣swering the cost of Seed and Plowing: And if by the pains of eight years Preaching, I have per∣sivaded any of you to take an Oath of Alleagiance to Christ the King of Kings, I cannot but judge, (had the time been longer, and my diligence great∣er) both imployed to good purpose.
May the Kings Majesty (whom God hath Mer∣cifully, and Miraculously restored to the Antient and Glorious Throne of His Progenitors,) be bles∣sed from Heaven with a Long, Pious, Peaceable, and Prosperous Reign, till at length he changeth an earthly, corruptible Crown of Gold, for an Heavenly, Incorruptible Crown of Glory.
May the Nobility be further Ennobled with

true Zeal and Sanctity, Never accounting Ho∣nour and Greatness, disobligations from Religion, which are then only wisely and faithfully impro∣ved, when they are made Incentives to, and Vten∣sils of Religion.
May we all live in Purity and Piety to God, as it becometh Christians, In Loyalty and Fidelity to our King, as it becometh Subjects; In Vnity and Charity one with, and toward another, as it be∣cometh Brethren. It is the hearty Prayer of

