



Right Honourable,
UPon your call and invitation, this Sermon was preached, and now your command hath drawen it to the presse. I cannot but observe a Divine over-ruling Providence, that thong I have been often solicited, to publish other Papers, both casuistique and Polemique, yet my first appearance in print, (if ever there shall be a next,) most needs be on such a Royall Theame. I ac∣count it my mercy, that the Lord hath honoured me, not only by the vocall delivery of this ensuing discourse, to excite our hearers unto, but now also by the printing thereof, to be (though the meanest, yet) among the standing Remembrancers, of these two great duties, to which the LORD is signally calling these Nations, viz. Thankfulnes to the Most High God, for the late wounderfull deliverance of Britaine & Ireland; and (which is the root of the former) genuin Christian Loyal∣ty to our GRACIOUS SOVERAIGN, whom the Lord hath with an out∣stretched arme repossessed with his due rights.
Loyaltie was the glory of the Primitive Christians, Confessours & Martyrs, both under the heathen Persecutions in the first three centuries, & afterwards under Hereticall Emperors: as CONSTAN∣TIUS,

VALENS, VALENTINIAN the younger, Arrians: ANASTA∣SIUS, an ETYCHIAN: HERACLIUS, a Monothelite: yea under JULIAN himself who from Christianity did shamefully apostatise, to grosse Heathenisme. Did not the body of JULIANS Army consist of Christians? did they not in evidence hereof, instantly vpon the death of IULIAN, proclaime IOVINIAN, a zealous Christian, EMPEROUR? When IOVINIAN, fearing lest the Army had been ledvened with Heathenism, declyned the Empyre, protesting that he would not be an Emperour to Heathens; Did they not all with one voice, (as witnesseth SOCRATES hist. Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 19. & Theod. hist. Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 1.) professe themselves Christians, some from the dayes of CONSTANTINE, Others from the dayes of CONSTANTIUS? Lo a Christian Army, which retained their allegeance under the worst of Princes, under that Heathenish Apostate IULIAN, whom NAZIANZEN Orat. 1. adversus IULIAN. affirmes to have been more pernicious, in his Contrivances against the Church, then either DIOCLESIAN, or MAXIMINUS. In the Army of VALENS an Arrian Empe∣rour and bloudy Persecutour wer not many of his commanders both sound in the faith and precious godly men, as Terentius, Trajanus Arintheus & Victor; who not only publickly professed the trueth; but also with such humble freedom as became Loyall Subjects, did re∣present to the Emperour (as is recorded by Theod. hist. Eccl. lib. 4. capp. 28. 29.) his heresis and opposition to a fundamentall trueth ofGul. Bar∣clayus lib. de potest. pa∣pe, cap. 7. the Gospel? yet, as one sayes, In tam Religiosa libertate, manus abstinuerunt, nec ultra admonitionem processit indignatio. They abstained from all violence, and contained themselves within the bounds of Loyall freedom of admonition. Did not Valentinian the younger, who also was Arrian, acknowledge that Ambrose had such influence upon his Army, that if he would have given a word to the Souldiers, they would have seised on the Emperour, and laid him fast: Hence Ambrose LIB. 5. epist. 33. to Marcellina his sister, brings in the Emperour speaking thus, Si vobis jusserit AMBROSIUS vinctum me tradetis. But precious Ambrose was acted by another spirit. Of the heroïck Loyalty of the more ancient Christians under the heathen persecutions, even then when the Lord had so exceedingly encreased their numbers, that they wanted not strength to have repulsed the injuries which they sustained from Heathens; Is not TERTULL. a speaking witnes, Apologet. cap. 37. Vel una nox &c. In one night (saies he) we could avenge our selves, if it were lawfull with us to recompence evill with evill, Si malum malo dispungi penes nos licerer: sed

absit, ut aut igni humano vindicetur divina secta, aut doleat pati, in quo probatur &c.
These and other pregnant instances of primitive Loyaltie, we left upon record sundry years ages, in our publick Divinity Lectures in the famous Colledge of this City, founded by the Most Noble Lord, the Earle MARISCHALL; cherished by the Honourable Councell of this Burgh; authorised by that Most Illustrious MONARCH, K. IAMES the VI. And further endowed and united with the Old Col∣ledge into one CAROLINE UNIVERSITY, by K. CHARLES the FIRST, of ever Glorious Memorie. To theses now onlie I adde the testimony of judicious CALVINE, (though it were easy to muster up an Army, of testimonies, from Reformed Divines, yeelding a most harmonious Echo, to the Loyaltie of these Ancient Worthies.) in his Commentarie on Rom. 13. upon these words v. 3. Rulers, are not a terrour, unto good works; but to the evill: wilt thou then not be afraid of the power? do that which is good. On which, lear∣ned Calvine commenteth thus. Hic de vero, et quasi nativo Magi∣stratus officio loquitur; a quo tametsi non raro degenerant, qui Principatum tenent: nihil-ominus deferenda est illis Obedientia, quae Prinicpib' debetur. Nam si malus Princeps, flagellum est ad punienda populi delicta, illud fieri nostro vitio cogitemus; quod eximia Dei benedictio nobis vertatur in maledictionem, ideoq, non desinamus bonam Dei ordinationem revereri: and again, u∣pon these words, v. 5. Wherefore yee must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. Ergo (saieth Calvin) etiamsi exarmatus esset Magistratus, quem impunè lacessere & contem∣nere liceret; nihilo magis esset id tentandum, quam si poenam statim imminere cerneremus.
O how dissonant to the primitive Loyaltie of Christians is the usur∣pation, of the Bishop of Rome? who spared not to rob Leo Isaurus of a part of the Empyre; Henrie the IV. of Germany, of the whole; Childerick of the Kingdom of France: not to mention the horrid murder of the two Henries, the III. and IV.Of Pope Sixtus the V. his ap∣probatiō of the murder of Henry the III. Of the Iesuits approba∣tion of, & accessiō to the murder of both the Henries, see, beside others, Burrhill pro Tortura Torti cont. Became. 18. §. 3. p. 188. 189. of France; the many treasonable contrivan∣ses against Queen Elizabeth; the Powder-plet against K. James &c.
Neither are these only the practises of Pa∣pists, but are also founded upon their doctrinall principles, as may appeare by these foure.
TheFour Jesui∣sish princi∣ples. First is, That men in Church-orders to

to whom they appropriat the title of Clerici, cannot be punished by any Politique Magistrate, though they keep not the Civill Laws. So ex∣presly
 Bell. lib. 1. de Clericis cap. 28. prop. 3. Yea a little after, he spares not to say, That their Clergiemen, are exempted by the Pope, a subjectione Principm saecularium, from subjection to secular Princes. How can these men be good subjects, who do not acknowledge themselves subjects at all?

 Their Second Principle is, That what is revealed by confession to their Priests, though it were a conspiracy, against the life of the KING, or safety of the Kingdome; yet they ought not to discover it.Val de sac. So commonlie their Schoolmen, in their debates, De sigillo confessio∣nis,poen. disp. 7. as Valentia, Valques, Suares, Lugo &c. Hence Garnet the Ie∣suitsq. 13. pun. 4. superiour in England, who suffered, for his accession to the Pow∣der-plot,Vas. in 3. p. q. 93. art. 4. dub. could pretend no other excuse, for con∣cealing10. Suar. in 3. p. Tom. 4. disp. that treasonable designe, but because, at33. sect 1. n. 2. Lug. de sacr. he alleadged, (though the contrary was made outpoen. disp. 23▪ sect. 4. in the processe,) it was revealed to him only by confession. And this is one of the grounds upon which Suarez, made bold to condemue the Oath of Allegeance. ten∣dered to K. James as sacrilegious,Suar. l. 6. de defen∣sione fidei Catholicae cont. An∣glican sect errores c. 3. n. 8. & 9. because it required the discovery of Conspiracies, though onely revealed under their imaginary seale of Confession. I know Suarez in end, to wipe off, if possible, the odium of this pernicious doctrine, yeelds that Conspiraces revealed by confessiō, may be discovered. But its with these CautionsSuar. loc. cit. n. 11. 12 1 That the person guilty, be neither directly nor indirectly discovered. 2. That it be done in favours of a Catholique, (that is a Popish) & pious Prince. Then Protestant Princes whom they hold for heretique's, are to expect no such favour; yea nor popish Princes, whom they▪ upon any prejudie, shall judge not to be pious. And 3. That they be so far from discovering the guily person on persons, that they be not so much as exposed to a Morall or probable hazard of being discovered by fur∣ther enquiries.Is not this on the mat∣ter, to retra∣ctat his for mer seem∣ing conces∣sion? Nay rather they will expose both the King & kingdom to certain ruine. Whether this doctrin be consistent with the security of the State, let the WORLD, but specially protestant Princes, judge.
Their third Principle is, That the Pope, by his illimited authority, can absolve subjects frō their obedience due to Princes, & ak voide all oaths of allegeance how solemnly so ever they be taken. This Sua∣rez holds out to be the received doctrine of the Church of Rome, in his sorecited treatise, de Defensione fidei Catholicae, adversus Anglicanae

 sectae errores; (which he wrote against K. JAMES the Sixt,

 Phoenix, for learning, at well as for other Royall endowments, a∣mong the Princes of his age) in whichSpalat. O∣stens▪ error. Suarez ii, c. 3. n. 58. cals this book of Suarz, librum pe∣stiferū, se∣ditionm Magistrū, rebellionū buccinam. the Iesuits grand scope, (as seems) is to teach subjects principles of sedition and rebellion against Princes when they ar not subservient to the Popes interest▪ Hence l. . c. 22. he undertaks to prove this Position; Reges Christianos non so∣lum quoad personas, sed etiā quoad regiam potestaem, i. non so∣lum ut homines sed etiam ut Reges Christianos potestati Pontifi∣cis subjici. The English of it is, That Kings not only as to their Per∣ons, but also as to their Royall Authority; not only as men, but also as Christian Kings are subject to the Popes jurisdiction. Behold, the Iesuite with one blow▪ degrading all the Monarchs of Europe & re∣ducing them to the Order of Subjects. Neither is this the private opi∣nion, of this on Iesuite, for he declares §. 2. of that same cap. that this his assertion, communi Catholicorum consensu recepta est is recei∣ved by common consent of his pretended Catholicks. But here he rests not. In the next cap▪ which is the 23. he layes down this position as the received doctrine of their Fathers, Pontificem Summum potestate coeroiva in Reges u posse, us{que} ad depositionem, That is, That the Pope may exercise his cercive power over kings even to the depo∣sing of them. Yea this they have made an Article of their Faith, in their fourth Lateran Councell,Concil. Later. . cap. 3. Si Dominus temporalis requisitus et monitus ab Ecclesi, terram suam purgare negle∣xeri ab haeretica foeitate — sig∣nificetur, hoc summo Pontifici ut ex tunc vasallos ab ejus fidelitate denun∣ciet absolutos, et terram exponat ca∣tholicis occupandam qui eam sine ul∣la contradictione possideant. I know Spalat. lib. 6. de repub. Eccl. cap. 10. n. 96 et seqq. labours to prove, That al∣beit these Later ā canons wer exhibited by the Pope to the Councell, yet no sentence or definition past on them. But what ever be of this, our charge bolds ad hominem against Bell. and the rest of that tribe: for they hold these Canons, as the authen∣tique decrees of a Generall Councell. under Innocent the Third. Suarez his drift through all his fixth book, is to dispute againt the giving or keeping of the Oh of allegeance to protestant Princes. Yea cap. 4. of that book §. 18. hee is not afrayed to affirme, That the pope may not only epose kings, but also take their lives; & that its law full to any private person commissionated by the Pope to kill the KING. Si Papa (saieth he] Regem deponat, ab illis tan∣tum poterit expelli, et interfici, quibus ipse (Papa) id cōmiserit, That is, If the Pope depose the King▪ he can only be ex∣psd and killed by these whom the Pope commissionats for that effect. Spalat. in o∣stens. errorum Suarez ii, cap. 6. n. 27. is so astonished at these hellsh tenets, orco digna, as his phrase is, that he breaks forth into these words, Mihi dum haec lego, oculi

stupent, dum haec transcribo manus contremiscit: his eyes failed him and hads trembled &c.

 I only adde a fourth of their Principles, (though they who tooke pleasure to rake this dunghill, could easily fill a volume with such stuffe from their writtings) which Cardinall Bellarm. delyvers, lib 5. de Romano Pontifice, cap. 7. Rat. 3. Non licere Christianis tolerare Regem haereticum, si is conetur subditos in suam haeresin pertra∣here. That its not lawfull for subjects, to tolerat an Hereticall King, if he labour to draw his subjects to his heresie. It not this to blew a Trumpet for rebellion? because of these and such like Popish principles, our gravest Divines, among the rest learned Davenant, in his book intituled, Determinationes quarundam Quaestionum Theologi∣carum quaest. 17 have most deservedly concluded, esuiticos Pontifi∣cios non posse esse bonos subditos, That Iesuited Papists can never be good subjects; and worthy Master Baxter in his Key for Catho∣licks, part. 1. cap. 48. spares not to say, That Kings are not Kings, where the Pope is folly Pope. What neede we more? It not Our Most Seren PRINCE of glorious memory K. Iames the VI. a Wit∣nesse beyond exception, Who in his Royall Apologi for the oath of Al∣legeance, pagg. 279. and 280. inter opera Regia after a recitall of twelve of Bellarmin's positions destructive to Royaltie, such as ThatO impudēt and prodi∣gious tenets Kings, are rather servants then Lords: that they are subject not onely to Popes, but also to Bishops & Presbyters, yea & to Dea∣cons: That Emperours, must not take it ill, to drink, not only after the Bishop, but also after the Presbyter. That Ecclesiastick persos, are as far above Princes, as the soul in dignity is beyond the body: That the function and authority of Kings, is not im∣mediatly of God or of Divine right: That Kings may be depo∣sed by their subjects: That Popes have deposed Emperours, but never did an Emperour depose a Pope &c. Who, I say, after a large recitall of these and other of the Iesuits pernicious tenets, most judiciously concludeth. Non magis opponi Christum Beliali, aut lucem tenebris, aut Coelum Inferno, quam Roberti Bellarmini, de Regibus opinio, Divinis Oraculis adversatur, That is, That the Devill is no more opposite to Christ, nor light to darknesse, nor hell to Heaven, then the Iesuite Bellarmine's opinion of Kings is re∣pugnant to the divine Oracles of holy Scripture.
But Alas! What shall I say? Is it not to be lamented, if it were possible with tears of bloud? That so much advantage should have been given to the Iesuited party for recrimination, to retort a charge of disloy∣al
