



Gentlemen and Neighbours!
IN Athens was a Law called, , or , whereby all strangers were com∣pelled to get them Patrons: and the custome of Dedicating Books in antient and warrant∣able. If therefore bountiful charitie, good esteem of Gospel truths, intire love to the Au∣thor,
be inducements to choos a Patrone, I need not go far, for in my own Parish are all these; besides, the Gentleman lives a∣mongst you who presented me, and hath hitherto been as good as his promise to me, and I hope he will continue so; besides many other civil courtesies from him in particular, and you in general, for all which I acknow∣ledge my selfe much ingaged. To you therefore I dedicate these my poor pains, to testifie the equall duty which I owe, and the impartial respect I bear to all, to make you all as one Patrone. I had a farr and free Call to this place, and I have spent almost one full Appren∣ticeship
amongst you, who have ever accepted my labours, and respected my person, though a stranger. When you were pleased to make choise of me there was probability of a com∣petent subsistence, in reference to the present allowance, and the obtained augmentation, but this shortly passed over as a cloud without water, and was never enjoied: the charitable contribution of well-affected people hath been much lessen∣ed also by their death, which as it is my loss, so I hope it is their gain. But O the misery of this place beyond others, which is no small grief to many of you, that out of one Impropriation
of 200 l. per annum, onely 30 l. should be the painful incum∣bents allowance, and but 8 l. of that pretended to be due, the rest lookt upon as a gratu∣ity: This is harder measure, then the most rigid Sequestra∣tors use to their most supposed enemies; allowing them the fift part, and tying them to no duty. I refer all Impropriators to the serious and timely consi∣deration of these places, Mal. 3.8, 9, 10. Act. 19 37. not one∣ly the light of the Word, but the light of Nature condemns it. And let men remember, that the antient and best Laws of this Nation so: and though a toleration at present, yet we
shall be judged at last by God's Law, not man's.
Adrichomious reports, that Ahaz Diall was made of the Brazen Altar of whole burnt Offerings: Fecit ex Altari holo∣causti aeneo; 2 King. 16, 17. it was but poor reparation, to set up a Diall with 12 hours, in lieu of the 12 brazen Oxen, which was under the great sea. Thus carnal men conceive,Out of Mr. Fullers Pisgah, pag. 400. they may safely steal God's Dove, & stick down a feather in the room thereof.
Nature will be content with little, and Grace with lesse; for the just live by faith, and com∣fortably too. We must look up∣on
the Apostle 1 Tim. 6.6, 7, 8, 9. I shall onely remember you who are as a remnant left of this sharp but short Visitati∣on, of the same Apostles pre∣cept, Gal. 6.9. this is the main end of my calling, and the mark I aim at in publishing and dedi∣cating this to you, that by a conscionable observance, and kind acceptance, you may gain much profit, and I much com∣fort: In it you have the variety of many, not the prolixity of few points. Multum loqui est rem superfluis agere verbis, Aug. Ep. 121.
In presenting you with this Tract, I will put you in mind of the charge of noble Alexan∣der,
who conquered a great part of the world: ; To esteem the whole world as their Country, good men as their Country-men, the bad as strangers. Upon presumption of which I shall not fear to ex∣pose my brood as the Eagles do theirs, to the raies of the open Sun. Give me leave therefore, as your loving Monitor to com∣mend unto you, the constant reading of the Scripture (which may be called your Husbands Jesus Christ's Love-letter) all other books being but scribling and pamphlets in comparison of that: and to read it all pari pietatis affectu, with the same
holy reverence and affection; yea to translate Scripture into your life, that your working and walking may be Scripture explication; for as David saith, Psal. 119.96. I have seen an end of all perfection: but thy Com∣mandement is exceeding broad. And you have lived in an age to see a glorious King, out-live his own, and Kingdoms earthly glory, besides many other great alterations. O that your heart may be a repository! to lay up carefully, & treasure this broad Commandement, when all earthly perfections prove false and fading, your souls may be furnished with holiness here, and happiness hereafter: and
that you may be sensible, that nothing can satisfie but grace, or glory, or God him self. The way to heaven is not strewed with Roses, but like the crown of Christ here on earth, set with Thorns: not smiles and loving embracements from the world, but wounds and strokes do a∣wait all those who have receiv∣ed the press-money of the Spi∣rit, & are enrolled for the Chri∣stian warfare: and every soul must expect that of Jacob to Jo∣seph, Gen. 49.23. Therefore the Scriptures not onely makes us wise to salvation, 2 lim. 3. ver. 15, 16. and valiant for the truth, Jer. 9.3. in these scep∣tick times: but they present us
with sundry platforms of the righteous conflicting with many troubles: and in all your trials support and anchor your souls with these Scriptures, Psal. 34, 19. Rom. 8.28 whatsoever God takes away from us, if he give us a new heart, we may con∣clude he is upon the giving hand; and that he hath some∣what else to give when he hath given a love unto, and a longing after his truth: in the mean time these meditations may be a help to you in bearing all affliction, a help to patience in suffering, to faith in believing, to hope in waiting for the salvation of the Lord. Here are Cordials for the reviving of spirits, and me∣dicine
for the cure of distem∣pers, Antidotes against the infe∣ction of spreading and soul-de∣stroying errors, caveats against Hell-damning drowning sins. Exhorting you to glorifie God in every condition, and to have good thoughts, and to speak good Words of God, who minds us nothing but good; and though he should strip you naked, yet cleave to him, who orders all his providence, and may use you as he pleaseth, and yee must bee quiet under his hand, his judgments being al∣waies just, though often secret. In, these evil times, I from my heart recommend to your hearts that exhortation Heb. 12
verse 14. The sight of as many Kingdoms and their glory as Sa∣tan shewed our Saviour is but vanity and vexation, without seeing of God. The Omnipo∣tent and Omniscient GOD, un∣dertake the guarding and pro∣tecting of you all, and make a hedge about all you have: and let the blessing of the Psalmist, 128.6. in its highest perfor∣mance be upon you. To con∣clude, in recompence of all my pains, I heartily pray you all to pray for him who daily praieth for you, and Preacheth himself
June 24. 1658



Macte, & sic fileo: mens sa∣na in corpore sano,
Summa libri, voti est & tibi summa mei.


