



NOBLE SIR:
THAT there is a life above that of sensuall pleasure; the Heathen by the twy-light of Nature could di∣scerne, who thought him not worthy the name of a man, that spent a whole day together in sensuall pleasure; reckoning such amongst beasts in humane shape, but that there is a life of faith as far above that of reason, as it is above the life of sense, that comming from God, returnes to him againe, moves by higher principles, and to higher ends, acts all for the honour of the great God, aymes in all at the setting up of Christ, and making

him glorious before the world; this is such a dark and hidden path, that had we not the fiery Pillar of Gods truth to cleare it to us, together with a cloud of many witnesses, especially in these last dayes, that have beaten it out before us, whose life is not in carnall pleasure, nor civill trans∣actions, no, nor yet in philosophicall specula∣tions, who lay out all their strength, are ready to exhaust all their bloud from Christ and his truth; we must have been for ever ignorant of it. This is not to be found in the Schoole of So∣crates, nor in the pit of Democritus. What those Masters of morality groped after in the darke, but could never reach; viz. the right way of li∣ving; I have adventured to present to your and the publique view in this poore and plaine Ser∣mon, which I confesse hath no other argument to procure either your view, or patronage, but this one; that it hath the Name of Jesus Christ in it; the want whereof when Austin espied, after conversion, in Tullies Booke, abated the heat of his delight which he once took in it. When you meet with weaknesses, may you be pleased to Remember, that not any selfe-forwardnesse, or over-valuing hath obtruded these unpolished Meditations into the publique light, but my

willingnesse to put a stop, if it may be, to the false and slanderous aspersions on the dead, that I perceive have already cankered the hearts and mouths of many, and to raise, though upon the ruines of my own credit, a monument of de∣served praise to him, to whose fidelity and reso∣lution in the cause of Christ, the Kingdome stands so much indebted to this day.
And now, Noble Sir, these rude Notes being forced to looke abroad, whither shall they run for shelter but to you? Surely your right is grea∣test to them, as succeeding the man in his ho∣nour and intrustments, as well as in his holy activity for the publique good. But I perceive by Austin,Retr. lib. 1. cap. 2. who repented him that he attributed more to Theodorus, to whom he wrote a booke, though otherwise he were a godly man, then was meet, that it is easie to over-lash in the com∣mendation of a good man. Only this therefore let me name without flattery, to give the world an accompt of my choise; Your love to Christ in his Ministers and members, your constancy in sticking to his Cause with the losse of friends and lands in these back-sliding, and forward∣nesse in acting for him in these bleeding times, doe more then satisfie me that I have found a

Patron sutable to my subject. Wherefore praying your favourable construction and acceptance of this poor mite, I commend you to the Lords grace, who double the spirit of his deceased ser∣vant on you, make you high and Noble in all your ends, faithfull and constant in all your in∣struments, couragious and valiant in all your undertakings for Christ and his truth. Remem∣ber, Sir, riches, honours, high places, may make you great, not gracious, not happy: they passe away daily, and often much faster then they came,I'le ad deum copiosus, ille opulentus adveniet, cui astabunt mi∣sericordia, patientia, charitas, fi∣des. Lactant. lib. 7. c. 27. and if they tarry with you to your last, yet then must you leave them to others, as they are now left to you. We shall carry nothing with us, but a life spent in, and for Christ, Worke apace then, be diligent to take in and put off as much as you can for your Masters advantage, that you may go richly laden to the Haven at the last, and when you have fulfilled your time, receive the crowne of righteousnesse and glory; for which he prayeth who is yours

