



Honourable and right worthy Patriots:
IF I might presume so far as to speak or write to so great and judicious an Assem∣bly, as you are known to be, I would in the first place, with all humble and hearty thankfulnesse to Almightie GOD, the KINGS MAJESTY, the Right Honorable PEERES, and You the Knights and Gentlemen, now most seasonably assembled in Parlia∣ment, acknowledge the many great and worthy things that have been done by His Royall Majesty, the Noble Peeres, and your selves for the publike good.
See the Remon∣strance, published Dec. 15. 1641. Who have eased our backs of that illegall burden of Ship-money, Coat, Conduct-money, and other military charges. Supprest all Monopolies, Taken away arbitrary government, the root of these evils. Much quelled evill councellours, and other malignant persons, by execution of justice on some, imprisoning others, and causing o∣thers to fly, out of the consciousnesse of their own guil∣tinesse, Setled a trienniall Parliament in stead of a tri∣enniall Visitation, and provided for the continuance of this, till all our grievances are heard and redressed, and all evils be removed, which is of unspeakable conse∣quence, because they secure a full operation of the re∣medy, and afford a perpetuall spring of remedies for the future. Put down the High Commission Court,
which in some respects (through the abuse of some, and over-ruling of others, was made too like the Spanish Inquisition, which suspended, silenced, and outed many of the most able and godly Ministers ont of their li∣vings and freeholds, and so undone many a whole fami∣ly; a Court, which indeed at first was erected to sup∣presse Papists and Popery, as the Spanish Inquisition was to curb the blasphemous Jews, but was now, as that, turned against pious Protestants; Have put down the Star-chamber; Taken away other Courts, the forges of misery, oppression and violence; Dismounted the Ca∣nons that were mounted to batter down the power of Religion, together with the late cursed Oath; Damned the Oath ex officio, by means whereof they tortured ma∣ny consciences with strange quaeries and forcing unnatu∣rall self-accusations. Freed Church-wardens from a dangerous oath. Limitted the immoderate power of the Councell Table. Punished and terrified some Mi∣nisters and others that were of scandalous life, or Au∣thors of Innovations in doctrine & ceremonies. Reduced the Forrests by good Laws to their right bounds. Re∣formed the incroachments and oppressions of the Stane∣ry Courts. The extortion of the Clerk of the market. The compulsion of the Subject to receive the order of Knighthood against his wil, or paying fines for refusall. Recalled the banished Exiles that had undergone the brunt, the chief let in the Prelats way to Rome. Setled a happy peace betwixt us and our Neighbour Nation, which the malignant Enemies of both, endeavoured to imbroile in civill wars which are grevious, yea which is worse, of Protestants against Protestants, one servant a∣gainst another, and one brother against another, till both were consumed. Removed the Bishops from voting in
Parliament, and all Clergie men from temporall offi∣ces, which like a false byas in a bowle, wheel'd them quite out of the way of preaching. Voted down Deans and Prebends, which were (many of them) too like the drones that eat up the hony which the painfull Bees should live on. Opened the Presses for publishing the good and profitable labours of the godly, and inhibited po∣pish books and Pamphlets tending to reconcile us and Rome, or rather to reduce us to Rome. You have ordered the removall and abollishing of scandalous pictures and images and other Innovations in the Church. The due sanctification of the Sabbath, cryed down by the Popish and prelaticall partie in their preaching, printing, and practise. Given libertie to tender consciences, burthned with unnecessary and scandalous (at the best inconve∣nient) Ceremonies, godly Ministers to exercise their ministery, to which God and man hath set them apart, so that many thousands may heare the joyfull sound a∣gain in their eares who were deprived of such blessed silver Trumpets, in stead whereof they had but Rams hornes, (too good a comparison for many of them) which many times sounded as terrible an alarum in their eares, as they sometimes did to them of Jericho. You have procured from His Royall Majestie a Monthly Fast, published by His Majesties Proclamation, in which like the New Moones Fast or Feast of Trumpets, the sil∣ver Trumpets of the word are sounded, and the sacrafice of prayer, praise and almes are offered up unto God. Published a much desired Order for setling of Church-government and Liturgie, your provident care for the relief of bleeding Ireland. The Bill against Pluralities and non-residency, order for weekly Lectures and dili∣gent preaching. Great care for the safety of the Land.
For the full discovery and removall of scandalous Mi∣nisters, the shame of the Realm and Religion. For ha∣nishing Priests and Jesuits. And for securing the Pa∣pists, the professed Enemies of King and Kingdom, Church and State. The happy concurrence of the Right Noble Peers, with the truly honourable House of Com∣mons in their Honourable proceedings. The happy and timely discovery of many grievous snares,
Pits were digged for the Righteous, gal∣lowses provided for Mordecai's, because they would not bow to Hamans; done of lyons for Daniels, because they would not leave praying; fiery furnaces for the three children, because they would not worship the golden I∣mage; dungeons for Jeremy's, because they would preach the truth with boldnesse. Mr. Cal. Feb. 23. in his Serm. broken by your great vigilancy and indu∣stry and the prevention of many most de∣perate designes against this Kingdom, so that our Isacks are delivered and the Rams are caught in the bush, and as the wise man saith,
Pro. 11.8. The Righteous is delivered out of the trouble, and the wicked cometh in his stead. And to name no more the renewing of our Nationall Covenant, so prudently made and commended to us by your Hono∣rable House) to bring back again all Isra∣el to worship the Lord their God in Jeru∣salem, who were too many of them making a Captain and turning back again into mi∣sticall Egypt, which Covenant gave the rise to this ensuing plaine, unpollished discourse (fitted and intended only for a country Auditory, where it is a commendation to speake in the most plain and vulgar terms) which in all humility I present unto you (wor∣thy Patriots) not as Patrons,
Homo sum, er∣rare pos∣sum hae∣reticus esse nolo. for if it be the truth of God, as I trust it is, he is the Patron of it and will de∣fend it: if any errour be found in it, I disclaim it, and think the work it self too slenderly performed, for so judicious persons as you are known to be, but only, as his hand full of water to a great
Artax∣erxes. Prince, the widdows mite,
a little goats hair, as a Testimony of my humble obser∣vance and thankfull acknowledgement of the unweatied labours, continuall care and zealous endeavours of the Noble Peers and your selves for the publick good, as also for the particular favour of divers worthy Members of your House towards my self.
And surely if it may seem good to your grave wisdomes, to procure and adde these things to all the rest, which are humbly desired by very many thousands: To out dumb and scandalous Ministers, setle able, godly Pastors over every Congregation in England and Waies, and comfor∣tably provide for them who (many of them especially in these evill times) lye under much discouragement and distraction through a miserable incompetency. And provide, That Priests and Jesuits be quite banished the Land. That Papists be fully disarmed, and conside∣rable persons be fully secured, and all the Laws duly executed upon them. That Notorious offenders in Church & Common-wealth whatsoever they be, the Achans that hinder the endeavour of Joshua and Israel, be censured and punished according to the qualitie of their crimes. That Idolatry and Superstition, especially the abomina∣ble Masse be totally rooted out of this Kingdom, for what peace so long as the whordomes of Jezabell re∣mains in this Land. That evill Councellors,
Rome, Ie∣zabel mysticall, Revel. 2.20. and 18.5. the raisers and fomenters of the great troubles and distempers of the Kingdom, and of the absence of His Royall Maje∣stie from His Parliament, &c. (which all good Sub∣jects are greatly greived to heare) be removed from His Royall Person. That distressed Ireland, whose conditi∣on is much to be lamented, be speedily relieved with an ample supply, where, as here, the blood of many thou∣sand soules cry to Heaven for vengeance, and to you for
help against the mighty. That the peace of the King∣dom, that the power and priviledges of Parliament, the lawfull Rights and Liberties of the Subject be firmly setled. That considerable places be fully secured by ap∣proved men, & so trading quickned, to the relief of many thousands that now languish greatly under want. That the blessed work of Reformation, with all good speed, go on & be perfected. Vnnecessary things and Ceremonies be removed. That the Hyerarchy, if it may be proved to be the root of much evil in Church & State may be eradi∣cated, and a Church-government setled according to the rule of Gods word. That the Sacrament by some good provision may be kept frō being polluted by unworthy persons, and all Ignorant persons be compelled to learn the grounds of the true Protestant Religion. That all scandalous Pictures and Images and all other Monu∣ments and Reliques of Idolatry and Superstition, and particularly Crosses by the high wayes and in such like places, be (according to a former order of Queen Eliz. injunction) abollished,
Injunct. 23. which occasion much Supersti∣tion, especially in these parts, by reason of the ignorance of very many, chiefly when they carry their dead by any of them. That whereas there is a great cry and grie∣vous charge against the Liturgie of the Church and the Vsers of it, that it cannot be lawfully used, yea that it is Superstitious, Antichristian, Idolatrous, and what not? whereby the consciences of many good and well-affected people, are much troubled, if it may be proved, if not, yet that whatsoever shall be proved to be either Superstitions, unlawfull, and may give just offence to tender consciences, or unnecessary, your grave wisdom with the advice of the learned and godly Divines, would be pleased with all convenient speed to remove it, and
provide that the people might have a sure rule to walke by in their worship of God, that their minds may be setled and consciences quieted to a cheerfull obedience, which would be a great inducement to many to joyne with us, who otherwise, I feare, will hardly ever be perswaded. That Arminianisme and Socinianisme, the enemies to free grace, and Romes Coy-ducks to bring in Popery be truly and thoroughly supprest. That Church Papists, the most dangerous enemies and underminers of Church and State, may by some good provision be dis∣covered. That You would procure that scandalous and Popish Magistrates that regard not the Execution of Justice, be removed, and approved just men fearing God and hating covetousnes and unrighteousnesse, be placed in their rooms. That Contemners of your former good Orders be punished. Wakes and unnecessary Alehouses and Playhouses, the very nurseries of vice and randevouz for all prophane wretches, be suppressed. That the joynt consent and happy concurence of the Noble Peers with your House, may be still continued. Especially that they and you would use all possible means and speed, that His Royall Majestie may have a right understanding of your just desires and proceedings, and would with the Prince be graciously pleased to reside neerer to His Parliament.
All which I mention not to shew you what to do, im∣pute not such folly to your humble servant, but in all humility to spread before your wisdoms, what is by ma∣ny thousands heartily desired and humbly craved, ac∣cording as in your pious and deepe wisdom, shall seem most agreeable to the rules of piety, true christian-pru∣dence and policy, which surely will compleat the bles∣sed worke of Reformation begun, make this a most flourishing Church and State, amiable to our God,
glorious to our friends, terrible to our enemies, and make you and your Posterities renowned while this is a Nation.
And because your difficulties be very many and great, therefore heare a word of encouragement from him who greatly honours you and your Assembly, and whose du∣ty it is ex officio speciali, to teach, instruct, exhort, re∣prove, &c. The cause you are about is eminently good and of great importance, God and all good men are on your side, and though your adversaries be many, mighty and politick, yet God, your Master whose worke you are about, is stronger and wiser then they all, and one Ja∣cob can do more with God for you, then 400. Edomites can do against you. And Honoured Worthies you have found God going along with you so, scattering your e∣nemies, and furthering his worke, even by their wicked plots and oppositions, that you should now greatly dis∣honour God and the cause, if you should suffer any thing to discourage you, or make you feare the perfe∣cting of the long and much desired worke of Reforma∣tion in its due time, only if Religion and the worship of God, and the discipline of Jesus Christ be first setled, then other evills how great soever will vanish away, till then it cannot certainly be expected.
It is true, it is not possible it should be done in a trice, the greatnesse and exactnesse of the work, the great deal of rubbish in the house of God, both wretched persons and things; and the great oppositions which great and good works meet with, must of necessity make the work long. Wherefore, Noble Senators, arme your selves with patience and resolution, alwayes look as upon the work with one eye, so at Gods glory and the publick good and upon Gods power, wisdom, goodnesse, promise, and
faithfullnesse with the other, and doubt not of a desi∣red issue in due time, which is the humble and hearty desire of him who is resolved, to his utmost power, and to the last breath (God inabling) by all means lawfull to maintain and defend the true reformed Protestant Religion, against all Popery and Popish Innovations, the Kings Majesties Person and Royall Posterity, the power and Priviledges of Parliament, together with their persons in all their just and good proceedings, the lawfull Rights and Liberties of the Subject, &c. against the enemies of God, the King and State, and shall till death remain

London August 3. 1642.
