



Sirs,
YOu may wonder that such an obscure per∣son as I am, and living in so remote a corner of the Kingdome, should (in this learned age, wherein so many ela∣borate Peeces of speciall worth have bin printed) publish any thing: Yet know∣ing the subject to be very sutable to the times (and you know what the Wise man saith of a word spoken in it's season)▪ A word spoken in due season, how good is it? it is like Apples of gold in Pictures of silver, pleasing and profitable, and finding the matter handled in it comfortable and profitable to my selfe, and well relished and desired by some others, being heartily desirous
to further the publicke good, and profit others, I have ventured to present it to the publicke view and use. And be it so, that this slender Treatise (at first intended only for a Country Au∣ditory) be indeed but as the Goats haire among the fine twined linnen, silke, purple, silver, gold and precious stones, that was offered towards the building of the Tabernacle; yet there is use of that also. Be pleased therefore to accept of it, which I assure you is as rich in affection as the most chose peeces are in worth; which I doe humbly present (as to the World in generall so) in particular to you (My much honoured and worthy friends) for your particular favour and expressions towards me and mine. If you or any others shall reape any good by it (which is my hearty desire) let God have all the praise, and me your prayers.
And doe you (I beseech you) labour more and more to lay out your selves every way to the utmost, for the publick good, and against the publicke enemies of the King and Parliament, espe∣cially in your most hearty affections, and fervent, frequent prayers for the peace and prosperity of our Ierusalem, and to returne praises some wayes answerable for mercies received. Thankfulnesse for benefits received is an holy kind of begging, and a preparative to more and greater mercies and deliveran∣ces, which only he can give (and therfore will be sought of us for them) whose Throne of grace we have still more cause and encouragement to frequent.Ezek. 36 37. The fire of civill dissention is bro∣ken out here at home, beside the great and lamentable ruines it hath made abroad in Ireland and Germany. Oh! cast on a few teares to help quench it, and you shall so much the more engage him unto you, who will remaine,

