



GOD having given to all men an object of Faith,Act. 17.31. Rom. 16.26. Mar. 16.15. Jam. 1.18. Rom. 10.10, 15. & 4.5, 22, 25. and com∣manded it to be made known by the Scriptures, & preach∣ed to all Nations for the obe∣dience of Faith, and that be∣lieving it, which is begot thereby, and closeth therewith, so as to rest thereon for that pro∣mised, being therefore by him called Faith; and to such Believers, Faith imputed for Righteousness: So as it is verily true,Heb. 11.6. Eph. 2.17, 18. Act. 10.43. & 13.38, 39. Rom. 5.1, 2, 3, 5. Heb. 11.2. Act. 18.26. & 9.15. Rom. 11.20. Eph. 2.8. 1 Cor. 15.1, 4. 2 Thess. 1.10. 1 Job. 5.10. By Faith we come and approach to God, by Faith we receive remission of sins, by Faith we are justified and approved of God, by Faith we receive the vertues of the Sacrifice and Blood of Christ, by Faith we are sanctified and con∣formed to the minde of Christ, by Faith we stand and are saved, by Faith we receive the Testimony of Christ, and so come to have that Testimony, and therein the holy Spirit testifying, and Christ testified of; and the
Father that is in Christ, dwelling in our heart by Faith:Eph. 3.17. Gal. 3.26. Hab. 2.4. Rom. 1.17. Gal. 1.13. 1 Joh. 5.4, 5. Heb. 11. all. 1 Pet. 1.5. so as by Faith we are the Sons of God; and in all trials and temptations, by Faith we live; yea, by Faith we have the vi∣ctory over the flesh, the world and the devil; and by Faith may be enabled to do worthily in our generations, and be constant in all ser∣vices of love, enduring through all sufferings, till we die in the Faith, and so in the Resur∣rection shall receive the kingdom: for we are kept by the power of God through Faith un∣to salvation: I therefore am perswaded, it is our best service and fruit of love,Jude 20.3. 2 Tim. 4.7, 8. Eph. 4.4, 5. to edifie one another in this most holy Faith; yea, and to contend for it also against the opposers of it; and know this Faith to be one, and that there is but one Faith, that is Faith indeed, though in time past I have conceited divers kindes of Faith: and now lately meeting with a Que∣stion stated, in which are asserted two kindes of Faith, each true and real in its kinde, by M. John Owen, in his Book entituled, The Do∣ctrine of the Saints perseverance, I was mov'd in my heart to consider the same, and to an∣swer some Expressions of his; yet leaving the handling of the Controversie to those more fit, to whom it may appertain; acknowledg∣ing
all for Truth in his Book, that is found in the Testimony of Christ, and stands with the Rule proposed by himself also; and refuse the rest, according to his own counsel & direction: wherein I have endeavored by plain Testimo∣ny and sayings of Scripture, to set forth the true Faith in the object of it, and Grace of be∣lieving, with its efficacies, and so to encourage men to believe, and believers to persevere. I desire the plain Testimony of Scripture may be believed; and so far as any of us are by the Spirit therein, brought to acknowledg Christ, and desire the exaltation of his Name, and winning in of others thereto, and encrease and growth of grace in believers, let us keep this unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, that so, in all our other differing apprehensions and expressions, we may so contend for what the Scripture saith, that whatever absurdity thereby, we seem to cast upon any expressions of one another, it may be without judging or despising of one another; taking opposed expressions, as consequences of misconcepti∣on in the fancy, and not fruits of the princi∣ple of grace in such as acknowledge Jesus the Lord; nor judging them graceless, or having no principle of grace, because of such an ex∣pression;
that so we may do all things in cha∣rity, seeking the edification of one another: and so I hope, if any be otherwise minded, God will reveal the same to them; onely whereto we have attained, let us walk by the same rule of Faith and Love, and believe what Scripture testifieth, and not be waved from that, the Scriptures being able to make us wise unto salvation, through Faith that is in Jesus Christ. And so committing my self and labour to the Lord's gracious good pleasure, and to Believers to be tried, and received or refused, as they are found to be agreeing or disagreeing with the plain sayings of the Te∣stimony of Christ, I rest
Wittlesey. Oct. 12. 1655.

