



SIR,
COncerning the choice of the sub∣ject
matter of my present pains,
I have, I think, spoke enough
in the insuing Preface. Concerning the
choice of my Patron, I shall say no more,
then that the sole inducement thereto, was
his singular Learning and Piety. The
former of which, is so conspicuous to the
world, that it is universally acknowledg∣ed
of all; and for the latter, there is none
that can be ignorant thereof, who has e∣ver
had the happiness, though but in a
smaller measure, of his more free and in∣timate

converse. As for my own part,
I cannot but publickly profess, I never
met with any yet so truly and becoming∣ly
religious, where the right knowledge
of God and Christ bears the inlightned
minde so even, that it is as far removed
from Superstition as Irreligion it self. And
my present Labours cannot finde better
welcome or more judicious acceptance
with any, then with such as these. For
such free and unprejudiced spirits will
neither antiquate Truth for the oldnesse
of the Notion, nor slight her for looking
young, or bearing the face of Novelty.
Besides, there are none that can be better
assured of the sincerity and efficacy of my
present Designe. For as many as are
born of the Spirit, and are not meer sons
of the Letter, know very well how much
the more inward and mysterious mean∣ing
of the Text makes for the reverence
of the holy Scripture, and advantage of
Godlinesse, when as the urging of the
bare literal sense, has either made or con∣firmed

many an Atheist. And assuredly
those men see very little in the affairs of
Religion, that do not plainly discover,
that it is the Atheists highest interest, to have
it taken for granted, that there is no spiri∣tual
meaning, either in Scripture or Sacra∣ment,
that extends further then the meer
Grammatical sense in the one, or the sen∣sible,
grosse, external performance in the
other. As for example, That to be regene∣rated,
and become a true and real Christian,
is nothing else, but to receive the outward
Baptisme of visible water: And, that the
Mosaical Philosophy concerning God, and
the nature of things, is none other, then
that which most obviously offers it self
in the meer letter of Moses. Which if the
Atheist could have fully granted to him on
all sides, and get but this in also to the
bargain, That there is no knowledge of
God, but what Moses his Text set on foot
in the world, or what is Traditional, he
cannot but think, that Religion in this
dresse, is so empty, exceptionable, and

contemptible, that it is but just with as
many as are not meer fools, to look upon
it as some melancholick conceit, or cunning
fiction brought into the world, to awe
the simpler sort, but behinde the hang∣ings
to be freely laughed at, and derided by
those that are more wise; And that it
were an easie thing in a short time to
raze the memory of it out of the mindes
of men, it having so little root in the hu∣mane
faculties. Which for my own
part I think as hopeful, as that posterity
will be born without eyes and ears, and
lose the use of speech. For I think the
knowledge of God, and a sense of Reli∣gion
is as natural and essential to man∣kinde,
as any other property in them
whatsoever: And that the generations
of men shall as soon become utterly ir∣rational,
as plainly irreligious. Which,
I think, my late Treatise against Atheisme wil
make good to any one, that with care
and judgement will peruse it.
Nor does it at all follow, because a

truth is delivered by way of Tradition, that
it is unconcludable by Reason. For I do
not know any one Theorem in all Natural
Philosophy, that has more sufficient reasons
for it, then the motion of the Earth, which
notwithstanding is part of the Philosophick
Cabbala or Tradition of Moses, as I shall
plainly shew in its due place. So likewise
for the prae-existency of the Soul, which
seems to have been part of the same Tra∣dition,
it is abundantly consentaneous to
Reason: And as we can give a genuine
account of all those seeming irregularities
of motion in the Planets, supposing, they
& the Earth move round about the Sun:
so we may open the causes of all those a∣stonishing
Paradoxes of Providence, from
this other Hypothesis, and show that there
is nothing here unsutable to the precious
Attributes of God, if we could place the eye
of our understanding in that Center of
all free motions, that steady eternal Good, &
were not our selves carried aloof off from
him, amongst other wandring Planets,

(as S. Jude calls them) that at several di∣stances
play about him, & yet all of them
in some measure or other, not onely pre∣tending
to him, but whether they pretend
or not, really receiving something from
him. For of this First, is all, both Wisdome,
Pleasure, and Power. But it is enough to
have but hinted these things briefly and
enigmatically, the wrath and ignorance
of all Ages receiving the most generous
Truths, with the greatest offence.
But for my own part, I know no reason
but that all wel-willers to Truth & God∣liness,
should heartily thank me for my
present Cabbalistical Enterprise, I having so
plainly therein vindicated the holy My∣stery
of the Trinity from being (as a very
bold Sect would have it) a meer Pagan
invention. For it is plainly shown here,
that it is from Moses originally, not from
Pythagoras, or Plato. And seeing that Christ
is nothing but Moses unveiled, I think it
was a special act of Providence that this
hidden Cabbala came so seasonably to the

knowledge of the Gentiles, that it might a∣fore-hand
fit them for the easier entertain∣ment
of the whole Mystery of Christia∣nity,
when in the fulness of time it should
be more clearly revealed unto the world.
Besides this, we have also shown, That
according to Moses his Philosophy, the soul
is secure both from death, and from sleep
after death, which those drowsie Nodders
over the letter of the Scripture have very
oscitantly collected, and yet as boldly af∣terwards
maintained, pretending that
the contrary, is more Platonical, then Chri∣stian,
or Scriptural.
Wherefore my designe being so pious
as it proves, I could do nothing more fit
then to make choice of so true a lover of
Piety as your self for a Patron of my pre∣sent
Labours. Especially you being so
well able to do the most proper office of
a Patron; to defend the truth that is pre∣sented
to you in them, & to make up out
of your rich Treasury of Learning, what
our Penury could not reach to, or Inad∣vertency

may have omitted. And truly, if
I may not hope this from you, I know
not whence to expect it. For I do not
know where to meet with any so uni∣versally
and fully accomplished in all
parts of Learning as your self, as well in
the Oriental Tongues and History, as in
all the choicest kindes of Philosophy; Any
one of which Acquisitions is enough to fill,
if not swell, an ordinary man with great
conceit and pride, when as it is your sole
privilege, to have them all, and yet not
to take upon you, nor to be any thing
more imperious, or censorious of others,
then they ought to be that know the least.
These were the true considerations
that directed me in the Dedication of this
Book; Which if you accordingly please
to take into your favourable Patronage,
and accept as a Monument or Remem∣brance
of our mutual friendship, you
shall much oblige

