



MADAM,
IN the draught of this Semi-cir∣cle, tending to compleat the other half, the Compass natu∣rally moves to that Point whence it first parted, which is Your Royal Name. And abstracting from
 the debt of this Dedication, I conceive, yours Madam, the properest Name under heaven for such addresses as design to publish the contempt of this World For what can speak so efficaciously, as your Image, the instabilitie of all humane felicities? And as the looking on your diffe∣rent states offers forcible motives towards the disvalue of all transitory glories; so surely the considering your present fixure of mind may afford powerful perswasions towards the esteem of such spiritual remedies, as can cure the wounds of such a fortune. So that both your Condition is a most notorious discreditor of tem∣poral affiances, and your Person a just indear∣er of spiritual confidences: which are the two ends I propose in this Edition of my Thoughts, the defects whereof, through my di∣ctating, may be much supply'd by this my De∣dication: while I mind the world of a Person, from Whose Head Fortune hath been able to shake off three Crowns; and on Whose Heart, Vertue (even by that adversitie) is fixing and enlarging three greater Jewels
 Faith, Hope, and Charitie, assur'd titles to immortal Crowns and Diadems.
Ʋnder that notion, Madam, of an aspirer to a more transcendent Majestie, I present your Religious Mind these entertainments: which will be the less unmannerly, the greater priva∣cie and retreat they intrude themselves upon: And truly, as your life stands now dispos'd, the greater part of your time is favourable for such admissions. Since you pass the most of it in that holy retirement, whither you have car∣ry'd up the Cross in triumph; having set That over your Head, and the most temptingChali t a hll looking over Paris, hereto∣fore a place of all worldly entertianment part (perhaps) of the whole world, as it were, under your feet.
And, methinks, Madam, this remark may not a little indear to you the seat of your pi∣ous retirement; viz. That you, who have been dispossess'd of so many noble houses and pleasant scituations, by the worlds violence and injustice, and have had many religious re∣ceptacles (by your means consecrated) taken from you by the Prince of this world, transfer∣ing
 them to his prophane uses: That your ver∣tue yet should have made so eminent a repri∣zal upon the worlds possessions, in your retreat out of it. And what a comfort may it be to you, to think that God has made use of you, to take from this Prince one of the chiefest holds; and convert it, as it were, into a Religious Citadel, furnish'd with such a Garrison, as professing irre∣concileable enmitie to him and all his partie, bears away as many conquests as it has combatants, dai∣ly singing TE DEUM for their continual vi∣ctories.
This reflection, Madam, when you let your eys fall downwards, may serve you for some acciden∣tal sollace; and set (as it were) some little aureola of delight upon your mind; while your substan∣tial joy must be not the looking down, but upward to the Authour and Finisher of our Faith CHRIST JESUS, who (joy being pro∣pos'd to him) sustain'd the Cross, despising the shame of it, and sits now at the right hand of the throne of God. Your conformitie to that original must be your essential comfort in
 this life; as your similitude to him shall be your essential beatitude in heaven.
And while, Madam, you are flying upon the wings of King Davids Dove, to your rest and solitude, methinks S. Paul offers you a very pro∣per entertainment, on your way, Jesus suffer'd without the Gate; let us go forth therefore to him without the Camp bearing his re∣proach: for here have we no continuing City, but we seek one to come. By this ap∣plication of your spirit, you may convert your Cal∣vary into a Thabor, and find even the darkest rayes of your present fortune transfigur'd into bright and glorious expectations. For whilst you are conversing with Jesus in his disfigurement upon earth, you are colouring anew your Royal Purple, stain'd by the dust of the earth, and diping it in the die of that Royal Blood, which will give it a far more lustrous and never-fading splendor.
In this religious assignment of your time, Ma∣dam, I present to your second hours, these consi∣derations of Divine Providence: whence seeking no compleat cures for particular cases, there may
 be some beneficial Receipts extracted for all our infirmities, through the general contemplation of its order.
And this principle, Madam, is specially pro∣per for you to hold by, when you look down into the precipice of your fortune. For surely there was scarce ever a greater temptation, then yours to misjudge of Providence; upon the notorious evidence of your crosses, and the apparent causes of them: You have therefore no small need of this rest which supported Job, while he was totter∣ing in his apprehension, the Omnipotent will behold the causes of every one;Job 35.14. yea, when thou shalt say, He considers not, be judg'd by him and expect him.
Nor am I hopeless, Madam, that you will find some light carryed by my hand, even into the deep∣est parts of this Abyss; whilst I presume to have display'd a full claritie into the Scenes of this world, for discerning the falsitie of all its painted commodities. And I have made you this pre∣sent of my thoughts in a Language the most pro∣per of any, for you to read mortification and self-denial
 in, viz. the Tongue; that only part of their birthright, which most of your loyal Subjects have left them, wherein to pay you their homages: by which I will hope, Madam, this record of my duty and gratitude may carry down your Name into such times, as may repair the iniquitie of these; by honouring your memorie in the unani∣mous voice of the whole Nation. For my own particular, I may own one special happiness in or∣der to my gratitude: namely, that though all I offer you be perhaps neither of use to you, nor value in it self; yet what I daily offer for you is, certainly, of a considerable benefit to you, and in it self inestimable. I shall therefore, Madam, most zealously apply my self all the dayes of my life, to the blessed discharging that dutie of
From Nanteul August 1. 1653.
Madam,

