



MY LORD,
SInce I come not to your dore to be conceal'd, but rather to be pub∣lish'd and brought to the Bar; I may, without a tax to my discre∣tion, follow my inclinations, and address this mission of my medita∣tions to you in the first place. VVherein if happi∣ly I am charg'd with the art of seeking to gain one of the ablest and most authoriz'd Judges of the Na∣tion; I shall easily confess it: And besides that I sue to the favour of him who has a leading voice in that Upper house of Judicature; in which only I claim my trial: for I bring no matter to be con∣vented before the Assembly; the greatest part of my cause consisting in speculations, which make the straightest Mounts they can upward, towards
 the skie of Ʋniversal Providence, and no stoopings to strike at any thing in the air of adverse opini∣ons. Wherein this Second Part (promis'd to com∣pleat the offering of the Leaper) performs that of the harmless Sparrow, which was to be let flie upon the consummation of the Sacrifice. Since then, my Lord, this Sparrow may shelter it self un∣der your roof without offence to you, blame not its choice of refuge, seeing it can be receiv'd no where with so much securitie to it self: for 'tis just∣ly evident, that whatever in this kind your ver∣dict shall give a Pass to, has a kind of safe conduct through the rest of the Nation. Though for my own part, so much more am I affected with private friendship, then popular applause; that I shall e∣steem your Partialitie to me, before the more equal approbation of my indifferent Judges: and I relye upon the much surer ground of being pleas'd by the declaration of your kindness, then authoriz'd by the sincerity of your judgment.
'Tis therefore, my Lord, the publication of your friendship and my most singular value of it, which I chiefly aim at by this publick address to you in these times: which, not allowing any of those near and tender correspndencies that entertain the sen∣sible delights of friendship, have made me contrive this way of carrying its marks beyond these unhap∣py divisions, and seek to extend them even farther then my own life; by which means, I may repair
 my griefs for their present interruption, by the hopes of their duration and transmission to poste∣ritie.
This is all I wil offer you, my Lord, to gain you. As for the rest of my Judges, I shall only entreat their reading the evidence, with such spectacles as indeed this Print requires: For I acknowledge the Letter is not so large or clear, that it may be currantly dis∣cern'd at such a distance of attention, as commonly Readers hold their books of this nature. I must therefore earnestly desire them to pass their sight upon these lines, through the perspective of a seri∣ous consideration; by which means I dare pro∣mise they'l be rendred fair and easie to all eyes. They were I confess design'd rather for critical then careless perusers; wherefore I invite not any of those, who commonly never read, but when they know not what else to do, but such as read constant∣ly to know what they always have to do; and such, I may presume, will find not only entertainment but instruction.
This justice I may require of my Readers, To consider that the objects of my speculations are in the highest intellectual firmament: as the Creation and defection of Angels, the origen, integritie and depravation of humane nature, Gods order in the seeming confusion of temporal revolutions, his final judgment of mans actions, and his own eternal state of glory and beatitude. All these
 may well be said to appear to us like stars in the firmament; whose greatness and brightness (as not immense in themselves, so) by reason of their di∣stance, seem to our eyes, but in the proportion and light of sparkles: such a kind of perception have we of these remotest parts of Divine Providence; which through their vaste elevation above our ca∣pacities, allow our reason but the twincklings or glimpses of their essential light and veritie.
Certain it is, that contemplation may be said to be the best Optick glass for the heavens. For as by the help of such instruments, we discover some∣what more of the magnitude, stations, and motions or the celestial bodies, then we can do without that supplement to the shortness of our sight, (though they afford us not just measures of any of those so remote objects;) so the same use we may make of our meditation and discourse upon Divine Provi∣dence; for we may thereby discover somewhat more of Gods method in government, then the weakness of our first and natural apprehension of∣fers us; but we can make no satisfactory discovery of his meaning in most of his particular orders: we may learn somewhat, but nothing compleatly of Gods designs, by the help of this applica∣tion.
Hence it is that while our reason acts but the part of Natural Astronomie, it may make pretty sfe calculations; but if it venture into Judiciarie
 Astrologie, 'tis like to divine very temerariously; that is, while our discourse presses no farther then the consideration of that general order of Provi∣dence, whereon depends the stations, promotions, and retrogradations of all states and conditions in this world; it may find some reasonable motives to quiet us, in those adverse changes and revolutions which perplex our selves or others. But if we strain our imaginations to reach the precise and special causes of the varying and mutation of pri∣vate fortunes, we are in danger to make very un∣sound conclusions. For as we have certain ge∣neral rules to guide us in the positions and moti∣ons of the stars; but none to declare their influen∣ces and operations upon our particular free acti∣ons: so have we some general notion of Gods or∣der in the common mutation of transitorie matters; but no marks whereby to discern his special design in the changes and variation of particular subjects. Conformable to this assertion, King David in his distress, said to God, I was mindful of thy judgments from the beginning, and was comforted: but in point of discerning special causes for many particular oc∣currences, he confesses, Thy knowledge is become wonderful above me, and I cannot reach it; thy judg∣ments are the great abyss, and thy footsteps are not to be trac'd.
This rule I have observ'd in my speculations upon Divine Providence, which I offer my Country: and
 I have held them in my practical conformitie with∣out much disquiet in all the adverse changes of my private fortune. Wherein there are some circum∣stances that may entitle my Children to some extra∣ordinary grace and benignitie: for when 'tis con∣sidered that one was sent into the service of his Country, while the Father was in prison there; the other, while he was exil'd thence; methinks this may claim much indulgence to them, in repara∣tion of such severities to me.
This, my Lord, is my Plea to the common Jury of my Country; but my title to your Vote is upon a quite contrary pretence; viz. Your having had no part in any of my censures, and a very great one in all the comforts my Country has afforded me. So that this Alien comes not to sue you, but rather to enter into his fathers bond, and make you as good securitie of my resentments, as my condition ad∣mits: therefore what justice soever he finds, as a suiter for right; he is certain to meet favour and welcom as a hostage or pledge for that debt of re∣spect and affection, which is acknowledg'd to you, before so many witnesses, By
Nanteul, August 5. 1653.

