


MAy it please your Honors, to pardon my boldnesse in presenting these lines unto your Honorable Assem∣bly: Because the love to our Lord and Master Jesus Christ, and to his poor Members hath set it upon my spirit to make my addresse unto your Honors. For who knoweth (Ester 4. 14.) Whether ye are come to the rule of this Nation for such a time as this: even to cast out that-Judas-like spirit amongst us; Of not caring for the Poor? I durst hold my peace no longer; because I found none to plead the Cause of the Poor and Needy, against these Oppressors, set forth to the life in these Papers. I may be blamed by your Honors, I have done it so bunglingly; but shamed I ought not to be, because I have done my best in a good cause, even Christs cause and his poore's, when abler men would not meddle. True is that of Solomon, Prov. 14-20. The poor is hated e∣ven of his own neighbour (hath hardly one good man or neighbour to speak or plead for him) but the rich hath many freinds. I am perswaded Christ stands and looks

on your Honorable Assembly what you wil do for him and his poor Members; and I hope it's none of your least design, To take care of the poor, to loose the bands of wickednesse, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free. Isa. 58.6. I beseech your Honors ever to remember that divine truth, Prov 29.7. The righteous considereth the cause of the poor, but the wicked regardeth not to know it. I bow my knee to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye in every thing may shew your selves to be the freinds of the Bridegroome and Bride Chamber too, and that this Honorable Assembly may be stiled the poor mans Freind; so shall the blessing of the poor, who are ready to perish come upon you, Job. 29.12.13. And Christ wil take it kindly as done unto himself, Matth. 25.40. In as much as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. I strive to God for your Honors in my pray∣ers, that he would make you serviceable to God, his Church, the Publick, and the Poor, in your generations, and am

