


My Lord,
WIth the poor widow, I have put in my Mite into the Publike Treasury of acknowledging the Lawfulness of submitting to the present Government, in which the Eternal God hath invested Your Highness at this day. I have taken the boldness to present it to Your Highness, for these Reasons:
First, because, of all men, you are most concerned in it.

Secondly, because, of all men, it belongs most to you, to patronize and protect the weak acknowledgements of sub∣missive affectionate Obedience.
Thirdly, that you may know that God is still owning you, and working for you, not onely by his Providence, in protecting your Person against the secret Combinations of a common Enemy; but by the more immediate working of his Spirit, to the satisfying of the Consciences of many un∣satisfied servants of Christ, whether the present Govern∣ment, with its endowments, be of God or no; in which my own soul was very lately unsatisfied.
Fourthly, that under your Protection and Patronization, it may bring forth some fruit of Satisfaction to the Consci∣ences of some others (though never so few) that are yet at enmity in their spirits against the Title and Dignity of the Government.
I have presented it to publike view, for this Reason:
That the world may know, that I am neither afraid, nor asham'd, to own, acknowledge, and confess, the good hand and providence of the God of heaven and earth, in exalt∣ing your Person to that Honour and Dignity, and placing you as his (hitherto) undaunted and unwearied Servant in subordination to himself, to sit at the Helm of Govern∣ment as at this day. Where sitting to govern, it is the un∣feigned desire of my soul, for You, and those Honourable men in Counsel with You, That the Spirit of Christ may be your Guide, the Power of Christ your Life-guard, the Laws and Ordinances of Christ the Basis and Foundation of yours, the Glory of Christ your greatest Aim, the Ad∣vancement of the Gospel your greatest Glory, the Flourish∣ing of it your chiefest Joy: That you neglect no oportuni∣ty of doing good, when Christ commands it to be done, and in your power to do it: That in all your Undertakings and Counsels, you may lay your selves open to the all-see∣ing eye of God; that so you may escape that Curse, which the Prophet Isaiah pronounceth against those that seek deep

to hide their counsel from the Lord, and their works are in the dark, and they say, Who seeth us? and who knoweth us? Isai. 29.15. That your Body may possess as resolved a heart to keep touch with God, in performing Vows and Promises made to him, as there was in Jephthah, who was once a Ge∣neral, and a subordinate Protector in the hand of God, of his people Israel from the hand of the children of Ammon; who having opened his mouth unto the Lord, was so care∣ful of his promise, that he parted with the dearest thing he had in the world, his onely childe, for beside her he had neither Son nor daughter. Judg. 11.30, 31, 34, 35.
The further desire of my soul for your Highness, is, That God would give you (not onely) a spirit of discerning, to see where injustice and iniquity doth yet remain and conti∣nue amongst the people; but also a free and resolved spirit to improve such power as God hath put into your hand, for the speedy reforming and purging of it out: That your Council-chamber may be free from evil Counsels, and false-hearted dissembling Counsellors: That both your Highness and your Council may be of one heart and one minde, free from all manner of dissention and discord; because that
Concordiâ parvae res crescunt,
Discordiâ magnae dilabuntur.
That your Courtly Attendants may be men of upright and faithful hearts, fearing God, and hating Vice: That all o∣ther inferiour Officers, in their several places subject to the Power by which they act, may discharge their duties with care and conscience, void of Dissimulation and Hypocrisie; not from Fear, but Affection to the Government which they seem to own: That the Army and Navie may be at peace in themselves, free from the least Mutiny: That all unsatisfied Consciences touching the Legality of the Go∣vernment, may be satisfied: That all heart-burnings of the People against it, may be quenched, through their causless complainings in the streets, of Tyranny and Oppression.

And lastly, That the God of heaven would more and more enrich your Valiant heart with all such endowments of Grace, Wisdom, and Vertue, as becomes the minde and person of a Christian Potentate, is and shall be the conti∣nual prayer of

