


Dread Soveraign,
WHen I first penn'd the ensuing lines, it was in the later end of the month February, and the begin∣ning of March, 1659. at which time I intended the Dedication of them to Englands happy Parli∣ament, (now sitting at Westminster by your Royall Autho∣rity) and since by reason of my own remoteness from Lon∣don, accompanied with a necessity of attending my Mini∣stry) they could not come forth in print by the time I in∣tended, (viz.) at the first sitting of the Parliament; the de∣crees of heaven having been since executed for your safe re∣turn to your native Birth-right, the Crown of England: I was necessitated to retract the Dedication of them to the Parliament, and being unwilling that those things should dye in the Birth, which had gone ou their full time in the womb of my heart and hand, (the publishing of them be∣ing earnestly desir'd by many of your faithfull subjects) I did resolve to midwive them into the world; by adventu∣ring upon your Princely Clemency to prostrate them at the feet of your Royal protection, hoping they wil find that fa∣vour at Court, as to have admittance to kiss your gracious hand. I shal not trouble your Majesty with a tedious Epistle, lest the Gate should be bigger then the City. Only let me beg this liberty, to seal this my bold attempt with my prayers to the most high; that he would ever vouchsafe to bless you, in your Royal person with length of days, health, and safety in your spirit, with the comfort and councills of his own in your heart and soul with meekness, truth, and righteous∣ness:
 In your Royall relations with oneness of hearty lov and unity of Faith; in your Privy Councill, with wisedom and fidelity. In your Parliament with speciall care to your safety and honour. In your Nobles with Loyall affection. In your Magistrates, with uprightness and justice. In your Ministers with soundness of Doctrine, good Discipline, and Piety of life. And in all your Subjects from the highest to the lowest, with unfeignedness of heart rendring to their King what they owe unto him, both by the Law of God and the Laws of the Nation. Yea, whosoever of us will not o∣bey the Law of our God, and the Law of our lawfull King, Let judgement be executed upon; whether it be unto death, or unto banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or to im∣pisonment, from either of which rebellions, the Lord keep the very thoughts of him, whose heart rejoyceth at the E∣stablishment of your Kingly Throne. To which, in life, or death, I am resolv'd to be

From my study at Wechicombe near Dunster in Somerset, June 25, 1660.
