



Worthy Friends,
HE best administers words of Comfort,Ordo conso∣lationis est moe∣rendo prius lu∣clui concorda∣re emolliri de∣bet animus ut afflicto congru∣at, congruens inhaereat, inhae∣rens trahat; nec ferrum ferro conjungi∣tur, si non u∣trinqúe
ccusti∣one igns li∣quetur. Greg. Mor. who first en∣tertains a Sympathy of sorrow; there being much of Consolation in Compassion. And thereforeRom 12 15. , O quàm brevi sermunculo to∣tius religionis depinxit insig∣ne! —his ube∣ribus mater Ecclesia loctat proficientes, nutrit perfectos— haec est mammilla compassionis, illa congratulationis. Bern. Serm. de B. Magd. to weep with them that weep, is not to encrease the Stream but cut the Channel, and so not heighten, but lessen the floods of grief. What comforts then are administred you from the
Pulpit, accept them commixt with tears over the Hearse; a sympathy in affliction being the su∣rest  testimony of affection. And what affection I have for the survi∣ving Parents, to say it, may seem in∣sinuation and flattery; but what af∣fection I had for the deceased Son, not to say it, were to wrong his merit and his memory. Indeed my just esteems of both, have made me yield to your pressing importunity, for the Impressi∣on of these
Funeral Meditations; which I here Dedicate as a Memoriae sacrum, to perpetuate the honour of his vertuous hopes, and your Paren∣tal loves.
Your Parental loves; not as to those indulgentiae blandimenta, those fond blandishments of a softning indul∣gence, which degenerate the spirits and effeminate the tempers of very many (otherwise) most generous  plants; no, for though I like not a
Lucius Brutus's austere severity, of whom it is said, thatValer Max. l. 5 c 8. Exuit patrem ut consulem ageret, he put off the bow∣els of a Father, when he put on the gown of a Consull, as if a good Pa∣triote and a loving Father were in∣consistent. Though I like not this too austere severity, yet I cannot but condemn that too
Mollis illa e∣ducatio quam indulgentiam vocemus, ner∣vos omnes & meniis & cor∣poris frangit. Quintil. Ʋna janua & aditus est ad omne sce∣lus. Lips ep. 7. Cent. 1. soft indulgence, which hath laid the first ground to this Ages debauchery and dissolute∣nesse, so infamously famous for those monstrous Births of Church and State Apostacy's.
But this is the commendation of your parental love, that it was accom∣pany'd with the desire and endea∣vour of adorning your son with what was most lovely, the princi∣ples  of a
Christian, the Institutions of a Scholler, and the Accomplish∣ments of a Gentleman. Where∣fore, this sprouting Branch being cropt in the blossom of his age, it will remain, Cedro dignum, a record of Honourable fame, that you were the careful
Parents of so hopeful a son, and he the hopeful son of so careful Parents. And to stop the cur∣rent of your tears, look up to
Paradise, raise your devotion to the Moun∣taine of Sion, and there behold flou∣rishing in life, what you bewail as cropt by death, even the blos∣soming Branch planted in Heaven; who, by how much he was the bet∣ter son to you by so much he is the fitter soul for God; whose blessed communion of grace, and blisful com∣munion  of glory, is the Divine ob∣ject of his hearty prayers, whose De∣votions answer his affections, in which he is
Dear and Honoured

