



IT is not one cause alone (most renowned Fathers) which u∣seth to move those, who de∣sire by their Meditations to benefit Mankind, and to make them come forth in publique, to dedicate their Books to great Men; for some, and those the most, are incited by Covetousnesse, that they may get money by so doing, or some peice of plate of Gold, or Sil∣ver; sometimes also that they may ob∣taine their votes, and suffrages to get some place for themselves, or their friends. But some are moved thereto,
by meere and pure friendship, that so they may publickly testifie that love, and affection, which they beare them, whose names they prefixe to their Books; let the one, and the other, please themselves, according as they de∣light in the reason of the Dedication, whether it be good, or bad; for my part, I best like them, who doe it upon this ground, that they may not com∣mend themselves, or theirs, but what is for publick good.
As for me (most renowned Fathers) in my dedicating this Discourse to you I can truly affirme, that I am induced to it upon no other ground then this, that I may gaine your favour and good will to our Nation, now scattered almost all over the earth; neither thinke that I doe this, as if I were ignorant how much you have hitherto favoured our Nation; for it is made knowne to me, and to others of our Nation, by them who are so happy as neare at hand, to
observe your apprehensions, that ye doe vouchsafe to help us, not only by your prayers; yea, this hath compelled me to speak to ye publickly, and to give ye thanks for that your charitable affecti∣on towards us, and not such thankes which come only from the tongue, but as are conceived by a gratefull minde.
Give me leave therefore (most re∣nowned Fathers) to supplicate ye, that ye would still favour our good, and far∣ther love us. Truly, we men doe draw so much the nearer to Divine nature, when by how much we increase, by so much we cherish, and defend the small, and weake ones; and with how much diligence doe you performe this, most renowned Fathers? who though ye seeme to be arrived to the highest top of felicity, yet ye doe not only not de∣spise inferiour men, but ye so wish well to them, that ye seeme sensible of their calamity; ye knowing how acceptable to God ye are by so doing, who loves
to doe good to them who doe good. And truly it is from hence, that of late ye have done so great things valiantly, and by an unusuall attempt, and things much to be observed among the Nati∣ons. The whole world stands amazed at these things, and the eyes of all are turned upon ye, that they may see whither all these things do tend, which the great Governour of all things seems to bring upon the world by so great changes, so famously remarkable, of so many Nations; and so all those things which God is pleased to have fore-told by the Prophets, doe, and shall obtaine their accomplishment. All which things of necessity must be fulfilled, that so Is∣rael at last being brought back to his owne place; peace, which is promised under the Messiah, may be restored to the world; & concord, which is the only Mother of all good things. These things I handle more largely in this Treatise, which I dedicate to ye (most renowned
Fathers) ye cannot be ignorant, that it is not only not unprofitable, but very usefull for States, and States-men, to fore-see the issue (which yet is ever in Gods hand) of humane Counsels, that so they may observe, and understand from Divine truth, the events of things to come, which God hath determined by his Spirit in his holy Prophets. I know that this my labour will not be unacceptable to ye, how meane soever it be, which I trust ye will cheerfully receive, because that ye love our Nati∣on, and as part of it, the Author of this Discourse. But I entreat you be cer∣tain, that I pour out continuall prayers to God for your happinesse. Farewell, most renowned Fathers, and flourish most prosperously.

