


MOst Dear and Dread Soveraign, In most humble wise, I prostrate, and present my self with this slender en∣suing Treatise before the Foot-stool of Your Sacred Majesty; First cra∣ving pardon for this my bold and rash attempt: For although I must ingenuously here confesse, Non est meae humilitatis vestrae Celsitudini dictare, It doth not become nor beseem the meanesse and obscurity of my place and calling, to dictate or prescribe any thing to Your High∣nesse; Yet as Philip the King of Macedon, per∣mitted and appointed a little Boy to come every morning to his Chamber-door and to say these words, ó , O Philip re∣member thou art a Man: So give leave (I humbly beseech You) to Your poor Servant, and faithful Subject, thus far to be your Remem∣brancer, as to say as David doth, or rather as
God himself saith by the mouth of David, Psal. 82.6. Dixi Dii estis. I have said yee are Gods, but yee shall dye like men, and fall like one of the Princes.
Pallida mors aequo pulsar pede pauperum ta∣bernas, Regumque turres.Horace.
There's no Estate or Calling of men, so high, eminent, or puissant, but as they are called Stew∣ards, so they must give an account of their Stew∣ardship as well as others. I pray then (most Gracious Soveraign) vouchsafe to hold out the golden Scepter of your favour that I may touch the top of it; or at least have the grace and privilege,Hest. 5.2. to kisse your hand, and let Your Princely hand take this Enchiridion, as an humble Adver∣tisement and wholesome Admonition, which I here prefix and propose unto you; Non quòd de te dubitem, sed ut tibi Currenti Calcar addam cum fraeno; Nôsti deum imprimis Colendum, Colere sine fide non potes, & fides vera ubi est, nisi ex dei verbo? Hoc scrutêris Cavens de papismo ac schismate: It is the duty even of Kings to be Conversant in the Scriptures, and to meditate and delight in the Law of God: they are admonished so to do when they sit upon the Throne of their Kingdom. Thus did Hezekiah,Deut. 17.18. Thus did Josiah, and thus did King David, he made the word of God his Counsellor,Psal. 119. and in the 56 Psal. ver 10. he saith, In Gods word will I re∣joyce, In the Lords word will I Comfort me, and in another Psalm he saith, In the multitude of
the Sorrows that I had in my heart, thy Comforts O Lord have refreshed my Soul:Psal. 94.19. he means the cordial and vital Comforts that he found in Gods word; if then you can freely and thankfully ac∣knowledge with holy David, and say it out of your own particular and personal experience;Psal. 119.21. It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy Statutes. Then you may also sweetly and joyfully recount and record with your self as the same David doth;Psal. 18.35. Thou hast given me the defence of thy Salvation: thy right hand also shall hold me up, and thy loving correction shall make me great. Yet here to shun and avoid the preju∣dicate opinion of Censoriousnesse, which I ever abhorred both in my self and others, let me bor∣row that pleasing Complement, or plausible Ac∣clamation and Insinuation of the Poet,
Qui movet ut facias, quod tam facis ipse mo∣nendo; Laudat, & hortatu comprobatacta suo.
If then you do, that which is an admirable thing, or a rare and singular thing for Kings and Prin∣ces to do, viz; in Alto altum non Sapere, to be of an humble and lowly mind in a high and lofty State;
— Regis Clementia virtus,
A King is Gods Vicegerent and Lieutenant on Earth; he must therefore be merciful, as our Father in Heaven is merciful.Cominae∣us lib. 6. c. . It is the part of a Tyrant, in Imperio nil nisi Imperium cogi∣tate; to glory with Lewis the 11th. King of France, that he passed his time in making and
undoing of men,Contre faustum, lib. 12. c. 56. as if he were placed in his Throne not ut prosit, sed tantum ut praesit, as Augustine speaks; let them remember the saying of another learned man,
Magna Servitus, magna fortuna;Petrarcha
We read in History that wise men invented the game of Chesse to mitigate the Cruelnesse of Go∣vernours, in which it is insinuated, that the King hath need of his Bishops, of his Knights, yea of the meanest peasant that tilleth or toyleth in his Land. And therefore considering that He differs only from his Subjects in use, not in stuff (as Your prudent Grand-father King James of blessed memory was us'd to say:Basilicon Doron. lib. 2.) He must become a Common Father unto the people, never unad∣visedly provoking them unto just Indignation and Anger. Which that You may prevent; hear once again what Your pious and peaceable Grand-father saith; speaking like another Solomon in his Ba∣silicon doron; Enrich not Your Self by Exacti∣ons, or grievous Impositions upon Your Sub∣jects, but account the Riches of Your Sub∣jects Your greatest or Your chiefest Treasure-Nullâ aliâ re propius ad Deum accidere possu∣mus, quàm Salutem hominibus dando.Tully pro Ligar. But I need not urge this, much lesse insist upon it, for the general voice, and unanimous report of the Coun∣try is, that You are rather too merciful; Let me give a word concerning this, Facilitas multa do∣cet mala, & licentia sumus omnes deteriores; You must therefore shew Your Self to be a just
King; I hope I need not to advertise You; for so the wisest of Kings telleth You; a wise King scattereth the wicked,Pro. 20.26. and bringeth the wheel over them (i. e.) the wheel of Judgement and Vengeance for their evil deeds; for it seems it was a kind of punishment, which was then used to be inflicted on Malefactors; for even as Solomons stately Throne of Ivory, was supported with two Lyons,2 Chro. 9. on each side one: So the Throne of every good and pious Prince, is supported and stayed up with these two Magnanimous and Lyonlike Vir∣tues, Justice, and Mercy. Therefore God made Thee King (said the Queen of Sheba to King Solomon) to do justice and judgement;1 Kin. 10. and therefore Augustine said well to this purpose, Ablatâ Justitiâ, quid sunt Regna nisi magna Latrocinia? And this Your discreet and mature Wisdom hath also done (for in this respect I may say to you as the Widdow of Tekoah did to King David,2 Sam. 14. my Lord the King is even as an Angel of God to discern right from wrong) This You have done, by leaving it to those sage, and grave, and honourable Heroes of this Nation, to make inquisition for blood, and to bring Just and Con∣dign punishment upon the heads of those Inso∣lent and Rebellious Traytors, who spild the In∣nocent Blood of Your dear Father, and put Him to death wrongfully: Even as David left a Charge with his Son Solomon concerning Joab and . Do Thou according to Thy Wisdome,1 King. 2. & let not their hoary head go down to the grave
in peace; for why? blood requires blood; That great Judge of Heaven and Earth,Gen. 9.6. made it a Statute-Law, which was never yet repealed.
— Neque enim Lex Justior ulla est,
Quam necis Artifices arte perire suâ;
If You do but serionsly consider (as I confidently presume, and both hope and trust that You do) how graciously the Lord hath dealt with You, ta∣king a care of You, even ab Incunabilis & à primâ lanugine, causing a Star to usher and at∣tend Your Birth, and to shine all the day long, on the day of Your Nativity (as a certain Chrono∣loger related it in his Anniversary Ephemeris, if I do not mistake, or forget my self, it was so;) and this I hope did not presage or prognosticate a∣ny ill Omen at all to Your Sacred Majesty.
If You do often ruminate and revolve, or call to mind the very great Mercyes, the manifold Gracious deliverances, and miraculous preserva∣tions, wherewith the Lord hath blessed You, and compassed You about with his loving kindnesse, as it were with a shield, preserving and protecting You both in Bello & in Exilo, in Persecutione, & in proscriptione tuâ; Defending You in the fight at Worcester, from the peril of the Sword, yea both from the Lyon and the Bear,1 Sam. 17. as David was delivered; from the hands of that violent Man, and from the snare of the Hunter, from the traps and plot of that perfidious Traytor, who intended to have betrayed You; But the Lord be∣ing gracious unto You, You escaped out of their
hands, as Lot out of the fire of Sodom, or as Da∣vid did out of the hands of the Philistines: like∣wise in the pursute, when those blood-thirsty men, the men of Belial followed hard after You, even as one followeth after a Partridge upon the moun∣tains, the Lord stretched forth his holy hand over You, he kept You as the apple of his eye; As an Eagle stireth up her nest, fluttereth over her birds,Deut. 32.11, 12. stretcheth out her wings, and beareth them on her wings; So the Lord alone led You, and guarded You, and guided You, and put it into Tour royal heart to fly to an hollow tree, to make it Your Castle, or rather Your Cave, to hide and shroud Your self in, till the storm of their wrath, and indignation was overpast; and this was no∣thing else but Digitus Dei, et Virgula Divina; nothing else but the immediate hand of God, to deliver You. Afterwards when a convenient means and time for Your safe convoy, and de∣parting hence out of the Land, by his providential disposition, and dispensation, was thought upon, contrived and concluded through the help of Your Hand-maid, that vertuous and fortunate Gentle∣woman, though You were then in the condition of a poor exile,Esay 63.9. and banished man; yet then the Lord made bare his holy arm again, and sent the Angel of his presence before You,Sicut e∣unt di∣unt ai∣nt, &c. to conduct You safe away, and transport You beyond Sea; and when You could not stay in France, by reason of the Implacable fiercenesse, and threat∣ning of Your deadly and damnable Persecutors;
You were (it seems) forc'd to go into Spain, where You kept Your heart perfect and entire to our sincere Protestant Religion, and Your Con∣science pure and untainted with any popish leaven, notwithstanding the many strong perswasions, and the many great proffers and promises of those rich, magnificent Spanish promotions, and ad∣vancements; belike You were of wise Cassandra's mind; Timeo Danaos vel dona ferentes.Virgil aenead. 10. For behold Your heart was still firm, and entire, and upright with Your God: constant and unmovable in that antient Catholick faith, and sincere Pro∣testant Religion, wherein You were born and bap∣tized; much like the heart of Reverend and Re∣nowned Cranmer.
Ecce Jnvicta Fides cor inviolabile Servat,
Nec mediis flammis corda perire sinit.
Cranmer, amid the fiery flames,
Thy heart unscorcht was found:
For why? behold undaunted Faith
Preserv'd it safe and sound.
Blessed be God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, for Your undaunted Constancy, and Perse∣verance in the faith; And both my heart, and the hearts of all Your true, loving, and loyal Sub∣jects, have great and just cause to rejoyce in that behalf, and to bless God unfeignedly for You; As also we are likewise even all of us bound to bless, and praise, and magnifie his holy name, for Your happy return unto Your Crown, viz. That it hath pleased Almighty God, of his singular goodness,
and especial providence, to reduce, and restore Your sacred Majesty, to be now Inaugurated, and Invested with the Crown, and Scepter of Your an∣tient famous Progenitors, and Predecessors; And this hath been effected, and brought to pass, by the Sweet, Celestial, and Sanctified policy, of an an∣tient, eminent, and renowned Worthie of our Na∣tion, without the effusion of blood, or without the help of a strong and potent Army (happy shall that man be call'd, that our deliverance hath wrought) O sing unto the Lord a new song;Psal. 137.8. for he hath done marvellous things, with his own right hand, and with his holy arm hath he got∣ten himself the victory; The Lord hath declared his salvation; His righteousness hath he openly shewed in the sight of the Heathen;Psal. 98.1, 2, 3, 4. He hath re∣membred his mercy, and his truth, towards his poor distressed, and distracted Church of Eng∣land; And all the ends of the World have seen the salvation of our God. Account I beseech You my poor service, and this small present, which I tender unto Your Majesty,1 Sam. 17.27. even as Old Bar∣zillai did his Barley, and his Beans, and his parched Corn to King David, when he was at Mahanaim. Pliny writes, that the people did offer to their Gods Milk, when they had no Frankincense; and Salt, that had no Milk, and were well accepted.Namque erit ille mihi Sem∣per Deus. Great men give great gifts; Sinetas a handful of Water; the Scho∣lar, Books; I, such as I have. The Lord hear You in the day of trouble: The Name of the
mighty God of Jacob defend You; send you help from his Sanctuary, and strengthen You out of Sion: make Your dayes long upon the Earth, and Eternal in the Heavens, grant You according to Your heart, and fullfil all Your mind.

Ex musaeo meo Primo Die Martij, 1660.
