



My Dear and ever Honoured Lords,
THough you love not applause, nor I can give titles to men, lest in so doing, my Maker should cut me off; Yet must I perform my duty to God and to you, in bearing witness to the truth as it is in Je∣sus, and effectually and exemplarily dwels in you. Your piety, faithfulness, zeal towards God, tenderness to the Saints, in whom is aliquid Christi, your ardent love to the faithful Ministers of Christ, and to this our dear Brother departed, with his dearly beloved consort and children, challengeth no less at my hands; who was my Partner and Fellow-helper in

the work of the Ministry, an earthen Angel, and an heavenly Mortal (that I may so speak;) of whom I may say, (as the Apostle of that Brother) his praise is in the Gospel throughout all the Churches: I have sel∣dom known of his years a head better hearted, or heart better headed: The enlargement of whose heart was the enlargement of his abilities: He was a burn∣ing and bright shining star in the Firmament of our Church: holy for Doctrine and Piety, but shining with a borrowed light from the Sun of Righteousness, (which he was very sensible of.) For he did not offer to God that which cost him nought, but gave up him∣self wholly to the Ministry of the Word and Prayer, and the Lord was with him: Who did not only (as he said) lay it on but with a warm hand rub it in. I have sometimes thought (when I have come into the Con∣gregation) that the Church-meeting-place was filled with the smoke of Gods presence; such a power there was that went along with the word: for he first did, then taught, and taught and did again. Acts 1. Mat. 5. living over in the week time, that which he preached to others on the Lords day; (as the Priest did of the Shew-bread which was set upon the Table, which none but themselves might feed upon) his life being a Com∣mentary Non loqunur maga sed vi∣vimus. upon his Text: and doubtless the Word is as efficacious to a gracious dispenser, as to any of his hearers. This is that which made his Ministry so effi∣cacious, Mat. 21. John wrought no Miracles, but (acting in a way of Righteousness) he was more pre∣valent than if he had wrought Miracles; for to obey is more than to work a Miracle, (as Luther said:) Hence it was that in him all Miracles (almost) met in one; the blind see, the deaf hear, the dumb speak, the

lame walk, the leapers are cured, and the poor are evan∣gelized, , and turned into the mould of the Gospel, not only the word delivered up to them, but they delivered into the form of the word. His style did (piscatoriam simplicitatem olere) savoured of Fisher-like simplicity, (as Chemnitius said) he did not sore aloft in high expressions, shooting over his hearers, but did condescend to the capacities of the meanest, which is an excellence in any: A garish attire doth not become a chast matron, neither doth the affectation of humane eloquence become a grave sober Minister of Jesus Christ; as much affection as you will, but no affecta∣tion, for nothing affected affects, nihil affectationum afficit; aeger non querit medicum eloquentem sed sanan∣tem.
We say of a Diamond, quicquid absconditur perditur, whatsoever is hid of it is lost; those Rethorical flou∣rishes are like the painted glass in the windows, that make a fair shew, but hinder the light: therefore (saith the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.) because the Gospel is glorious, we use plainness of speech.
But that which was the glory of all in this our dear Brother, was this (I may boldly say) his labours were crowned with the conversion of many souls; which is an evident sign of the truth of the Ministry by which they were converted: He was sweetest (as Christ) towards his latter end, for he was not as a staff behind the door, but being planted in the House of God, and enjoying Communion with many precious Saints, he grew fast: whereas many with Thomas, Joh, 20. 24. ab∣senting themselves, have fallen short of that intimate Fellowship and Communion with Christ they might have attained to. But he was not like Joshuah's Sun that

stood still, nor Hezekiahs Sun that went back; but like Solomons Sun, shining more and more to the perfect day; neither did he set in a cloud (as many that have ecclip∣sed Gods glory, and therefore he ecclipseth theirs) but sets gloriously in this world, and riseth (I am perswad∣ed) more gloriously in another; therefore well may I cry out, (bitterly lamenting his death) as that Pro∣phet did, My father, my father, the chariots of Israel, and the horsemen thereof; or as David concerning his son Absalom, O my son Absalom, my son! my son Absa∣lom! would God I had dyed for thee! O Absalom, my son, my son! for I may truly say, it hath been no small trouble to me, that the Lord should take away this emi∣nent instrument in the prime of his daies, and leave me behind (being a dry barren tree, and declining fast) as the dresser of his Vineyard: but as in the means of grace, God grants them to some that will not make use of them, but denies them to others that would, (for his waies are unsearchable) even so he takes away some more hopeful instruments, and leaves behind such as are less hopeful.—To prevent that , incident to many, that we might live above all, having our hand upon the stern of duty, and our eye on the Star Christ.
My Lords, I present to your serious view, this piece of this our dear Brother, transcribed by his beloved Consort, which (though it hold forth the state of the Virgin-Church to come in the latter daies) yet is it very suitable to the present times, in which you may see, like Peters Cock, he claps his wings, and calls upon 2 Tim. 2. 26. others to waken out of their drunken sleep. When the Cocks begin to crow, the day begins to dawn, when the Cocks crow young and old, we say its clear day:

but when they hasten to their roost (with the sweet chirping birds, Cant. 2.) night draws on: Now the Lord look back upon us as he did upon Peter: And give us to remember our Rulers, even such as have been (as  est substantivum . appears by the words following) our Rulers; and have taught us the Word of the Lord again and again, con∣sidering the end of their conversation, &c. for assured∣ly, the living speeches of dying Prophets live for ever, Zach. 1. Their word took hold, that is, it did pursue, overtake and seize upon that generation. And so will the word of this our dear Brother fasten upon many a soul (if not to his salvation) certainly to his eternal destruction, who if he were alive again, would he not speak as now (though dead) in this present discourse he speaketh? Oh! rest not satisfied with the Lamp of profession, but get the oyl of saving grace into the vessels of your hearts, and go forth to meet the Bride-groom, that when he cometh, whether at midnight, cock-crowing, or at the dawning of the day, you may not be found sleeping, but may enter in with him. Its said of Arrius, that as his errour, with the sad effects thereof, spread after his death, so his torments were in∣creased in hell; for the Lord will render to every man not only according to his doings, but according to the fruit of his doings: If so (as I believe it is a truth) O then! would we add to this our Brothers Crown, and make it more massie, and fuller of those choice pearls another day, let us remember, and forget not what by him was done and taught; but say, (as she said) Lord lay up this for me, that whenever I have occasion to make use of it, (as when not) I may so remember it, as that I may practise, and be blessed in my deed.

But I detain your Lordships too long, I shall con∣clude with my hearty prayers to the Lord, that as he hath made you eminently instrumental, so he would take pleasure in you both, to make you more and more instrumental in the hand of Christ, (which next to our salvation, is one of the greatest priviledges in this life) and lengthen out your daies, that you may return slowly to heaven; which is the humble desire of,
My Lords, 
