


IT being my hap, not long since, to find this Trea∣tise of Yours, even be∣fore the printing and publishing thereof, in a Friend's House; And being, upon Inquiry, informed touching the Quality of the Authour, I wondred what man it was, that had so much Chri∣stian Courage in him, as to adventure to vindicate this Christian Duty of cele∣brating the Nativity of our Lord and Saviour Christ Jesus; contemning the clamorous Censures, and the vain Ob∣jections,
and Argumenta mutilata of the weak multitude of Pretenders to Religion and Learning. Therefore be∣ing much affected with your Christian valour, in this kind, and desirous to commend the same to posterity; It is not in my power to do it more effectu∣ally, than by adding this Epistle to your Treatise, which (if I were eloquent) I should commend in the Superlative de∣gree. For, although the valiant and learned Champions, or rather railing Antagonists, of our times, evemunt quic∣quid in buccam venit, and spit out their venome against it, and strive, tanquam pro aris & focis, to maintain that it is a meer vanity to observe the blessed time of Christ's Birth-day: Yet, if they will give me leave to speak, I shall tell them, That the most learned Arguments that their subtle brains can invent or produce, are not sufficient to prove it a Sin, to ce∣lebrate this time; and besides, I will tell them, it is an Herculean labour, and as hard a task as to fetch Cerberus out of Hell. And although they give out the worst words they can rake out of the sink of their rotten brains, against it; yet I will tell them, It is easier for them to
drive a Spunge into a Milstone, than to disswade many godly People from the due Observation of it.
Reader, Whoever thou art, be per∣swaded in thy self, That the bonouring of this time is just, honest, commenda∣ble, good, and lawful. And I prove it thus, with a threefold Argument (and you know that a Cord which is three∣fold, or thrice doubled, is not easily broken): My Argument is this,
That which God, and the Church of God, and the ancient Fathers have com∣manded to be kept and celebrated, ought to be kept and celebrated; and the use of it, is good, pious, lawful, and com∣mendable:
But God, and the Church of God, and the Fathers, have commanded this day to be kept and celebrated. Ergo. &c.
I prove that God hath commanded it out of Heb. 1.6. . And again, when he bring∣eth the first-begotten into the World, he saith, And let all the Angels of God worship Him, Psal. 77.7.  Incurvate vos ei
omnes Divi. Luke Chap. 2. ver. 10.11.

. And the Angel said unto them, Fear not, &c.
That the Church of God, and the Fa∣thers, commanded it to be celebrated, is exactly proved in the Answers of some of the 14 Arguments, and I need not re∣cite them here: And I do believe that there is no man in this Nation, who hath lived forty or fifty years, but hath known Christmas — day strictly observed and kept.
But alas! We can expect no good∣ness, if we cast but our eyes upon the age wherein we live. It is most admirably deciphered by the Poet,
—De duro est Ultima ferro;
Protinus irrupit venae pejoris in aevum
Omne nefas: Fugêre Pudor, Verum{que}, Fides{que},
In quorum subiêre locum frandes{que}, do∣li{que},
Insidiae{que}, & vis, & amor sceleratus ha∣bendi.

At last the Iron-Age comes blustring in,
I'ch' latter times, and fills the World with Sin;
All Shame, and Truth, and Faithfulnesse are gone:
Fraud and Deceipt, Lords paramount, alone,
Do rule: By snares and violence men get
Estates, and all is Fish that comes to Net.
Which how truly it is verified, every body may see, if not as blind as Moles; and may feel, if not senslesse. I shall now speak a word or two to some which raile at, and preach down, the Solemni∣ty of this Time: & desire them to spend the time which they spend in burying Antiquity and lawful Customs, in the Translating of many things which are not as yet translated, and not to mono∣polize Knowledge. I will name some places which are not as yet translated, viz. Psal. 56. To the Chief Musi∣tian upon  Why could not they have translated it Super Columbam mutam remotis, The dumb Dove in a far Country. And I
am perswaded, that they durst not tran∣slate one Word, when they looked on their own Coats, Zeph. 1.4. I will cut off the names of the CHEMARIMS with the Priests; meeting with the Word, now and then, in Hosea, they translated it Priests; but here it being joyned with the word PRIEST, my Blades plaid the honest (I should have said, the selfish) men, and never translated it at all: Tremelius and Junius give it a very honest and true Version, Nomen Atrato∣rum cum Sacerdotibus, The Names of Black-Coats with the Priests. I com∣mend this Scripture to the serious con∣siderations of our Rigid Presbyterians: and when they look upon it, let them do as the Peacock doth, when he looks on his leggs.
I desire the Reader of this Book, not to give credit to every one that speaks against Antiquity, nor to carp at that which they cannot mend: for I dare say, and will affirm, that the Authour here of hath written herein, nothing but what is true, nothing contrary to the Will of God; to whose Protection I leave him.
The Almighty bless him, & prosper his studies: For such is the desire and hopes
of him, who craves leave to subscribe himself,

