



YOU were pleased to require my ser∣vice on your late day of Fast, as you had done on the same occa∣sion, just a Twelve-moneth be∣fore: I desired to speak seaso∣nably then and now too: The Lord directed my thoughts then to a subject of peace, our distra∣ctions were great; and now to treat of Zeal, our de∣struction (we fear) draweth nigh. These two things may well stand together, Love and Zeal; and if men were wiseJames 3.18., the fruit of righteousness might be sown
in peace, and such concord effected between Brethren, wherein Religion may not suffer: I know there are two Parties that will never be accorded, the seed of the Woman, and the seed of the Serpent; there will be enmity: But is not there a wise man among us? not one that shall be able to judge between Brethren? I speak not this to1 Cor. 6.5. flatter with a generall offer; I have alwayes disliked generall invectives against Errour, and generall Proposals of PeaceQui pacem tract at non re∣petitis conditio∣nibus dissidii, is magis animos dulcedine pacis fallit quàm aequi∣tate componit.; This were to deale in names rather then things, and to seduce the Soul into an hope of that, which is farre enough from being accomplished. Neither doe I speak it to cool any mans zeal, the drift of this Sermon is to kindle it; Godliness cannot be without an holy heat: those that suffer under persecution, will contend against delusion; that's but a duty; and 'twere to be wished it were more done, and more regu∣larly: Certainly some have been too silent whiles the truths of God have been made void, &c. Naz. Orat. de moderat. in disput.; therefore we are farr from condemning any such vigorous opposition of the present Errours. I onely mention it as an expression of my desires and hopes.
For the present Discourse, the stile of it (I confess) is too turbid, and hath too much of inculcation in it, to be fit for the Press, and therefore I should have ad∣judged it to keep company with some other neglected Papers; But that in obedience to your Order, and con∣descension to the requests of some Friends, I have now made it publick, and (my employment being much) am forced to send it forth without refining: I doe not know what blessing the Lord (whose power is usually2 Cor. 12.9. perfected in weakness) may ordain by it, I desire to wait upon him, commending it to his Grace.

In many things I have freely expressed my self, and, possibly some may think, uncovered our own nakedness; the mouth of iniquity is soon opened, and 'tis hard to speak against the Sins of religious persons, without gi∣ving some advantage to religions enemies. All that I shall say to this, is, That offenders give the scandall, not the reprover: I confess, I like rouling in the dust at AphrahMicah 1.10., that Gath may not know it; but when offen∣ces are publique, 'twere an injury to religion to be silent; we cannot doe it a greater right then to declare and wit∣ness against such miscariages; and therefore when the house of Jacob offendeth, it must be told its own with aIsa. 58.1. opened to this purpose by Mr. Richard Vines in the morning. full throat; 'twill be our honour to shake off the Vipers upon a discovery, though they would still stick on: But for the enemies,Horatius. Nulláne habent vitia? immo alia haud fortasse minora: are they so innocent as to be able toJohn 8 7. cast the stone at us? shall they that have wounds,, Nazianz. de inimicis Ecclesiae, Orat. l. 13. upbraid us with skars? and they that halt downright, charge us with tripping? or the Blackmore object spots to a fair woman? Let them first pluck out their own beam, and then possibly they may understand what an injury it is, and a wicked malice to throw personall guilt in religions face; and out of a dislike of one Mor∣decai, to seek the destruction of all the Jewes, Esth. 3.6. and to charge that upon the order, which is but the just blemish of some persons sheltred under the name and pretence of it; As Nazianzen speaketh of some, :Naz. Orat. 14. That for some Bishops sake accuse Christianity it self as an evill law.
For your selves, (Right honourable) I beseech you
remember Religion flourishing will be your defence; and that it is better trust God with your protection, then to fly toAdmonendi sunt pais Au∣thores ne dum pacem nimis di∣ligant & cum omnibus quaerāt, consentiendo perversis ab Au∣thoris sui se pace disjungunt, ne dum humana foris jurgia me∣tuant, interni foederis discussi∣one feriantur, Ambros. ill Counsels, or condescensions, whereby you may gain the respects of men: The Lord grant that you may live up to such a principle; and in these Times of vio∣lence doe nothing unworthy of God, or of his Oath that is upon you: So prayeth

