



Honoured Sir,
It is not ambition but du∣ty which makes me thus bold to intitle you Iobs Patron, your Charity be∣ing so great to all who oppressed, make the armes of your ver∣tue and humanity their Sanctuary. It is your honour to be great, your happi∣nesse to be good: by the one you are
made famous, by the other you will be immortall.
The troubles of the Times are so great, and all men by them such suffe∣rers; that England had need to be a Na∣tion of
Iobs, that with patience they may run through the extremities which daily begin to coast us. And truly, if we would make Iobs example our Precept, it is to be beleeved we should endure our sufferings with more Chri∣stian-like alacrity, and have a more Saint-like deliverance our of all our troubles.
There are many materiall points in the History which are peculiarly worth our observation: For first, we find him possessor of as much riches as his heart could wish, and immediately by Sa∣tans malice robb'd of all. Oh never letprosperity make us so secure, as to think our selves immoveable; for then is dan∣ger greatest, when we suppose our selves safest: for quos perdere vult Iupi∣piter, hos dementat; an over-great securi∣ty is an infallible signe of ruine. If we stand, let us take heed lest we fall; againe, he is not only afflicted out∣wardly in body, but is tormented in∣wardly in his mind by the temptations of his Wife, and his other friends who came to visit him; wherein we may see the subtlety of that malicious ene∣my of mankind, who maketh even our dearest friends his instruments to drive us to despaire: This shal suffice of much more which might be said, for my work is an Epistle, not a Comment.
Therefore not to interpo se in your more serious affaires; if your Honourwill daine out of your innate benigni∣ty to stoope to the perusall of this Me∣taphrase at your times of leasure, and grace it with your Patronage, I shall then rest assured that all hazards are past, and that it will go current through the wits of this our too curious and censorious Age, though cloathed in a dresse so meane as it is.
However, my hopes perswade me, that your perfect maturity will wink at the faults of my immature Youth, and that you will not be so curious to mark every failing, lest my blossomes, being nipped in their spring, for ever lose their hope of ripening; In confidence wher∣of I shall hereafter lay no more claime to this Booke, but wholly resigne it in∣to your hands, and together with it my selfe, to whom it hath been a labori∣ous
recreation: but if it attaine the ho∣nour of your teste, I shall triumph in the happy successe of my presumptuous ambition; the reward so much exceed∣ing the proportion of my meane la∣bours, that I have no way sufficient to expresse my gratitude, but in imitating those birds, who having nothing else, brought their feathers to Apollo's Tem∣ple to adorne it: here are my endeavors; And in things we would, if in our po∣wer, the Will must be taken for the deed; In hopes vvhereof I assume the confidence to subscribe my selfe,
Sir,
 West.
Oct. 29. 1651.
