



MADAM,
`TIS a lovely Conjuncti∣on when Goodness and Greatness meet together: Persons of Estate and Respect in the world, have more temptations and hinderances than

others, but greater obligations to own God; the great Landlord of the world expecteth a Rent from every Country-Cottage, but a large Revenue from great Houses: Now u∣sually it falleth out so, that Qui majo∣res terras pos∣sident, mino∣res census solvnt, Pa∣risiensis. they that hold the greatest Farms pay the least Rent; never is the Lord more neg∣lected and dishonoured then in great mens Houses, in the very face of all his bounty; if Religion chance to get in there, it is soon worn out again; though vices live long in a family, and run in a blood from father to son, yet 'tis a rare case to see strictness of Re∣ligion carryed on for three or four descents; 'twas the honour of Abra∣hams house, that from Father to Son for a long while, they were Heirs of the same Promise, Heb. 11. 9, but where is there such a succession to be found in the houses of our Gentry?

The Father perchance professeth godliness (for , saith the Apo∣stle,b 1 Cor. 1. 26. not many noble, &c. there are a few, he doth not say there are none) and a carnal son cometh and turneth all out of doors, as if he were asha∣med of his Fathers God: The Cau∣ses of this mischief may be supposed to be these. 1. Plenty ill-governed disposeth to vice and sin, as a rank soil is apt to breed weeds. 2. Brave Spirits (as the world counteth them) think Coguntur esse mali ne viles habean∣tur. Salvian. strictness inglorious, and the power of Religion a base thing, that taketh off from their Grandure and Esteem: a loose owning of Christia∣nity is honourable, since the Kings of the earth have counted it one of the fairest flowers of their Crowns to be stiled the Catholick King, the most Christian King, the Defender of the Faith, &c. But a true submis∣sion

to the power of it is made a scorn, as being contrary to that li∣berty of fashions, vanity of comple∣ment, and some Gentile customes, which in a fond compliance with the humour of the age they are loth to part with; 'twere a rude zeal to de∣ny them honest civilities, but cer∣tain Customes and Modes there are inconsistent with the severity of Religion, which rather then men will part with, they will even break with God himself. 3. The Marriage of children into carnal families, where∣in they consult rather with the great∣ness of their House then the conti∣nuing of Christs interest in their line and Posterity; how careful are they that they should match in their own rank for blood & Estate! should they not be as careful for Religion also? but even good people give a suspicion

sometimes that they do not beleeve what they do profess; That this is the ready way to undo all that hath been set on foot for God, is evident by See Gen. 6. 1, 2, 3. Psal. 106. 38. Neh. 13. 25. 26. Scripture and Experience▪ in Scripture we read of Jehoram, who is said to walk in the way of the Kings of Israel, for the Daughter of Ahab was his wife, 2 King 8. 18. and in Ecclesiastical History of Valens the Emperour, who by marrying with an Arian Lady, was himself en∣snared in that wicked opinion.
All this is spoken (Madam) to quicken you to the greater care in your Relations, that you may set∣tle a standing interest for Jesus Christ so hopefully already begun in your House and Family; it will not be pleasing to you that I should pub∣lish upon the house top what God hath done for you, or enabled you

to do for him; Go on still and be faithful, there are few (that I know in the world) who have more cause to honour God then you have.
That I have inscribed this Com∣mentary to your name will not seem strange to those that know my great obligations to your Self and your worthy Husband, and your interest in that Stoke New∣ington. beloved place and people, among whom I have had so many sweet opportunities of enjoying, and (I hope) of glorifying God, and from whom I should never have re∣moved, but upon those weighty causes and considerations which did even rend me from them: and though I am now transplanted and owe very much service and respect elsewhere, yet that The Right Honorable William Earl of Bed ord. Noble Lord that gave me the Call will allow me full time and leave to pay my old

debts that afterward I may be the more in a capacity publickly to ex∣press my gratitude to himself.
If any should be so foolish as to object the unsuiteableness of Dedica∣ting a Comment on the Scripture to one of your Sex (as it seemeth some did to Hieron. Epist. 140. Jerom) I shall not plead, that two of the Books of Scripture are named from Women, Ruth and Esther, that an Epistle which maketh up a part of the Canon in inscribed to an Elect Lady, that if this be a fault Hieron, to Celantia Asella, &c. others have faulted in like kinde before me, but onely that this is a practicall Commentary, and surely in matters of practise (which is every Christians Common interest) your Sex hath a full share: though your course of life be more private and confined, yet you have your service; the Scriptures speak of the womans

gaining upon the husband, 1 Pet. 3. 1. seasoning the children, Pro. 31. 1. 2 Tim. 1. 5. incourraging the servants in a way of Godliness, especially of their own Sex, 'tis said Esther 4. 16. I also and my maidens will fast like∣wise: these maidens were either Jews, and then it sheweth what servants should be taken into a nearer atten∣dance, such as savour of Religion, see, Psal. 101. 6. or else which is more probable, such as she had in∣structed in the true Religion, for these maidens were appointed her by the Eunuch, and were before in∣structed in Court-fashions, Esther 2. 9. but that did not satisfie, she taketh time to instruct them in the know∣ledge of the true God, and it seemeth in her apartment had many opper∣tunities of religious commerce with

them in the Worship of God. Madam, how far you practise these duties, it is not necessary that I should tell the world, persevere with cheerfulness, and in due time you shall reap if you faint not: the good Lord shed abroad the Comforts and Graces of his Spirit more abun∣dantly into your heart, which is the unfeigned desire of him, who is
Madam,

