



LUke-warme Laodicea by some hath beene made Englands Embleme, and sutably enough, not so much to the cold climate, and this coole evening of the world we live in, as to the tepid spring of our reformation at first, especially to the decaying Autumne, which of late yeares wee were come to. But as cold oft breeds an inflammation, so this hath inkindled Gods wrath, and it these sad combustions, which we are already well-nigh consumed with: what remaines now therefore but that fire should take out fire, the kindly warmth of holy zeale, the wo∣full heate of this devouring fire, that it may not come to everlasting burnings? Great is the honour that God in this kind hath con∣ferred upon you, and great the blessings which hee hath to this whole land conveyed by you: Your Engines not more admirable to quench fire in your Citie, then your care, cost, and blood freely usefull to the extinguishing of the generall scare-fire of this whole kingdome: your zeale herein hath saved many, provoked more, hath under God beene as a wall of fire about us, and will bee for ever a more sparkling Diamond in your Crowne, then those stones Ezek 24. 14: of fire in the King of Tyres Diadem. The Ministers Lungs some make the Prophets Bellowes to blow up a dying fire, I de∣sired Jer 6. 29. that mine in preaching this Sermon might helpe to blow up yours to a yet brighter flame; and if this further publishing of it (at your request) may any whit serve to keep still alive this holy fire on the Altar of your hearts, whilst Incendiaries set on fire from hell, are every where shooting fiery bullets to set all into a further combustion, I am but subservient to my great Master in his pre∣sent

work, who is now purging the blood of our Jerusalem out of the midst of it, by the spirit of judgement and burning; Fervet opus, and then I know you will not coole. Isa 4 4.
Its reformation, worke, and the examples of Phinehas, Elias, John Baptist, Luther, Knox, and those other great reformers tell us it requires zeale. Baruch was a great repairer of Jeru∣salems walls, but it is said of him, that flagrante animo in∣stauravit, Nehem 3 20.  hee repaired fast, but it was when hee was hot upon it.
It is Gods worke, and they must be fervent in spirit that would serve the Lord, who had rather wee should let his worke alone, Rom. 12. 11. then see us freeze at it, it is his zeale that must now doe all for us, and therefore hee expects that our zeale should doe what Hab. 97. 37. 32 wee can for him.
It is Christs worke and cause, who is willing to redeeme us, but that wee might bee a people zealous of good workes; hee Tit. 2. 14. did not sweat that wee should freeze, nor shed his blood out of his owne veines, that it might congeale in ours.
It is finally a great worke, and the oppositions against it are greater, but as they said to Joshua, Onely be couragious, so I to Josh. 1. 7. you, Onely bee zealous, and then bee not discouraged; Hannibal by fire made his way over the Alpes, and you by zeale may make yours over greatest mountaines of opposition, which without run∣ning up with full strength and speed will not bee gotten up to; Palmes are the Embleme of victory, but they love to grow in a hot soyle; be warme, and promise your selves the Palme; nay God promiseth it, and that not onely to Smyrna (whose name smells sweet of warme incense) that if shee will be faithfull to the death, Revel. 2. 10. he will give her a Crowne of life; but even to our cooler Laodicea, that her, whom hee was ready to spew out of his mouth whilst she was lukewarme, hee will be ready to come into and sup with, Revel. 3. 16. with 19. 20. when she shall once be zealous and repent: which is the humble and hearty prayer of your

