


THat which was preached by your command is now
published, when the great voice saith Come up
hither, tis an evill modesty to hide among the
stuff. In these busie times they are happy to whom
God hath vouchsafed the shelter os an obscure privacy; yet
upon a call we should not consult with our own ease & quiet.
The times are violent and blasting, & this poor endeavour
is likely to undergoe several misconstructions. But (I thank
God) I am learning to passe through2 Cor. 6. 8 good report and evil
report, and to disvalue censure, when it seizeth upon me in
the way of duty, I have dealt freely and impartially against
the miscarriages of both parties, & happily my liberty may
displease some, others may look upon the things offered here
as too low and trivial, & not weighty enough to reach the
end of the design; let them remember, the intent of these pro∣posalls
is only to ingage to a further consultation about the
matter, the entire discourse were fitter for a Treatise then a
Sermon; and yet something is offered, which by the blessing
of God may be serviceable to reduce men from their violen∣ces
& extremities to some better temper and moderation.
Some possibly may dislike the whole designe, spirits now are
very keen and exasperated, men think 'twill be a cooling of
their zeal if we should a little take off their edge and sharp∣ness;
fire wil not be quenched without hissing. To these I shall
only profes, that if I know mine heart, I abhor all such mode∣ration
& compliances as wil not stand with christian zeal,
and may disadvantage truth and religion, what ever become

of my own party I would be faithfull and true to that inte∣rest.
I know that as 'tis hard to be moderate without dan∣ger,
so also without sin, men of middle interests do alwayes
displeasemen, and they should be carefull they do not dis∣please
God, there are many counterfeits of Christian mo∣deration,
a cold or at best a tepid indifferency; lukewarm
Christians may easily middle it; Carnally-wise neutrality,
it's no wonder to see men that observe the times, neither
hot nor cold.James 1. 8 A doubtfull uncertainty,  are 
double-minded men are unstable, and their compliance is
promiscuously dispensed: some possibly may have so much of
child and selfe in them, as to mind Church-peace only as a
taking theam, & speak for it rather from their brain then
their heart;Dan. 11. 23. others may (like him in Daniel) deale deceit∣fully,
and press a league that they may become strong with
a small people, mind moderation for their own advantage,
some out of a desire of their carnall ease and quiet, may be
against stirs. I fore-saw these rocks, desired grace to avoide
them, therefore I hope nothing will be found here to occasion
any such prejudice & suspition against this endeavour: how∣ever
it speedeth abroad you were pleased to honour it with
acceptance, and to do something upon it, which I hope you
will revive againe, when it shall comport with the times. I
shall desire God to guide you in that and other your great af∣faires;
the Wonderfull Counsellour be with you in all your
streights,Esay 9. 6. make you understanding men of the season, care∣full
to apply apt remedies to the distempers of it.1 Chron. 12. 32.

