



THE Lord that now makes it his great work to build up Zion, and settle his Arke there, in its place, hath made it your great honour, that hee hath taken you into a partnership in so bles∣sed a work; Hee make it your happinesse,

that your Faithfull indevours being crown∣ed with a blessed successe, both the present and after Ages may deservedly call you the Repairers of the breach, and restorers Esa. 58. 12. of paths to dwell in. It is pity such buil∣ders should want either fair weather, or a sure Scaffold to build on; but you will not be discouraged, whilest you think how in great repaires, all use to lie on heaps, and remem∣ber, what the ablest of Gods Master-build∣ers in this kind have met with, it is enough that Jerusalems Wall may be built in trou∣bleous times. God can lay the beams of Dan. 9. 25. Psal. 104 3. Luk. 17. 6. his Chambers in the water, and Faith can plant Sycamines in the Sea; it was a con∣fused Chaos, without form and void, full of darknesse, which this goodly Fabrick of Heaven and Earth was at first made out of, and there were Evenings as well as Morn∣ings all along in the Work, however it went on, each day adding distinction and beauty, and the last, perfection, so that God beheld

all and saw it to bee very good. It is the same creating God, that must order our pre∣sent confusions, and raise up our ruines, in which your humble and faithfull Prayers, will be more usefull then your ablest Coun∣sels. Moses, Elias, our Saviour, the great builders and repairers of the Church, are every one of them recorded to have fasted forty daies and nights, when they were upon that Worke, it much commends Prayer and Fasting to all who are at any time ingaged in a like service; that was your businesse, when this Sermon was Preached, which, if either in the delivery it did any whit help your Spirits then in prayer, or in the pub∣lishing, it may now or hereafter, ingage you, when you most diligently look to your Work, more earnestly to look up to God in it, it will bee the joy, as it is the prayer of

