



I Have not without good cause in∣scribed this Commentary unto you. First, those Sermons were Preach'd amongst you: Secondly, some of you have heretofore, often importuned the publication of this, and some others of my Labours: Thirdly you were my First fruits, and therefore the First Commencement of my Labours in this kind doth properly belong to you. As then it is justly Dedicated unto you, so I desire it may have your favourable acceptance, and passe under the Convoy of your worthy names. I have by me an Exposition of three other of the the Small Prophets, viz. Habakuk, Zephanie,
and Haggai, which together with this, are Licen∣sed, and intended for the Presse; but the charge of Printing being great; and the number of Buyers of Bookes in these times (if we may be∣leeve the Stationers) very small; I thought fit to send forth this as Joshua did the Spies, to see, what encouragement the rest may happily finde to follow after it. I am of Saint Austins minde, who accounted nothing his owne, but what he did communicate, and professed himselfe to be of that number, qui scribunt proficiendo, & scribendo proficiunt, that write what they have learn't, and learne more by writing: and if the graine be good, it is fitter for the Mar∣ket then for the Garner: What entertainment this will finde there, I know not; for mine owne part, I have taken the Councell of the Wise, neither to praise, nor dispraise my owne doings; the one he saith is vanity, the other folly; others will be rea∣dy enough to save me that paines, to whose uncer∣taine censure I submit my selfe to stand or fall before them.
Yet thus much I will make bold to say for my selfe, that I have done little or nothing herein without consulting the best Authors both Ancient and Moderne, to which I have added that light, which God by his Spirit revealeth in my under∣standing,
to discerne what his will is, and to sug∣gest what I shall French in his Church; as the Bee gathereth Hny, and storeth her Hive out of severall sorts of Flowers for the Common-good: so have I out of these Collected and Ga∣thered sundry Honey-Combes of truth, for the use and benefit of the Publick.
All my desire is, to doe all the good I can, and to that end my Tonge being suspended for some time, I have taken this opportunity to sup∣ply the defect thereof by my Pen. I am loth to lose our Crowne of rejoycing in the day of the Lord.
Animae servatae, the saving of Soules will pro∣cure us a better Garland at the coming of Christ, then Cives servati, the saving of Citizens did the Ancient Romanes. That is the onely marke we aime at, and (if we be light and not smoake in the Church of Christ) the onely Subject and Matter of all our Preaching and Writing; And the saving of your Soules a part of that bounden duty and debt, which by the just bond of thank∣fulnesse I owe unto you, especially; Testis est mihi Deus quomodo cupiam vos omnes in vis∣ceribus Jesu Christi, God is my witnesse how much I have desired the good of you all in the bowels of Jesus Christ: and if I have not been
able to doe for you what I would, yet that I have desired and endeavoured it what I could, may de∣serve acceptance, or at the least will satisfie my owne Conscience. In a word, to see the welfare and happinesse of you and yours, how much will it re∣vive his heart? who professeth himselfe

