



Right Honorable,
THis Sermon published by your Order, holds out an instance of what St. Paul preached 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28. God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to con∣found the wise; the weake things of the world to confound the things which are mighty; and base things of the world, and things which are despised hath God chosen; yea, and things which are not, to bring to nought things that are.1 Cor. 1. 27, 28. What Creature so simple, weake, or base as a Worme, a crea∣ture which no man values, loves, or feares? yet here's a worme beats great Mountaines to dust, and makes the hills as chaffe. What so shiftlesse and unable to de∣fend it selfe, or offend an Enemy, as a Babe or Suck∣ling? yet behold here are Babes and Sucklings quelling and destroying the strongest enemies, even the Enemy and Avenger. Your eares have not onely heard these things preached, but your eyes do see them fulfilled in this our day: O that these things might perswade your hearts of these Two things; 1 That

it is better, more excellent and honourable to be one of Christs Babes, one of his weake, simple, and despised ones, then to bee one of the Zanzummims, the Nim∣rods, or men of renowne of the world. 2 That the greatest support and strength to Families, Cities, or Kingdomes, proceeds out of the mouth of these Babes, that their hearts and tongues can doe more then an host of Men. The first would make you with Theo∣dosius, rejoyce more in being the meanest Christian, then in being the greatest earthly Potentate. The latter would provoke you both to plant the Kingdome with faithful Ministers, who are Fathers to beget these Babes unto Christ; and to encourage and cherish the godly party of this Kingdom, who with Mordecai will seek the wealth of the Kingdom, and as so many shields under God, defend this Nation against all its enemies, These Innocents will deliver the Iland, and it shal be delivered by the pureness of their hands;Job 22. 30. Yea it would provoke you to get such about you, and with David,Psal. 101. 6. make your eyes set upon the faithfull of the Land, that they may dwel with you, and serve you, and conclude that you and your Family shall be blessed in them. My Lords, I beseech you let this bee your choice, it is the earnest prayer of

