



THE Lord hath cast us into times, in which the foure Windes Dan 7. 2. strive upon the great Sea; a great part of the World hath little leasure for any thing, but storm∣ing of Townes and strong holds, and taking in of Kingdomes and Countryes; in our Land of Peace, we also of late have cryed out of VVar and Violence; and although those Hab. 1. 2. winds have (through Gods goodnesse) in a great

measure ceased blustring, yet the Sea hath not left rowling; Animosities yet remaine too great, Paroxysmes very sharpe, and pursuits of worldly interests, extreame eager: here like Jehu, wee drive 2 Kings 9. 20 furiously, magno conatu nugas, we throw feathers with the whole strength of our arme: vaine men! that lean too hard on a weak reed; unwise builders! who lay too great a weight upon a slight foundation; make such trifles our Master-peeces, that when we come to review our work, wee must be inforced to say, Materiamsuperavit opus, that wee have overdone it, laboured too hard for that which satisfieth not, and caused our eyes to fly upon that which is not, and therefore that wee had been more wise, if wee had been Isa 55. 2. Prov 23. 5. lesse earnest, and more happy, if wee had not effusissimis habenis, let out the strength of our de∣sires and endeavours after those things, which prove vanity and bitternesse in the latter end. Odit Deus nimis vehementes impetus, odere cives, gratior est moderatio. Because Morall vertue is circa res medias, therefore the Philo∣sopher rightly placed it in a Mediocrity: sure I am, the Grace of Christ perswades to a modera∣tion, Phil. 4. 5. Psal. 131. 2. a weanednesse, a remissnesse in suth things as these, in which wee have not so much need of the spur as of the Bridle. But if the metled

horse bee so upon his speed, that hee cannot be held in, it would bee a peece of our best skill to guide him in a safe way, and to turn the vio∣lent stream that cannot bee stopt, into a right chan∣nell; This was the design of my weake endea∣vours in this short Sermon, to stay the man that runnes so violently down the hill earth-ward and hell-ward, and (if it might be,) to turn his face and heart, that if he cannot with so much speed, yet with more contention and earnestnesse, he may get u pthe hill heaven-ward. In which endeavor omne valde tuum, al thy might is too weak, al speed tooslow, and Deut 6. 5. greatest earnestnesse too faint. Against sin, all that carefulnesse, indignation, fear, vehementest de∣sire, 2 Cor. 7. 11. and hottest zeal, yea and revenge that the A∣postle speaks of, are not over much, but onely malo nodo malus cuneus, a sharper wedge for a knotty peece, which will require our best strength to drive it in so as to pierce an hard heart. For Gods truth, an earnest contending is not too impetuous. For the Iude 3. Church of God, & the rearing up of Ierusalems wals, a Satagentia is not enough; a Nehemiahs intense Nehem 4. 21, 22, 23. Luke 13 24. 2 Pet. 1. 5. 10, 10. earnestnes is deservedly imitable. For Heaven, if by striving to enter in at the strait gate, & by giving al diligence, at last we come to have an abundant entrance, our labour will not exceed our reward. In this work of the Lord, if you abound, your labour

wil not be in vain in the Lord: and may my poore paines any whit herein quicken your endeavours, 1 Cor 15. 58. to get to heaven your selves, and by your helpe to have others goe along with you; to enter your selves into that Kingdome, and by your authority with a sweet violence to compell others to come in, as Luke 14 23 it is the prayer, so it will be the rejoycing of

