



THis worke was too high for me, but as its now done by so weake an hand, is too low, for so many judicious eyes with any favourable respect to look down to: But  own Children, though lesse beautifull, we can behold with ve; and even stoope to take them by the hand, that wee may hold and lead them, that cannot goe or stand by themselves: ch a weakling is this, that is now before you, the defects d weaknesses whereof, I acknowledge are mine, but the rth is Gods, and yours; to him I humbly present it, for  blessing; and to you, for your acceptance and helpe, that may better goe abroad; whilst all shall know, that it is rs more then mine, and therefore to bee disposed of rather

by you, then by my selfe. By your Command, (for so I in∣terpret all your requests to me) it was Preached, and is now Published; and this with the more boldnesse, because with some confidence, that it will passe the better without others censure, because it hath already passed your scrutiny with al∣lowance and acceptance. But whatever the lot of it in that kind shall be, it will be abundant satisfaction to me, if the main end be attained by it, which by you and me was intended in it; viz: the help of our selves and all, the more to adore the infi∣nite wisdome, and power, and goodnesse of our God, who can make light to shine out of darknesse; discords intended 2 Cor. 4. 6. by enemies, to make up our more harmonious consent, and divisions of tongues that scatter the builders of Babel, Gen. 11. Acts 2. to help up the more compact building of his Church. Hee once turned the day of his peoples griefes and feares to the Ester 8. ult. 9. 1. quite contrary, so that they had then joy and gladnesse, a Feast, and a good day, insomuch that many of the peo∣ple of the Land became Jewes for the feare of the Iewes fell upon them. Now hee that hath wrought for us the like turne of things, be pleased in mercy to worke a greater turne in all our Enemies hearts, that so now and ever, our Lord Iesus may appeare to be the wonderfull Counsellor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, whilst thus, the Prince of his Peoples Peace: So prayeth,

