


IT is not very long (right Honourable) since the condition of England was much like unto that of the Iews in their captivi∣ty; of whom it is said the children of Israel,Ier. 50.33. and the children of Iudah were oppressed together, and all that took them captives held them fast, they refused to let them go. At which time when we seemed to be e'ne at the last gaspe it pleased Al∣mighty God in mercy to visit us, and in the restauration of our gracious Soveraigne to give no small hopes of our restauration to peace both in Church and State, and Oh! how joyful and pleasant asight is it to all sound-hearted Christians to see the Walls of our Hierusalem building again? yet hath it likewise fared with us as it did also with the people of God, after their
Captivity, that no sooner could they begin to build, but Sathan stirred up those who did indeavour to hinder this Glorious work, who combined in a Plot and conspiracy against Gods Church,Neh. 4.11 and designed before they should know any thing, or see them, to come into the midst of them, and slay them, & cause their work to cease, which we have once more with our eyes beheld to be attem∣pted in our time. It is this malice of the Devil against the peace of our Zion, which hath occasioned me to handle this Sub∣ject, looking upon it as my duty hereup∣on to open the hainousness of this sin of Rebellion from the word of God, and to give answer to the Pleas of discontented persons, that if it be possible, the erro∣neous might be reduced, and the like sad unscriptural attempts might be for fu∣ture prevented; I doubt not but some may be much displeased, at what is herein con∣tained, especially those who are touched in the sore place. Even wholesome food is unsavory to the palate of such as are distempered, but we must please God rather then men. The Lord knows, the peace of the Nation and Church in
which we live, is the maine end why I have taken the boldness to expose this Home-Spun Sermon unto publick view. (peace is that Jewel which set in the ring of the Church makes it sparkling & glo∣rious, though it be the design of Sathan to rob it of this its glory, of this its Iewel) Accept therefore (Right Honourable) of this plain Sermon with all humility beg∣ging your protection, and unto whom in∣deed could I more properly Dedicate it then unto your Honours,) by whose in∣couragement it is, that both it and the rest of my labours in this place have re∣ceived their very life and breath, but un∣to you; whose bounty in building us a Sy∣nagogue, and care in promoting the Gospel of peace among us in a place where otherwise in all likelihood, many souls would have starved for want of food, whose charity, I say, in erecting and induing an Almes-house, wherein to feed and cloth the bo∣dies of the poore, and in erecting a Spa∣cious Chapel among us (even in the midst of those times when others made it their work to throw down Churches) where
many hundred souls are continually fedthw the bread of life, a high expression of your love to the God & Gospel of peace, such renouned acts as are worthy to be re∣membred, and may serve as eminent ex∣amples to following Generations. Oh! hovv many souls in this place are bound conti∣nually to blesse you, and to blesse God for you? besides indeed the particular favors I have received of you, have ingaged me to pre∣sent you vvith these first Fruits, as a small expression of my thankfulnesse to you, for those many undeserved favors confer∣red upon me; all that I humbly petition of you is your acceptance, praying that the Lord would abundantly blesse you, with spiritual blessings in your souls, and prosper you in your affaires in this world, and at last advance you to be of the Com∣pany of the Glorious Saints in heaven, which is the constant Prayer of him who is,

