



Honoured Sirs,
I Have had many thoughts heretofore, and some of late, to publish a short Narrative of the Life, and Death of Mr. Ignatius Jurdain, a Worthy Mem∣ber of your Society; and the latter might have been stifled as the former, had not the solicitations of some friends, both nearer and farther off, excited me to carry on my purpose to performance; And having set about this businesse and brought it to some issue, I have taken the boldnesse to present it unto you; and I supposed, that it would not be unacceptable to you, he being for a long time of your Society, and an honour thereunto as unto the whole City: His Name (no doubt) would have lived, and that in great esteem, though this small memorial of
him had never seen the light; but yet hereby many may take notice of more particulars, then formerly they have heard of, and take occasion to recount many more re∣markable, and praise-worthy qualifications that were in him, then have come to my Knowledge: I might have added many more things, but I have omitted them, partly be∣cause I was not assured of the certainty of them, and part∣ly because I declined Personal reflections, which would have sounded very harshly in the eares of many. That which hath been done (though with much weaknesse, and not answerable to his worth) hath been out of a desire to honour him, that was so zealous for the advancing of Gods glory, and to set his example before your selves, and others for imitation: For the good examples of holy men are as the light side of the cloud,Heb. 12.1. Perk. in loc. N. Annot. in loc. Dyk. Dec. of the heart. c. 12. to give light to others, and to direct them in the Wildernesse of this World towards the heavenly Canaan. I know you have a surer and a straighter rule, and a brighter light to direct you, then any humane examples, the infallible and unerring Word of God,Psal. 119.105. Prov. 6.23. Psal. 119. & Prov. 6. whereunto you shall do well to take heed as to a light that shineth in a dark place,2 Pet. 1.19. 2 Pet 1. But yet God himself would have us to observe the commen∣dable examples of good men, and to set them before us for our imitation and pattern, asProv. 2.20. Prov. 2. To walk in the way of good men, and to be followers, or imitators of them,1 Cor. 4.16. . 1 Cor 4. but we may not follow the best of men in all things but with a limitation, as they follow that exem∣plary Rule Jesus Christ,1 Cor. 11.1. 1 Cor. 11. And I know not, whether I should presse the imitation of this renowned Worthy, in all things, as in his so early rising in the morn∣ing, to enjoy communion with God in holy meditation, the bodily temper of most not being able to bear it, so that we may herein rather admire then imitate him. He was
(as I conceive) of an Heroical and raised spirit, elevated above theAbsit verbo invidia. ordinary rank of true Professours of Reli¦gion; for as Heroical vertue (as the MoralistsArist. E∣thic. lib. 7. c. 1. Piccol. Philos. Grad. 6. c. 1—6. say) ex∣cells moral vertue in an high and eminent degree; so there is a kind of HeroicalKeck. Sst. Eth. lib.;. c. 5. spiritual vertue, as Abrahams Emi∣nency in Faith, and the like I may say of this Holy mans intensiveness in zeale for God, that excels the ordinary vertue of Christians.(i) 2 Pet. 1.3. Called to glory and vertue. I know that some did much un∣dervalue him, as a man of meane and low parts; they would acknowledge, that he was an honest well mean∣ing man, but weake, and beneath those that were accounted wise men; but suppose that his naturall, and acquired parts were not so great as some others, yet for his zeale and courage for the truth and cause of God, his close communion with God, and indignation against sin, I dare boldly say, he did excell the most of men: And they that have greater parts of knowledge and wisedome, should be provoked by his example, to act the more vi∣gorously for God, for every man must give an account of the improving his talents for theMat. 25.15. behoof of the Lord, that hath intrusted them therewith, remembring that of our SaviourLuk. 12.48. Luke 12. To whom much is given, of him shall much be required.
There be three things, which in the ensuing Narrative, you shall find very commendable in him; his Piety, Justice and Charity, wherein I shall crave leave to commend him to your imitation, and if you shall exceed him there∣in, I know no good man that will blame you, though I cannot secure you from the Scorpion like lash of the viru∣lent tongues of wicked men.
1. For his Piety, all that knew him, and did not look upon him with an evill eye, will give testimony to it; and it will be your honour to stand up zealously for God,
and to walk sincerely and uprightly before him, and as under his eye, who seeth not only all your actions, but your seeret intents, purposes and designs, whether you look with a squint-eye upon your sinister & self-ends, or with a single eye aime at his glory, in all your undertakings: And you should let it appeare, that you are on the Lords-side,Exod. 32.26. now so many Apostat se and revolt, yea, deeplyEsay 31.6. revolt from him, I speak it not in way of doubt or jealousie of you, for many blesse God for your stedfastness in the faith, in these declining dayes; and your constant attending upon the Lords holy Ordinances both on the Sabbath and Week dayes is very exemplary, not onely to those of inferiour rank in this City, but to others that either see, or hear of your forwardnesse therein. But Holinesse should appear also in the whole course of your conversation, both in your publike administrations of Justice, (for you judge not for man but for the Lord, 2 Chron. 19.2 Chr. 19.6. And the Seat of Justice is the place of the Holy, Eccles. 8.Eccl. 8.10. N. Annot. in loc. Pemb. Expos. the Holy One, or Holy God;) and in your more private conversing with men, and most secret retirements, Holinesse to the Lord, that under the Law was engraven upon the High Priests Miter, and to be worn upon his forehead,Exod. 28.36. Exod. 28. should now be written on things of common use,Zech. 14.20. N. Annot. in loc. Zech. 14. you should conse∣crate your selves and all your actions to the service of the Holy God; the more sincere and constant you are herein, with the greater comfort you will give up your account unto the righteous Judge, when you shall be called unto it; and your account drawes very nigh, Jam. 5.Jam. 5.10. Behold the Judge standeth before the door.
 2. His impartial administration of Justice against Swearers, open profaners of the Sabbath, unclean per∣sons and other scandalous Offenders wherein he shewed himself anotherN h. 13.17. Nehemiah andPsal. 106.30. Phinehas, will but
mind you of that, which I have cause to be perswaded, that you resolve to do; And you have advantage to do more, in some respects, then he had, because many of those disorders and pollutionsEsay 56. 2-6. of the Sabbath, (the removing of which found great resistance in those daies) have been, for many years, taken away, and yet I dare not say that he was the first that brake the ice, and set upon the reformation of abuses upon the Lords holy day; for I am informed by one, that was an Active Officer in the redressing of those profane abuses, that his imme∣diateMr. John Sheere, Major. A.D. 1616. Predecessour in the Office of the Majoralty did begin to reform some open profanations of the Sabbath; Whe∣ther any did attempt it before, is more then I can learn, it being long before my coming to the City. But God hath a perfect Record of all things that are done by men, espe∣cially for his names sake, whether men take notice of it or no.
 3. And for his Charity and beneficence to the poor and other pious uses; I leave it to your serious consideration, how far he was a pattern to you therein, if you think it too much to do as much as he did, yet liberality and for∣wardnesse in well-doing is left as a charge upon you by God himself,1 Tim. 6.17, 18. 1 Tim. 6. and he would not have you to forget it, Heb. 13.Heb. 13.16. seeing it is well-pleasing to him; And you will be no losers by it here but great gainers; the more free you are this way, you may expect that the Lord will deal the more freely, and bountifully with you, or yours, you have his Word, and that's as good as any bond for you.Prov. 11.24 25. Eccles. 11.1— Psal. 37.26. Esay. 32.8. see Prov. 11. Eccles. 11. Psal. 37. and Esay 32. And this will frther your account,Phil. 4.17. Phil. 4. in the great day of reckoning, for then the Lord will take special notice, not so much, of that which you have laid up for your selves, or yours, as of that, which you have
laid out for him, and his. But I am here prevented in pressing one point of Charity upon you, for providing for the poor; for in your late act of Charity, shall I tearm it? or Justice and Mercy meeting together, I mean the erect∣ing of a Work house: You have taken the best care that the ranging and disorderly poor might be set on work, and so be better provided for by their own labour, then by being relieved at mens doors; and that noPsal. 144.14. complain∣ing, by that clamorous sort of idle people, may, for the future, be heard in our streets. The Lord strengthen your hearts and hands for the perfecting of that righteous and charitable work, and for thePsal. 41.1.  Pisc. Qui pru∣denter segerit. Gen. Transla∣tion, Judgeth wisely. Ainsw. Pru∣dently atten∣deth. wise considering the condi∣tion of the impotent poor, that they being restrained from begging, may have no just cause of complaining to God or man by reason of want. God hath honoured you above many, I beseech you let it be your chiefest care to honour him, in the faithful discharge of your duty unto him, and of the trust committed by him unto you, that this City may be truly stiled the faithful City, Esay 1.Esay 1.26. Fidelis in aeter∣num. The City's Motto. and we may say with the Prophet, Jer. 31.Jer. 31.23. The Lord blesse thee thou habitation of Justice and mountain of holinesse; This is the sincere desire of him that is willing to sign himself

Exon. Decemb. 24. 1653.
