



REV. FATHER.
Sithence the com∣mon practise of writers hath now so prevailed, that each one almost, either, for patro∣nage
 of their workes, or to ma∣nifest their respects, Dutie, and Gratitude, is accustomed, to present them, vnder the shelter of such persons, who by their acceptance may equalise their labours and paines; I hope it will not seeme strange to your R. Paternitie, or to any other; that I haue made choise to pre∣sent my poore industries, to you; who in all respects may challen∣ge, vnder God, the vtmost of my endeavours; Nay I should offend, if I should attribute the Patronage of this little worke to any, but to you R. Father, who first desired it, and by whose commands I haue vn∣dertaken it.

Besides if vertuous actions may allure me: I know not where, within your ranke and qualitie, to paralell your he∣roique deeds: for to omit your progenie; which may adde à pro∣babilite of à vertuous minde: as Aristotle saith. 3. Pol: Ve∣risimile est praestantiores ac meliores esse eos, qui ex me∣lioribus. and to speake no∣thing of the happinesse you enioy, by being Brother to so Glorious à Martyr M. Edmōd Gennings: as also of your mi∣raculous conuersion, of your continuall labours, for many yeares in Gods vineyard, for the conversion of soules: your praise and merit, both before
 God and man, hath taken no small degree, in your erecting or rather restoring againe, that sometimes famous Province of the English Friar Minours; wherein haue bene in all scien∣ces, some of the most renowned and learned men of Christen∣dome. Of this Province was Alexander Hales, who was called Doctor Doctorum and was the first that euer did write Summe of Divinitie. of this Province was Scotus, whose fame is spread thorough the whole world, both for his sub∣lime subtilitie, and more than vulgar devotion to our B. La∣dy: what shall I reckon vp, Oc∣cham, Bachont, Midleon
 with infinite others, who haue embelished Gods Church with their Doctrine: and strenuous∣ly defended it against heresies: to which we may adde; that of three schooles from whence all others almost, deriue their do∣ctrine, to wit, of Thomists, Scotists, and Nominalists: two of them haue had their begi∣ming from men of this Provin∣ce. Is it not R. Father à great glorie to you, that notwithstand¦ing the violent impetuositie of these our times; God should vse you as an instrument, to make this renowned Province to reviue againe, in our order? but I am confident, greater is your ioy, to see and heare the
 fruicts of your labours; for we may well say of this seeming shrubbe, which you haue plan∣ted: that it is tanquam li∣gnum, quod plantatum est secus decursus aquarum: quod fructum suum dabit in tempore suo. It is like vnto à Tree planted by the water side whith bringeth forth fruict in due season: for this your tree, was no sooner planted: but it beganne to sprout forth leaues of rare examples; Its root was scarse setled in the ground, but its branches loaded with pietie, deuotion and learning did extend themselues to the gayning of soules: as soone as the waters of grace had wate∣red
 it, the heavens did receiue its fruict: I meane amongst o∣thers, those glorious Martyrs who for Gods honour, and for his Church, haue lately giuen their liues in sacrifice; of whom according to the breuitie of an Epistle: I will speake a word or two.
Father Thomas Bullaker vpon his arriuall into England being taken and emprisoned, cōtracted such diseases, through miserie and want, which he suf∣fered in prison; that he neuer had his health after: yet: the zeale of soules, which brought him vnto his country; forced him with vndaunted courage to come to london, in the greatest
 rage of Persecution, to helpe the poore distressed Catho∣liques: which he did both spiri∣tually and temporally; vntill such time, that being taken at Masse, whilst he was saying Gloria in Excelsis: he was emprisoned againe, condemned, hanged, drawne and quartered, when his soule did ascend to sing eternally a canticle of Ioy in heauen.
Father Paule of S. Magda∣len alias Henry Heath, twise Guardian of your Convent at Douay, and once Commissarie Provinciall in these parts, and long since Reader of Diuinitie: after hauing well profited in his studies in Cambridge; by
 reading of the holy Fathers, and disputing with others; he was the occasion of the conversion of many, wherof some became Religious: and after God touching his heart, he did reconcile himselfe vnto the Catholicke church and comming beyond seas to Douay he entred into the order of our holy Father S. Francis: and therein liued with so great au∣steritie, that indeede it was more to be admired than imi∣tated: for to omit his blou∣dy disciplines, wherewith most parts of the house are marked; his lying on the ground con∣tinually; his haire-cloaths of of seuerall sorts; his chaines,
 girdells, and bracelets of Iron: his life was in a manner, à con∣tinuall fast; for long time to∣gether, vntill Obedience com∣manded the cōtrary, he did take nothing but bread and small drinke; vnlesse it were once or twise à weeke; and then in such manner, that if he could, he would put ashes or dust into it: but aboue all; it is to be ad∣mired, how piously he spent his time; for you should neuer find him, but either at his study, or else in vocall or mentall prayer; and to talke with him of other matters, was out of his ele∣ment: and notwithstanding that alwayes he was imployed in exteriour offices of the house;
 Reading both Diuinitie, and Philosophie, hearing confes∣ssions; visiting the sicke, espe∣cially the poore: sometimes till 10. 11. or 12. à clocke at night: yet scarce would he be absent from the Quire at midnight; or àny other office of the Quire at any time: In fine none can better expresse his great desi∣re of gaining soules, and obtay∣ning martyrdome; than he himselfe who felt the burning fire of his zeale, which he hath manifested in his owne wri∣tings; which in time conve∣nient shalbe put to the presse: briefly, he was singular in his austeritie; rare in his pietie, excessiue in his zeale, most
 humble in his owne conceit: yet as learned in the eies of all that knew him. I cannot let passe the last passage, which I and many more did marke in him: that although he was much retired, and seldome dis∣coursed of any thing, vnlesse he were vrged, for that he tooke no content in company: yet at the time when he had gotten leaue to goe into Eng∣land; he was so much alte∣red, and changed, as if he had bene another man, or as one who was not able to cōtaine his ioy, but in actions, voice ad countenāce one might iudge what his heart possessed: and so after a most austere, peniten∣tiall,
 and humble life; much admired, esteemed and honou∣red of all: he did offer vp a vo∣luntarie sacrifice of his life for Gods cause; that he might reape an eternall crowne in heauen; which as we piously belieue, and may gather out of his owne writings; he ob∣tained by the mediation of our B. Lady: to whom he was sin∣gularly devoted, and from whom he had receiued many favours.
Of Father Francis Bell (who was formerly Confessour to your Religious women of the third Order, Guardian of your Convent aforesaid, and Pro∣vinciall of Scotland: and a
 little before his death againe elected Guardian of your said Convent of Douay) I neede say no more than, what each one that knew him would say, that he was a true Franciscan, or child of our holy Father S. Francis, & that consequētly he was fitting fuell, to satisfie the burning rage of Gods enemies: and to make a pleasant holo∣caust to God, by sacrificing his life for his sake. Here I may apply the example of that famous Captaine Epimanon-das, who did not so much glo∣ry in his great victories, as that his parents, from whom he had his being, did take plea∣sure and content therein: as
 Plutarch reporteth. I for my part (and I belieue such is the opinion of all your children whom you haue begotten in Christ Iesus) doe not so much rejoice for the great glorie that redounds to our Province here∣by; as that you the Father of vs all, with pleasure and con∣tent haue seene the fruict of your labours,
If Dutie may challenge it, sure it must be yours by all right: for whatsoeuer we doe, is yours: you R. Father being our first Father, and vnder God the sole beginner and worker of our being in this happy state of Religion: for if Vlisses was iudged to haue right to the
 Armour of Achilles, because he was the occasion of his com∣ming to the wars of Troy, sure∣ly you may challenge whatsoe∣uer act praise-worthy may be performed by any of vs: and therfore if any haue deserved praise, in labouring for the con∣version of soules, in teaching & instructing others, in writ∣ing, in vertuous examples or any other heroicke acts, they are yours; and are but so many additions to your Glo∣rie.
If gratitude for benefits re∣ceiued may moue me: who can better deserue it, than your R. Paternitie? who by your la∣bour haue sustained, maintai∣ned,
 and conserued vs for di∣uers yeares: truly if we proue vngratfull, euen the very wals of your two erected Convents will crie shame on vs, and giue testimonie of our ingratitude. Now although each of vs haue this generall obligation: yet in a more particular manner, must I acknowledge it; and therfore most willingly doe I xoffer this, and all my labours as yours by all right and duty: wherfore it resteth, only that you vouchsafe R. F. to pa∣tronize and accept of this ex∣position of the Rule (which Pope Leo the tenth hath ac∣comated for Religious persons of the third Order of our holy
 Father S. Francis) which I haue made and composed for your Religious daughters of that Order, now residing at Neuport: whose Religious Sim∣plicitie, prompt Obediēce, peace full Amitie, and regular Ob∣servance, may crowne your old age with joy and content; which I pray, may alwayes continue both in this life and in the world to come Thus he wisheth who alwayes remaineth.
RIGHT REV. FATHER.

