



DEARE BRETHREN,
IT is a sad thing to consider, how the Saints, who are uni∣ted, and made one, with, and in Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 6. 17. by parta∣king of his Spirit, 2 Pet. 1. 4. or divine na∣ture: should yet be so disunited, and broken off one from another, by

yielding to much to that 1 Cor. 2. 12. spirit of the world, or rather to that principle of James 3. 16. & 4. 5. envy, and malice, which Sathan the God of this world labours to throw in amongst them; Is it not cause of much sadness and grief, to see that a little difference in opinion produceth great breaches, and much estranged∣ness in affection? and yet this diffe∣rence being weighed in the ballance of true Judgement, will be found no difference amongst them who are tru∣ly Saints. Indeed, Rev. 2. 9 & 3. 9 There are some who say they are Jewes, and are not, but doe lie; and these are some of them high in notion, but altogether without life, and power of godliness, and the difference between the Saints, and such in point of sound doctrine, is very great. But the Saints, who are truly so indeed, Eph. 4. 3. they all indeavour to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace: They all know, and profess, that there is but one body, whereof they are members: and that Vers. 4. there is but one Spirit, by which they

are united, and made one in this bo∣dy: and that their hope, whereof they are not ashamed, is one and the same, being effectually called there∣unto; they all profess and acknow∣ledge Vers. 5. one Lord, in whom they do be∣lieve; and one faith, by which they believe, and one baptisme, through which they are not onely made con∣formable to Christ in his death, but also are made like unto him in his glorious resurrection, unto newnesse of life: And are also annointed with him, to hold forth the same to others; they all professe one God, who is the Vers. 6. Father, the Fountain, the Originall of all good; who is above all in respect of his glorious power, and through whose infinite love and goodness, they all obtaine life and happiness; and who is in them all, to act and car∣ry them on, unto eternall glory. Thus the Saints, who are so indeed, hold correspondencie one with ano∣ther in the substance of religion: and the difference between them is but a

seeming difference, a difference in re∣gard of manifestation: for to every one of us is given grace, according Vers. 7. to the measure of the gift of Christ. The Lord dispenseth not alike to all, but to every one a measure as he will, and yet they may be all of one, and the same Judgement, though some of a higher, and some of a lower de∣gree, Exod. 34. 12. Heb. 11. 27. Moses had high and glorious manifestations, and yet he was of the same judgement wth the meanest of his Saints in that generation: 2 Cor. 12 2, 3, 4. Paul was taken up into the third Heavens, in respect of those glorious revelations, and high discoveries of God made known unto him; Gal. 4. 12. and yet he was as the Saints were, that so he might perswade them to be as he was, 1 Cor 9. 19, 20, 21, 22. yea, he submitted to the weakness of the Saints, that he might thereby bring them up into strength: Al the differen∣ces among the Saints at this day is onely about externall, and outward formes; and observations, I which are Col. 2. 17. all terminated in Christ: when they

once come to know him, and are Eph. 4. 21. taught by him, as the truth is in him; then they cannot look for him at any distance, for he is Col. 1. 27. in them the hope of glory. It is a great fault among children to begrudge one another of their fathers gifts: there be severall attainments among Saints, or severall degrees of manife∣stations: 1 Ioh. 4. 12. 1. 2 there be some babes, and some strong men, Heb 5. 13. 14. and there is milk for the one, and strong meat for the other, they that be strong, were once weake, and they who are weak as yet, will in time grow strong (my deare Friends) let us leave judging, and censuring one another, Rom. 14. 4. for who art thou that iudgest another mans ser∣vant: let us indeavour unity, peace and concord; let us walk in love, oh 1 Pet. 1. 22. if we could love one another with a pure heart fevently! with what sweet imbraces should we receive, and in∣joy each other? how would our heavenly Father be glorified? how would truth be advanced, and appear

like it selfe? and how would Isa. 2. 18. 19. errors, heresies, lyes and falshoods, run into holes to hide themselves? yea, how soon might we expect to see our dread Soveraign (the Lord Jesus, com∣ming forth gloriously, Psal. 45. 4. and riding on prosperously, Rev. 6. 2. conquering, and to conquer, and bringing the wheele over sin and flesh, and all sinners and ungodly men, Rom. 1. 18. who hold the truth in unrighteousness; and proclaiming that joyfull Levit. 28. 13. Jubile to all his, who are yet kept under by poverty, debt, &c. Sin, ignorance, unbelief, weak∣ness, clouds, forms, observations. Friends, rest not in shadows, let your souls Prov. 8. 21. inherit substance, Christs king∣dome is spirituall, Luke 17. 21. it is within, and it is above all outward observations, Rom. 14. 17. it is not meat and drink, but it is righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost: This little Starre (if it please the Father of Lights) may lead you toward this King: or this little Catcchisme may instruct you in the way to this Kingdom. It pre∣sents

you with no new thing, but cleers up old truths, and distinguisheth them from new errors. It comes not busling forth, stuft full of humane te∣stimony, but it comes forward gently, and meekly, attended with divine evidence, and witness: (Dear Friends) first read, and then judge, but be not rash in censuring; if any thing seem difficult, weigh the Scriptures in the margent, and yet if difficulties and doubts still arise, Eph. 6. 18. wait upon God by prayer, and supplication of the Spi∣rit. And he who is a Revealer of se∣crets, and to whom interpretati∣ons doe belong, shall in due Phil. 3. 15. time reveale the same unto you, If you cannot receive it at pre∣sent, yet ye may in time; but if not at all, yet take heed of condemning it for heresie, blasphemy. Mat. 9. 3. Christ was called a blasphemer, a Devil, and that by Saints in profession. Truth hath been adjudged to be falshood and sound doctrine hath been con∣demned for heresie in all ages. If any

dislike, or cannot receive it, be∣cause in some passages it may seem beyond his apprehension: Let him know that the maine end of this is, to carry up his heart to Christ above it selfe: and if on the other hand a∣ny shall despise it, and cast it away as too much below them: let such know, that it is not sent, but to the lost sheep of the House of Israel, 1 Cor. 1. 25. and that the foolishness of God is wiser than men.
To whomsoever it comes, it will bring this testimonie along, that it hath no self-ends at all, but comes meerly out of love to poore souls.
Deare Brethren, Let me now in one word beseech you to lift up your heads, for your redemption draweth nigh. Heb. 4. 11 Be making toward your heavenly rest, be longing af∣ter your Fathers house, be owning of your own priviledges, be standing fast in your own liberty, 2 Cor. 6. 17. be get∣ting out of Babylon, ye have dwelt

Deut. 1. 6. long enough in confusion, long e∣nough in the mount of outward observations: Take up your carri∣ages, raise up your hearts, Jer. 50. 5. ask the way to Sion, set your faces that way, if you can but get one step into new Jerusalem, you are past all danger, here yee see sorrow, sighing, pain, fear, and death: here you say, oh that I were assured of Gods favour; oh, that I knew he loved me, &c. poore soules.
If ye were but entred into Christs spirituall Kingdome indeed, if ye did but know God, Christ, and the Saints in the Spirit, indeed your hearts would leap for ioy, did you but know Joh. 17. 21, 22, 23. God in Christ, Christ in the Saints, the Saints u∣nited, and made one with God, in Christ, by that one eternall Spi∣rit, Ioh. 16. 22. your hearts would rejoyce, your joy would be full, yea, 1 Pet. 1. 8. yee would rejoyce with joy unspeak∣able, and full of glory: Rev. 21. 3 Then

you should see the Tabernacle of God with men, and God dwelling with men, or in men: then should all teares be wiped away, and then 4 there should be no more feare of death, no more sorrow nor crying, nor paine in respect of the losse of Gods love, and favour: for all for∣mer things, (as namely, all low, and carnall apprehensions of God, which caused feares, doubts, distra∣ctions) would be passed away: Rev. 22. 3. for there shall be no night, nor clouds to hide his love, but they that be his Servants, shall serve him in Spirit and Truth, and they shall see his face with joy, and 4. his name (or glory) shall be in their fore-heads, or shine forth in 5. them to his praise, and they shall reigne with him here in joy, and glory even in this life, and shall at last injoy him in unconceiveable, and eternall glory, of which this is

but a tast. Brethren, 2 Thess. 3. 18. the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all.
Amen.

