



SIRS,
THey that have been acquainted with my resolutions will admire to see any thing of mine (especially by my consent) made thus publick. This Infant as you know was very weake, and there was neither Will nor Strength to bring it forth in this way, but it was forc't into the world by strong expulsives. Now it is come a∣broad my hope is, that either (like Zaccheus) it will bee hid among the croud of taller and more stout conceptions: or if a∣ny chance to spy it, he will not be so unworthy to wrong such a poore weak thing as this is. If it may live to be to any of you a remembrancer of the uncomparable mercy of our God, who show'd himselfe upon the Mount, I have the utmost of my aime in this publication.
We finde sometimes in Scripture, that a heap of stones hath serv'd for a memoriall, as well as a more curious Pillar. Though this be but a heap of things, not orderly digested in a curious Method, but hastily throwne up together, as the short time for preparation would permit; (this service following close upon the Sabbath dayes labour) yet it may serve for a memo∣riall of that sweet and pretious mercy, which if it dye in your
thoughts, I desire to dye with it. The Lord set up a lasting monument of this deliverance in our hearts, and write it there with a pen of Iron, and the point of a Diamond in indeleble Characters, that no injuries of time may ever blot it out again; and give us yet at length, to render to him according to the benefits he hath done us, lest we provoke him to repent, and doe us evill after he hath done us good.
My heart bleedes when I thinke what God hath done, what he expects, what we returne, and what is likely to become of all in the latter end. I have a horrid apprehension of it, as the Prophet had; if after God hath punisht us farre lesse then our iniquities deserve, and giv'n us such a deliverance as this, we should againe breake his Commandements. We should againe? Why, we doe break them since there came deliverance, and that more frequently and boldly then wee did before. The Lord breake our hearts for it, and helpe us to make up our breaches and our controversies with him, in, and by him, who as our peace, before our houses (that be left) be all desolate; before it come to, Oh that thou hadst knowne; before the wrath of God arise against us, and there be no remedy.
All that I have to adde is this desire, that as the Sermon is a monument (such as it is) of Gods praise for the deliverance of this happy day: So this Dedication of it, may be a mo∣nument of my thankfulnesse to you, for all the great encou∣ragement, and kindnesse, and respect, with which you have re∣fresht his bowells, who is, in the Apostles stile, 2 Cor. 4.5.

