


Right Worshipfull, Worshipfull, and much Honoured in our Lord Jesus,
THat this weak Treatise cometh forth under your Name cannot seem strange to him who remem∣bers Natures Off-spring by in∣stinct sheltring it self under those wings from whence it received life and breath.
Reluctances from personall unfitnesse to undertake this Service, Religion forbad me to hearken after, whilest I considered the call of the Court thereunto to be the call of God; and how unworthy it would be for any of Aarons Sons so far as lieth in them to fail Mo∣ses leading on and calling to follow in a Cause immediately concerning the Lord Jesus, es∣pecially at such a time when to be silent were not only to deny a joynt-witnessing with you

to the truth; but in appearance tacitely to strengthen the adversary in bearing false wit∣nesse against the power of the Christian Ma∣gistrate concerning the Defence of the Truth: Seeing Donatus now crieth aloud again,Quid im∣peratori cum Ec∣clesiis? What hath the Emperor to do with the Churches? Notwithstanding that position concerning the Magistrates power in matters of Religion be attested to by Civill-Law, Common-Law, Nature, Scripture, Reason and Testimony both old and new.
The lawfull Administrations by the Kings of Judah touching the custody of the first Ta∣ble they did not as Types of Christ but as Servants of Christ, otherwise what was done by the Type must be fullfilled by the Anti-type, but Christ never exercised any act of Civil Government. Again, the coming of the Anti-type is the abolishing of the Type, con∣sequently then it should be unlawfull for Civil power now to assist the Cause of Religion. The reason given of such administrations was not typicall but morall, viZ. to put away evil from Israel; the moral reason is of like force now as then; the reason of the Law and the Law live and die together.
1 King. 20.42. 2 Chron. 3.11.Ahab King over an Apostate Church dieth for not putting Benhadad to death for Blas∣phemy.
When Jehojada put the Crown upon Jo∣ash his head, he gave the Testimony into his hand.

The King of Nineveh proclaimeth a Fast.Jon. 3.7. Dan. 3.29 Nebuchadnezzar makes a Decree against Blas∣phemy.Ezra 1. Cyrus giveth out a Proclamation for the Buiiding of the Temple.Dan. 6.29 Darius the Mede makes a Decree for the acknowledgement of the true God:Ezra 7.13 The like doth Artaxerxes for the beautifying of the House of the Lord. These being Heathen Princes could not be Types of Christ, as Kings of Judah.
In the times of the Gospel,Act. 21.28 23.29.24.5.6.25.8. & 19.20.26.3. Paul in a matter of Religion appealeth unto Caesar, which nei∣ther Lysias, Felix, Festus, nor Agrippa decline the audience of.
As Religion was the cause of the Warre purposed between the nine Tribes and a half, and those on the other side of Jordan; So Religion shall be the cause of the War both purposed and performed by the ten Kings against the Man of Sinne,Rev. 17. which supposeth Civil Authority acting therein.Isa. 49.23 The Pro∣phets speaking of the times of the Gospel, assure the godly that Kings shall be their Nursing Fathers, and Queens their Nursing Mothers, and that false Prophets shall be thrust through with a Sword.Zec. 13.3. This power then of the Magistrate expires not together with the Legall dispensation of the Cove∣nant. From the premises appears the vanity as well as ignorance of their evasion who ac∣knowledge the power of the Magistrate in the time of the Old, yet deny it in the time of the New Testament.

The adaequate end of the Magistrate is to procure that the people may live a peaceable life in all godlines and honesty.1 Tim. 2.2 Magistrates are called Gods, strange Gods who take no care of godlinesse. 'Tis a carnal and unworthy po∣sition that limits the Magistrate to the Cor∣porall, and restrains him from the care of the spirituall good of the Subject, thereby spoil∣ing this Olive of its choicest fatnesse where∣with it rejoyceth both God and man.
That licentious and pestilent Proposition, The care of the matters of Religion belongs not to the Magistrate, is a Stratagem of the Old Serpent and Father of lies, to make free passage for the doctrine of devils; an inven∣tion not unlike Sauls Oath, the trouble of Is∣rael and escape of the Enemy; a sad errour that fosters all errour; a Satanicall device tending to undermine the policy of God; at∣tempting to charm that Sword with a fallacy, whose dexterous and vigorous use instrumen∣tally puts away evill from Israel, and turneth every way in its manner to keep the path of the Tree of life. The rusting of this Sword of divine execution in the Scabbard, hath been more destructive unto truth then the drawing of the Sword of Persecution. Per∣secution hath slain Thousands, but the dead∣ly Sea of false doctrine hath slain ten Thou∣sands.See Mr Cot∣tons An∣swer to Mr W. ch. 33. Might this Imposture prevail, then rejoyce ye Heretiques, Idolaters, Seducers, Ranters, &c. but wo be to the Sheep of the

slaughter, whose Possessours may slay them, and pleade themselves Not-guilty at the civil Barre.
Both Swords make up a compleat Medium of all our good and remedy of all evil, and are of speciall use each to other mutually, as well as of necessary use unto the people joyntly. The Magistrates need the Ministery to fix them in the Consciences of men, and the Ministers need the Magistracy to preserve them from men that have no Conscience, or worse. Saul feels the worth of Samuels Countenance: Joash soon wants Jehojada, nor doth Jehoash forbear to honour Elisha with the compellation of My Father, My Father. Again, the Levites stand in need of Nehemiah; and Hezekiah calling them Sons, intimates their Orphan like condition with∣out his assistance.O mi Impe∣rator, tu me gladio de∣fende ego te verbis & scriptis de∣fendam. My Emperour (saith Occam to Ledovick) you shall defend me with your Sword, and I will defend you with my Pen.
The counsell of peace shall be between them both. As the sacred power is liken∣ed to Heaven, so is the civil power compa∣red to Earth: Man cannot continue with∣out either: Both policies acted according to the Word with Christs Spirit in respect of the external means of our welfare, hold forth a happy Analogy with the concrea∣ted Image of God, and assisting grace (to∣gether with what superiority then became)

in the state of innocency, and are a resem∣blance of what the renewed image of God and immediate assistance of Christ shall be in the state of glory. They are that unto the People of God throughout the Metaphori∣call Sea and Wildernesse of this Life, which that man of God and Saint of the Lord were unto Israel throughout that naturall Sea and Wilderness unto the Land of Canaan. This is that Moses and Aaron.
Both Powers are Gods way to mans well-being and all good, the polity of hea∣ven. The violation of them is Satans me∣thod to mans wo and all evil; the treachery of Hell. Whereby is legible the constant Antipathy between Dogmatists and Order; together with the reason of the present in∣surrection by the Spirit of Errour against both Policies;Contemptus Disciplinae comes hae∣reseon. Danaeus de heresibus Prolegom. cap. 1. Ataxie (as of old) being still found a necessary companion of Here∣sie, and all experience having proved that the latter cannot be long-lived without the former.
How formidable then is that worse then Ammonitish Lust (too much adhered unto by many not only in but of Israel, in this hour of the Gospels Passion) which endea∣voureth together with the putting out of the right eye of Magistracy, that neither the name of Councels in Jerusalem, nor of Of∣fice-rule in Churches may be had any more in remembrance. Luther sometimes wrote to

the Senate of Mulhaysen to beware of the wolf Muncer.
I appeal to any competently judicious and sober-minded man, if the deniall of rule in the Presbytery, of a decisive voice in the Synod, and of the power of the Magistrate in matters of Religion, doth not in this point translate the Papll power unto the Bro∣therhood of every Congregation. Thou that abhorrest Episcopacy dost thou commit Po∣pery? Alas, alas! Is there no medium be∣tween Boniface and Morellius, between Papa∣cy and Anarchy, Babylon and Babel? If there be a mystery of iniquity in the one, is there not a University of iniquity in the other? Confusion is not far from every evil work, and though not mysticall in it self, yet my∣sticall in this that the way to so manifest confusion and ruine should not be manifest. The Historians indignation that the East was overcome by a drunken Commander with a drunken Army,Curtius. is now become (I speak the words of truth and sobernesse) a matter of astonishment, when so drunken a Tenet in an Age of such learning, piety, action, suffering, and successe, should threa∣ten the hopes of so glorious a Reformation come unto the very birth.Ingemuit orbis Chri∣stianus & miratus est factum se esse Aria∣num. The Christian world long since sighed and wondred at it self, that after such sore travell and bring∣ing forth of a man-childe, it was in point of doctrine become an Arian: the Lord

Jesus grant that there may not be cause for so considerable a part of the world of the Reformed to sigh deeply and wonder, that after its present like pangs and birth it should (to say nothing more grievous) in point of dis∣cipline become a Morellian.
Of so great moment is the Doctrine of these holy Tacticks of the Civil Sword, as that the neglect hath been contempora∣ry and accessory to the efficacy of errour, the effectuall exercise thereof signall to the times of Zions mercy.
At{que} hinc profecta est totâ, &c. Zanch. in praecept. 4.The difuse of the Civil Sword as concer∣ning matters of Religion gave opportunity to the rise of the man of Sin; the abuse of it maintained him; the good use thereof shall help to ruine him.
Scultet. in Isa. 49.23.It went well with those Churches when that good Old Duke hearkened to Melan∣cthon citing those words; Kings shall be thy Nursing Fathers, and Queens thy Nursing Mothers;Act. 18.17 but it fared ill with Sosthenes when Gallio cared for none of those matters.
That the care of Religion is the duty of the Magistrate, is evident; yet when and how far to bear,Scripsit Constanti∣nus sui esse officii, ante omnia id officere, ut in Ecclesiâ sit unae fides Euseb. l. 3. de vitâ ejus in case of errour concerning mat∣ters of Religion, is a great Quaery of these times. Unity injudgement is to be endeavour∣ed as much as is possible, because truth is one and indivisible, yet some difference touching the truth must be endured, because of the weaknesse of men. To tolerate every thing,

and to tolerate nothing, are both intolerable.
Zeno's Union, Anastasius Act of Oblivion,Zenonis , Anastasii , Osiand. Cent. 6. l. 1. c. 5. id. cent. 16. l. 2. c. 68. Cassand. de officio pij viri, & alibi. Charles his interim, Cassander's advice, were humane policies that sought peace with the losse of truth. Schismatical rigour prejudiceth truth with the breach of Peace. Deserved∣ly abhorred amongst all Christians is the Spi∣rit of that Giant who made all he took even with his Bed, by stretching out them that were shorter, and cutting short such as were longer.
A Toleration is not an approbation. Those distinctions between mixtures in Religion, and errours in those that professe the same Religion, between Fundamentals and not Fun∣damentals, between errours held forth by an erroneous conscience and a contumacious will; between persons peaceable in Israel and disturbers of the State; between points that are clear or orderly decided with due time for conviction, and such as are disputable and of depending disquisition; being pru∣dently applied, may be of speciall use here∣unto. Zanchy commends two Rules for this purpose, the Rule of Faith, and the Rule of Love: The Rule of Faith whereby we may not be wanting to the Truth, and the Rule of Love whereby we may not be wan∣ting to our Brother.Junius cont. 5. l. 2. c. 19, 22. Phi. 3.15, 16. Junius treating of this Subject, betakes himself from dispu∣tation unto praier; yet so, as commend∣ing to his Reader the counsell of that great Casuist, Let us therefore as many as be per∣fect

be thus minded; and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you: Neverthelesse whereunto we have already attained, let us est verbum militare, tum enim milites di∣cuntur , cum persistentes in suâ quâ∣que stati∣one, ordi∣ne proce∣dunt, &c. Zanch. in loc. walk by the same rule, let us minde the same things.
The sum whereof is, that those who con∣sent in Fundamentals, notwithstanding they dissent in points of an inferiour nature, are not only to be tolerated but are to be looked upon (by Gods blessing thereby in the use of means) as likely to be gained, provided they walk regularly and orderly.
Such hitherto have been the suitable pro∣ceedings of this Court unto the premises, tem∣pered with that zeal against the errour and ten∣derness towards the Author of this Dialogue, as that they that hear thereof have cause to blesse you, as the eyes that saw gave winesse to you.
Upon which occasion, having (after the example of Leo to Theodosius) rendred hereby unto you solemn thanks, I accounted it my duty that wheresoever this poor Script should come, not only that this should be told as a memoriall of you, but also
That you have now above twenty years ruled in this place, during all which space you have not been ashamed to take upon you the protection of your exiled Brethren, fled for conscience sake from the face of the late Pre∣lacy to worship God in this vast Wildernesse,
That you have given proof by so long ex∣perience unto the world, that Civil Govern∣ment

and the Congregational way may consist together,
That you have been amongst the first of Magistracies which have approved and pra∣ctised that Congregational way; no small fa∣vour from God, nor honour to your selves with the generations to come, when that shall appear to be the way of Christ.
I have no more to adde, but that poor New-Englands superadding hereunto the concurring Testimony of the Synod, Court, and Chur∣ches respectively, to what shall be found to be the Truth concerning Doctrine and Disci∣plihe (according as you were lately stirred up) shall thereby doubtlesse witnesse a good confession, a service of a high nature, which God will not forget, and posterity will re∣remember, gain to it self not the least name among the two Witnesses: Such work was worthy of Christ, and both the work and worth of those that during the Reign of An∣tichrist were and are designed to prophesie in Sack-cloth.
And lastly, help to prepare that choice weapon of bearing witnesse to the Truth, an Engine fitter to do execution then Goliath's Sword; which together with the rest of like nature held forth in the Ages of the Patience of Saints, the true David hath promised to make use of and prosper unto victory, not only in the lighter skirmishes of the Lord, but in the great day of Battle of God Almighty at the

Fall of Babylon, in the place of Armaged∣don: For even then it shall be said, They over∣came by the Bloud of the Lamb, and by the Word of their Testimony; Though the Witnesses die, their Testimony lives; This shall be when they are not, Higgajon Selah.
The Lord lift up your hearts in his Name, alwaies inspiring you with that divine discern∣ing of the Seasons, that through his Grace you may quit your selves as becometh his ex∣iles in such a cause, and at such a time. So prayeth and ceaseth not to pray

