


My Lord
These few pages thus presented to your hand at your Command, contain the message of the great God, spoken from him to this Honorable City, and more especially to your Lordship, being then elected the Nehemiah or Governor thereof, The publishing of this Sermon though thus late, yet I cannot but deem it sea∣sonable, not only for that the word of God hath a season even out of season
2 Tim. 4.2. but this being the time that you give up your trust, it doth seasonably serve to provoke you as from the Lord, to a serious and strict account within your self how you have discharged it, In the Parable of the steward our Lord Christ calleth upon all any way intrusted to give an account of their stewardship, Then when they may be no longer stewards, Luke 15.2. My confidence thus far is, that the substance of this Sermon is such, as by comparing your own heart and waies with the contents thereof. It wil prove helpful to you in the cast∣ing up your present great account of this years Government betwixt God and your own soul, which is required by him of you now to be done, you will here see upon what terms you took this Office of the Lord, and
what he instructed and directed as your Lordships duty How much you have prized the assistance of a Godly ministry in carrying on your Go∣vernment this year, what Eminency of sincerity hath appeared in any dif∣ficulty or Conflicts, with what a pub∣lick spirit, with what Wisdom, Piety, and Courage, the Government of this City hath been carried on in your Lordships hand, the time is now come, and God cals upon your Con∣science most seriously to consider, there wil be a final and great account which you as we all must give of our several stewardships, but that wil not excuse the omission of this.
I am bold to conclude with the Apostles words, I now write the things unto you that you formerly heard And did then acknowledg,2 Cor. 1.13. And I
trust you will acknowledg now at the end and to the end as he there speaks, And acknowledging make that use thereof I have been now insisting on. My earnest Prayer unto God is that as this Sermon was by divine appoint∣ment the Early Rain at the first Spring of your Government, so that now it may obtain the Blessing of the latter Rain at the Inning of the Harvest.
September, 1660.

