



Worshipful, Reverend, and dearly beloved in our Lord and Saviour;
PAuls desire to make known nothing but Christ unto the Corinths, his Travail until Christ was formed in the Galatians, with other like speech∣es, of him that breathed nothing but Christ: What were they else, but the effects of that Savior-like disposition, wherewith the Lord Jesus still inspires the Instrumental Saviours of Mount Sion?.
This Ministerial Spirit rested not only upon that great Doctor of the Gentiles; but also rests, and acts in its measure, in all the Ministers of the Go∣spel, for the calling, and compleating of the Elect, until we all come to be a perfect man. So as there
is not to be found a more vigorous effusion of the Bowels of Jesus; in any of the hearts of the chil∣dren of men, then is in the souls of the Ministry: no bowels either of civil, or natural relations ex∣ceed theirs: the love of them is wonderful, sur∣passing the love of Ionathan, that passed the love of women. By the unbosoming hereof as with a key, the Apostle in his Epistle, opens the heart of the Reader; whilst the Colossians behold the spi∣rit of the writer:Col. 2.2. I would to God ye knew what great conflict I have for you.
Hence (I hope) in its measure is this present labor for the truths sake, for your sake, for the sake of any, that in the Lord shall accept thereof, and for conscience sake.
To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, to bear witness unto the truth. So our Lord Jesus, notwithstanding the Truth was that which the Jews then maligned, and Pilate de∣rided, see the Spirit of Christ an Hypocrite, and a Moralist, the difference between piety, Maligni∣ty, and neutrality concerning the truth.
Nothing is more contended for, nothing more contended against, then the truth. The Gospel truth as it is most dear to God, so is it most op∣pugned by Satan. As the Attribute of the Holy One is the Spirit of truth: So the wicked one, is called a lyar from the beginning. Concerning it, are the greatest thoughts of heart, the most intense endeavors of Tongues, Pens, and Swords: It being much more beloved of its followers then Life: and more hated of its opposers then death.
Truth is the excellency of things, where truth is
there may be a bad action, but where truth is not, there cannot be a good action. Paul supposeth a man may give his Body to be burned in a good cause, and it profit him nothing. 'Tis not the suffering and the cause alone; both suffering, cause and Spirit, must concur to make a Martyr. In a bad cause it holds universally, Who hath required these things at your hand?
Mans interpretation of the Scripture, is not Gods mind, but mans mistake. To confess and suffer in testimony to an error, is to be a false-witness, not truths witness: Pleaders for error, not Pillars of the truth. To add to the profession of error, suffering for it, is to add sin unto sin: The latter error, worse then the first: Such sufferers are so far selfe-vassals, not Christs Martyrs. Such suffer∣ings, unto spoyling of goods, bonds, exile, the wilderness, or whatsoever, are worse then lost: a dead birth after sore travel, is a double wo: Such tears must be wept for again: this ungodly sorrow, is not to be undone without godly sorrow. We may build, and work; but if it be Wood, Hay, Stubble, we shall suffer loss; our work must be burnt, though our selves be saved, yet as by fire.
The Scripture mentions, Little children, Chil∣dren, young-men, men, Fathers, and a perfect man in Christ: as concerning your selves, unto whom the dreadful bond of office hath endebted me, the weakest of many, to make known unto you, the truth of the Gospel: what hath my soul longed, or labored for more, after your birth in Christ, then that you should be, not only Babes,
but men: both sound, and strong in the faith: Sincere, and distinct: that Christ might not only be formed, but perfected. That you might not onely have a saving, but a satisfactory know∣ledg of him, in whom you beleeve? The end of the Gospel is to be known, the duty and disposi∣tion of the Beleever, is to know.
Even Fundamental Truths which have been the same in all generations, have been, and shall be transmitted more clear from age to age in the times of Reformation: until that which is perfect is come, and that which is imperfect be done away:Vid. Grey∣naei praefat locis com. Zeged. prae∣fix. pag. 5. The truth held forth is the same; though with more of Christ, and less of man. Such addition, is no in∣novation, but an illustration, not new light, but new sight. The looking glass slurred and clear∣ed more or less, is the same glass. Columbus did not make a New World, when he made a new dis∣covery of the old World.
Truth wants so much of its glory, as it is unseen. The understanding wants so much of its perfection, as it is short in seeing thereof. The Members of the New man, have their joynts: joynts not fully set are painful, and less useful. All unbeleif is presumption, not faith: which hinders nourish∣ment, and genders humor.
Grace, Glory, and Glorification, hold pro∣portion with the truth. Though knowledg may be without grace, yet there can be no grace with∣out knowledg. According to the measure of our approach, to an exact, total, and Adequate Uni∣on, of the understanding with the truth of the Gospel: So is the glory of the truth beleeved,
and the Communion of the Soul beleeving.
Men need strong meat, at well as Babes need Milk; though he who is but a Babe, hath not the knowledg of a man, yet he that is a Babe labours after the knowledg of a man. Babes rest not in being Babes. I have endeavored to say some∣thing that might entertain the stronger, yet so as (I hope) I have scarce said any thing, that weaker ca∣pacities. may not with due attention attain unto. Solid meat that is best prepared, is not digested without: yet is digested with time, and the labor of nature. The Seed which the husbandman sow∣eth with pains, the Earth receiveth not without pa∣tience. 'Tis the Prerogative of God, 'tis not in the power of man to communicate understanding without study, and diligence: Though it be in Gods power to give, yet according to his ordina∣ry Dispensation, he doth not give knowledg unto man, without labor and prayer; but he giveth un∣to his a spirit, by meditating day and night, to search into the deep things of God: Who refuseth ripe fruit because it groweth higher then can be had without climbing; or the treasures hid in the Earth because they cannot be had without digging?
And who knoweth but that these poor sheets may find a place with some others, especially in the houses and hearts of them, of whose house I am: out of whose heart, they cannot be, whilst I am. That I may not be, as one altogether dead to those, whom I should have been glad to have lived and dyed with; yea whom I should have been glad to have lived and dyed for. My absence from them, hath named this Wilderness, Gersom:
their acceptance hereof, shall so far name it Ephra∣im: It is with God that knoweth the heart of exiles to comfort exiles.
'Tis not with me, as with Hortensius, who though he was weak in writing, yet was he able to speak; Nor as with Albericus, who though weak in speech, was able in writing; but being contious of my infirmity in both, I have added the latter, to supply in some measure (if God so please) the defect of the former.
Sometimes Pauls writing is more weighty then his speech, and some of Christs words after his death, were more effectual then in his Life. Hence I have desired to sow Seed, both by Pen and Tongue; present, and absent; Alive and dead: Not knowing whether shal prosper most, either this, or that, or whether they both should be alike good. Good Books help both the understanding, and memory. They are both Teachers, and Registers, like steeled looking-glasses; that do not only re∣flect, but continue reflecting the Image to the be∣holder:Segnius irri∣tant animes, demissa per auros Quam quae sunt oculis Subjecta si∣delibus— The speaker hasteth on, and cannot wait the leasure of the hearer; but the writer is always at hand, attending the capacity of the Reader. What is sayd of the poor, with a little alteration, may be applyed to written Treatises; Books you have always with you, you may receive good from them when you will.
Solomon admonisheth not to write superfluously; Paul encourageth to write profitably.Eccle. 12.12 2 Tim. 4.13. 'Tis with books as with meats; he that refuseth eating as the cure of an unwholesome, or unreasonable diet, acts the part of a murtherer, not of a Physitian.
He is not a man, that distinguisheth not be∣tween good and bad. He is not a wise man that discerneth not between excess, and nothing. The Pen-men of corrupt Books must hold up their hands as highly guilty of the evil of the times: and superfluous Books, do but add to the heap of va∣nity, and vexation of spirit. These lose precious hours, those lose more precious souls. By way of Apologie for this Treatise, I shall only say the wise mans admonition, I have been conscionably awful of, and have aimed at Edification.
The use of Books, is to communicate pertinent truth; the excellency of Books, is to do it Substan∣tially, clearly, briefly. Abuse takes not away their use; nay such books, are the cure of evil books. The opening of Titus lips, is the means to stop de∣ceivers mouths: the light of the book of the Go∣spel, consumes the Magicians books to ashes:Tit. 1.11. Acts. 19.19. one pin, must be forced out by another.
After forgiveness begged in the Blood of Jesus, for what is mine herein; Pardon I crave of all, pardon and acceptance as I hope for from some, so especially from your selves, to whom as I could bequeath no greater legacy; so then from whom, whence could I encourage my self with better ex∣pectation; for YOU are OUR glory and joy: for∣get not the emphasis in the word OUR: Ministers (compared with other Christians) have little to joy in, in this world. 'Tis not with the Ministers of the present, as with the Ministers of late times; nor with exiles, as with the rest: nor with your exiles, as with some others: Let this our (or if you please your) condition (for therein you have been
both partakers with us, and supporters of us) be your provocation. A receiving encouragement whereof is the constant remembrance that you are our companions in this Patmos, wherein many of you were before divers of us. You know the hearts of strangers, for ye are strangers.
The Lord who in rich grace hath not only Sanctified the tongue of the Preacher, but also the pen of the Scribe unto the edification of his; So bless all our labours, that both Speaker and Hear∣er, Writer and Reader, may rejoyce together in that day, that they have not run in vain. This is the prayer of

Ipswich in N. Eng. Octob. 7. 1652.
