


Gentlemen,
SInce the Abettors of this Remonstrance have had the confidence to addresse themselves, and prescribe Rules to you in such perempto∣ry language, give me leave (under your favour and connivence) to publish an Answer thereunto by Pen, since (for ought I see) you dare not give it your selves by word of mouth; because if you should de∣clare a sense contrary to theirs (as in
honor and conscience you must) they have as good as told you in plain termes, that they will make your House too hot to hold you.
I observe, their Remonstrance is founded upon these
principles: that their own Faction (whom alone they call the
well-affected, and the honest men, excluding all others) are the People. Secondly, that their Interest is the only
Interest of the People. Thirdly, that the Safety of the People is to be respected before any Kings, or
Governers, or Go∣vernments whatsoever. Lastly, that themselves are the only compe∣tent Judges of the Peoples
Safety, and so by consequence may drive on their
Designe against all Powers, and Forms of
Government, and Law whatsoever, upon pretence of that old Aphorisme, Salus Populi suprema Lex, the safety of the People is the soveraigne Law, which hath been the fruitfull mother of
Rebellions in all ages, to serve the corrupt ends of ambitious persons; who usually fisht in troubled waters to attain those ends, which they could not hope for in a setled State of
Commonweales and Kingdoms. And such (now it is apparent to all the world) were some of you in the beginning of this Parliament; from whose plea and practices, this upstart Faction have learned to re∣bell against your selves, upon the very same principles and pretences that you first bandied against his Maiesty.
I need not repeat here, how they have terrified and quell'd you from time to time, as often as you durst but offer to speak your
con∣sciences in the behalf of the Publike, against their corrupt and private Interest. But all that is past is nothing to what they have presented to you now, & wherwith they have affronted you to your very faces, in this Remonstrance. Do they not challenge you, as inconstant to  your own Votes and
Resolutions, perfidious to that trust reposed in you, and such as will not, or know not which way to settle the just
Rights and Liberties of the People? And therefore they undertake to new-mold the fundamentall Constitutions of the Kingdom, and con∣jure you to comply with them, and renounce your King, or any A∣greement with him, and settlement by him; or otherwise they say, they shall be constrained to set a period to your
Authority, and pro∣vide themselves of another Parliament, which shall be elected of per∣sons of their humor, and so establish themselves in a kind of legall Tyrannie, by the Law of their own
wills, and the Sword.
It is high time (Sirs) then to look about you, and vindicate the
Lawes of the Land, the Priviledges and Freedom of Parliament, and the just Rights of the People, thus impiously invaded. Acquit your selves like men, and if you must perish it will be your glory and Crowne in the midst of calamity, that you suffer in defence of the Li∣berties of your Country. Proceed to an happy Accommodation with his Majesty: He hath granted more than ever the world supposed you would have demanded, then let not those
Differences which he by his Concessions hath brought into so narrow a Compasse, hinder a Peace any longer, but meet him now at length with an honorable Complyance, and leave the
successe to God, who will scatter those that delight in War; and to this end (how small soever the meanes be at present, yet ere long) you shall have the hearts, hands, and
Purses of Thousands to assist you. I am not ignorant, that your Debates and Resolutions are extremely stagger'd by a pack of Sectaries, which have crept into the House to that purpose by undue elections; and that you feare, if you should declare against the designe of this Remonstrance, they should take this occasion to purge you out of the
House, and make use of the same way of unjust elections, to put others in your Places: But how∣soever, put it to the
venture, and do your duty. As for me, I should reckon it the greatest glory I could be born unto, to be accounted worthy to suffer in so noble a Cause; and since they are arrived to this height of Impiety, to tread all Authority under foot (as well yours as the King▪s) do you but agree with his
Majesty, upon just and e∣quall Termes, then (whatever I have been heretofore) I shall list my selfe henceforth For King and Parliament.

Novem. 27. 1648.
