



Honoured Sir,
THis Sermon, in the hearing, was so accept∣able to the Generality of that City (for which you serve in Parliament, with your worthy Colleague, James Stephens Esq one of the Aldermen of the said City) that it is really extorted from me, into the publique View. Their importunity shews their affection to the Subject Matter thereof, (I suppose) rather then to the Manner of its composure and handling, as being altogether too low for such a Subject, in this day of Englands Liberty, by Gods Blessing restored to the Right Keeper thereof, his most sacred Majesty. But however it be, such as it is, I humbly crave your patronage thereof. England hath scarce been England for many years, till the day of

His Majesties happy Restauration, wherein you were, under God▪ so instrumental, even to the hazard of all, that you cannot but rejoyce in the poorest Memorials of its ac∣complishment in so peaceable a manner. This Mercy is the Subject of this Sermon: Wherein so much of God was seen, that you must pardon me, if I allowed no time to speak to the Honour of those Humane (but never to be forgotten) Instruments, who put their Hands to this Work. It was a Day wherein GOD was to be glorified, and not Man. It is our work to improve it to his honour, who, in mercy to the Kingdom, set his Excellencie, your self, with many other worthy Patriots, on, and prospered you and them in the prudent managing of this Noble Under∣taking. I am sure, when we consider our former Bon∣dage, especially in respect of our conscience, which by rea∣son of the power that was over us, we could hardly keep safe to our selves, without the violation of our outward peace, and hazarding▪ all that was near and dear to us; we cannot but acknowledge the mighty and merciful hand of God, in this remarkable turn of his Providence; prai∣sing and blessing his Name, that we are Restored to the li∣berty of owning our own thoughts, and to the opportunity of endeavouring a reformation in a Legal, and not a Tu∣multuary way; and the freedom of crying Hallelujah's for, and Hosanna's to his Majesties happy Return to his People. Which is, and shall be, the constant practice of
From my Study in Gloucester, July 5. 1660.
SIR,

