


Most Illustrious Assembly,
WE owe the homage of Service in those places where we first breathed, not where we were conceived; this little Treatise had indeed his conception be∣yond the Seas, but being brought into the world in the Land, and in the time of Your Authoritie, it is to You it oweth ho∣mage, and to whom it is bound to render all the dutifull submissions a vassall oweth to his Lords; and will account it self exceeding glorious, if ye but daign to vouchsafe it with your favorable ac∣ceptance: for it trusteth, that once being acknow∣ledged for Yours, it will be the more welcome in other places; and your Patronage alone will be a sufficient protection to defend it against all the at∣tempts of its enemies and evill willers.
And I am fully perswaded it could never have

obtained a more happy nor Honorable protection in this world; For, that famous Assemblie consist∣ing of the supreme and royall Majesty (as the most worthie Head thereof) of the Illustrious Nobilitie, and the choicest Persons of the whole Kingdom, as the Members of it, there is none in this State, who will not think themselves obliged to receive it favourably; and if it shall passe the Seas to travell through forraigne Countreys, it will (questionles) be more regarded, there being no Canton in Europe where the wisdome of this Noble Assemblie is not admired and redoubted, and where all that it avoweth and protecteth, is not highly prized.
But as there is no good thing in the world which meeteth not with some contrarietie, no vertue that is not opposed, no prosperity that is not crossed; I doubt not but it will find contradictions and obstacles both at home and abroad; at home, from some evill Christians, secret enemies of the peace and tranquillitie of this Church and Estate; abroad, from the Enemies of the truth; and every where, from envious and malicious spirits.
But I trust it shall be as the nest of the little Al∣cion, which under the protection of the most High, contemneth the surging billows of the Ocean, and which though tossed with the waves, remaineth still victorious above the floods. Or rather as the

Rocks which cannot be moved with stormes, but continue firm against all the assaults of winds and tempests.
So, I shall let it travell under those favourable hopes with expresse charge to proclaim in all pla∣ces where it shall passe, the greatnesse of your glo∣rie. While in the meane time, I shall endeavour to shelter my self here from all dangerous stormes under the shadow of your wings, to enjoy the sweetnes of peace and happines which this whole Land expecteth from your wisdom, and one who for the glory of God hath sought hither for refuge, (as I) may hope from your bountie.
And there in greater securitie than the Dove that is chased by the Hawks, doth find: being once gotten into the holes of the Rock, I shall meditate the rest of my dayes the wonders of the Almighty, and earnestly pray to him, that it would please him to poure out upon their royall Majesties, and their Princely Progenie, upon your most Honora∣ble Persons, and this whole Land, all the heavenly and earthly blessings that can wish.
Most Illustrious Assembly,

London this 28. of March. 1642.
