



Most noble Lord, and my very honourable good Ladie,
THIS Epistle to the Colossians con∣taines an excellent Epitome of the doctrine expressed in the rest of the bookes of the old and new Te∣stament: as will appeare by a briefe delineation or adumbration of the proportion and parts of that sacred body of truth, paralelled with the seuerall parts of this Epistle, vsing the benefit of this Com∣mentarie vpon it.
The whole word of God may be diuided into two parts: the first concernes faith, or what we must beleeue;The sub∣stance of all Theologie exprest briefly in this Epistle: as is mani∣fested by in∣stance. the se∣cond Loue, or what we must doe. So the Apostles diuided it, as may appeare by the patterne vsed in their times, which stood of two parts, faith and loue, 2. Tim. 1.13. And so is this Epistle deuided; for in the two first Chapters he tells them what they must beleeue, and in the two last, what they must doe.
Now faith lookes either vpon God, or vpon the world. In




 God two things are to be beleeued: 1. the attributes of the essence. 2. the trinitie of the persons. The attributes vn∣fold the nature and proprieties of God; such as are, his power, glory, knowledge, and the like; of the power of God, yee may read, Chap. 1.11. & 2.12. of the glory of God, Chap. 1.11. & 3.17. of the knowledge of God Chap. 3.10.
The Persons are three, the Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost; of the Father, chap: 1.2.12. & 3.17. of the Sonne, chap. 1.2.13.15. &c. of the Holy Ghost, chap. 2.19. Thus of God.
In the consideration of the world, faith is taken vp espe∣cially about the creation of it, and the gouernment of it. In the creation it viewes the mightie workemanship of God, ma∣king all things of nothing, euen the very Angels, as well as men and other creatures. Of the creation, chap. 1.16. of Angells also chap. 1.16. both good, chap. 2.9. and euill, chap. 2.15.
The gouernment of the world, is two waies to be considered: First, in the generall disposing and preseruation of all things. Secondly, and principally, faith is taken vp about the consideration of the gouernment of Men in the world: of the generall prouidence, chap. 1.16.17.
The prouidence of God ouer man, may be considered according to his fourefold estate: 1. of Innocencie. 2. of Cor∣ruption. 3. of Grace. 4. of Glorie.
In the estate of Innocencie, faith chiefly beholds and won∣ders at the glorious Image of God, in which man was created; of this Image you may read, chap. 3.10. by analogie.
In the state of Corruption, two things do offer themselues to our dolefull contemplation: 1. sinne, 2. the punishment of sin. Sinne is both originall and actuall: of originall sinne, chap. 2.13. of actuall sinnes, chap. 2.11.13.3.5.6. of the punishment of sinne, chap. 3.25. & 2.13. & 3.6.
In the state of Grace, faith viewes three things: 1. the meanes of grace. 2. the subiect. 3. the degrees. The meanes is either before time, or in time: before time, tis the election of God; of which, chap. 3.12. in time, the meanes chiefly is
 Christ, and the couenant in him. In Christ, two things are to be considered, his person, and his office. The theorie concerning Christs person, is twofold: 1. concerning his two natures. 2. concerning his twofold estate in those natures. The natures of Christ are two, humane and diuine, ioyned in the bond of personall vnion; of the humane nature, chap. 1.22. of his di∣uine, chap. 1.15.16, &c. of the vnion of both, chap. 2.9. The state of the person of Christ is twofold: 1. of humilia∣tion. 2. of exaltation. His humiliation comprehends, 1. his incarnation, as the antecedent. 2. his obedience to the law of Moses. 3. his passion: of his incarnation and obedience impliedly in diuers places; of his passion, chap. 1.14.20.22, 14, 15. His exaltation comprehends his resurrection, as∣cension, and session at the right hand of God: of his resurrection, chap: 2.12: of his sitting at Gods right hand, chap. 3.1.
Thus of the person of Christ.
The office of Christ is to mediate between God and man. The parts are 1. his propheticall office. 2. His priestly office. 3. his regall office. His propheticall office stands in propoun∣ding of doctrine, and in making it effectuall by his spirit. His priestly office standeth in two things: 1. Expiation of sin. 2. Intercession for vs to God. His regall office is partly in the gouernment of the Church, as the head thereof: and partly in the subduing of the enemies of God and the Church; of the treasures of wisdom in Christ as a Prophet, chap. 2.3. of the sacrifice of Christ as a Priest, chap. 2.14. of the head∣ship of Christ ouer the Church, chap. 1.18. & 2.19.
Thus of Christ.
The couenant followeth, which is considered both in it selfe, and in the seales of it. Though the couenant of workes be accidentally a meanes to driue vs to Christ, yet the proper effectuall meanes is the couenant of grace, which God hath made with the elect in Christ: this being recorded in the word of the Gospell both in the old and new Testament, is the ordinarie meanes, by the power of Christ, to con∣uert soules to God, by the preaching of it in the ministery of his seruants; of this chap. 1.6.

The seales of this couenant are the Sacraments, both of the old and new Testament: of the old testament, was Circum∣cision, and the rest; of which chap. 2.11. of the new testa∣ment, are baptisme and the Lords Supper, of baptisme, ch. 2.12
Thus of the meanes of grace. The subiect of true grace is the Church, the body of Christ vnited to him by mysticall vnion. The Church consists of two sorts of men, Ministers and people; of the Church in generall with her vnion with Christ, chap. 1.18, 19, 20. & 2.19. of Ministers and peo∣ple with their duties, chap. 1.25.28. & 2.1. and in diuers other places.
Thus of the subiect also. The degrees of grace in the third estate, are 1. vocation. 2. faith. 3. remission of sinnes 4. sanctification. of vocation, chap. 3.15. of faith, chap 1.4.23. & 2.12. of remission of sinnes, chap. 1.14. & 2.13. of sanctification, in both parts, both mortification, chap. 3.5.8. and viuification, chap. 2.13. & 3.10.
Thus of the estate of grace.
The fourth and last estate of man, is the estate of glorie; which stands of three degrees. 1. resurrection. 2. the last iudgement. and 3. life eternall. of resurrection, chap. 1.18. of the last iudgement and eternall glory, chap. 3.4. And thus of the first part of the patterne of wholesome words, and that is faith: now followeth the second, and that is loue.
Loue comprehends all the duties we owe to God or men, as being the bond of perfection, which ties together all holy seruices. Loue must bee considered both in the adiuncts, and in the sorts of it.
The adiuncts are constancie, wisedom, zeale, care to auoide offen∣ces, and the like of loue in generall, chap. 1.4. & 2.2. & 3.14. of constancie, ch. 2.6. of zeale, chap. 4.13. of wisdome and care to auoide offences, chap. 4.5. thus of the adiuncts.
The sorts of works comprehended vnder loue, are two chiefly: 1. works of worship. 2. workes of virtue. The works of worship are either internall onely, or externall and inter∣nall also. The internall are, the acknowledging of God, the loue of God, the feare of God, the trust or hope in God, and which
 floweth from thence, patience. of the acknowledgement of God, chap. 1.9, 10. of the loue of God, chap. 1.8. of the feare of God, chap. 3.22. of the hope in God, chap. 1.5. of patience, chap. 1.11. The workes of worship that are both externall and internall, are praier and thankesgiuing. of prayer, chap. 4.2, 3. of thankesgiuing, chap. 3.17.
Thus of workes of worship. Workes of virtue either con∣cerne our selues or others: the workes that concerne our selues, are chiefly two: the studie of heauenly things, and tem∣perance. Temperance containes chastitie and sobriety in the vse of all sorts of earthly things. of the studie of heauenly things, chap. 3.1, 2. of chastitie, ch. 3.5. of sobriety, ch. 3.2.
Thus of vertue that concernes our selues.
Works of virtue towards others, are chiefly nine. Mercy, curtesie, humilitie, meekenesse, long-suffering, clemencic, peaceablenes, thankfulnes and iustice: of the first eight of these, chap. 3.12. to 16. Now Iustice is either publike or priuate: publike Iu∣stice is in Magistrates, of which, chap. 2.5. priuate Iustice, is either commutatiue, in bargaining, or distributiue, in giuing that which is right to euery one according to his degree, and so distributiue Iustice is either ciuill or oeconomicall. Pri∣uate Iustice in ciuill conuersation with men abroad, is either to Magistrates, of which, chap. 1.5. or to all men, and so consists of truth and faithfulnes with sincerity and obseruance. oeconomical Iustice is that which concernes the houshold; and so containes the duties of husbands and wiues, chil∣dren and parents, seruants and masters; of which chap. 3.18. to the end, with the first verse of chap. 4.
Thus also of Loue.
Thus I haue shewed the excellent compleatnes of this worthy scripture: it remaines that I declare some of the reasons that haue emboldned me to make choice of your Honors names for the dedication of my exposition vpon this scripture. Three things swaying Godly men in like case, haue compelled mee, protection, obseruance, and thank∣fulnes. the preaching of this doctrine, as by the mercy of
 God it wrought abundant consolation and comfortable reformation in many hearers, so did it seldom rest from the assaults and calumnies, which one while prophanenesse, ano∣ther while enuie powred out vpon it. Great cause there is therfore that it comming out now to a more publike view, should seeke shelter: and of whom should I seeke it or hope for it sooner then of your Honors, who are pleased by your daily countenance to assure me a iust patronage? For the second, to omit the high reputation which the re∣ligious eminencie of both your ancestors hath set your Honors in, and the praises of many singular endowments and gifts, in which you doe worthily excell: there are two things wherein your Honors daily winne a great increase of obseruance; the one is pietie towards God, the other mercie towards the poore. The loynes of the poore daily blesse your Honors, and their mouthes daily pray for you. Your piety is many waies exprest: to omit many vndoubt∣ed proofes of it, your Lordship hath much confirmed the perswasion of your religious disposition by your daily and affectionate respect of the word of God and praier in pri∣uate, since the Lord hath made you lesse able to resort more frequently to the publike assemblies. And Madam, what thanks can wee euer sufficiently giue vnto God for that rare and worthy example, with which your Ladishippe doth comfort and incourage the hearts of many, in your care of Gods sabaoths, & in your neuer-failing attendance vpon the ordinances of God, with the congregation, mor∣ning and euening, not only in your owne person, but with your whole familie. For the third, I doe ingenuously pro∣fesse before God and men, that I hold my obligation vnto your Honors in the iust debt of seruice and gratitude to be so great, as the labour here imployed is no way answerable to a meete discharge, no though it had bin taken only for your Honors vse; for to omit the debt which I am in for a great part of my maintenance, and that singular incourag∣ment I reape daily in your Honors respect of my mini∣sterie; what thankes can euer be sufficient, or what seruice
 can euer be enough for that incomparable benefit (which I haue and shall euer esteeme the greatest ouw blessg did euer befall mee; and which (Madam) by your Hs singular care and furtherance, after an admiral  anr I obteined) I meane the cleaning of my reputation from the vniust aspersions of my aduersaries, and that by th mouth and pen of the Lords annointed, my most dread Seueraigne, whom the God of heauen with all abundance of royall and diuine blessings recompence in all earthly felicitie and e∣ternall glory. And the same God of Peace and Father of mercies, sanctifie your Honors wholy, that your whole spi∣rits and soules and bodies may be preserued blamelesse vn∣to the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ: faithfull is hee that hath called you, who also will doe it. And I doubt not but God that hath inriched your Honors with the true grace that is in Iesus Christ, will daily winne vnto you in∣crease of honor from your perseuerance in well-doing: so as thanksgiuing for your sakes shall bee abundantly giuen vnto God by many. Thus in most humble manner crauing your Honors acceptance and patronage of this worke, I end, and shall reioyce to remaine.

