


Worthy Sir,
I Have by a providence (God so orde∣ring it) seen and perused your pain∣full, profitable, powerfull work; E∣nough (through Gods grace) to startle and awaken the wicked, and to encou∣rage Saints: well it is for the former that they have any remote hopes of heaven: but sure it is in respect of a possible change, for otherwise, they are at present,Eph. 2.12. without Christ, without Hope, and without God in the World. The hope they usually harbour in themselves is indeed no hope, at least no true hope, for such an hope, as an handmaid,Job 8.13.14. Job. 11.20. follows faith. The Hypo∣crites hope shall perish, it shall be cut off and his trust shall be as a spiders web, or
as a puffe of breath, or as the giving up of the ghost; The hope therefore you give them is not in respect of their pre∣sent state: Christs rule is infallible; verily, verily I say unto thee,Jo. 3.3. except a man be born again he cannot see the king∣dome of God.1 Cor. 6.9.10. Know ye not (saith the A∣postle) that the unrighteous shall not in∣herit the Kingdome of God? be not de∣ceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idola∣ters, nor Adulterers, &c. shall inherit the Kingdome of God. The Souls of men, as such, do wave up and downe without any anchor at all, only if they will come in, lay hold on the covenant, embrace the offers and tenders of grace, there is then Hope in Israel concerning this Thing. And as for the Saints, that are often beset with darkness, sin, af∣fliction, you have opened such a doore of Hope to them, that if they will but enter, they may take a view of that buil∣ding,Isa. 54.11.12. whose stones are layd with fair co∣lours, and the foundation with Saphires, whose Windows are of Agats, and the Gates of Carbuncles, and all the borders of pleasant desirable stones.Pro 10.28. The Hope of the righteous shall be gladness, Saith So∣lomon;
it may be for a time the Lord may rear out of Zion,Joel. 3.16. and utter his voice to Jerusalem, and the Heavens and the Earth may shake, yet for all this, the Lord will be the Hope of his people, and the strength of the Children of Is∣rael: there is no reason that Gods people at the lowest should let go their hold; are not the promises of victory & defence to the Prisoners of hope? yea sure∣ly. The Lord their God shall save them in that day,Zach. 9.12 16. as the flocks of his people; for they shall be as the stones of a Crown lifted up. Now that the unregenerate may be wonne, and that the Saints may know their priviledges whilst they are yet in the valley of Achor, my advice and desire is that these things may be published, not only to a great congregation, but to the Church throughout these Nations. I hope much good will be in the publishing of these Hopes, that although we have all trespassed against our God, even from Dan to Bersheba, Yet now there is Hope in Israel concerning this thing. If a Blush of modesty should
stand as a temptation to keep back the publication of this piece, I can∣not but say to you as Schecaniah to Ezra, Arise,Ezra. 10.4. for this matter belongeth unto thee, we also be with thee, be of good courage and do it. The Lord bless these papers, and the labours of all the learned to the good of his church and the Glory of his grace. So prayes
Garstang Jan: 2. 1658.

