


THe publishing of this Sermon (what ever the preaching of it was) may seeme (Right Honourable) as unseasonable as that Con∣solatory Embassy the Trojans sent to the Emperour Tiberius upon the death of his son Drusus,Sueton. in Tibe∣rio. which came so extremely late, that the Emperour, to re∣quite their kindnesse, tels them, That as they were sorry for the death of his son, so was he for the death of their Hector; implying that they were both equally forgot∣ten. Possibly that sad Accident in the West, which first ministred occasion for the preaching of this Sermon, is so too, and then quorsum haec? if at all, why not soo∣ner? if not sooner, why now? I might plead many things in mine own excuse, why not sooner? My avocations & employments since the preaching of this Sermon have been so many, that had I been most desirous of obeying your Command for the printing of it; I could scarce soo∣ner have accomplished it, but I must confesse my desire was that this unworthy piece (the conception of so few houres) might never have out-lived the houre in which it was delivered, except (by the blessing of God) in the

hearts of those that heard it. But then why now? why at all made publike? God is my Record, the only reason that extorts this from me at this time is, because we are still encompassed with the Evidences of that Displeasure, which in the West began to break out upon us, which makes me feare, that some of that heart-searching, sin-discovering, heart-humbling, Covenant-acting work which God then call'd us to, hath on some hand or other been neglected. We whom God hath made Seers to his people must not shut our eyes,Ezk. 33.3. &c. and refuse to see what God reveales, nor lay our hands upon our mouths, and fear to declare what we see. And certainly you have it from the mouth of more then one or two, or a few of those that preach before you, that God is very sore dis∣pleased still. There are manifest signes of Gods displea∣sure against a Nation, such as every eye that beholds them, may read wrath and indignation in them. And there are secret intimations of Gods displeasure, ocu∣li  exon , i¦pas amen quo ram Dei indi nt, cogno∣scuntur. Ma. loc. com. which though they be visible in themselves yet few know how to interpret them, and to collect the displeasure of God from them. The sword is a manifest signe of Gods wrath against the Nation. Iob 19.29. Be ye afraid of the sword: for wrath bringeth the punishment of the sword, that you may know there is a Iudgement. But besides this, there are Characters, though all cannot read them, of Gods indignation against his own people

in this Kingdome, against those that have appeared & engaged themselves for him. There is, that saith, When God is angry with a people,Less: de Perfe∣ctionibus Divi∣nis, li. 13. c. 10. and intends to dash them in pieces, he leaves them sine animo, sine concilio, &c. without heart, without Councill, without strength, with∣out fit Commanders; so involved with difficulties for∣reigne and domestick, they know not how possibly to ex∣tricate themselves. If one give good counsell, presently another by captious arguments overthrowes it, & those that should judge of both, have not light enough to dis∣cerne, which is for the publike safety and which destru∣ctive. If any opportunity of Service be presented, either there is no notice takē of it, or to save a little charges, it is neglected, or none knowes how to improve it. Dangers imminent, are either not fore-seen, or slighted: Traitors creepe in, that discover their Councels to their enemies. There are jealousies & factions among their great men, in favour whereof, one studies to crosse the designes and successes of the other, though the Publike be undone by it. The Treasury is wasted in needlesse expences; the soul∣diers mutine and are seditious, and when they have plundered a Country, must have as much given them to forbeare plundering as would maintain a war. Finally, while all seek their own profit, & no mans heart is upon the Publike good, all runs to ruine. On the contrary, the enemies whom God intends to punish that people by,

though they be far more wicked and ungodly, yet they prosper, their courage, their strength increases; they take opportune counsels, they know how to improve & pur∣sue advantages; there is great concord among their Lea∣ders; no man seeks to undermine & overthrow another; no man blends his own private quarrels with the Pub∣like Cause. In a word, all things succeed as if God favou∣red their cause, & directed their counsels, when yet their cause is unjust, and their intentions wicked, and there is nothing further from their heart then God.
But this Discourse you need not, much lesse any Appli∣cation of it, who are apprehensive of this already, and have therefore set your selves very lately to seeke the Lord, and Attonement with him, by Fasting and Humi∣liation, in such away as never Parliament did before you. That God who hath put it into your hearts thus to seeke him,In the East i Lincones-Inne Chappell, kept Decemb. 18. grant that you and we may find such fruit & suc∣cesse therof in your selves, Counsels, Armies, as this poore Church and Nation, after so many dayes of mourning, may once take up that song of praise, Isai. 12.1. O Lord, I will praise thee: though thou wast angry with me, yet thine anger is turned away, and thou comfortedst me. This is the Prayer of

