



IF there be any History in all the Booke of God that may paralell our times, sure it is this of Nehemiah.
The People of Israel though delivered from their long and sorrowfull captivity in Babylon: yet long it was ere they could see Truth and peace esta∣blished in their Church and Common-wealth, the Temple of God reedified, the worship of God restored, the walls of the holy Citty repaired, the Lords Sab∣baths sanctified, the Priests in their severall Orders and stations attending the service of their God: Long it was ere matters of Church and State attained unto a Beautifull Regularity;c Pembl. some reckoning above a a 100. other above 150.Perk. Chronol. Red. cap. Anno. 3431. Secundus Nehe∣miah praefectus, Anno Mund. 3537. Calvetius & Helvicus, redit populi, 3418. Secund Nehem. praefect. Anno 3575. some 200. yeares.d The vulgar Latine and the English Gene∣va, make Ezra the writer of this Story, but it is a mistake. Nehem. 1.1. See Pembl. Three on sets were given to this great work: thrice did the Lord raise up and employ blessed and glorious instruments in it before it arrived at it's perfection. The first was Zorobbabel, Ezra 1. The second was Ezra, Ezra 7. The third was Nehemiah, the Author of this Booke, according to the good hand of his God upon him,Neh. 4.2, 3. with invincible courage and indefatigable patience against the insolent scoffes, multiplyed conspiraciesCap. 4.8, 11. cap 6.2, 4. and terrifying reports of his enemies,Cap. 4. cap. 12. cap 6.6, 9. against the treacheries of some of his owne Bre∣thren and Nobles, and their base compliances with the publick AdversariesCap. 3.5. cap. 6.10, 17. against the murmurings of the peopleCap. 4.10.5.1, 2, &c. with great expence of his estateCap. 5.8, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. and hazard of his lifeCap. 4.23.6.2. carried on this great work, and gave it a full and blessed period, to the comfort of the Jewes and terrour of their enemiesChap. 6.16

To paralell this: the people of England, though through the mercy of God they have bin in a gracious measure de∣livered from the spirituall Captivity of Romish Baby∣lon, which our fore-Fathers were enthralled in so long a time; yet now almost a 100 years have passed over us, since that first deliverance, and yet we see not that purity of Truth, that beauty of worship, that orderlines of admi∣nistrations, that strength of discipline, as wals and bul∣warks about this our Jerusalem, which hath bin the desire, prayer, expectation of us & the ages that were before us. God seems to me to proceed by the same steps with us, that he did with the people of the Jews, and hath made 3 visible and memorable on-sets upon the Reformation and re∣stauration of his Church among us. The first by that fa∣mous Prince, the miracle and glory of his people & age, Edward the 6. of ever blessed memory, whose beginnings though exceeding hopeful and promising were soon stopt by acountermand, as it were from the God of Heaven, as Zerobabells beginnings were by letters from the KingEzr 4.23, 24.. Soon after the work was revived againe by his deare and gratious sister Q. Elizabeth, in whose hands the Lord cau∣sed the worke to prosper to some further perfection, yet not unto that beauty and glory we hope our God intends to raise it to therfore this 3d time hath God raised up Instru∣ments for the advancing of this worke, even your selves, Honorable and Beloved: who though you have met with the same oppositions in this great imployment that wor∣thy Nehemiah did: Malignant scoffs, bloudy conspira∣cies, reports full of various terrours, desertions of some of your Brethren, murmurings of not a few of the people: yet in the midst of Armies and changes of Oppositions and discouragements, have hitherto with unwearied patience and undauntable Resolutions, not without great expence of your estates and hazard of your
lives, attended upon this worke now these two years. At the present to the great griefe of all loyall and honest hearts, we see you in the same posture that Nehemiah and his assistants were, Cap. 4.17. Every one with the one of his hands working, and with the other holding his weapon, a sad condition: yet go on, the work of reforming the Church is Gods: he called you to it, he will maintain and defend you in it, he will give perfection to it, God is not as Man, that he should begin to build, and not be able to finish.
The sutablenesse of this History to our times, invited my thoughts (upon Summons received to this service) to looke into this Book, and see if there were not something there might fit the Day, and the sutablenesse of that por∣tion of Scripture, which is the Basis of this ensuing Dis∣course unto the Day, concluded my thoughts upon this Text. My desire and prayer was, that I might speake something that might give glory to God for the mani∣fold and great Deliverances he had wrought for us, and something that might give encouragement to your selves in the great things you are to work for God. This latter part of my desire was intercepted by a feare of consuming too much of that time, which (though your Piety could willingly have bestowed upon the worke of Praise-offering) yet the extreme necessities of State, could hardly spare. This made me silence, much of what I had prepared to speake, both in the Explicato∣ry and Applicatory parts of the Sermon: which yet (seeing it is your pleasures to command what you heard to the Presse) waits now with the rest upon you. I dare not thinke there is any thing, either in the one or in the o∣ther, that can adde unto your light: if any thing spoken or written may excite or encrease your heat, I shall en∣joy much of the end I propounded in this Service. I dare not undertake to direct in any thing, if in any thing, I
may erect your spirits in times so full of distempers, with a Christian holy dedignation of all oppositions to carry on the great businesse of the Lord Iesus, in estab∣lishing Religion, Reforming the Church, rooting out Popery. I have enough, if I faile of this, it is the sin of my infirmity, not my intention.
Luther in sad tumultuous times was wont to say to his Brethren and those about him, Come let us sing the 40. Psalme. Me thinkes you (Right Honourable) in these sad conflicting times may say one to another, come let us reade the Booke of Nehemiah, there you may reade experiences, encouragements, quicknings, di∣rections, presidents, to spread them before you is not the worke of an Epistle: nor is it needfull, having beene fully and excellently offered to your view in a Fast Ser∣mon,Dr Gouge his Sermon. onely this, as you have made the same preparations to this service you are now upon,Nehem. 1. which Nehemiah did, addressing your selves thereunto by Fasting and Prayer: and have met the same varieties of oppositions and dis∣couragements, so persisting in the same pathes of Zeale for God, compassion to his Church, dependance on his power, adherence to his cause, constancy in his Service, Doubt not but the same mercifull hand of his and your God (after your Nehemiah like conflicts) shall crowne your faithfullnesse with Nehemiahs suc∣cesses, which were so glorious, that when all their ene∣mies heard thereof,Nehem. 6.16. and all the Heathen round about, they were much cast downe in their owne eyes, for they perceived that the worke was wrought of God. And they that are of you shall build the old waste pla∣ces, shall raise up the foundations of many Generati∣ons:Isa. 58.12. and yee shall be called the repairers of the brea∣ches, the restorer of paths to dwell in, which hath been and is, the Prayer of

