



IT is not so much to Vindicate the inno∣cency of my intentions and perfor∣mances (though too enviously or un∣reasonably traduced by some) as it is to assert the eminency of my respects unto you, and all others of your Order; that I now present to your more seri∣ous review, what I lately preached, and you favourably heard, this Sermon: I never yet doted so much upon any of my Composures, as to think'em worthy by the midwifery of the press, to be delivered unto publike censure or protection. And for this, it might have been contented to have dyed amongst its follows in my study, and layn there wrapt up in its own winding-sheet; but that I held it improper to light a Candle, and then presently put it under a Bushel.
I have seen and heard of Sermons, addressed and directed to the honour of other callings much inferior to yours; but if I mistake not, I have the happiness to be the first, who
have thus publiquely remonstrated their Ministerial affe∣ctions unto Husbandry; a calling that (as I hope I have in some good degree made it appear) is as capable of our most industrious and honourable respects, as any other.
It is the trivial excuse of many writers, to pretend the im∣portunity of friends, for the publishing their conceptions; and it is the slight policy of others, with a seeming modesty, to ac∣knowledge the weakness, worthlesness, or abortiveness of their labours: thereby indeed vehemently desiring that ap∣plavse, which they would be thought to decline: I have no such excuse for this publication. I do clearly profess, that it was my ambition to promote the honour of your calling, and the salvation of your soules, which prevail'd with me to preach and to print this Sermon. Nor is such ambition to be blamed, but cherished; For asS. W. D. one has solidly and ac∣cutely observed, Ambition (if the vulgar acception of the word were corrected) would signifie no more, than an ex∣traordinary lifting of the feet in the rough wayes of honour; and hath a warmth (till it be chafed into a Fever) which is necessary for every virtuous breast. And the Apostle says plainly,Gal. 4.18. It is good to be zealously affected alwayes in a good thing: Ambire, ardenter sectari, sayes the Scholiast; Ambitiously, and ardently to pursue it. I have given you the reason of this dedication, my respect unto you; Ile now add the reason why I do so respect you.
To you who heard this Sermon, and to whom it was more particularly designed, my respects are oblidgedly deep and many; I respect you as my very friendly Neighbours, as my very benevolent friends, and some of you as my Parishioners, the immediate and undenyable Objects of my Ministerial care and affections; you are dear unto me in the Lord, it is the substance of all my studies and contrivements, how I may advance your Spiritual good: Knowing therefore that encouragements unto well-doing, are the Noblest and most prevailing documents, I quickly resolved upon this under∣taking; hoping it may prove the most compendious Method,
both to encourage and instruct you, since hereby I have the advantage at once to demonstrate both your dignity and your duty.
Again, you reap unto me temporal things; and is it not my duty to sow unto you spiritual? True it is, that we Mi∣nisters do this, in the ordinary and perpetual seed-time of our weekly Sermons: And that we do so, we have nothing to glory of1 Cor. 9.16. for necessity is laid upon us yea, wo is unto us, if (so of't at least) we preach not the Gospel. But this I have done willingly, and not out of necessity, that you may have some testimony of my Gratitude, as well as of my duty.
Lastly, to you All, who in a Civill sence are (and it is my serious ambition, that you may be in a religious sense too)Isa. 6.13. the pith and substance of the County, my respects are due for your Calling sake. A Calling, so worthy the indispensable respects of all men, that if I would in this Epistle permit my officious pen to expatiate, I should sooner want paper, then matter to dilate upon; but that were in part to prevent the business of the Sermon and to entertain you longer in the Porch, then I intend to do in the House. In a word then, my opinion of your Calling is this: that I think the Sun, who is (under God) the universal Paerent of fruitfulness, is not more necessary or comfortable to the world, than is Hus∣bandry.
'Tis a Calling so venerable, that it has taught the most barbarous Nations, the most insulting Conquerors, a saving ingenuity, and a merciful tenderness; Parce Agricolis, Have a care to preserve the Husbandman, was the publike voice of Nature and Nations;Diod Sicul. lib. 2. Bibl. One of the most ancient Historians, relates it to have been the custome of the Indians, that even in their mutual devastations, and invasive wars, they on all sides spared the Husbandman; as well know∣ing how advantageously usefull he was to both parties. And Plutarch observes, that the old Corinthians and inhabitants of Megara, were so respectful to the Husbandman, that no man would by any means disturb or endamage him, Another
reports, that Cyrus commanded it to be proclaimed, That the Husbandman should be permitted to follow his imploy∣ments,Xenephon de Cyri. Jnstit lib. 5. and preserved unharmed. And Suidas gives this full altestation to Bellisarius, that great and most victorious Ge∣neral, that so solicitous and effectual was his care of Hus∣bandmen that no violence or wrong was ever done to any one of them by any souldier under his conduct or command; I'le add but one instance more, even he who hath so prodigiously advanced his Empire by spoil and ruine, he who hath been esteemed, even to a Proverb. Barbareus; the great Turk, is yet observed (by the mostS. A. Blunt. judicious of modern Travel∣lers) to take a special and most exact care for the mainte∣nance of Husbandry; for he divides all his Countries among his Timariots, who are but his Yeomanry, upon whom he be∣stows Timars or Teuds, not only that they may awe the Pro∣vinces, but also couse the land to be well till'd and cul ivat; And these Timariots (or Yeomen) themselves, that their Farms may be well managed, held up the Farmers with much care. It were easie to add unto these the consenting suffra∣ges of Nations more eivilized, which are both copious and magnificent.
But what need I multiply the Testimonies of men, to assert the honour and respect that alwaies hath been, and alwaies shall be due to Husbandry? Since God himself hath been, pleased to publish his most sacred respects unto it, as many other ways, so particularly, by that strict and provisionary care which he hath taken for the protection of the most in∣feriour pieces of it: He would not allow so much as a fruit Tree to be spoyled;Deue. 20.19. When thou shalt besiege a City, a long time in making war against it, to take it, thou shalt not destroy the Trees thereof: For, thou mayst eat of them, and thou shalt not cut them down, &c. And Christ him∣self in that brief model of Prayer, doth not obscurely inti∣mate the respects we owe unto the Husbandman, when he ranks this in the middle of those jew Peritions which he would have us to put up daylie to our heavenly Father, Give
us this day our daylie Bread; Which unless we understand it in a mystical or miraculous sense only, doth in my opinion clearly appoint us to pray daylie for the Husbandman, by whom God does ordinarily dispense that staff and support of life. This is every man's duty, this shall be my practise, as to speak well of you, so to speak as well as I can for you; And this also directs me how to conclude at this time; Beseech∣ing you All to accept this Sermon, as the first publike Essay of my Christian respects, and exalted affections towards you; and beseeching the All-sufficient God, to direct, bless, encou∣rage, and defend you, in all your lawful labours, and laborious imployments.2 Cor. 9.10. Now he that ministreth seed to the Sower both minister bread for your food, and multiply your seed sown, and increase the fruit of your Righteousness. So prays he who is indeed one of the most unworthy Labourers in the Lords Harvest, But

