



THis Sermon might have been entertai∣ned from the Pulpit, and now from the Presse, as Pharez was from the womb,Gen. 38.29. with a, Quàm erupisti, how hast thou broken forth? were it not knowne to this Assembly, that the Parliament had designed another, both in yeares and all Intellectuall and spi∣rituall abilities, far more fit for the solemn work of so solemne a day, in so solemne and Reverend anConsisting of both Houses of Parliament & the Divines all joyning in hu∣miliation and prayer. Assembly. But bodily infirmities compelling him with Zarah to draw back his hand, the work was (I know not by what providence) devolved on me, . I was to that quire of Mourners and In∣tercessours, but as the grashopper was toHujus memi∣nit & Strabol. 6. & Clem. Al. in Protreptico al gentes, & Phot. in Ep. ad Joen. Patrici∣um. Eunomius his harp; quae Citharae jugo insidens ruptae chordae sonum expleret.

The same Authority (which I am resolved to obey, usque ad Aras) that commanded mee to preach then, commands me now to make publique to the eyes of all, what then was committed to the ears of not ma∣ny; when the same Authority shall command other things that have since been spoken and transacted in your Assembly to see the Light, I doubt not but all so∣ber-minded men, that have not been made drunk with the cup of Romes fornication, will acknowledge you have with a single eye sought Truth with peace, and union with Reformation.
It is (Men, Brethren and Fathers) a great work that God hath called you to set your heads, and hearts, and hands unto, to rescue truth from the jaws of those monstrous errours, that had almost devoured it; to disburthen the worship of God of those corruptions, that have so long clogged and defiled it; to advise of, and propound such a Government in the Church, as may be most agreeable to Gods word, most conformed to the pattern in the Mount, and to the practises of the best Reformed Churches; ; Had our God cast you upon this work in the most pacate times, and among a People the most prepared for Re∣formation that ever any were, yet (in it selfe conside∣red) such is the infinite weight of your employment as might even swallow up all your thoughts. But then to consider how unprepared the hearts of people are for that which is the work of this age, and this Assembly, Reformation, which hath been represen∣ted to Prince and People under the odious notion of Brownisme, Anabaptisme, Church Anarchy,
Confusion; in so much that with many, endeavours and assays of Reformation will find no better entertain∣ment, then Hezekiahs messengers of Reformation did, 2 Chron. 30.10. when the people laughed them to scorn, and mocked them; Nay, with some worse, for so enragedly doe some burn after their Idolatrous wayes, and so mad are they upon their own inven∣tions,Jer. 50.38. that deny them these, and it is to be feared you shall finde them in the temper the Abezrites were, scarce any thing will pacify them, but the bloud of those that have cast down the altar of Baal, and cut down the grove that was by it; Iudg. 6.30. Doe not Mul∣titudes cry already upon the disuse of some Ceremo∣nies, and the displacing of some Superstitious Priests? do they not cry with Micah, Judg. 18.24. Yee have ta∣ken away our Gods and our Priests, and what have we more? This makes the times so calamitous, as we may say of them with the Learned Rivet. In multis certè infoelicissima sunt nostra Tempora, in quibus in pessum omnia ruunt, & quasi transversum ire vi∣dentur. Concutiuntur Regna, & Respublicae; tu∣multibus omnia perstrepunt, & seditionibus; cae∣dibus terra polluitur; & quod malum omnium malorum fons est, clamant peccata, et coelum pro∣vocant; profligatis ferè moribus honestis, & vitiis latè quasi apertâ portâ erumpentibus. Pruriunt ingenia multorum, & in rebus Divinis ita se ge∣runt & adeò licenter, ut quod olim in populo E∣braeo (quibus temporibus non erat Rex in Israele) quisque quod rectum videbatur in oculis suis fa∣ciebant, Iud. 17.6. Sic multi sunt qui nullis repa∣gulis
continentur, & fidem in dies mutans, quam dum multiplicant, amittunt. Alios vetustâ socor∣diâ detentos dum nullam mutationem admittunt in bonum, ita dementat superstitio, ut in monito∣res insurgant, ne dum ut eos patienter audiant. All this proclaims the work of Reformation the more ne∣cessary, but withall the more difficult.
Against these difficulties what have you to encou∣rage you? : were yee encompassed as sometimes Elisha was, with an hoast of armed men, yet might yee say as he did there, They that be with us are more then they that be against us.
For first,Revel. 19 14. with you are all the Armies in heaven: All the Saints and Churches of Christ are with you, striving with you by their prayers, (not only in re∣ference to your persons, but to your employments) for protection, guidance, blessing. The appearing of Christ in the beauty of Reformation among us, may be said to be the desire of all (Christian) Nations.
Secondly, not only so, but yee have the prayers of those that have been before us. For verily many Pro∣phets and righteous men have desired to see the things which ye see,Favour me the use of this ex∣pression by way of allusi∣on. & have not seen them; viz. a Parliament resolved upon a more thorough Reformation; an As∣sembly called to debate & advise about the establishing of Doctrine and worship, and the Government of the Church in a more pure & regular manner; with how ma∣ny tears and prayers did our Forefathers seek this at the hands of God? The first fruits of which prayers we (who are entred upon their labours) have already tasted, and shall reap in full answers, in due time if we faint not.

Thirdly, you have the promise of our Lord Iesus Christ, Mat. 18.20. Where two or three are met together in my Name, there am I in the middest of them. To be met together in the Name of Christ, implies 3. things, 1o. Convenire ex vocatione.Camero in Myrothe. 2o. Convenire animo sequendi praescriptum Dei. 3o. Ita ut unus∣quisque diffidat sibi, & soli Deo fidat. And if ever any in all these particulars were met together in the Name of Christ, then are you, and therefore may with a holy humble confidence challenge this promise of our Lord Iesus, to be in the midst among you: Christ being in the midst of you, implies not only his adesse, but his praeesse too: as Psalm 82.1. And if God be thus with us, who can be against us? Rom. 8.
Fourthly, some sweet, encouraging, engaging experiences, we have had of the accomplishment of this promise. He must have a heart more ignorant and unbeleeving then the Apostles Idiot, that should come in and be an eare-witnesse of your proceedings and not worship God and report , That God is in you of a truth. Verily I have often from my heart wished that your greatest Ad∣versaries and Traducers might be witnesses of your Learned, grave, pious debates, which were able to silence, if not convert Malignity it selfe.
Goe on in this your might;Judges 6.14. hath not the Lord sent you? is not the Lord with you? goe on in this your might. Pergite quo coepistis pede. In that Spirit of wisdome, and Love, and zeal for Truth, where∣in you have proceeded hitherto, goe on still, to Love the Truth and Peace. Peace is precious, and so
is every grain and selvage of Gods truth. It was a say∣ing of Basil. Mag. and it well resembles him, , &c. qui sacris literis innutriti sunt, ne unicam quidem syllabam Divinorum Dogma∣tum prodere sustinent, sed pro his omnia, si opus sit, genera mortis libenter subeunt.
The Lord strengthen your hands and hearts unto the great work that lies before you, raise you above all discouragements and oppositions, fill you more and more with a Spirit of Wisdome, discerning, Reso∣lution, Courage, Zeale, faithfulnesse; make you in this work of Reforming his Church as Zachariah and Haggai were inre-building the Temple, ut Ecclesi∣am hanc, quam invenistis minus quam Lateriti∣am, reddatis plusquam Marmoream:Suet. in vitâ Aug. which is the sincere desire and prayer of him,

