


SIRS:
THe righteous judgements of God, having brought a disturbance, and noyse of War, for our security, unthankfulnesse, murmur∣ing, and devouring one another, upon our Country, those who were intrusted with the power thereof, turned their streames into severall Channells. Troublous Times, are Times of triall.
Many shall be purifyed and made white, and tried, but the wicked shall do wickedly, and none of the wicked shall understand, but the wise shall understand, Dan. 11. 10. Some God called out to suffer, some to doe, leaving Treacherous dealers, to deale treacherously.
Of the two first sorts are you. This honour have you received from God ei∣ther with patience and constancy to undergoe unvoluntarily a dangerous restraint, or with Resolution and courage, voluntarily to undertake, a Hazardous ingagement, to give an example, that Faith and Truth so shame∣fully despised in these evill days, have not altogether forsaken the sonnes of men.
It is not in my Thoughts, to relate unto your selves, what some of you suffered, and what some of you did: what difficulties and perplexities you wrestled withall, within, and without, the walls of your enemies, (The Birds in the cage, and the feild, having small cause of mutuall emulation) for that which remaines of these things, is only a Returnall of praise to him, by whom, all your works are wrought.
It cannot de denyed, but that Providence was eminently exalted, in the work of your protection and delivery: yet truly for my part, I cannot but con∣ceive

that it vayles to the Efficacy of Grace, in preventing you, from putting forth your hands unto iniquity, in any sinfull compliance with the enemies of our peace. The times wherein we live, have found the latter more rare then the former. What God wrought in you, hath the preheminence of what he wrought for you: as much, as to be given up to the Sword, is a lesser evill, then to be given up to a Treacherous Spirit.
What God hath done for you all, all men know; what I desire you should do for God, I know no reason, why I should make alike publick. The generall and particular civilities I have received, from all and every one of you, Ad∣vantaging me to make it out in another way. I shall adde nothing then to what you will meet withall, in the following Discourse, but only my De∣sire that you would seriously ponder the 11th Observation with the deducti∣ons from thence. For the rest, I no way feare, but that that God, who hath so appeared with you, and for you, will so indulge to your spirits, the presence and Guidance of his Grace, in these shaking times, that if any speak evill of you as of evill doers, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good Conversation in Christ, and glorify God in the day of Visi∣tation.
For these following Sermons, one of them was Preached at your desire, and is now published upon your Request. The first part of the labour, I wil∣lingly and cheerfully under went, The Latter merely in obedience to your com∣mands: being acted in it, more by your judgements, then mine own; you were perswaded, (meane as it was) it might be for the Glory of God, to have it made publick, where upon my Answer was, and is, that, for That, not only it, but my selfe also, should by his Assistance be ready for the Presse. The faillings and infirmities, attending the Preaching and Publishing of it, (which the Lord knowes to be very many) are mine: The inconveniences of Publishing such a Tractate from so weak a hand, whereof the World is full, must be yours; The fruit and benefit, both of the one, and other, is his, for whose Pardon of infirmities and removeall of inconveniences, shall be, as for you, and all the Church of God, the Prayer of
Sirs, 
Coggesh: Octob. 5. 1648.
