



SIR,
THe ensuing Sermon was preached upon as
sad an occasion, as on any particular ac∣count
hath been given to this Nation
in this our Generation. It is now pub∣lished,
as at the desire of very many who
love the savour of that perfume which is
diffused with the memory of the Noble person peculiarly
mentioned therein: so also upon the requests of such
others, as enables me justly to entitle the doing of it, Obe∣dience.
Being come abroad, it was in my thoughts to have
directed it immediately in the first place to Her, who of
any individuall person was most neerely concerned in
Him. But having observed how neere she hath been to
be swallowed up of sorrow, and what slow progresse, he
who tooke care to seale up instruction to her soule
by all dispensations, hath given her hitherto toward a
conquest thereof: I was not willing to offer directly a
new occasion unto the multitude of her perplexed
thoughts about this thing. No doubt, her losse being as
great as it could be upon the account of one subject to the
law of mortality, as many grains of grief and sorrow are
to be allowed her in the balance of the Sanctuary, as God

doth permit to be laid out and dispended about any of the
sons of men. He who is able to make sweet the bitterest,
waters, & to give a gracious issue to the most grievous tri∣all,
will certainly, in due time, eminently bring forth that
good upon her spirit, which he is causing all these things
to work together for. In the mean time, Sir, these lines
are to you: Your neer relation to that rare example of
Righteousness, Faith, Holiness, Zeal, Courage, Self-denial,
Love to his Countrey, Wisdom and Industry, mentioned
in the ensuing Sermon, the mutuall tender affection be∣tween
you whilest he was living; your presence with him
in his last triall and conflict, the deserved regard you bear
to his worth and memory; your designe of looking into,
and following after his steps and purpose in the work of
God in his Generation, as such an accomplished patern,
as few ages have produced the like; with many other
reasons of the like nature, did easily induce me hereunto.
That which is here printed is but the notes I first took,
not having had leisure since to give them a serious peru∣sall,
and upon that account, must beg a candid interpreta∣tion
unto any thing that may appear not so well digested
therein as might be expected. I have not any thing to ex∣press
concerning your self, but only my desire's that your
heart may be fixed to the Lord God of your fathers, and
that in the middest of all your Temptations and Opposi∣tions
wherewith your pilgrimage will be attended, you
may be carried on and established in your inward subje∣ction
unto, and outward contending for the Kingdome of
the dearly beloved of our souls; not fainting, or waxing
weary until you receive your dismission to rest, for your lot
in the end of the dayes.
SIR,

April. 2d.
