



THe many ample testimonies
of zealous reverence to the
providence of God, as well,
as affectionate care, for the
priviledges of men, which
have beene given, by this
Honourable Assembly of Parliament, in∣courage
the adorers of the one, no lesse then
the Lovers of the other, to vindicate that
also, from the incroachments of men. And
as it was not doubtlesse without divine
disposition, that those should be the chiefest

Agents, in robbing men of their priviledges,
who had nefariously attēpted to spoile God
of his providence: so we hope, the same All-ruling
hand, hath disposed of them, to be
glorious instruments, of re-advancing his
right, and supreme dominion over the hearts of
men, whose hearts, he hath prepared with
courage and constancy, to establish men, in
their inviolated rights: by reducing a sweet
Harmony, between awfull Sovereigntie, and
a well moderated libertie. Now the first of
these, being demandated to your particu∣lar
care, I come unto you, with a Bill of
Complaint, against no small number in this
Kingdome; who have wickedly viola∣ted,
our interest in the providence of God,
and have attempted to bring in, the for∣reigne
power of an old Idol, to the great
prejudice, of all the true subjects, and ser∣vants
of the most High. My accusation I
make good, by the evidence of the fact,
joyned with their owne confessions. And
because to wave the imputation of violent
intrusion, into the dominion of another,
they lay some claime, and pretend some
title unto it. I shall briefely shew how it
is contrary to the expresse termes of the

Great Charter of heaven, to have any such
power, introduced amongst men: Your
knowne Love to truth, and the Gospel
of Christ, makes it altogether needlesse
for me, to stirre you up by any motives, to
hearken to this just Complaint, and pro∣vide
a timely remedy for this growing
evill: especially since experience, hath so
cleerely taught us here in England, that not
onely eternall, but temporall happinesse al∣so,
dependeth on the flourishing of the
Truth of Christs Gospel.
Iustice and Religion, were alwaies con∣ceived,
as the maine Columnes and up∣holders
of any State, or Common-wealth;
like two pillars in a building, whereof the
one cannot stand, without the other; nor
the whole fabricke without them both.
As the Philosopher spake of Logick and
Rhetoricke, they are Artes , mutual∣ly
ayding each other, and both ayming at
the same end, though in different man∣ners:
so they, without repugnancie con∣curre,
and sweetely fall in, one with ano∣ther,
for the reiglement and direction, of
every person in a Common-wealth, to
make the whole happy and blessed: and

where they are both thus united, there, and
onely there, is the blessing, in assurance
whereof, Hezekiah rejoyced: Truth and
Peace. An agreement without Truth, is
no Peace, but a covenant with Death, a
league with Hell, a conspiracie against the
Kingdome of Christ, a stout rebellion a∣gainst
the God of Heaven; and without
Iustice, great Common-wealths, are but
great troopes of Robbers: Now the re∣sult
of the one of these, is civill Peace, of
the other Ecclesiasticall, betwixt which
two, there is a great sympathie, a strict
connexion: having on each other a mutu∣all
dependence: Is there any disturbance
of the State? it is usually attended with
Schismes, and factions in the Church, and
the divisions of the Church, are too often,
even the subversions of the Common-wealth.
Thus it hath beene ever since that unhappy
difference, betweene Cain and Abel: which
was not, concerning the bounds and limits
of their inheritance, nor which of them
should be heire to the whole world: but
about the Dictates of Religion, the offering
of their sacrifices. This fire also of dissenti∣on,
hath beene more stirred up, since the

Prince of Peace, hath by his Gospel, sent the
Sword amongst us: for the preaching thereof,
meeting with the strong holds of Satan, and the
depraved corruption of humane nature, must
needs occasion a great shaking of the earth. But
most especially, distracted Christendome, hath
found fearefull issues of this discord, since the
proud Romish Prelates, have sought to establish
their hell-broached errors, by inventing, and
maintaining, uncharitable destructive censures
against all that oppose them: which first causing
Schismes, and distractions in the Church, & then
being helped forwards, by the blindnesse and
cruelty, of ambitious Potentates, have raised war
of nation against nation, witnesse the Spanish
Invasion of 88. of a people within themselves,
as in the late Civill wars of France, where after
divers horrible Massacres, many chose rather to
die Souldiers, then Martyrs.
And Oh, that this truth, might not at this day,
be written with the blood of almost expiring
Ireland. Yea, it hath lastly descended to dissen∣tion,
betwixt private parties, witnesse the horri∣ble
murder of Diazius,Sleid. Com. whose brains were chopt
out with an axe, by his own brother Alphonsus, for
forsaking the Romish Religion: what rents in
State, what grudgings, hatreds and exasperati∣ons

of mind, among private men, have happen∣ed
by reason of some inferiour differences, we
all at this day grieve to behold; tantum Religio
potuit suadere malorum: most concerning then is
it for us to endevour obedience, to our Saviours
precept, of seeking first the kingdome of God,
that we may be partakers, of the good things,
comprised in the promise annexed: were there
but this one Argument, for to seek the peace of
the Church, because thereon depends the peace of
the Common wealth, it were sufficient to quicken
our utmost industry, for the attaining of it. Now
what peace in the Church, without Truth? all
conformitie to any thing else, is but the agree∣ment
of Herod and Pilate, to destroy Christ
and his Kingdome, neither is it this, or that, par∣ticular
truth, but the whole Counsell of God, re∣vealed
unto us, without adding, or detracting,
whose embracement is required, to make our
Peace firme and stable. No halting betwixt
Iehovah and Baal; Christ and Antichrist, as
good be all Philistine, and worshippers of
Dagon, as to speake part the language of Ashdod,
and part the language of the Iewes: hence, hence
hath been the rise of all our miseries, of all our
dissentions, whilest factious men, laboured eve∣ry
day, to commend themselves to them, who

sate aloft in the Temple of God, by introducing
new Popish Arminian errors, whose Patronage
they had wickedly undertaken: who would
have thought, that our Church, would ever have
given entertainment, to these Belgicke Semipe∣lagians,
who have cast dirt upon the faces, and
raked up the ashes, of all those great and pious
soules, whom God magnified, in using as his in∣struments
to reforme his Church; to the least of
which, the whole troope of Arminians, shall ne∣ver
make themselves equall, though they swell
till they breake? what benefit did ever come to
this Church, by attempting to prove, that the
chiefe part, in the severall degrees of our salvation,
is to be ascribed unto our selves, rather then God?
which is the head and summe, of all the Contro∣versies,
between them and us: and must not the
introducing and fomenting of a doctrine, so
opposite to that truth our Church hath quietly en∣joyed,
ever since the first reformation necessari∣ly
bring along with it Schismes and dissentions,
so long as any remaine who love the truth, or
esteeme the Gospel above preferment: Neither
let any deceive your Wisdomes, by affirming, that
they are differences of an inferiour nature, that
are at this day agitated, between the Arminians
and the Orthodox Divines of the reformed Church,

be pleased but to cast an eye on the following
instances, and you will finde them hewing, at
the very root of Christianity. Consider seriously
their denying of that fundamentall Article of O∣riginall
sin: Is this but a small escape in Theolo∣gie?
why, what need of the Gospel? what need
of Christ himselfe, if our nature be not guilty, de∣praved,
corrupted? neither are many of the rest
of lesse importance; surely these are not things,
in quibus possimus dissentire salva pace ac charita∣te,
as Austin speaks, about which we may differ,
without losse of peace or charitie, one Church
cannot wrap in her communion, Austin and
Pelagius; Calvine, and Arminius. I have here
onely given you a taste, whereby you may judge
of the rest of their fruit: mors in olla, mors in olla;
their doctrine of the finall apostasie of the elect, of
true beleevers, of a wavering haesitancy, concern∣ing
our present grace, and future glory, with di∣vers
others, I have wholly omitted: those I have
produced, are enough to make their abettors
uncapable of our Church communion: the Sacred
bond of peace, compasseth onely the unitie of
that Spirit which leadeth into all truth. We
must not offer the right hand of fellowship,
but rather proclaime ,Greg. Naz. an holy warre,
to such enemies, of Gods providence, Christs me∣rit,

and the powerfull operation of the holy Spirit▪
neither let any object that all the Arminians do
not openly professe, all these errours, I have re∣counted;
let ours then shew wherein they dif∣fer
from their Masters,Profitentur Remonst. hasce ad promotionem causae suae artes adhibere, ut a∣pud vulgus non ulterius progre∣diantur quam de articulis vulgo notis, ut pro in∣geniorum diver∣sitate quosdam lacte diualant, aliis solidiore cibo &c. Festus Hom. praestat ad specimen Con. Bel. we see their owne con∣fessions,
we know their arts, ,
the depths and crafts of Satan, we know the
several wayes they have to introduce, and insinu∣ate
their Heterodoxies into the mindes of men:
with some they appeare onely to dislike our do∣ctrine
of reprobation: with others to claime an
allowable libertie of the will: but yet for the
most part, like the Serpent, where ever she gets
in her head, she will wriggle in her whole bo∣dy
sting and all: give but the least admission,
and the whole poyson must be swallowed.
What was the intention of the maintainers of
these strange assertions amongst us, I know
not: whether the efficacie of errour prevailed
really with them, or no? or whether it were the
better to comply with Popery, and thereby to
draw us back againe unto Egypt, but this I have
heard, that it was affirmed on knowledge in a
former Parliament, that the introduction of
Arminianisme amongst us, was the issue of a Spa∣nish
consultation:Hieron. Zanch. ad Holderum: Res. Miscel. it is a strange story that learned
Zanchius tels us, how upon the death of the Car∣dinall

of Lorraigne there was found in his Study
a note, of the names of divers Germane Doctors and
Ministers, being Lutherans, to whom was paid an
annuall pension, by the assignment of the Cardinall,
that they might take pains to oppose the Calvinists,
and so by cherishing dissention, reduce the people a∣gaine
to Popery. If there be any such amongst
us, who upon such poore inconsiderable mo∣tives,
would be wonne to betray the Gospel of
Christ, God grant them repentance▪ before it be
too late; however, vpon what grounds, with
what intentions, for what ends soever, these
Tares have been sowed amongst us by envious
men, the hope of all the piously learned in the
Kingdome is, that by your effectuall care and
diligence, some meanes may be found to root
them out. Now God Almightie increase and
fill, your whole Honourable Societie, with
wisedome, zeale, knowledge, and all other
Christian graces, necessary for your great cal∣ling
and employments, which is the daily
prayer of

