



MY LORD,
IT was with Thoughts of Peace, that I embraced my Call, to this Place, and Time of Warre. As all Peace that is from God is precious to my spirit, so incomparably, that between the Father & his Elect, which is established, and carried on in the Blood and Grace of Jesus Christ. The Ministeriall dispensation of this Peace, be∣ing through free Grace committed even unto me also, I desire that in every place, my whole may be, to declare it to the men of Gods good pleasure. That this was my chief design, in answer to the Call of God upon me, even to poure out a savour of the Gospel upon the Sons of Peace in this place, I hope is mani∣fest to the Consciences of all, with whom (since my coming hi∣ther) in the Work of the Ministery I have had to do. The En∣mity between God and us, began on our Part: The Peace which he hath made, begins and ends with himself. This is the way of God with sinners, when he might justly continue their Enemy, and fight against them to their Eternal ruine, he drawes forth Love, and beseeches them to be reconciled, who have done the wrong, and them to accept of Peace, who cannot abide the Bat∣tell. Certainly, the bearing forth of this Message, which is so worthy of all Acceptation, and ought to be so welcome, can∣not but have sweetnes enough to season all the Pressures and temptations wherewith it is somtimes attended. This hath bin my desire to pursue, and that, with the weapons which are not carnal. And though some may be so seasoned with the leaven of contention about carnal things, or at best the tithing of Mint and Cummin, as to disrelish the weightier things of the Go∣spel, yet the great Owner of the Vineyard, hath not left me with∣out

a comfortable assurance, that even this labour in the Lord hath not been in vain. The following Sermons, which I desire to present unto your Excellency, were preached one at Berwick upon your first advance into Scotland; the other at Edin∣burgh. My willingnes to serve the Inheritance of Christ here, even in my Ablence, caused me to close with the desires, that wercheld out to this purpose. And I do present them to your Excellency, not only because the Rise of my Call to this ser∣vice, under God was from you; but also, because in the carrying of it on, I have received from you in the weaknesses and temp∣tations wherewith I am encompassed, that dayly spirituall Re∣freshment and support by inquiry into, and discovery of the deep and hidden dispensations of God towards his secret ones, which my spirit is taught to value. The carrying on of the In∣terest of the Lord Jesus amongst his Saints, in all his wayes, which are Truth and Righteousnesse, the matter pointed at in this Discourse, being the Ayme of your spirit in your great under-takings it bears another Respect unto you. I am not un∣acquainted with it's meannesse yea it's coming short in respect of use and fruit, of what the Lord hath since, and by others drawn forth; but such as it is, having by Providence stepped first into the world, I wholly commend it to him for an In∣cense, who graciously supplyed the seed to the sower: be∣seeching him that we may have joy unspeakable and glori∣ous, in the Acceptance of that Peace, which he gives us in the Son of his Love, whilest the Peace whose desire in the midst of warre, you continually bear forth to him, and to others, is by them rejected to their hurt.
Edinb. Nov. 26. 1650.

