



MADAM,
WHen I first heard of
the Death of your
Dear Child, and
only Son, I much deplored your Loss,
and was greatly concern'd to think
how you would bear it, as consider∣ing
that your affections towards him
were exceeding great, and surpas∣sing
the common and ordinary Love
of Women; and that your Heart
was set so much upon him, that
your Life seem'd to be wrapt up in

his; so that he could hardly die,
but his Death must go near to kill
you too.
I knew indeed your Prudence and
Religion to be very great, yet I
much feared that upon so severe a
tryal, your Passion might get the
start of your Reason, and so far over
come it, as to prove a great prejudice
to all wise Considerations: And as I
feared, so I was credibly inform'd
by some that were Spectators of your
sorrows, that you laid the Death of
your Son so much to Heart, and
was so deeply ingulph'd in sorrows,
that like Rachel you refused to be
comforted: And the truth is, you
had a singular loss, and therefore
might very well be afforded some
grains of allowance in sorrowing
more than ordinary for the loss of

your only Son; the most intense sor∣row
being described and represented
in Scripture by Mourning as for
an only Son.
And therefore when I understood
that you took on so heavily, and con∣tinued
mourning and afflicting your
self at such a great rate, I thought
it my duty to do my best endeavours
(as having received so many Obliga∣tions
from your Family) to support
part of the foundation when it was
sinking with the weight of over∣much
sorrow. And whilst I was
studying for some Counsels that might
be proper for one in your case, it
was my misfortune to meet with the
like sad Providence in the death of
one of my own Children, which made
me more sensible of the greatness of
your loss, who was bereav'd of your

only Child; so that I had now a new
work to do, which was to master
my own Grief, and to keep those sor∣rows
within compass, which naturally
arise upon the loss of our nearest and
dearest Relations: whereupon im∣mediately
I consulted not with flesh
and blood, which I knew would lean
more to the side of Passion than
Reason, but begg'd of God that he
would endue me with wisdom from
above, and that whilst I shewed the
resentments of a man, I might behave
my self like a Christian, and not sor∣row
like others without hope.
And being by the Divine Assistance
supply'd with the Considerations in the
following Discourse, which wrought
effectually upon me towards the miti∣gating
of my sorrows; I thought that
the same remedy which I found from

them might very rationally be pro∣pounded
to another, and proba∣bly
work the same Cure upon your
Ladyship, which they had done upon
my self. And so Cicero relates of
himself, that being in great afflicti∣on
for the loss of his Dear Daughter
Tullia, he was forc'd to fly to the
Precepts and Arguments of some
famous Philosophers for comfort and
relief, and to propound to himself the
Examples of some Eminent Persons
who had behaved themselves with
great temper and moderation under
the like sorrowful circumstances. And
notwithstanding all the wise Precepts
& brave Examples of others, he found
it so hard to be reconciled to Provi∣dence,
and to conquer his Grief for
the loss of such an Excellent and Vir∣tuous
Daughter, that he was fain

to set upon writing his Book of Con∣solation,
on purpose to divert his
Melancholy, and to beguile the tedi∣ousness
of his Sorrows. And praised
be God, I have had the happiness to
find the same benefit by Consideration,
which Cicero did. And hope that
having experimented the benefit of
my own Counsels, IDeinde plus me habiturum au∣toritatis non dubi∣tabam ad excitan∣dum te, si prius ip∣se consurrexissem. Seneca ad Helviam.
may be better qualifi'd
to win both upon your
Ladyships Reason and
Judgment.
Indeed your Ladyship has had
somewhat the greater tryal, as losing
a Son, and an only Son, Quid e∣nim
utilius filio? quid jucun∣dius
unico? Sayes Cicero de
Consolatione: What is more com∣fortable
and useful than a Son? and
what is more pleasant and dearer

to us than an only Son? And yet he
tells us ofAt filium & unicum Q. Fabius, praeterea Consula∣rem, qui jam mag∣nas res gesserat, & majores cogitabat, amisit: ne{que} solum non doluit, quod fortissimus animus fuit, sed etiam mortuo laudatio∣nem in foro dix∣it, &c. Q. Fa∣bius,
who lost his on∣ly
Son, one that was
in a place of great
Dignity and Honour
in the Common-wealth,
and had got a great
reputation by doing
brave and excellent
things, and would have been more
famous if he had liv'd; That he
was so well reconcil'd to the Death of
his only Son, and bore it so bravely,
that he stood up and made a large
speech, and a very trim, solid,
and even Oration in Commendation
of his Son, and recited his great
Vertues without lamenting his
Death.
And he makes further mention of

one Q. Martius, a King, who lost
his only Son and Heir Apparent to
the Crown, and of many others, as
Xenophon, Cassius, Pericles,
who had the misfortune to bury and
lose their Sons, when they were come
to be men, and were persons of great
worth, of singular prudence and
piety, and of a growing fame and
reputation in the World; who car∣ried
it with great prudence and mo∣deration,
and shewed themselves
great Masters of their Passion upon
these sad occasions.
But perhaps these Examples of a
Masculine patience may seem not to
suit with the softness of your Lady∣ships
temper, nor agreeable to the
natural tenderness of your Sex;
Men being always accounted the more
hardy and invulnerable, and less lia∣ble

to the impressions of sorrow than
Women, whose very constitution does
give a lift and advantage to their
Passions; for being the weaker Ves∣sels
they cannot so well contain their
resentments, and support their spirits
in affliction, as those that are strong∣er.
And although the Poets feign that
Niobe was turn'd into a Statue,
because of her weeping so stifly for
the death and slaughter of her Chil∣dren;
yet they make no mention of her
Husband Amphion, that the he
was any ways concern'd at loss of
them. And therefore some instances
of the like patience and moderation
in some of your own Sex, are more
likely to prevail with your Ladyship,
and to excite you to their imita∣tion.
I crave leave therefore to pro∣duce
the same Examples which Se∣neca

did to Marcia upon the very
same account. Now the Examples
which he produces are Octavia and
Livia: Each of which had the mis∣fortune
to lose a Son, and they were
a pair of very hopeful and pregnant
Youths, and of great expectations in
the World. Octavia, she laid so
much to heart the death of her Mar∣cellus,
that she could not endure
the least mention of his name, but
was ready to sink whenever she
heard it, and would not admit
that the least word of comfort should
be spoken unto her. Talis (sayes
Seneca) per omnem vitam fuit,
qualis in funere, she mourn'd and
took on at the same rate all her life∣time
as she did at the time of the
Funeral. But Livia she behaved
her self quite otherwise, and though

she lost her Drusus, who was a
great man at present, and rising to
be a Prince; yet she beheld the pom∣pous
Funeral that was made for him,
and how his Death was lamented by
the whole Nation as a publick and
general loss, without falling into any
great fit of Passion, and as Seneca
phrases it, ut primum intulit tu∣mulo,
simul & illum & dolo∣rem
suum posuit, she buried all
her sorrow in his Grave, and laid
aside her grief as soon as he was laid
in the ground. And having pro∣pounded
these Examples to Marcia,
he refers it to her wisdom and dis∣cretion
which of them she would
chuse to follow. But I dare not
make any such proposition to your
Ladyship, or make the least question
which way your choice is determined,

being well assured that you steer all
the actions of your life by the com∣pass
of Reason and Religion. So
that I need not tell you, that Mode∣ration
is the Christians Motto, and
that there is quaedam & dolendi
modestia, A Rule of Decency to
be observ'd in our very Mourn∣ing.
And therefore if your Ladyship
will be pleased to pardon the trouble
and presumption of this Dedication,
I shall add little more, but only to
make some Apology, and to acquaint
you with the reason why this Dis∣course
was presented no sooner to
your hands. And truly I can give
you no other reason but what the
Excellent Cicero and Seneca have
given long before to excuse their
writing their Tracts of Consolation

so late to their Friends,
Non enim ve∣reor, quin, si mi∣nus in ipso Doloris aestu remediis u∣tendum Homines censeant, certè, cùm modicè Do∣lor resederit, ac se paulùm quasi re∣mittere coeperit, ad exstinguendas Doloris reliquias monita, praecep∣ta{que} nostra adhi∣beantur. Cicero de Consolatione. Dolori tuo, dum recens saeviret, scie∣bam occurrendum non esse, ne illum ipsa solatia irrita∣rent & accende∣rent. Nam in mor∣bis quo{que} nihil est magis periculo∣sum, nec pernicio∣sum, quàm imma∣tura Medicina. Se∣neca ad Helviam. viz. that I thought
a Comforter would
hardly be admitted, or
very welcome to you
when you were in the
Zenith of your sor∣rows,
and that it was
improper, as Physici∣ans
think it in other
Cases, to apply a Re∣medy,
or administer
Physick till the Fit
was over. But now
that your sorrows
have had a consider∣able
time to spend
themselves, and that the flood of
your tears, as may be presum'd, is
pretty well abated, I thought that
this Discourse would come at the most

opportune and convenient time to
have your Consideration, and to put
a full stop to your Mourning.
And now that I have given your
Ladyship the reason why this Dis∣course
came so late, perhaps others
may require a reason why it came so
soon, and why I would venture to
expose it to publick, especially in such
a Critical Age, wherein the most
Correct Discourses can hardly pass
muster with some captious Wits, and
escape their censure and reflection.
But the most that I can say for
my self why I have publisht such
a slender Discourse is this, That
although there is a great plenty of
Authors who have written excel∣lently
well upon this subject of the
great unreasonableness of intempe∣rate
Mourning for the Dead; yet

few have so confined themselves as
to handle it with a particular respect
to the loss and Death of Children;
which being a common and daily Ca∣lamity,
and the sorrows thereupon
so mightily prevailing, and judged to
be not only natural but highly rea∣sonable,
I thought with my self, that
it might not be amiss to endeavour
to obviate this vulgar Error, and
to lay down such Arguments as
might be a perpetual fence against
all inordinate sorrowings for the loss
of Children. And I hope that my
good intentions herein will make some
Atonement for the failings of my
Pen. And that it will be a great
Provocation to some able and judici∣ous
Divines to set upon providing
and furnishing the World with bet∣ter
and more substantial Arguments

against this sort of Passion, which
is often so violent and outragious,
both in Parents and others, upon
the loss of their Children and Rela∣tions,
to the great scandal both of
their reason and their Christian Be∣lief.
I have, as your Ladyship may
easily see, avoided all flowery Ex∣pressions,
or to deck up this Dis∣course
with the paint and varnish of
Oratory, as considering, that the
plainer it was, the more suitable to
wait upon a Lady in Mourning.
But after all it must be confess'd,
that you have had a great affliction
and a deplorable loss in the Death of
your only Child, and only Son: But
I doubt not but God will give you a
better Name than that of Sons and
Daughters; and that by your eminent

Example and practice of true Virtue
and Piety, you will entail a greater
blessing upon your Family, than if
you left behind you a large and nu∣merous
Progeny. Now that you and
your Relations may live long to bless
the World with your Excellent and
Pious Examples, and when you leave
this troublesome Place, may be tran∣slated
to a Kingdom of Joy and
Peace, and rest Eternally in a Bo∣som
of Blessedness, is, and shall ever
be the Ardent Prayer of

