



THE reason of my inscribing the
ensuing pleas for the Authority,
purity, and perfection of the Scrip∣ture,
against the pretences of some
to the contrary, in these dayes, unto
you, is because some of you value
and study the Scripture as much as any I know, and
it is the earnest desire of my heart, that all of you
would so do. Now whereas two things offer them∣selves
unto me, to discourse with you by the way of
Preface, namely the commendation of the Scripture,
and an exhortation to the study of it on the one hand,
and a discovery of the reproach that is cast upon it,
with the various wayes and meanes that are used by
some for the lessening and depressing of its Authority
and excellency on the other; the former being to good
purpose, by one or other almost every day performed;
I shall insist at present on the latter only; which also
is more suited to discover my aime and intention in
the ensuing discourses. Now herein as I shall, it may
be, seeme to exceed that proportion which is due unto
a Preface to such short discourses as these following;

yet I know, I shall be more briefe then the nature of
so great a matter as that proposed to consideration
doth require. And therefore ,
I shall fall upon the subject that now lyes before me.
Many there have beene and are, who, through the
craft of Sathan, and the prejudice of their owne
hearts, lying under the power of corrupt and car∣nall
Interest, have ingaged themselves to decry, and
disparage, that excellency of the Scripture which is
proper and peculiar unto it. The severall sorts of
them are too many particularly to be considered, I
shall only passe through them in generall, and fix upon
such instances by the way as may give evidence to
the things insisted on.
Those who in this business are first to be called to an
account, whose filth and abominations given out in
gross, others have but parcelled among themselves,
are they of the Synagogue of Rome. These pretend
themselves to be the only keepers and preservers of
the Word of God in the world; the only ground and
pillar of truth. Let us then a little consider in the
first place, how it hath discharged this trust; for it is
but equall that men should be called to an account
upon their owne principles; and those, who supposing
themselves to have a trust reposed in them, do mani∣fest
a trecherous mind, would not be one whit better
if they had so indeed.
What then have these men done in the discharge
of their pretended trust? nay what hath that Syna∣gogue

left unattempted? yea what hath it left
unfinished, that may be needfull to convince it of
perfidiousnesse? that saies the Scripture was
committed to it alone, and would, if it were
able, deprive all others of the possession of it or
their lives; what Scripture then was this, or
when was this deed of trust made unto them?
The oracles of God, they tell us, committed to the
Jewes under the Old Testament, and all the
writings of the New; and that this was done
from the first foundation of the Church by Pe∣ter,
and so on to the finishing of the whole Ca∣non.
What now have they not done in adding,
detracting, corrupting, forging, aspersing those
Scriptures to falsifie their pretended trust?
They adde more bookes to them, never indited by
the Holy Ghost, as remote from being :
so denying the selfe evi∣dencing
power of that word, which is truly ,
by mixing it with things ,
of an humane rise and spring; manifesting them∣selves
to have lost the spirit of discerning, pro∣mised
with the Word, to abide with the true
Church of God for ever. Isa: 59. 21. They have
taken from its fulnesse and perfection, its suffici∣ency
and excellency, by their Massora their, orall
law or verbum , their unknowne, end∣lesse,
bottomlesse, boundlesse treasure of traditi∣ons;
that  for all their abomi∣nations.

The Scripture its selfe; as they say,
committed to them, they plead, to their eternall
shame, to be in the Originall Languages cor∣rupted,
vitiated, interpolated, so that it is no
stable rule to guide us throughout in the know∣ledge
of the will of God. The Jewes, they say,
did it whilst they were busie in burning of Chri∣stians.
Therefore in the roome of the Originals,
they have enthroned a translation that was never
committed to them, that came into the world
they know neither how, nor when, nor by whom.
So that one saies of its author, Si quis percon∣tetur
Gallus fuerit an Sarmata, Judaeus an
Christianus,Erasmu. vir an mulier, nihil habituri sint
ejus patroni quod expeditè respondeant.
All this to place themselves in the throne of
God, and to make the words of a Translation
authentick from their stamp upon them, and not
from their relation unto, and agreement with,
the words spoken by God himselfe. And yet
farther, as if all this were not enough to mani∣fest
what Trustees they have been, they have
cast off all subjection to the authority of God in
his word, unlesse it be resolved into their own;
denying that any man in the world can know it
to be the word of God, unlesse they tell him so;
it is but inke and paper, skin of parchment, a
dead letter, a nose of wax, a Lesbian Rule, of
no authority unto us at all. O faithfull Tru∣stees!

holy mother Church! infallible chaire!
can wickednesse yet make any farther progresse?
was it ever heard of from the foundation of the
world, that men should take so much paines, as
these men have done, to prove themselves faith∣lesse,
and treacherous in a trust committed to
them? Is not this the summe and substance of
volumes that have even filled the world; the
Word of God was committed to us alone, and no
others; under our keeping it is corrupted, depra∣ved,
vitiated; the copies delivered unto us we
have rejected, and taken up one of our owne
choice; nor let any complaine of us, it was in
our power to do worse. This sacred depositum
had no , whereby it might be knowne to
be the Word of God; but it is upon our credit
alone, that it passes in the world, or is believed;
we have added to it many bookes upon our owne
judgement, and yet thinke it not sufficient for
the guidance of men, in the worship of God, and
their obedience they owe unto him: yet do they
blush? are they ashamed as a thiefe when he is
taken? nay do they not boast themselves in their
iniquity? and say, they are sold to worke all these
abominations? The time is coming, yea it is at
hand, wherein it shall repent them for ever, that
they have lifted up themselves against this sa∣cred
grant of the wisdome, care, love, and good∣nesse
of God.

Sundry other branches there are of the Abo∣minations
of these men, besides those enumera∣ted;
all which may be reduced to these three
corrupt and bloody fountaines.
1. That the Scripture at best, as given out
from God, and as it is to us continued, was,
and is, but a partiall revelation of the will of
God: the other part of it, which how vast and
extensive it is no man knowes, (for the Jewes
have given us their  in their Mishna
and Gemara; These kept them lockt up in the
breast, or chaire of their holy Father) beeing
reserved in their magazine of Traditions.
2. That the Scripture is not able to evince
or manifest its selfe to be the Word of God, so as
to enjoy and exercise any Authority in his name,
over the soules and consciences of men; without
an accession of Testimony, from that combination
of politicke, worldly minded men, that call them∣selves
the Church of Rome.
3. That the Originall copies of the Old and
New Testament are so corrupted (ex ore tuo,
serve nequam) that they are not a certaine
standard and measure of all doctrines, or the
touch-stone of all Translations.
Now concerning these things you will find
somewhat offered unto your considerations in the
ensuing discourses; wherein, I hope▪ without
any great alteration or disputes, to lay downe

such principles of truth, as that their Idoll ima∣ginations
will be found cast to the ground before
the sacred Arke of the word of God, and to lye
naked without wisdome or power.
It is concerning the last of these only, that at
present I shall deliver my thoughts unto you;
and that because we begin to have a new con∣cernment
therein, wherewith I shall afterward
acquaint you. Of all the Inventions of Sathan
to draw off the minds of men from the word of
God, this of decrying the authority of the O∣riginalls
seems to me the most pernicious. At
the beginning of the reformation, before the
Councill of Trent, the Papists did but faintly,
and not without some blushing, defend their
vulgar Latine Translation.1. Praef. in 5. lib. Mos. 2. In August. de Ci∣vit: Dei. lib. 15. cap. 13. 3 De∣fens. Conc. Trid: lib. 4. 4▪ Proleg. Bib∣lica. 5 Praef. in Bibl: in Lat: & passim. 6 Praef. in Com∣ment. in Josh. Some open∣ly
preferred the Originall before it, as 1
Cajetan, Erasmus, 2 Vives, and others.
Yea, and after the Councell also, the same
was done by Andradius 3, erarius 4,
Arias Montanus 5, Masius 6, and others.
For those who understood nothing but La∣tine
amongst them, and scarcely that,
whose ignorance was provided for in the
Councill▪ I suppose it will not be thought
meet that in this case we should make any
account of them. But the State of things
is now altered in the world, and the iniquity,
which first wrought in a mystery, being now

discovered,7 Loc. Com. lib. 1. cap. 13. 8 De opt. Gen. Interpr. lib. 1. 9. Lib. 2. de verb. Dei 10 Tom. 1. D. 5 Q. 3. 11 De Trans∣lat. Stae. cum Comment. in Jsa. casts off its vizard and grows
bold; nihil est audacius istis deprensis.
At first the designe was mannaged in pri∣vate
writings, Melchior Canus 7, Gu∣lielmus
Lindanus 8, Bellarminus 9,
Gregorius de Valentia 10, Leo Castri∣us
11, Huntlaeus 12, Hanstelius 13,
with innumerable others, some on one ac∣count,
some on another, have pleaded that
the Originalls were corrupted;12 Epito. Con∣trov. Contr. 1. C. 8. some of
them with more impudence than others.
Leo Castrius,13. Dispunctio Calum. Ca∣saub. as Pineda observes, raves
almost, where ever he falls on the mention
of the Hebrew text. Sed is est Author
(saith he) dum in hujusmodi Ebraizationes
incidit,Pined. lib. 5. de Reb. Solom. C. 4. S. 1. vix sui compos; & bono licet zelo,
tamen vel ignoratione rerum quarun∣dam,
vel vehementiori aliquâ affecti∣one,
extra fines veritatis & modestiae ra∣pitur:
& si ex hujusmodi tantum unguibus
Leonem illum estimaremus, non etiam ex
aliis praeclaris conatibus, aut murem aut
vulpem censeremus, aut canem aut quid∣dam
aliud ignobilius. Yea Morinus, who
seems to be ashamed of nothing,Morin. Ex∣ercit. de Sincerit. Exerc. 1. c. 2. yet shrinks a
little at this mans impudence and folly. Apo∣logetici
libros (saith he) sex bene longos
scripsit, quibus nihil quam Judaeorum vo∣luntarias
& malignas depravationes demon∣strate

nititur; zelo sanè pio scripsit Castri∣us,
sed libris Hebraicis ad tantum opus quod
moliebatur parum erat instructus. In the
steps of this Castrius walkes Huntley a sub∣tie
Jesuite,cap. 10. lib. who in the treatise above cited, as∣cribes
the corruption of the Hebrew Bible to
the good providence of God, for the honour of the
vulgar Latine. But these with their compa∣nions
have had their mouths stopt by Reinolds,
Whitaker, Junius, Lubbertus, Rivetus,
Chamierus, Gerardus, Amesius, Glassius,
Alstedius, A mama, and others. So that a man
would have thought this fire put to the house of
God had been sufficiently quenched. But after
all the endeavours hitherto used, in the daies
wherein we live, it breaks out in a greater
flame; they now print the Originall it selfe,
and defame it; gathering up translations of all
sorts, and setting them up in competition with it.
When Ximenius put forth the Complutencian
Bibles, Vatablus his, & Arias Montanus those
of the King of Spaine, this Cockatrice was not
hatcht, whose fruit is now growing to a flying
fiery Serpent. It is now but saying the anci∣ent
Hebrew letters are changed from the
Samaritane to the Chaldean; the points or
vowels and accents are but lately invented,
of no Authority, without their guidance
and direction nothing is certaine in the

knowledge of that tongue, all that we
know of it comes from the translation of
the 70▪ the Jews have corrupted the old
Testament, there are innumerable various
lections both of the old and new; there are
other copies differing from those we now
enjoy, that are utterly lost. So that upon the
matter, there is nothing left unto men, but to
choose, whether they will be Papists or Athe∣ists.
Here that most stupendious fabrick that was
ever raised by inke and paper, termed well by a
learned man magnificentissimum illud (quod
post homines natos in lucem prodiit un∣quam)
opus biblicum;Edm. Ca∣stel. Praef. ad Ani∣mad: Sa∣mar. in Bib. Poly. I mean the Parisian
Bibles, is prefaced by a discourse of its Erector
Michael de Jay, wherein he denies the Hebrew
text, prefers the vulgar Latine before it, and
resolves that we are not left to the word for our
rule, but to the Spirit that rules in their
Church: pro certo igitur atque indubitato
apud nos esse debet, vulgatam editionem,
quae communi catholicae Ecclesiae lingu
circumfertur verum esse & genuinum sacrae
Scripturae fontem;Mich. le Jay Prae∣fat. ad o∣pus Bibl: hanc consulendam ubi{que},
inde fidei dogmata repetenda; ex quo insu∣per
consentaneum est, vera ac certissima
fidei Christianae autographa in Spiritu Ec∣clesiae
residere, neque ab ejus hostium ma∣nibus
repetenda.

Et certè quamcunque pietatis speciem
praetexunt, non religione quapiam, aut sin∣cerâ
in Scripturam sacram veneratione a∣guntur
dum eam unicam, quasi inelucta∣bilem
salutis regulam, usurpant▪ neque spi∣ritûs
Evangelici veritatem investigare de∣creverunt;
dum ad autographa curiosius re∣currentes,
ex quibus, praeter perplexa quae∣dam
vestigia, vix aliquid superest, vel capi∣tales
fidei hostes, vel eos qui Ecclesiae minus
faverint, de contextuum interpretatione a
germano sacrorum codicum sensu consu∣lunt.
Scilicet non alia est opportunior via
à regio illius itinere secedendi, neque in
privatarum opinionum placitis blandius
possunt acquiescere, quas velut unicas do∣ctrinae
suae regulas sectari plerunque cen∣suerunt.
A page caecam animorum libidinem, non
jam in institutionem nostram subsistit lite∣ra,
sed Ecclesiae spiritus; neque è sacris co∣dicibus
hauriendum quidquam, nisi quod
illa communicatum esse nobiscum voluerit.
So he, or Morinus in his name; and if this be
indeed the true state of things, I suppose he will
very hardly convince men of the least usefulnesse
of this great worke and undertaking. To usher
those bibles into the world, Morinus puts forth
his Exercitations, intituled of the syncerity

of the Hebrew and Greek Text, indeed to
prove them corrupt and uselesse. He is now the
man amongst them that undertakes to defend
this cause: in whose writings whether there be
more of Pyrgopolynices, or Rabshekah, is un∣certaine.
But dogs that bark loud, seldome
bite deep; nor do I thinke many ages have pro∣duced
a man of more confidence and lesse
judgment; a prudent Reader cannot but nau∣seate
at all his leaves, and the man is well laid
open by a learned person of his own party. By
the way,Simeon▪ de Muys De∣fens. nc. Text. Heb. I cannot but observe, that in the height
of his boasting, he falls upon his mother
Church, and embraces her to death. Exrcit.
1, cap. 1. pag. 11. that he might vaunt himselfe
to be the first and only discoverer of corrup∣tions
in the originall of the old Testament,
with the causes of them, he falls into a profound
contemplation of the guidance of his Church,
which being ignorant of any such cause of reje∣cting
the originalls, as he hath now informed
her of, yet continued to reject them, and prefer
the vulgar latine before them hîc admirare
lector (saith he) Dei spiritum ecclesiae prae∣sentissimum,
illam per obscura, perplexa, &
invia quaeque, inoffenso pede agentem:
quanquam incognita esset Rabbinorum su∣pina
negligentia, portentosa ignorantia, sae∣dque
librorum Judaicorum corruptela, &

Haeretici contraria his magnâ verborum
pompâ audacter jactarent; adduci tamen
non potuit Ecclesia, ut versio, quâ solâ per
mille ferè & centum annos usa fuerit, ad
normam & amussim Hebraei textus iterum
recuderetur. But is it so indeed, that their
Church receives its guidance in a stupid bru∣tish
manner, so as to be fixed obstinately on con∣clusions,
without the least acquaintance with
the premises? it seems she loved not the Ori∣ginalls,
but she knew not why; only she was ob∣stinate
in this, that she loved them not. I If this
be the state with their Church, that when it
hath neither Scripture, nor Tradition, nor Rea∣son,
nor New Revelation, she is guided she
knows not how, as Socrates was by his Daemon,
or by secret and inexpressible species of perti∣nacy
and stubbornnesse falling upon her ima∣gination;
I suppose it will be in vaine to contend
with her any longer. For my own part I must
confesse, that I shall as soon believe a poor delu∣ded
fanaticall Quaker, pretending to be gui∣ded
by an infallible Spirit, as their Pope with
his whole conclave of Cardinalls, upon the
tearms here laid down by Morinus.
But to let these men passe for a season; had
this leprosy kept it selfe within that house which
is throughly infected, it had been of lesse impor∣tance:
it is but a farther preparation of it for

the Fire. But it is now broken forth among
Protestants also; with what designe, to what
end or purpose, I know not, , God knows,
and the day will manifest. To declare at large
how this is come about, longa esset Historia;
too long for me to dwell upon; some heads of
things I shall briefly touch at. It is known to
all, hat the Reformation of Religion, and re∣stauration
of good learning were begun, and
carried on at the same time, and mostly by the
same persons. There was indeed a Triumvirate
among the Papists of men excellently skilled in
Rabbinicall learning before the Reformation.
Raymundus Martinus, Porchetus de sylvati∣cis,
and Petrus Galatinus, are the men; of the
which, the last dedicated his book to Maximili∣an
the Emperour, after that Zuinglius and
Luther had begun to preach. Ʋpon the matter
these three are but one: great are the disputes,
whether Galatinus stole his book from Ray∣mundus
or Porchetus; from Porchetus, saith
Morinus, and calls his worke plagium porten∣tosum,
cui vix simile unquam factum est:
Exerc: 1. Cap. 2. from Raymundus, saith
Scaliger, Epist. 2. 41. mistaking Raymun∣dus
Martinus for Raymundus Sebon; but gi∣ving
the first tidings to the world of that book.
From Raymūdus also, saith Josephus de Voy∣sin
in his prolegom: to the Pugio fidei, and from

him Hornebeck in his Proleg. ad Judae. I shall
not interpose in this matter, the method of Galatinus
and his stile are peculiar to him, but the coincidence
of his Quotations too many to be ascribed to common
Accident. That Porchetus took his Victoria adver∣sus
impios Judaeos for the most part from Raymun∣dus,
himselfe confesseth in his Preface. However cer∣taine
it is, Galatinus had no small opinion of his
own skill, and therefore, according to the usuall way
of men, who have attained, as they think, to some E∣minency
in any one kind of learning, laying more
weight upon it than it is able to beare, he boldly
affirmes, that the Originall of the Scripture is cor∣rupted,
and not to be restored but by the Talmud;
In which one concession he more injures the cause he
pleads for against the Jews, then he advantageth it
by all his books beside. Of his  of Rabbe∣na
Haskadosh there is no more news as yet in the
world, then what he is pleased to acquaint us with∣all.
At the same time Erasmus, Reuchlin, Vives,
Xantes, Pagninus, and others, moved effectually for
the restauration of the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin.
But the worke principally prospered in the hands of
the first Reformers, as they were all of them general∣ly
skilled in the Hebrew, so some of them as Capito,
Bibliander, Fagius, Munster to that Height and
usefulnesse, that they may well be reckoned as the
Fathers and Patriarchs of that learning. At that
time lived Elias Levita, the most learned of the
Jews of that Age, whose Grammaticall writings

were of huge importance in the studying of that tōgue.
This mā as he was acquainted with many of the first
Reformers, so he lived particularly with Paulus a∣gius,
as I have else where declared. Now in one
book, which in those daies he published, called Masso∣rech,
Hammasoreth, he broached a new opinion, not
much heard of, at least not at all received among the
Jews, nor for ought that yet appears, once mentioned
by Christians before, namely that the points or vow∣els,
and accents used in the Hebrew Bible, were in∣vented
by some criticall Jew or Massorite, living
at Tiberias about 5 or 600 yeares after Christ: no
doubt the mans ime was to reduce the world of
Christians to a dependance on the ancient Rabbins,
for the whole sense of the Scripture; Hinc prima
mali labes, Here lies the first breach in this mat∣ter.
The fraud being not discovered, and this opinion
being broached and confirmed by the great and almost
only master of the language of that Age, some even
of the first Reformers embraced his fancy. Perhaps
Zuinglius had spoken to it before: justly I know
not. After a while the poyson of this error beginning
to operate, the Papists waiting on the mouths of the
Reformers, like the servants of Benhadad on Ahab,
to catch at every word that might fall from them to
their advantage, beg an to make use of it. Hence Co∣chlaeus,
lib. de Auth. Scripturae, Cap. 5. applauds
Luther, for saying the Jews had corrupted the
Bible with Points and distinctions, as well he
might, for nothing could be spoken more to the ad∣vantage

of his cause against him. Wherefore other
learned men began to give opposition to this Error;
so did Munster, Junius, and others, as will be shew∣ed
in the ensuing discourse. Thus this matter re∣sted
for a season. The study of the Hebrew tongue
and learning being carried on, it fell at length on
him, who undoubtedly hath done more reall Service
for the promotion of it, than any one man whatever,
Jew or Christian. I meane Buxtorsius the Elder;
his Thesaurus Grammaticus, his Tiberias, or
Commentarius Massorethicus, his Lexicons and
Concordanes, and many other Treatises, whereof
some are not yet published, evince this to all the
world. Even Morinus saith that he is the only man
among Christians, that ever throughly understood
the Massora; and Symeon de Muys acknowledgeth
his profiting by him, and learning from him;
Other Jews who undertake to be teachers, know no∣thing
but what they learne of him. To omit the Te∣stimony
of all sorts of learned men, giving him the
preheminence in this learning, it may suffice that his
workes praise him. Now this man in his Tiberias
or Commentarius Massorethicus, printed with the
great Rabbinicall Bible of his own correct setting
forth at Basil, An. 1620, considereth at large this whl
matter of the points, and discovereth the vanity of
Elias his pretension about the Tiberian Massorites.
But we must not it seems rest here: within a few
yeares after, to make way for another designe, which
then he had conceived; Ludovicus Capellus publi∣shed

a discourse in the defence of the opinion of Elias,
(at least so far as concerned the rise of the punctati∣on)
under the Title of Arcanum punctationis re∣velatum.
The book was published by Erpenius with∣out
the name of the Author. But the Person was
sufficiently known; and Rivetus not long after took
notice of him, and saith he was his friend, but con∣cealed
his name. Isag. ad Scr. 1. cap. 8. This new
attempt immediately pleaseth some. Among others,
our learned Professour Dr. Prideaux reads a publick
Lecture on the Vespers of our Comitia on that sub∣ject;
wherein though he prefaceth his discourse
with an observation of the advantage the Papists
make of that opinion of the novelty of the points, and
the danger of it, yet upon the matter he falls in whol∣ly
with Capellus, though he name him not. A∣mong
the large Encomiums of himselfe, and his
worke, printed by Capellus in the close of his Cri∣tica
sacra, there are two Letters from one Mr. Eyre
here in England, in one whereof he tells him, that
without doubt the Doctor read on that subject by the
help of his book; as indeed he useth his Arguments, &
quotes his Treatise, under the name of Sud Haniseb∣hoth
Hanaegalah. But that (I say) which seems to
me most admirable in the Doctors discourse is, that
whereas he had prefaced it with the weight of the
controversy he had in hand, by the advantage the
Papists make of the opinion of the novelty of the
Points, citing their words to that purpose, himselfe in
the body of his exercitations falls in with them, and

speaks the very things which he seemed before to
have blamed. And by this means this opinion ten∣ding
so greatly to the disparagement of the Authori∣ty
of the Originals, is crept in amongst Protestants
also. Of the stop put unto its progresse by the full and
learned Answer of Buxtorfius the younger (who
alone in this learning, in this age, seems to answer
his Fathers worth) unto Capellus, in his discourse
de origine & antiquitate Punctorum, I shall speak
more afterwards. However it is not amisse fallen out
that the masters of this new perswasion are not at
all agreed among themselves. Capellus would have
it easy to understand the Hebrew text, and every
word, though not absolutely by it selfe, yet as it lies
in its contexture, though there were no points at all.
Morinus would make the language altogether un∣intelligible
on that account; the one saith, that the
points are a late invention of the Rab∣bins,
and the other, that without them, the un∣der∣standing
of the Hebrew is , yet
though they look diverse wayes, there is a firebrand
between them. But we have this Brand brought yet
nearer to the Churches bread corne, in the prolego∣mena
to the Biblia Polyglotta, lately printed at
London. The solemne Espousall of this opinion of
the Hebrew punctation, in that great worke, was
one chiefe occasion of the second discourse, as you will
find it at large declared in the entrance of it. I dare
not mention the desperate consequences that attend
this imagination, being affrighted among other

things, by a little Treatise lately sent me (upon the
occasion of a discourse on this subject) by my worthy
and learned friend Dr. Ward, intituled fides divi∣na,
wherein its Author, who ever he be, from some
principles of this Nature, and unwary Expressions
of some learned men amongst us, labours to eject and
cast out as uselesse the whole Scripture or word of
God. I should have immediately returned an answer
to that pestilent discourse, but that upon conside∣ration,
I found all his objections obviated or an∣swered
in the ensuing, treatises, which were then
wholly finished. And this, as I said, was the first way
whereby the poyson of undervaluing the Originalls
crept in among Protestants themselves.
Now together with the knowledge of the tongues,
the use of that knowledge in Criticall observations,
did also encrease. The excellent use of this study and
employment, with the fruits of it in the explanation
of sundry difficulties, with many other advantages,
cannot be easily expressed. But as the best things are
apt to be most abused, so in particular it hath falne
out with this kind of learning and studie. Protestants
here also have chiefly mannaged the businesse. Beza,
Camerarius, Scaliger, Casaubon, Dusius, Goma∣rus,
Usher, Grotius, Hensius, Fuller, Dieu, Mede,
Camero, Glasius, Capellus, Amama, with innume∣rable
others, have excelled in this kind. But the mind
of man being exceedingly vaine-glorious, curious, un∣certain,
after a doore to reputation and renowne, by
this kind of learning was opened in the world, it

quicly spread its selfe over all bounds and limits of
Sobriety. The manifold incoveniences, if not mis∣chiefes,
that have ensued on the boldnesse and curiosity
of some in criticising on the Scripture, I shall not
now insist upon; and what it might yet grow unto,
I have often heard the great Usher, expressing his
feare. Of the successe of Grotius in this way we have
a solid account weekly in the Lectures of our learned
Professor, which I hope, he will in due time benefit the
Publick withall. But it is only one or two things that
my present designe calls mee upon to remarke.
Among other wayes that sundry men have fixed
on to exercise their criticall abilities, one hath beene
the collecting of various lections both in the old Te∣stament
and New. The first and honestest course fixed
on to this purpose, was that of consulting various co∣pies,
and comparing them among themselves; wherein
yet there were sundry miscarriages, as I shall shew in
the second treatise. This was the worke of Erasmus,
Stephen, Beza, Arias Montanus, and some others;
some that came after them finding this Province pos∣sessed,
and no other world of the like nature remaining
for them to conquer, fixed upon another way, substi∣tuting
to the service of their designe, as pernitious a
principle, as ever I thinke was fixed on by any lear∣ned
man since the foundation of the Church of Christ,
excepting only those of Rome. Now this principle is
that upon many grounds, which some of them are long
in recounting: there are sundry corruptions crept into
the Originals, which by their criticall faculty, with

the use of sundry Engines, those especially of the Old
Translations are to be discovered and removed. And
this also receives countenance from these Prole∣gomena
to the Biblia Polyglotta, as will after∣wards
be showne and discussed. Now this principle
being once fixed, and a liberty of criticising on the
Scripture, yea a necessity of it thence evinced, it is
inconceiveable what springs of corrections and a∣mendments
rise up under their hands. Let me not be
thought tedious if I recount some of them to you.
1 It is knowne that there is a double Consonancy
in the Hebrew Consonants among themselves; of
some in figure that are unlike in sound, of some in
sound that are unlike in figure, of the first sort are

of the latter are ,
Now this is one
principle of our new Criticks, that the Scribes of
the Bible were sometimes mistaken by the likenesse
of the Letters, in respect of figure, sometimes by
their liknesse in respect of sound; and so remembring
the words they wrote, oftentimes put one for ano∣ther;
so that whether they used their Eyes, or their
Memories, they failed on one hand or another; though
the Jewes deny any Copy amongst them to be writ∣ten
but exactly by patterne, or that it is lawfull for
a man to write one word in a Copy, but by patterne,
though he could remember the words of the whole Bi∣ble:
now whereas the signification of every word is
regulated by its radix, it often falls out, that in the

formation and inflexion of words, by reason of letters
that are defective, there remaines but one letter
of the Radix in them, at least that is pronounced:
How frequent this is in this tongue, those who have
very little skill in it, may ghesse by only taking a
view of Frobenius his Bible, wherein the Radicall
letters are printed in a distinct character, from all
the praefixes and affixes in their variations. Now if
a man hath a mind to criticise and mend the Bible,
it is but taking his word, or words, that he will fix
upon, & try what they will make by the cōmutation
of the letters that are alike in figure or sound. Let
him try what  will doe in the place of  or on the
contrary; which as they are radicall, or as they
are prefixed, will sufficiently alter the sense; and so
of all the rest mentioned. If by this meanes any new
sense that is tolerable, and pleaseth the Criticke,
doth emerge, it is but saying the Scribe was mista∣ken
in the likenesse of the Letters, or in the affinity
of the sound, and then it is no matter, though all the
Copies in the world agree to the contrary, without
the least variation. It is evident that this course
hath stood Capellus and Grotius in very good
stead. And Symeon de Muys tells us a pretty sto∣ry
of himselfe to this purpose. de Heb. Edit. Antiq.
& Verit. S. S. Yea this is the most eminent spring
of the Criticismes on the old Testament, that these
times afford: a thousand instances might be given
to this purpose.
2. But in case this course faile, and no reliefe

be afforded this way, than the transposition of
Letters offers its assistance; those who know any
thing in this language, know what alteration in the
sense of words may be made by such a way of pro∣cedure,
frequently words of contrary senses, dire∣ctly
opposite consist only of the same Letters diversly
placed. Every Lexicon will supply men with in∣stances,
that need not to be here repeated.
3. The points are taken into consideration;
and here bold men may even satisfie their curio∣sity.
That word, or those three Letters  are
instanced in by Hierome to this purpose, Hom. 9.
12: as it may be printed it will afford 8 severall sen∣ses
 is verbum &  is pestis; as farre
distant from one another as life and death; those let∣ters
in that order may be read with—and—and
—and—and—, the Jewes give instances how
by this meanes, men may destroy the world. But
4. Suppose that this ground proves barren also,
it is but going to an old Translation, the 70, or
vulgar Latin, and where any word likes us, to
consider what Hebrew word answers unto it, and if
it discovers an agreement in any one Letter, in Fi∣gure
or sound, with the word in that Text, then to
say that so they read in that copy; yea rather
then faile, be the word as farre different from what
is read in the Bible as can be imagined, averre it
to yeeld the more convenient sense, and a various le∣ction
is found out.

And these are the chiefe heads and springs of the criticisms
on the old Testament, which with so great a reputation of
learning men have boldly obtruded on us of late dayes. It is
not imaginable what prejudice the Sacred truth of the
Scripture, preserved by the infinite love and care of God,
hath already suffered hereby, and what it may further suf∣fer,
for my part, I cannot but tremble to think. Lay but
these two Principles together, namely that the points are a
late invention of some Judaicall Rabbins, (on which
account there is no reason in the world that we should be
bound unto them) and that it is lawfull to gather vari∣ous
Lections by the help of Translations, where there
are no diversities in our present Copies, which are owned in
the Prolegomena to the Biblia Polyglotta, and for my
part I must needs cry cut , as not seeing any
meanes of being delivered from utter uncertaintie in and
about all sacred truth. Those who have more wisdome
& learning, & are able to look throngh all the digladiations
that are likely to ensue on these principles, I hope will
rather take paines to instruct me, and such as I am, then
be angry or offended with us, that we are not so wise or
learned as themselves. In the meane time I desire those
who are shaken in mind by any of the specious pretences of
Capellus and others, to consider the specimen, given us, of
reconciling the difficulties, that they lay as the ground of
their conjectures in the miscellany notes, or Exercita∣tions
of the learned Mr Pocock; as usefull and learned
a worke as is extant in that kinde, in so few sheets of paper.
The dangerous and causelesse attempts of men, to rectifie
our present copies of the Bible, the Reader may there also
find discovered and confuted.

But we have not as yet done; there is a new invention of
Capellus, greatly applauded amongst the men of these opi∣nions.
He tels us lib. 6. c. 10. Crit. Scr: Planum est om∣nem
quae hodiè est in terrarum orbe linguae Hebraicae
cognitionem servandam tandèm esse & ascribendam
Graecae  70. Sacrorum Bibliorum translationi.
This is greedily taken up by Morinus (as nothing could be
spoken more to his purpose) who also tells us, that the lear∣ned
Prefacer to these Biblia Polyglotta is of the same
judgement; Morin: Praefat: ad opusc. Haebr: Samarit.
Hereupon he informes us, that in the Translation of the
Pentateuch he went for the meaning of sundry words unto
Hierome, and the Translation of the 70. But it is not un∣knowne
to these learned persons, that Hierome, whom one of
them makes his rule; tels us over and over, that not∣withstanding
the Translation of the 70. he had his know∣ledge
of the Hebrew Tongue, from the Hebrew it selfe; and
the help of such Hebrews as he hired to his assistance. And
for Capellus, is not that the Helena for which he contends,
and upon the matter the onely foundation of his sacred
worke of Criticising on the Scripture, that there was a
succession of learned men of the Jewes at Tiberias untill
an hundred yeares after Hierome, who invented the Points
of the Hebrew Bible, and that not in an arbitrary manner,
but according to the tradition they had received from thē
who spoke that language in its purity? shall these men be
thought to have had the knowledge of the Hebrew tongue
from the Translation of the 70; Certainly they would not
then have hated it so, as he informes us they did. But this
thing is plainly ridiculous. The Language gives us the

knowledge of it selfe. Considering the helps that by provi∣dence
have been in all Ages, and at all times afforded there∣unto,
ever since the time wherein Capellus saies, some knew
it so well, as to invent and affix the present Punctation,
there hath beene a succession of living or dead Masters to
further the knowledge of it. And this will not seem strange
to them who have given us exact Translations of the Per∣sian,
and Aethiopick pieces of Scripture. In the 
we are little assisted by the 70. The chiefest seeming
help unto this tongue is from the Arabick. And thus have
I given you a briefe account, how by the subtilty of Satan,
there are principles crept in, even amongst Protestants, un∣dermining
the Authority of the Hebrew verity, as it was
called of Old; wherein Hierusalem hath justified Samaria,
and cleared the Papists in their reproaching of the Word of
God. Of the New Testament I shall speake particularly in
the second discourse ensuing. Morinus indeed tels us, de
Heb: & Graec: Tex: Sincerit. Exercitat: 1. cap: 1. p. 5.
it is a jocular thing that the Hereticks in their Disputati∣ons
do grant, that there are Corruptions, and various Le∣ctions
in the Greek & Latine copies of the Scripture, but
deny it as to the Hebrew: but why, I pray, is this so ridicu∣lous?
It is founded on no lesse stable bottome than this ex∣perience,
that whereas we evidently find various lections in
the Greek copies which we enjoy, and so grant that which
ocular Inspection evinces to be true; yet although men dis∣cover
such virulent and bitter spirits against the Hebrew
Text, as this Morinus doth, calling all men fooles or
knaves that contend for its purity, yet they are none of
them able to shew out of any Copies yet extant in the

World, or that they can make appeare ever to have been
extant, that ever there were any such various lections
in the Originalls of the Old Testament. And is there any
reason that we should be esteemed Ridiculous, because
believing our own eyes, we will not also believe the Te∣stimony
of same few men of no credit with us, asserting
that for truth, which we have abundant cause to believe
to be utterly false; But of these men so far.
I thought at the Entrance of my discourse to have also
insisted on some other wayes, whereby Satan in these daies
assaults the sacred truth of the Word of God in its Autho∣rity,
Purity, Integrity, or Perfection; especially in the
Poor, Deluded, Fanaticall soules amongst us, commonly
called Quakers. For the instruction of the younger sort,
against whose abominations I have subjoyned the Theses
in the Close of the other Treatises. But I am sensible how
far already I have exceeded the bounds of a Preface unto
so small Treatises as these ensuing; and therefore giving
a briefe account of my undertaking in this Cause of God
and his Word, for the vindication of the Authority and
Integrity of it, I shall put a Close to this discourse.
It may be some of you have heard me professing my un∣willingnesse
to appeare any more in the World this way. I
have not in some things met with such pleasing Entertain∣ment,
as to encourage me unto it: where I have been for
Peace, others have made themselves ready for war. Some
of them, especiallyM. G. F. one of late, neither under∣standing
me, nor the things that he writes a∣bout,
but his mind for opposition was to be satisfied. This
is the manner of not a few in their writings; they mea∣sure

other men by their own ignorance, and what they
know not themselves, they thinke is hid to others also;
Hence when any thing presents its selfe new to their
minds; as though they were the first that knew, what
they then first know, and which they have only an obscure
glimpse of, they rest not untill they have published it to
their praise. Such are the discourses of that person, part∣ly
triviall, partly obviated and rendred utterly uselesse to
his purpose by that treatise, which he ventured weakly to
oppose. I wish I could prevaile with those, whose interest
compells them to choose rather to be ignorant, then to be
taught by me, to let my books alone. Another after two or
three years consideration, in answer to a book of neer 140
sheets of paper, returnes a scoffing reply to so
much of it,Mr. I. G. as was written in a quarter of an
houre. I am therefore still minded to abstaine from such
Engagements. And I think I may say if there were lesse
writing by some, there would be more reading by others,
at least to more purpose. Many books full of profound lear∣ning
lye neglected, whilst men spend their time on Trifles;
And many things of great Worth are suppressed by their
Authors, whilst things of uo value are poured out, one
on the neck of another. One of your
selves I have often solicited for the
Publishing of some Divinity le∣ctures,Dr. Henry Wilkinson publick Reader of Divinity in the Uni∣versity.
read at solemne times in the
University, which, if I know ought, are, to say no more,
worthy of publick view. I yet Hope a short time will an∣swer
my desire and expectation. Of my present Ʋnderta∣king
there are 3 parts. The first is a Subject that having

preached on, I was by many urged to publish my thoughts
upon it, judging it might be usefull: I have answered their
requests; what I have performed through the grace of
Christ in the worke undertaken, is left to the judgment of
the Godly learned Reader. The second concernes the Pro∣legomena
and Appendix to the late Biblia Polyglotta:
of this I said often, ab alio quovis hoc fieri mallem,
quàm à me, sed à me tamen potius quàm à nemine.
The reasons of my ingaging in that worke are declared at
large in the entrāce of it. The theses in the close were drawn
in by their affinity in Subject to the other discourses, and to
compleat the doctrine of the Scripture concerning the Scrip∣ture,
I endeavoured to cōprize in thē the whole truth about
the Word of God, as to name & thing opposed by the poor
fanaticall Quakers, as also to discover the Principles they
proceed upon in their Confused opposition to that Truth.
I have no more to adde, but only begging I may have the
Continuance of your prayers, and assistance in your seve∣rall
stations, for the carrying on the worke of our Lord and
Master in this place committed unto us, that I may give
my account with joy and not with Griefe, to him that
stands at the door, I commend you to the powerfull word of
his Grace; and remaine

From my study,
Septemb. 22. 1658.
