


To the Supreme Authority, the Par∣liament of the Commonwealth of England, now sitting at Westminster.
FOrasmuch as it hath pleased the great Jeho∣vah, who is the onely wise Disposer of all things, to re-call You to Your Places, from whence You were unjustly deposed by an Usurped Power; Therefore I beseech You consider, that great things are now expected from You: And I do humbly intreat and beseech You, that You will be pleased to act prudently and vigorously for the Glory of GOD, the Peace and Tranquillity of this Nation, and the Comfort, Liberty and Free∣dome of all the faithful Servants of the Lord Jesus Christ, within this Commonwealth. And foras∣much as some grievances and pressures rest upon the hearts and Spirits of many Godly, Conscien∣tious People of this Land; and one especially up∣on mine own Spirit and Conscience in particular, (as well as upon divers others) I mean that unsup∣portable burden of Tythes, so dishonorable to God, and destructive to his true Worship, and so much tending to the abasement of the Kingdom of Christ, and the advancement of the power and do∣minion of Satan and Antichrist: This, I say, is a grievance necessary to be considered, and speedily

reformed; Because I do not finde any Warrant in in the Word of God, to uphold Minister Mainte∣nance by Tythes. And therefore, I, as a Lover of the Truth as it is in Jesus, and as an obedient Ser∣vant and Subject to the Lord Jesus Christ, do exhort and beseech You, that You will have a tender care and compassion upon all fad oppressed Souls. And to stir You up thereunto, am bold to offer to Your view the short ensuing Treatise, humbly desiring that You will be pleased to read it deliberately, and consider it seriously: and to make it a chief part of Your work, according to the counsel of the Lord, by the Prophet, Isa. 58. 6. To loose the bands of wickedness, to take off the heavy burdens, and let the oppressed go free, and that You break every yoke. And then in so doing, God will bless You in all Your consultations and actions.
But I beseech You mistake not my good intent and meaning herein: For I purpose not to take up∣on me to teach You Your Duties in Your places and callings; but to inform You of such a growing evil in this Commonwealth, as if it be not timely suppressed, may speedily draw down the wrath and judgements of God upon this Nation.
Wherefore I desire to stir up your mindes, that by your godly actings and proceedings, God may be glorified, your own souls comforted, and poor oppressed Consciences relieved.
Which shall ever be the Prayer of

