



Sirs,
IT hath always suited the wisedome of God, to
do great things in difficult seasons. He sets
up wals in troublous times. Dan. 9. 25. His
builders must hold Swords and Spears, as
well as Instruments of labour, Neh. 4. 16. Yea while
sin continueth in its course here (which began in Heaven,
and having contemporized with the Earth, shall live for
ever in Hell.) Great works for God, will cause great trou∣bles
amongst men. The holy, harmlesse Reconciler of hea∣ven
and earth, bids us expect the Sword, to attend his un∣dertakings
for, and way of making peace, Mat. 10. 34.
All the waves in the world, arise to their height and roar∣ing▪
from the confronting of the breath of Gods spirit, and
the vapours of mens corruptions. Hence seasons receive
their degrees of difficulty, according to the greatnesse and
weight of the workes which in them God will accomplish.
to their worth and excellency is mans opposition proportio∣ned.
This, the instruments of his glory in this generation,
shall continually find true to their present trouble, and
future comfort.
As the days approach for the delivery of the decree,Heb. 12. 26, 27 to
the shaking of Heaven and Earth,Dan. 7. 27. and all the powers of the
World,Ego nisi tu∣multus istos viderem, ver∣bum Dei in mundo non esse dicerem: Luth. de s. A. to make way for the establishment of that kingdom
which shall not be given to another people (the great
expectation of the Saints of the most high before the con∣summation
of all) so tumults, troubles, vexations and dis∣quietnes,
must certainly grow and increase among the sons
of men.
A dead woman (says the Proverb) will not be carryed
out of her house under four men. Much lesse will living
men, of wisedome and power, be easily & quietly dispossessed

of that share and Interest in the things of Christ, which
long continued usurpation, hath deluded them into an
imagination of being their owne Inheritance. This then
being shortly to be effected, and the scale being ready to
turn against the man of sin, notwithstanding his ballanc∣ing
it in opposition to the witnesse of Jesus, with the weight
and poyse of earthly power, no wonder if heaven, earth,
sea,Isa. 34. 4, 5. and dry land, be shaken in their giving place to the
things that cannot be moved.Revel. 16. 16. God Almighty having called
you forth (Right honourable) at his entrance to the rolling
up of the Nations heavens like a Scroll, to serve him in
your Generation in the high places of Armageddon, you
shall be sure not to want experience of that Opposition
which is raised against the great work of tbe Lord, which
generally swels most, against the visible instruments therof.
And would to God, you had only the deuoted sons of
Babel to contend withall, that the men of this shaking
earth were your only Antagonists: that the Malignity
of the Dragons tayle,Revel. 12. 4. had had no influence on the Stars
of heaven, to prevaile with them to fight in their courses
against you. But jacta est alea, the providence of God must
be served, according to the discovery made of his owne un∣changeable
will, and not the mutable interests and pas∣sions
of the sons of men. For verily the Lord of Hosts
hath purposed to pollute the pride of all glory, and
to bring into contempt all the Honourable of the
Earth, Isa. 23. 9.
The contradictions of sinners against all that walk in
the paths of righteousnesse and peace, with the support∣ment
which their spirits may receive (as being promised)
who pursue those wayes, notwithstanding those contradi∣ctions,
are in part discovered in the ensuing Sermon; the
foundation of that whole Transaction of things, which
is therin held out, in reference to the present dispensations

of providence (being nothing but an entrance into the
unravelling of the whole Web of Iniquity, interwoven of
Civill and Ecclesiasticall Tyranny, in opposition to the
kingdome of the Lord Jesus) I chose not to mention. Nei∣ther
shall I at present add any thing thereabout, but onely
my desire that it may be eyed as the granted Basis of the
following discourse. Only by your very favourable accepta∣tion
of the making out those thoughts, which were the ha∣sty
conception, and like Jonah's Gourd, the child of a
night or two (which with prayer for a rooting in the
hearts of them to whom they were delivered, had certainly
withered, in their owne Leaves, had they not received
warmth and moysture from your commands in general,
and the particular desires of many of you, to give them a
life of a few dayes longer) I am encouraged to the annex∣ing
of a few lines, as a free-will offering to attend the fol∣lowing
Product of obedience.
Now this shall not be to the Opposition which you doe
and shall yet further meet withall, but as to the Causes, re∣al,
or pretended, which are held forth as the bottom of that
contradiction wherwith on every side you are encompassed.
The things in reference whereunto, your proceedence
is laden with such criminations, as these sad dayes of re∣compence,
have found to be Comets portending no lesse
then blood, are first Civill, then Religious.
For the First, as their being beyond the bounds of my
Calling, gives them Sanctuary from being called forth
to my consideration, so neither have I the least thoughts
with Absolom of a more orderly carrying of of Affaires,
might my desires have any influence into their disposall.
Waiting at the throne of Grace, that those whom God
hath intrusted with, and enabled for the Transaction of
these things, may be directed and supported in their em∣ployment,
is the utmost of my undertaking herein.

For the other, or Religious things, the generall interest I have in
them as a Christian, being improved by the super-added Title of a Mi∣nister
of the Gospel (though unworthy the one Name, and the other)
gives me not onely such boldnesse as accreweth from enjoyed Favour,
but also such a Right as will support mee to plead concerning them,
before the most Impartiall Judicature.
And this I shall doe (as I said before) meerly in reference to those
criminations, which are layd by conjecturall presumptions on your
Honourable Assembly, and made a cause of much of that opposition
and contradiction you meet withall. Now in particular, it is the
Toleration of all Religions or invented wayes of worship, wherein
your Constitutions are confidently Antidated in many places of the
Nation, the thing it selfe withall, being held out, as the most enor∣mous
apprehension, and desperate indeavour for the destruction of
Truth and Godlinesse that ever entred the thoughts of men, profes∣sing
the one and the other. The contest hereabout, being adhuc sub
Judice, and there being no doubt, but that the whole matter, com∣monly
phrased as above, hath (like other things) sinfull and dan∣gerous
Extreames. I deemed it not amisse, to endeavour the powring
a little cold water upon the common flames, which are kindled in
the breasts of men about this thing. And who knowes, whether the
words of a weake Nothing, may not by the power of the Fountaine
of Beings, give some light into the determination and Establishment
of a thing of so great concernment and consequence, as this is
generally conceived to be. What is in this my weake undertaking, of
the Lord, I shall begg of him, that it may be received, what is of
my selfe I begg of you that it may be pardoned. That God Almigh∣ty
would give you to prove All things that come unto you in his way,
and to hold fast that which is good, granting you unconquerable
Assistance, in constant perseverance, is the prayer of,

Coggeshall, Feb. 28.
