



OF This Second Addresse unto you in this Kind, whereunto I am en∣couraged by your faire and can∣did Reception of my Former, I desire you would be pleased to take the ensuing Account. It is now (as I remember) about a yeare age, since one Mr Biddle, (formerly a Master of Arts of this University, by which Title he still ownes himselfe) Published two Lit∣tle Catechismes, (as he calls them) wherein under sun∣dry specious Pleas and Pretences, (which you will find discussed in the ensuing Treatise) he endeavours to insinuate subtilly into the minds of unstable and un∣learned men, the whole substance of the Socinian Reli∣gion. The man is a Person, whom (to my knowledge) I never saw, nor have been at all curious to enquire after the place of his habitation, or course of his Life. His opposition some years since, to the Deity of the Ho∣ly Ghost, and now to that of the Father and Sonne also, is all that he is known to me by. It is not with his Per∣son that I have any contest: he stands or falls to his own Master. His Arguments against the Deity of the Holy Ghost, were somewhile since answered by Clop∣penburgh, then Professor of Divinity at Franeker in Friesland, since at rest in the Lord; and (as I have heard) by one in English. His Catechismes also are gone
 over the Seas, whereof farther mention must after∣wards be made. At their first Publishing, complaint being given in by some worthy Persons to the Honou∣rable Councell against them, as abusive to the Majesty and Authority of the Word of God, and destructive to many important Truths of the Gospell, (which was done without any knowledge of mine) They were pleased to send for me, and to require of me the per∣formance of that Work, which is here presented unto you. Being surprized with their request, I laboured to excuse my selfe to the utmost, on the account of my many employments in the University and elsewhere, with other Reasons of the like nature, which to my thoughts did then occurre. Not prevailing with them, they persisting in their Command, I looked on it as a call from God to plead for his violated Truth, which by his Assistance, and according as I had Opportunity, I was in generall allway resolved to doe. Having in∣deed but newly taken off my hand from the Plough of a peculiar Controversy, about the Perseverance of the Saints, in the following whereof I was somewhat tired, the Entrance into the Work was irkesome and burthensome unto me: After some progresse made, finding the searching into, and discussing of the im∣portant Truths opposed, of very good use to my selfe, I have been carried through the whole (according as I could break off my dayly pressing occasions to at∣tend unto it) with much Cheerfulnesse, and Alacrity of mind. And this was the Reason, why, finding M. B. came short of giving a faire occasion to the full vindi∣cation of many heads of Religion by him oppugned, I have called in to his Assistance and Society one of his great Masters, namely Valentinus Smalcius, and his Catechisme (commonly called the Racovian) with the
 Expositions of the places of Scripture Contended about by the Learned Grotius, as also on severall occasions, the Arguments and Answers of most of the chiefe pro∣pugners of M. B's Religion. Now besides your Interest in the Truths pleaded for, there are other Considerati∣ons also, inducing me to a perswasion, that this endea∣vour of mine will not be unacceptable unto you▪ M. B's Catechisme (as I said) being carried over, and di∣spersed in sundry places of the Ʋnited Provinces, the Professors of their Academies, (who have all general∣ly Learned the English Tongue, to enable them for the Understanding of the Treatises of Divinity in all kinds writtē therein, which they begin to make use of, to the purpose) cry out against thē, & professedly undertake the refutation thereof. Now certainly it cannot be for our Advantage in poynt of repute amongst them; that they (who are yet glad of the Occasion) should be enforced to undertake the Confutation of a Book, written by one who stiles himselfe a Master of Arts of this Ʋniversity, (which they also take notice of) wherein they are so little concerned; the poyson of it being shut up from their People, under the safe cu∣stody of an unknown Tongue. Prodiit hoc anno în An∣glia, Auore Johanne Bi∣dello, Artium Magistro, pneumatoma∣cho, duplex Catechesis Scripturaria, Anglico idiemate typis evulgata, quâ sub nomine Religionis Christianae pu∣rum putum Socinianismum, orbi Christiano obrudere satagit. Quanquam antem non videatur velle Socinianus haberi; attamen cujus sit ingenii, sub sinem libelli prodit, cum commendat librum cui Titulus, The Life of that incomparable Man, Faustus Socinus Senensis, phrasin Scrip∣turae ad dogmata mere Sociniana ita detorsit, ut nemo ante eum hesin istam tam fraudulenter in∣stillarit: Larvam illi detrahere post dies caniculaes, cum Deo est animus. Nicol. Arnold. Praef▪ ad Lector. Nicolaus Arnoldus, the Professor of Divinity at Franeker, gives an account of this Book, as the most subtile insinuation of the So∣cinian Religion, that ever was attempted, and Promi∣ses a Confutation of it.

Maresius Professor at Groning, a man well known Necessarium est hoc tristi tempore, quo Sociniana pe∣stis, quam haud immerito dix∣eris omnis im∣pietatis , videtur nunc in vicina An∣glia sedem sibi Metropolita∣nam fixisse, nisi quod isthic facile admit∣tat & bella cruenta, & Judicia capi∣talia severissi∣ma, sub quo∣rum umbone crevit. Nam inter varias Haereses, quibus faelix illa quondam insula & Orthodoxiae tenacissima hodie conspurcatur, tantum eminet Socinianismus, quantum lenta solent inter viburna Cupressi: nec enim amplius ibi horrenda sua misteria mussitat in angulis, sed sub dio explicat omnia vexilla suae iniquitatiae: non loquor incomperta, Benevole Lector: Modo enim ex Anglia allatus est Anglica lingua conscriptus Catechismus duplex, Major & Minor, Londini publice excusus, hoc Anno 1654. apud Jac Coterell, & Rich. Moone, &c. Authore Johanne Bidello Magistre Artium Oxoniensi. &c. Sam Mares. Hyd. Socin. Refut. Tom. 2. Praefat. ad Lect. by his Works published, goes farther; and on the ac∣count of these Catechismes, Charges the whole Nation, and the Governours of it, with Socinianisme, and (ac∣cording to the manner of the Man) raises a fearfull out-cry, affirming, that that Heresy hath fixed its Metro∣political seat here in England, & is here openly professed, is the head Sect in the Nation, displaying openly the Ban∣ners of its iniquity; all which he confirmes by instan∣cing in this Book of a Master of Arts of the Ʋniversity of Oxford. Of his rashnesse in censuring, his extreame ignorance of the state of Affaires here amongst us, which yet he undertakes to relate, judge, and con∣demn, I have given him an account in a private Letter to himselfe.
Certainly, though we deserved to have these reproa∣ches cast upon us, yet of all men in the World, those who live under the Protection, and upon the allowance of the Ʋnited Provinces, are most unmeet to mannage them: Their incompetency in sundry respects for this service is known to all. However it cannot be denied, but that even on this account, (that it may appeare, that we are, as free from the guilt of the calumnious in∣sinuations of Maresius, so in no need of the assistance of Arnoldus, for the Confutation of any one arising among our selves, speaking perverse things to draw Disciples after him,) an Answer from some in this place unto
 those Catechismes, was sufficiently necessary. That it is by Providence fallen upon the hand of one, more um∣meet then many others in this place, for the perfor∣mance of this Work and Duty, I doubt not but you will be contented withall; and am bold to hope, that neither the Truth, nor your own esteeme, will too much suffer, by my engagement herein. Yea, give me leave to speak it, I have assumed the confidence, to aime at the handling of the whole Body of the Socinian Religi∣on, in such a way and manner, as that those who are most knowing, and exercised in these Controversies, may find that, which they will not altogether despise, and younger Students that, whereby they may profit. To this End I have added the Racovian Catechisme, (as I said before) to M. B's: which as I was urged to doe by many worthy Persons in this Ʋniversity, so I was no way discouraged in the publishing of my Answer there∣unto, by the view I took of Arnoldus his discourse to the same purpose, and that for such Reasons, as I shall not expresse, but leave the whole to the judgement of the Reader.
From thence, whence in the thoughts of Some, I am most likely to suffer, as to my own Resolves, I am most secure. It is in medling with Grotius his Annotations, and calling into question what hath been delivered by such a Gyant in al kinds of Literature. Since my engage∣ment in this Businesse, & when I had well nigh finished the Vindication of the Texts of Scripture commonly pleaded, for the Demonstration of the Deity of Christ, from the Exceptions put into their Testimonies, by the Racovian Catechisme, I had the sight of Dr H's Apolo∣gy for him, in his Vindication of his Dissertations a∣bout Episcopacy, from my occasionall Animadversions, published in the Preface of my Book of the Perseve∣rance
 of the Saints. Of that whole Treatise I shall else∣where give an account. My Defensative as to my dealing with Grotius his Annotations, is suited to what the Doctor pleads in his behalfe, which occasions this mention thereof.
This very Pious, Learned, Judicious Man (he tells us) hath fallen under some harsh censures of late, especially upon the account of Socinianisme and Popery. That is, not as though he would Reconcile those Extreames, but being in Doctrinalls a Socinian, he yet closed in many things with the Roman interest: as I no way doubt, but Thousands of the same perswasion with the Socinians, as to the Person and Offices of Christ, do live in the outward Communion of that Church (as they call it) to this day; of which supposall I am not with∣out considerable grounds, and eminent instances for its Confirmation. This (I say) is their charge upon him. For his being a Socinian (he tells us) Three things are made use of, to beget a jealousy in the minds of men of his inclinations that way. 1. Some parcells of a Letter of his to Crellius, 2. Some Relations of what passed from him at his Death. 3. Some passages in his Annotations. It is this Last alone wherein I am concerned. And what I have to speak to them, I desire may be measu∣red and Weighed by what I doe premise. It is not that I do entertaine in my selfe any hard thoughts, or that I would beget in others any evill surmises of the Eternall condition of that man, that I speake what I do. What am I, that I should judge another mans Servant? He is fallen to his own Master. I am very slow to judge of mens Acceptation with God, by the Ap∣prehension of their Understanding. This only I know, that be men of what Religion soever, that is professed in the World, if they are Drunkards, Proud, Boasters, &c.
 Hypocrites, haters of good men, persecutors and revilers of them, yea if they be not regenerate and borne of God, united to the head Christ Jesus, by the same spirit that is in him, they shall never see God.
But for the Passages in his Annotations, the sub∣stance of the Doctors plea is; that the passages intimated Jam vero sci∣endum est, multo quidem citius, quam nunc denium temporis eam resumi, absol∣vi{que} potuisse, et quo minus id ampridem factum sit, per eum non stetis∣se virum, cu∣jus fideli curae opus integrum ab Authore ip∣so primum creditum fuit & sedulo com∣mendatum. Praemon. ad Lect. are in his Posthuma, that he intended not to publish them, that they might be of things he observed, but thought far∣ther to consider: and an instance is given in that of Col. 1. 16. which he interprets, contrary to what he urged it for, Joh. 1. 1, 2, 3. But granting what is affirmed as to matter of fact, about his Collections; (though the Preface to the last part of his Annotations will not al∣low it to be true) I must needs abide in my dissatisfa∣ction as to these Annotations, & of my resolves in these Thoughts give the Doctor this account. Of the Soci∣nian Religion there are two main Parts; the first is Photinianisme, the latter Pelagianisme: The first con∣cerning the Person, the other the Grace of Christ. Let us take an Eminent instance out of either of these heads: out of the First, their denying Christ to be God by Nature. Out of the Latter, their denyall of his Satisfaction.
For the First, I must needs tell the Apologist, that of all the Texts of the New Testament and Old, where∣by the Deity of Christ is usually Confirmed, and where it is evidently testified unto, He hath not left any more then one (that I have observed) if one, speaking any thing clearly to that purpose. I say, if one, for that he speaks not home to the businesse in hand on Joh. 1. I shall elsewhere give an Account; perhaps some one or two more may be interpreted according to the A∣nalogy of that. I speak not of his Annotations on the Epistles, but on the whole Bible throughout, whererein
 his Expositions given, do for the most part fall in with those of the Socinians, & oftentimes consist in the very words of Socinus and Smalcius, and alway do the same things with them, as to any notice of the Deity of Christ in them. So that I marvell the Learned Do∣ctor should fixe upon one particular instance, as though that one place alone were corrupted by him, when there is not one (or but one) that is not wrested, perverted, and corrupted to the same purpose. For the full con∣viction of the Truth hereof, I refer the Reader to the ensuing Considerations of his Interpretatiōs of the places themselves. The condition of these famous An∣notations, as to the Satisfaction of Christ, is the same: not one Text of the whole Scripture, wherein Testimony is given to that sacred Truth, which is not Wrested to another sence, or at least the Doctrine in it concealed, and obscured by them. I do not speak this with the least intention to cast upon him the reproach of a Soci∣nian: I judge not his Person; his Books are Published to be considered and judged. Erasmus I know made way for him, in most of his Expositions about the Deity of Christ: but what repute he hath thereby obtained a∣mong all that honour the Eternall Godhead of the Son of God, let Bellarmine on the one hand, and Beza on the other, evince. And as I will by no meanes main∣taine or urge against Grotius any of the miscarriages in Religion, which the Answerer of my Animadversions un∣dertakes to vindicate him from; nor do I desire to Fight with the dust and Ashes of men; yet what I have said, is, if not necessary to return to the Apologist, yet of tendency, I hope, to the Satisfaction of others, who may enquire after the Reason of my calling the Anno∣tations of the Learned Man to an account in this dis∣course. Shall any one take liberty to pluck down the
 Pillars of our Faith, and weaken the Grounds of our assurance, concerning the Person and Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and shall not we have the boldnesse to call him to an account for so sacrilegious an attempt; with those then, who Love the Lord Christ in sincerity, I ex∣pect no blame or reproach for what I have endeavou∣red in this kind; yea that my good will shall find ac∣ceptance with them, especially if it shall occasion any of greater leasure and Abilities farther, and professedly to remarke more of the Corruptions of those Annotati∣ons, I have good ground of Expectation. The truth is, notwithstanding their pompous shew and appearance (few of his Quotations, which was the Grotius in lib. 5. de ve∣ritat. Relig: Christian. in notis R. Sel. Aben Ezra & Onkelos ad∣ducit: sed ali∣enis oculis hic vidit, aut alienâ fide retulit (forte authoribus illis aut non intellectis, aut propter occupationes non inspectis) aut animositati & authoritati suae in citandis authoribus, & referendis dictis aut fa∣ctis, ut ipsi hoc usui veniebat, nimium in scriptis Theologicis indulserit. Voet. disput. de Advent. Messi. manner of the man, being at all to his purpose) It will be found no difficult matter to discusse his Assertions, and Dissipate his Conjectures.
For his being a Papist, I have not much to say; let his Epistles (published by his Friends) written to Dyo∣nysius; Reverende Domine, saept tibi molestus esse cogor—sumpsi hanc ul timamoperam, mea antehac dicta & famam quo{que} a ministris allatratam tuendi, in eo scripto si quid est, aut Ca∣tholicis sententiis discongruens, aut caeteroqui a veritate alienum, deeo abs te viro Eruditissimo &c. cujus judicium plurimt facio moneri percupio. Epist. Grot. ad Dyonys. Pelat. Epist. 204. Petavius the Jesuite, be perused, and you will see the Character which of Himselfe he gives: As also what in sundry writings he ascribes to the Pope.
What I have performed through the good hand of God, in the whole, is humbly submitted to your Judge∣ment. You know (all of you) with what weight of bu∣sinesse and Employmet I am pressed; what is the con∣stant work that in this place is incumbent on me, how many & how urgent my avocations are; the consideration
 whereof, cannot but prevaile for a pardon of that want of exactnesse, which perhaps in sundry Particulars will appeare unto you. With those who are neither willing nor able to doe any thing in this kind themselves, and yet make it their businesse to despise what is done by others, I shall very little trouble my selfe. That which seems in relation hereunto, to call for an Apology, is, my Engagement into this Work, wherein I was not particularly concerned, suffering in the mean time some Treatises against me to lye Ʋnanswered. D. Hammonds Answer to my Animadversions on his Dissertations a∣bout Episcopacy; Mr Baxter's Objections against some∣what Written about the Death of Christ; and a Book of one Mr Horne against my Treatise about Ʋniversall Re∣demption, are all the instances that I know of, which in this kind may be given. To all that candidly take notice of these things, my defence is at hand. I do not know that I am more obliged to Answer a Treatife written against my selfe, then any other written a∣gainst the Truth, though I am not particularly named, or opposed therein. Nor do I intend to put any such Law of disquietnesse upon my Spirit, as to think my selfe bound to reply to every thing that is written against me, whether the matter and subject of it be worth the publick ventilation, or no. It is neither Name, nor Repute, that I eye in these Contests; so the Truth be safe, I can be well content to suffer. Besides, this pre∣sent taske was not voluntarily undertaken by me, it was (as I have already given account) Imposed on me by such an Authority, as I could not wave. For M. Hornes Book, I suppose you are not acquainted with it; that alone was extant before my last engagement; could I have met with any one uninterested Person,
 that would have said it deserved a Reply, it had not have laid so long Un answered; In the mean time I cannot but rejoyce, that some like minded with him, Mr J. G. cannot impute my silence to the weaknesse of the Cause I mannaged, but to my incompetency for the work of Maintaining it. To Mr Baxter, as far as I am concerned, I have made a Returne in the close of this Treatise: wherein I suppose I have put an End to that Controversy. Dr Hammonds Defensative came forth much about the time, that halfe this Treatise was fini∣shed: and being about a matter of so mean Concern∣ment, in comparison of those weighty Truths of the Gospell, which I was engaged in the defence of, I durst not desert my Station, to turne aside thereto. On the cursory view I have taken of it, I look upon what is of reall difference between that Learned Person and my selfe, to be a matter of easy dispatch. His Leaves are much more soft and gentle, then those of Socinus, Smalcius, Crellius, and Schlictingius. If the Lord in his Goodnesse be pleased to give me a little Respite and Leisure, I shall give a farther account of the whole difference between the Learned Doctor and Me, in such a way of Processe, as may be expected from so slow and dull a Person as I am; in the mean time, I wish him a better cause to mannage, then that wherein against me he is engaged, and better princi∣ples to Mannage a Good Cause on, then some of those in his Treatise of Schisme, and some others; faile he not in these, his Abilities and Diligence will stand him in very Good stead. I shall not trouble you with things which I have advantages other waies to impart my Thoughts concerning; only crave that you would be pleased candidly to accept of this Testimony of my Re∣spects
 to You; and seeing no other things are in the en∣suing Treatise pleaded for, but such as are Ʋniversal∣ly owned amongst You, that according to your severall Degrees, you would take it into your Patronage or use; affording him in his daily Labours the benefit of your Prayers, at the Throne of Grace, who is,

OXON. Ch. Ch. Coll. April. 1.
