


Reverend and Worthy Sir,
IT is an usual saying, Si mu∣sae Latine loquerentur (inquit Varro) Plantino sermone loquerentur. Although I take the boldness to pre∣sent you with this my Nec inter vivos, Nec inter mortuos, upon the 107. Psalm, which was writ upon a frowning and tempestuous Sea (whom I know to bee a person every way so well studied, read, and accomplished, not in the least in∣feriour to him, whom a great University Tutor much boasted of (that was a Pupil to him) fac periculum, &c. try him in the Tongues, Rhetorick, Logick, and Philosophy, &c. in what you will, hee is able to answer you) I hope you will expect no such high strained stile and phrase from mee, which the Muses, would delight to speak in, and whom it would far better become than mee, for the Sea is no place to write, and polish

books in, no more than hard riding is to him that would make a Map, or true description of a Country. I confess, such is the great respect I bear you (I speak now ex imis praecordiis) that if it were not for that, and also for that worth and merit that I clearly see in you, together with that sweet mixture of ingenuity, wisdome and good na∣ture, besides a great many more good things that is possible for to be in a per∣son of your rank and quality, I should scarce have adventured to have offered you this peece of my travelling Operam & Oleum. I beg your acceptance of it, and shall assure you, that you have a very high room in my thoughts, which is indeed reserved for all such as both know and fear the Lord. I freely bestow this peece upon you, and give you all the interest in it, that possibly can bee be∣stowed upon you, I hope you will both see, and also find something in it worth the reading, and the while, in your per∣using.
Sir, You are descended of a very high and honourable Family (a Family whom I much honour and respect, and that is one of the grand inducements that puts mee upon an appearance unto you) and the onely way to heighten your honour still is to grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. I know no one thing this day upon the face of the earth,

that stamps such a Nobility and emi∣nency upon our Gentry in the land, as Piety and Religion doth. Nobility by blood (as one well said) is but a fancy, or an imagination, but this hath a reality in it, and where it is, it evermore be∣gets a splendor, and a lustre. But, I will not further; the prayers of him shall bee for you, and yours, who rests,
Sir,

From my Study at my Lady Hungarfords in Hungardford house upon the Strand, Lon∣don,
May 4. 1659.
