



Honoured Sir,
WHen you first view this Paper, I know you will be stricken with won∣der what I aim at, or intend by it; but when you understand both the occasion and end of this undertaking, you will (I doubt not) accept it with mildness and candour, and forgive my boldness in presuming upon your Patronage, seeing I know not any, who hath a juster right to it, than
 yourself. The occasion of making this Sermon (delivered by my Fa∣ther at the funeral of your late reli∣gious
Mrs. Do∣rothy Free∣borne. Consort) publique was the desire and solicitation of her two
Cap∣tain Ri∣chard and Captain
William Goodlad. Sons, to whom I bare so singular a respect, and am so much ingaged, that I could not deny this their first, and so reasonable re∣quest; nor shall deny any other, which is in my power to grant: this was the occasion. The end of it is twofold, private and publique, and I hope both good. Private for the benefit of you and them, of your Family and theirs; by receiving the memory of so choise a Saint, who was a pattern of Piety in all her relations, more especially in those two, of a Wife and a Mother; whose example if her Children fol∣low, they will manifest themselves born again, and so to have a right to that Glory, which she now pos∣sesseth.
 The publique end I aim at, is the Spiritual good of all those, that shall read the Sermon with dili∣gence, and Prayer to profit by it. This (the good of Souls) was, I am sure, my Fathers chiefest end in Preaching it, and is mine also in Publishing it. His great care and design in his work (when ever God gave him opportunity) was to win Souls, and God was pleased to let him see of the travel of his Soul, the fruits of his labours, long be∣fore he took him to himself; which was great comfort and satisfaction to him, upon his dying Bed. You know Sir, it was never his custome or ambition, to interline his Ser∣mons (especially upon such solemn occasions as this) with much read∣ing, nor yet to glaze them with much Rhetorick, well understanding, that the leaves of Antiquity would make but a weak Shield against the stroke of Death, and that the fine
 flowers of Rhetorick would not be Armour of proof against the con∣quering fears of the King of terrors. His manner was to Preach a cruci∣fied Christ in a cracified stile, to hold fast the form of sound words, delivering the mind of God, in Scripture language, not in the in∣ticing words of mans wisdom; to see that his Doctrine was sound, wholesome, savoury, and edifying, not meerly notional, suited to mens corrupt humours; but well ground∣ed on holy writ, and suited to the Souls of his hearers; which savours of a more divine-like spirit, than the light jingling of some, and spi∣ritual bombest of other Preachers and Writers in our dairs.
Such as it was in the Pulpit, such you have it from the Press, there is nothing added to adorn it, nor yet to enlarge it; somthing more there is, than was delivered, (time preventing him) yet nothing more,
 than what I find in his own Notes. As to the dead, if any thing be added, tis but what he could have spoken of her, if occasion had per∣mitted; and but what all persons who had the happiness to know her, and be acquainted with her, will witness to be true; yea and say, that all that is written doth not set forth half of her Glory, the half of her excellency. The Charracter, which the Holy Ghost hath given of Abigall, 1 Sam.
25. 3. May be
1 Sam. 25. 3. given of her; she was a woman of good understanding, and of a beautiful countenance. She was eminent for her Piety, Modesty, Humility, Charity, and (which made her amiable in the eyes both of God and men) she was adorned with the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit. So richly decked with all Christian excellencies, that as
Solomon speaks of the Vertuous
Pro. 31. 10. Woman, Prov. 31. 10. Her price  was far above Rubies; for what doth the wise man mention Com∣mendable in Women, that was not found in her? She stretched out her
Verse 20. hand to the Poor, yea she reached forth her hand to the Needy. She opened her mouth with wisdom, in
Verse 26. her tongue was the Law of kindness. She looked well to the waies of her
Verse 27. Houshold, and eat not the bread of Idleness. Her Children rise up, and
Verse 28. call her blessed, her Husband also, and he praiseth her. Many Daugh∣ters have done Vertuously; but she
Verse 29. excelleth them all, and her own works praise her in the gates. But lest,
Verse 31. while I mention her (though God hath been pleased to Compensate your loss in another Pious Consort) I should renew your grief, I for∣bare, and only add my prayer to the God of all grace, to perfect his own work, begun in you, and to increase your graces, till you shall attain the measure of assurance, which she en∣joyed;  till you shall certainly know there is such an Union betwixt Christ and your Soul, as death it self shall never be able to loose; that so when your work is finished, and your graces perfected, according to the measure of that stature, which God hath appointed you in Christ Jesus, here on Earth, You may go trium∣phantly to Heaven, which is, and shall be the fervent desire of
Sir,

August 18. 1671.
