


Gentlemen, Captains, and Sea-men:
WAs not hee a very stout peece of flesh, think you,The use of shipping I conceive was first shewed by God in Noahs Ark, whence afterwards that Audax I apei genus, Japhete off-spring sailed and re∣plenished the Islands. that first adventured to put forth to Sea, of whom the Poet sings and vaunts?
Illi robur, & aes triplex
Circa pectus erat, qui fragilem truci
Commisit pelago ratem
Primus, nec timuit praecipitem Afri∣cum, &c.
What shall I then say of you who are ten thousand times before him, the worlds brave Viri Cordati, and his matchless and unparalleld successors? You have not onely the boldness to sail the ragingest and stormiest Sea that ever

ran before the winds,I would have none of you, Viris spectanti∣bus praelio, & stantibus instar stipitum, look∣ers on, and standers by, like stock and stones, but at it down drive, when you see, others ingaged but to fight the proudest and out-bravingest enemy that ever was known, or heard of under the Heavens; Your stout-hearted va∣lour hath been well known, not onely to the Dutch, but also to the French and Spaniard. For your badge of Honour (which I hope you will still maintain) I give you the priority and pre-emi∣nence for fighting Tamerlanes, sword∣handling-Scanderbegs, and world-con∣quering-Alexanders, above all the Na∣tions that bee at this day under the wide and spatious Universe. Terribler are you to your enemies, than those two great peece of Ordnance which were feigned to be cast by Alphonsus Duke of Ferrara, the one whereof was called an Earthquake, and the other Grandiobolo, the great Devil, when they were fired. You, and your Friggots (Mee thinks) re∣semble the prancing valour of the Em∣battelized Horse in Virg. of whom the Poet sings,If I were to give our Eng∣lish Captains & Sea-men a Motto to the life, it should then be that of Luthers Quo magis illi furiunt, eo am∣plius procedo: The more my e∣nemies rage, the more vali∣antly will I go on to charge them.
— Quod siqua sonum procularma dedêre
Starae loco nescit, micat auribus, & tre∣mit artus,
Collectumque premens volvit sub naribus ignem.
— Cavatque
Tellurem, & solido graviter sonat un∣gula cornu,
Quadrupedante putrem sonitu quatit ungula campum.
Such was the impatiency of the war∣like horse, that the Poet here doth sing of, that they would champ their Byts, stamp, and tear the ground with their feet, prick up their ears, dance it with their Riders upon their backs, foam it at their mouhes, and hardly bee held in till the enemy came up, but would glad∣ly bee amongst the Pikes and Drums and the ratling and thundring of the Guns and Cannons. Such was the gal∣lantry of the Sibarites War-horses, that it is said of them, Uni ad symphoniae can∣tum saltatione quadam movebantur.
What shall I further say of your va∣lour?Lucan. lib. 1. Monstra enume∣rans quae bellum civile praecesse∣runt. Certainly what hath been said of that War that was once on foot be∣twixt Pompey and Caesar, when all the Sea seemed to bee on a gore blood, it may more truly bee said of your most for∣midable and unparalled Disputes a∣gainst the Dutch,It was a Pro∣verb in forein parts, when they were in fear, to say, Clangite, cla∣mate, Hanibal est ad portas. Blow the Trumpet Hanibal, our ene∣my is a com∣ing upon us. Stand to your arms left Hol∣land fall foul of you. and also with other Nations.
— Superique minaces
Prodigiis terras implerant, aethera, pon∣tum,
Ignota obscura viderunt sydera noctes,
Ardentemque polum flammis, caeloque volantes
Obliquas per inane faces —
Fulgura fallaci micuerunt crebra sereno
Et varias ignis denso dedit nere formas.
Your fights at Sea have been as ter∣rible

to all the Nations round about you, both far and near, as that great fight was, that was once fought in the world, betwixt Amurath the third King of Turks, and Lazarus, Despot of Ser∣via, in that battel, the noyse of warlike weapons, the neighing of Horses, and out-cries of wounded and fighting men, was so great and dreadful, that the very wilde beasts in the woods stood astonished therewith, the trees seemed to shake and tremble, and the very ground to quake on which they fought on, and the Turkish History to express the fatal terrour of that day, vainly sayes, that the very Angels themselves in the Heavens were so amazed with that hideous noyse,Bee valiant, you are Eng∣lands Armatae∣phalanges, to stand round about it, as Solomons threescore valiant Warriours did about his bed, Cant. 3.7, 8. They all hold swords being expert in War, every man hath his sword upon his thigh, because of fear in the night. that at that time they forgat their heavenly Hymns, &c.
Gentlemen, bee intreated never to stain your reputation in the Seas, for the best, and worst that an out-coming Nation can do against you. Let mee tell you, that if it bee true what the Poet speaks, then are you men that live at the upper end of the world, and seeing you so do, labour to out-strip the whole world in valour, and undaunted prowess. The North is held to bee the upper part of the world, according to that of Vir∣gil,

Mundus ut ad Scythiam, Riphaeasque arduus arces
Consurgit, premitur Libyae devexus ad anstros.
Let your stoutness resemble Alexan∣ders the Great, who when being asked, how hee so soon over-ran the Universe, answered, I never held any thing dan∣gerous to bee done, or unlikely, but would set upon it the rather, and say, Jam periculum video par animo Alexan∣dri, this is an enterprise for Alexander.History tells us, that the noble Dogs which the King of Al∣bany presented Alexander withall, out of an overflowing valour and courage, scorn∣ed and con∣temned to en∣counter any beasts save Elephants and Lions. Fear not the number, nor the strength of your enemy, but ask where are they? They are like the Eccho in the Poet, — Quem non invenis usquam, putas esse nusquam. Julius Caesar (who had in his time taken a thousand Towns, conquered three hundred Nations, taken prisoners a million of men, and slain as many) of whom the Poet sings (should bee your Card to sail by.)
— Caesar in omnia Praeceps
Nil actum credens, dum quid superest ad agendum
Fertur atrox —
Difficulty doth but sparkle mens spirits, and set on an edge upon Hero∣ick spirits. Hannibal made his way through the Alps by breaking down an huge rock putrified with fire, and vinegar poured thereon, hence Juvenal, Sat. 10.

— Opposuit natura Alpemque Ni∣vemque,
Deduxit scopulos, & montem rupit aceto.
Gentlemen, I will assure you, that you both have, and also shall have my prayers, that you may bee the Lords, Kings, and Princes of the Seas, and the Conquerours of all the Armadoes in the world that shall dare to meddle with you,Inter caetera providentiae divinae opera, hoc quoque dignum est ad∣miratione, &c. Amongst o∣ther works of a divine pro∣vidence, this is very admi∣rable, that the winds lye up∣on the Sea for the further∣ance of Navi∣gation. and that they may all strike, and vail to you, as forein Nations once did unto the Kings, and Princes that were their Conquerors, of whom it is said, that at what time they sent their Ambassadors to them, whom they both had subdued, and would have subdued to them, they desired of them, Terram, & Aquam, and in token of their sub∣jection, they sent them both Water and Earth, because all command is either by Sea, or by Land, and all possessions and riches are either gotten out of the Sea, or out of the Land.
And now after all that I have said (in the high commendations of you) I pray God bestow peace on our Na∣tion, both at Sea and Land, for that is far better than these dreadful, and heart-amazing Wars: There is small comfort in it to see Nation rising up a∣gainst Nation, and an imbruing of their hands in one anothers blood. It is a very sad sight in these our dayes, the

Lord amend it, to see Nations running one against another, like the two Moun∣tains in Pliny, of which hee tells (Montes duo inter se concurrerunt crepitu maximo, assultantes, recedentesque inter eos, flam∣ma, fumoque in Calum exeunte) that they ran continually one against the other,Plin. cap. 2.83. Nat. Hist. from whom nothing but smoke and fire rise up, and ascended towards the heavens, with a great, sonorous, and formidable noise, they that take de∣light to see it, I wish they may have enough of it.) Give mee leave to take my leave of you in a few directions, which I would have you to look up∣on as one of the highest expressions of my love and affection, that a man can possibly bear you, I speak not only unto you altogether that fear the Lord, but unto the other prophane crew also shall I commend a word of counsel, and this Treatise is one of the greatest Legacies of my love, that I either have, or know how to bestow upon you, and truly I could wish that every Minister that goes in your ships, and in the States service, would endeavour to shew something of the improvement of his time, that it may stand upon record for the good of you that use the Seas, and so far would I have any from carping at what I have done, that I would wish them to mend it if they can, or shew something of their own. I had no warm study to sit in, nor no place that was free of

noyse, and tumult, when I writ it.
Sirs, You may visibly behold the great love I bear you, who hath taken all this pains in the Sea for you. What would you have mee to do for you? I have gone a begging to all the good Mi∣nisters in the land to pray for your pre∣servation, conversion, and sanctificati∣on. I have gone a begging to all the Saints and servants of God to pray for you.It was some∣what a soure saying of one concerning the viler sort of Sea-men, when he said, if you see them not in Sea-port Towns in November, December, Ja∣nuary, and March, which are the windiest Months in the year, then you may conclude that they are all gone to Heaven, or else they will never come there, They mount up to Heaven, &c. vers. 26. I have exhorted all the Sea-ports in England to pray for you, and to re∣member you that go in the turbulent deeps, and I will assure you that I will never forget you, neither in Pulpit, nor in private, but pray hard for your pro∣sperity in the Seas, and felicity in the life to come. My hearts desire is that you may bee saved in the day of the Lord.
The Rules I would commend to you that travel, are such as these fol∣lowing, and I would hand them not onely to every good, and honest heart that goes in the Seas, but to every pro∣phane wretch whatsoever.
1. Let not the irreligion of those places you travel into, whether France, Spain, Italy, Barbary, or Turky, &c. breed in you a neglect of divine duties,

or a disgustion unto the pure, and most reformed Religion that is amongst us in England.
2. When you meet the Host or Eu∣charist in the streets (through which it is often born to the houses of the sick) get out of the way that you kneel not to it, which if a stranger neglects, hee is ly∣able to the Inquisitors, or one mis∣chief or other.
3. Go no further into the Out∣landish Churches in the world, than the hand of your own Religion, and con∣science will lead you, lest you dash upon the rocks of Atheism and Idolatry.
4. Pitty rather, than spurn, scoffe, and scorn at those you see prostrate be∣fore a Crucifix, or a Saint. It hath been matter of pitty unto my soul many and many a time when in forein parts.
5.Neglect will sooner kill an injury, than revenge. If you meet with injuries in fo∣rein parts, prudently, and patiently put them up, an ill turn in those parts is far cheaped passed over, than revenged, the endeavour of which many times is but Gentleman usher to a greater.
6. Keep your selves out of all the Mercenary Harlot houses that bee in the Italian, French, and Spanish Cities, or in any other parts of the world you traffick to, Prov. 5.8. Remove thy way far from her, and come not nigh the door of her house.
7. Begin all your voyages with

fear, and sincere and hearty prayer unto God to go along with you through, and over the Seas, to carry you well out, & to return you wel back. You go very rashly upon all your designs. The Israelites usually asked counsel of God first, and then they went. The Grecians went to their Oracles,Gentlemen and Sea-men, in your perusal of this Treatise, you will finde me sharply striking at pro∣phaneness in the Sea, and to those that are bad I speak to, and those that are honest, and godly, are very silly and simple if they quarrel with it, thereby they will bring upon themselves an evil name, for let but me hear a man speaking against it, and I shall conclude him to bee some Swearer or &c. the Persians to their Magi, the Egyptians to their Hierophantae, the In∣dians to their Gymnosophista, the ancient Gauls and Brittains to their Druides, the Romans to their Augures. It was not lawful to propound any thing of weight and moment in the Senate, Pri∣usquam de coelo observatum est, before they had observed from heaven whether God would shine upon their proceed∣ings, and enterprises, yea or no.
8. Abhor to go to Sea out of any Sea-port Town in England in a drun∣ken posture.I would have those that are naught in the Sea, to say with the Ger∣man Emperor, Let us fight with our faults, and not with them that tell as of them. How knowest thou, but God may meet with thee for that sin before ever thou return again?
9. Have a care of entertaining all that doctrin that you hear preached by those that are brought into your ships (by your Schismatical Sea-Captains) under the notion of Chaplains, who never had any true cal, to usurp the Ministry. Thales sent a golden Tripos which some Fisher-men

took up in their Nets, and the Oracle commanded that it should bee given to the wisest, to Bias, Bias to Solon, &c. when they had but seven wise men. If you will but beleeve the times wee live in, there are hardly so many fools now to bee found, either on Sea, or Land, and if such a thing were now to bee had, wee should all fight for it, as the three Goddesses did for the gol∣den Apple. Wee are so wise now, that wee have our women Politicians, women Preachers, preaching Souldiers, preaching Sea-men, and preaching Sea-Captains, teaching Trades-men, every silly fellow can now square a circle to an hair, make perpetual motions, finde out the Philosophers stone, inter∣pret the Revelation of St. John, make new Theoricks, new Logick, dispute de omni scibili. Town, City, Country, Sea, and Land, are now full of these deified spirits, and divine souls. God bee mer∣ciful to us.
10. Bee you respecters both of Mi∣nistry and Magistracy in the Land, there is no greater, nor higher baseness at this day upon Land or Sea, than the dis-respecting of them; such as live at Sea, or live on Land, let mee tell them, they have a foul name in Scripture, (hee that is a despiler of these, I desire to hear no more of the man, for I am sa∣tisfied what hee is) Jude's Ep. vers. 9. Filthy Dreamers, despisers of Dominions,

and speakers of evil against Dignities.
I would wish that every Sea∣man would get him one of these books that I have writ, and that hee would minde the good wholesome directions that are laid down in it; What if thou sparest three or four shillings out of thy wages to purchase it? that is no great matter, it cost the Author a far greater charge to set it out, for the good of thee, and every poor soul that goes down into the deeps.11. When you come on shoar into Sea-port Towns where there are week∣day Lectures, and good preaching, hear all the good Sermons you can, for you stand need of it, and tarry not bez∣ling in an Ale-house, when you may have food for your souls.
12. When you come into any Parts of this Land, or go into the Ports in forein Nations, let your outward carri∣age and deportment bee good and or∣derly. A good name is soon lost else. There is a pretty story, how that Re∣putation, Love, and Death, made a Co∣venant (together) to travel all the world over, and each of them was to go a several way, and when they were ready to depart, a mutual inquiry was made how that they might meet again. Death stood up an said, that they might be sure to hear of him in Battels, Hospitals, and in all parts where either famine or dis∣eases were rife. Love bade them hearken after him amongst the children of poor people, whose parents had left them nothing, at Marriages at Feasts, and a∣mongst the professed servants of vertue, the only places for him to bee in. Re∣putation stood a long time silent when it

came to her turn to speak, and being urged to assign them places where they might finde her, shee sullenly answered, that her nature was such, that if once shee departed from any man, shee ne∣ver returned to him again. I wish you wise.
13. Let your hearts and tongues go alwayes together; it is a sad age wee live in, they are not relatives neither on Sea nor Land. It is well worth your observation of the Peach, namely, that the Egyptians, of all fruits make choice of that principally to consecrate to their goddess, and for no other cause, but that the fruit thereof was like to ones heart, and the leaf to ones tongue.
14.Nothing but godliness will bee a target to you, against your Aquarum confluges. Bee not carried away with the damnable opinions that are in the heads of many of your Sea-men, and Com∣manders. There bee many sorry So∣lecismes amongst them.
15. Lay aside all that vain talking that is amongst you in ships. A prating Barber asked King Archelaus how hee would bee trimmed, the King replyed, silently, Surely in much prate, there can∣not but bee much vanity.
16.Many Sea-men deal by prayer, as the Atheni∣ans did with their holy An∣chor in time of danger, they would throw it out, never else, whence the Proverb,  i.e. Sacram an∣choram solvere dicimur, quando ad extremum prasid um con∣fugimus. Erasm Use prayer every morning you uprise, whether on Sea, or Land, if you would have God to bless you. There are six seasons many Sea-men take up prayer, and never else.
1. When they are put to it to cut down their Masts by the board.
2. When a Cable breaks.
3. When the Rudder bands break off, and leave them Rudderless in the great and wide Sea.
4. When they are thrown irrecover∣ably upon Rocks and Sands.
5. When they are put to it to pump night and day to keep up their ships from sinking.
6. When the winds tear all their sails to peeces about their ears. And this I like not.
17. Get a spirit of meekness and hu∣mility, detest a high, and a proud spirit. I wonder why many should bee so proud, and surly as they are at Sea, cer∣tainly, if they did but recollect them∣selves, their descent, pedigree, and line∣age, together with their imployment, they would finde themselves to bee but carried up and down in the Sea, by a fart at the best out of Aeolus's breech, the god of wind.
18. Shake off that rugged and chur∣lish nature that is come onely amongst you, and get a more affable and cour∣teous disposition, that will bee your in∣terest.
19. Pay the Lord all those solemn vows that you make unto him in the Seas, when you are in deep distress, and dangerous storms. Not one of a thou∣sand of you doth this, I dare bee bold to speak it. Erasmus's Colloquium in nau∣fragio, is very much like you. In a

storm the Mariner promises no less than golden Mountains to be sacrificed, it but come safe to land, another vows to go on pilgrimage as far as to St. James's of Compostella bare foot, and bare head∣ed, in a shirt of male next his skin, beg∣ging all the way, a third promises St. Christophers Statue, which is (mons ve∣rius quam statua) a Mountain rather than a statue, and this is to be seen in one of the great Churches at Paris, that hee would give him a wax Candle as big as himself, whom one of his contempo∣raries checked, saying, if thou shouldest now go, and sell all that thou hast, thou art not worth so much, neither canst thou ever perform what thou hast vow∣ed, to whom hee replied, in the storm,Vers. 26. Their soul is meltd because of trouble. They are even ready to dye at this time. Junius understands it of extreme vomiting, as if they that used the Seas, were casting up their very hearts many times. Anacharses for this very cause, doubted whether hee should reckon Mariners amongst the living, or amongst the dead. And another said, that any man will go to Sea at first, I wonder not, but to go a second time thither, is little better than madness. very softly and silently (lest St. Christo∣pher should hear him) Hold thy peace thou fool, dost thou think that I ever meant it? if ever I recover shore, the Devil take mee, if ever hee gets as much as a small tallow candle of mee, or the pairing of my nails. Make you the Application.
20. Beleeve that all storms that come upon you, are of the Lords rai∣sing

and commissionating. I have met with this passage, which was found, sayes history, in a Council above a thou∣sand years ago, Si quis credit quod Dia∣bolus tonitrua, & fulgura, & tempestates, sua authoritate, sicut Priscillianus dixit, Anathema. This Canon was made a∣gainst such as did simply attribute storms, tempests, thundrings, and light∣nings, &c. to the Devil, and not to God, as if so be that he should be the causer, and the procurer of them; whosoever be∣leeves this, said the Council, as Priscillianus hath done, let him bee an Anathema.
But without any further wording of it to you, I freely bestow this peece, of my Nec inter vivos, Nec inter mortuos, upon you all that use the Seas, and beg your acceptance of it; The God of Heaven grant it may do you good; read it, heed it, yee need it; pray for mee, and I shall not bee wanting in my pray∣ers for you, that God would bless, and prosper you in your imployments; and thus hee that takes his ultimum vale of you, and the Sea, rests,
Gentlemen,

From my Study at my Lady Hungarfords, in Hungar∣ford House upon the Strand, London,
May 4. 1659.
