



My dearest Cosen,
I Ever looked upon that friendship which you have been pleased to afford me, as a very considerable part of my Happiness, and have made it my business to finde out some way, whereby I might manifest my desire of expressing my Obligations to you, which I cannot do more publickly than I do now.

Hereby also making as many, as shall vouchsafe to read this, Witnesses of that sin∣cere and unfeigned affection I bear you.
This is the only end of the present address, and not the least hopes I have fancied to my self, that the Book will find a more candid reception; or any desire to put you to the trouble of defending it where you come. No, these Considerations are as far from my thoughts, as per∣haps they are common to most men, upon the like occasion.
For the first of these, give

me leave to tell you what I have many times thought of such, as promise to them∣selves from the high and splendid names they prefix before their writings, to acquire I know not what ho∣nour, or at least Protection: That they are like those sil∣ly people of Arcadia (I think) that presumed if they could once attain the top of a certain high Mountain, they might with ease touch the Moon; but when they had with a great deal of pains reached the top of it, how much they fell short of their

aime, is easie to guess. For my part, I could never yet perceive, that any Book fa∣red the better for his sake, to whom it was Dedicated, no more then those ships that having painted upon them the glorious Image and In∣scription of some Deitie, were notwithstanding torn by common tempests, and made the sport of every or∣dinary wave.
— Et pictos verberat unda Deos.
For the second, I should be very unjust, to expect that at your hands, which I am so far from doing my self, that

if I should hear any vilifie and condemn it as poor and low, I should, if no worse, at leastwise readily assent to what they say; so mean a conceit have I of ought that is mine. For, Translations at the best (as 'tis commonly, but well, said) are but the wrong side of a sute of hangings, which, though the stuffe be never so rich, and the workmanship artifi∣cial, looks but untowardly. I do not therefore invite any to read this Translation, but advise them rather, both for their own sakes, and for the Authors,

whom I do very much honour, to read it in the French, as it came from the most accurate hand of the no∣ble PELLISSON. But if they can neither procure that, (as I think they will hardly), nor (if they do) un∣derstand it, they may make use of this which I offer them. If notwithstanding all this, any shall scorn it because a Translation, I shall give them their liberty, so they will allow me mine, to say (which is all I am likely to bring, in my own defence) that Volentibus, non no∣lentibus, transtuli.
For the Book it self, ab∣stracting from it the coorse English habit I have given it, I suppose it cannot be un∣acceptable to any, that care to know what is done abroad in the world. I do not mean of the routing of Armies, and sacking of Towns, which indeed looke best at a di∣stance, and when the Scene is laid in forreign Countries, (for our own has more then satisfied us with such cruel delights) but of Learning and Learned men; an en∣quiry after whom is a pardo∣nable, if not laudable curio∣sity.

I am sure 'tis pleasant: For, to instance in the present work, What greater con∣tentment can be imagined then to see the whole pro∣gresse of so Famous a Com∣pany, even from its Infan∣cy and Budding in a few se∣lect Friends, unto its full growth and maturitie, when established in a Body, to the number of fourty, and those all eminent Persons, either in Church or State, or at least in the Common-wealth of Learning? Can it be o∣therwise then extreamly de∣lightful to know their De∣signs,

to hear their De∣bates, and in some degree to enjoy the conversation of so many ingenious Spirits, such as Monsieur de Balzac de Gomberville, (the Au∣thor of Polexander) and de Scudery: Whom I the rather mention for that their Names are so well known among us, by their works that are done into En∣glish.
But I trespasse too much, and am afraid, least this Pleasure, which so much transports me, seem

dull and flat to you, coming from my Pen. I therefore beg your pardon, and be∣seech you to accept of this small testimony of the great Love and Respect of
SIR,

