


Reverend and Noble Sir;
IF Anatomists tell true, that there is a certain concave in the heart, in which little cell lies all the best affe∣ctions, then shall I not onely promise you, but assure you that you have them all. I do affectionately speak it, Si de capite tuo (sicuti Minervam ferunt ex Jove) natus essem, non ma∣jor afflueret amor, quam tibi manat. I am constrained to tell your Worship, that I am acted like the Sea by the Moon, whose operation (if Philosophers tell true) sets the Sea, the worlds great wonder, on an ebbing, and reflowing. The like power, and influence, has your transcendent worth, and goodness, over mee, besides the many, and unexpected kindnesses, and Christian favours that I have now recei∣ved from you, and your religious, and ver∣tuous family, and am still likely to have

conferred upon mee, that I cannot but break out into a torrent of admiration, & of thank∣fulness, unto you; and could I write those re∣spects which I bear to you again for them,Thankfulness in men, was a thing that He∣lidor, much prised, and looked for, when he said, .
Gratitudo viro sapienti, pul∣cherrimum mu∣nus.
Sir, They are but my Iuve∣nilia's, yet I hope that you will esteem of them, and bid them welcome. with a Ray of the Sun, as once Aureli∣us the Roman Emperour wished to doe, I would. Certainly, Ego sim planè per∣ditus, & inhumanus, si egregiam tu∣am, mihi tam perspectam in me pie∣tatem, benevolentiam, & fidem, ex a∣nimo deinceps affluere aut elabi patiar. Nay should I not bee an Adinstar Mecae∣natis annuli, in quo, Rana fuit ex In∣sula quapiam, ubi ranae perpetuo si∣lent, If I should not acknowledge my ma∣ny engagements unto your worthiness? It was a notable saying of Seneca, sayes hee, (si ingratum dixeris, &c.) let mee but hear of a man that is unthankful, and you need to say no more of him to mee, I know then well enough what hee is. Wor∣thy Sir, I would not for a world lye under such a censure to your merit. De tuis in∣numerabilibus in me amoribus, nullum nec finem, nec modum facio cogitan∣di. To put you out of all questioning of that, I here present you with the best prae∣libamen, or principium of that great, and high respect that I do bear you, and can for the present procure you (from which you may expect, and shall assuredly find hereafter far greater acknowledgments) and it is, namely, My Nec inter vivos, nec inter mortuos, which was writ upon the cradel-rocking waves, and surges of

Neptune's restless, and turbulent Ocean, which was (and is) a place, that is not for study, or any other weighty under∣taking of this nature. I hope you will look for no extraordinary strains of wit, and fancy from it, because it is an impossible thing, that the head should bring forth any extraordinary conceptions, in such a confused, and head-disturbing, and brain-perplexing employment, where the winds roar it over head, Sailors rant it within board, and guns roar it, and thunder it without board, and the Seas run on hills and mountains before the winds, where there is nothing but reeling, and stagger∣ing, and staggering and reeling every day one uprises. If there had not been an un∣withstanding providence leading mee, and stirring of me up dayly to the work,Many are the Symbols and Emblems of true thankful∣ness and grate∣ful acknow∣ledgment. In the Sun-dyal with all the hours thereon by distinct fi∣gures, the motto is, in umbra desino, to the Sun onely I owe my mo∣tion, and being. The shel full of Pearl lying open to the Sun, and the dew of Heaven, with this word, Rore divin. The Olive grow∣ing amidst the craggy clifts without rooting or moysture, with this motto, or wreath coming out of it, A Coelo. All these exam∣ples prompt me to express my thankfulness to you, whom I shall live and dye admiring. to that end I might do that generation of people some good that go in the Seas, whom I find to have nothing writ too, in any Subject I ever saw extant, I should never a gone about such a work, in such a plac, which is onely for transportation, and not for com∣moration, and body-tyring lucubrations.
Worthy Sir, I freely bestow upon you this my Nec inter vivos, nec inter mortuos, and withall, I give you the highest interest in it, that is possible for a man in the De∣dication of a Book to bestow upon a person that it is dedicated to; I humbly beg your acceptance of it, and I will not doubt but that you will find some thing in it, that will bee worth your perusal; there is a great part (I will assure you) though not all, of the sweet experiences that my soul has ta∣sted of, when in the Seas. Such was the excellent condescending frame of Artax∣erxes's spirit, King of Persia; that hee thought it as well becoming a Royal mind, to accept of small things from others, as to give great things unto them. Worthy Sir, your name is sweet, fragrant, savory, and fa∣mous in our Israel, and with, and amongst the people of God, and the Lord has be∣stowed a publick frame of heart, and spi∣rit upon you, to do all the good you can in your generation, both to Church, and Commonwealth, which is a thing I much bless God for in my spirit, and admire. My prayers shall bee for you and yours, that God would blesse both you and them with the dews of heaven in this life, and crown you, and yours, in the life to come. In the interim my prayer shall bee, that you may live and dye, Adinstar Isabellae Arragoniae Reginae, quae habuit duos flosculos, unus vocabatur Scelenitro∣pos (i.e. Flos Lunae,) Alter Heliotro∣pos, (i. e. Flos Solis) cum lemmate:

sequor & aeternum specto. So prayeth he, who resteth,
Sir,

From my Study at my Lady Hungarfords, in Hungar∣ford House upon the Strand, London,
May 4. 1659.
