



THat a Chain of Gold,
could be fastned to the
Neck of a Flea; was
heretofore such a Rari∣ty,
that it obtain'd a
Memorial in the Chronicle; and
could not purchase Belief, at an easie
Rate, untill it was rendred undenia∣ble,
by the verdict of Quotidian Ex∣perience.
The facetious Epigram∣matist,
can boast a wit, capring hi∣ther,
and as fast retreating; consci¦ous
of no greater Crime, then under
 fictitious Name, to Flea-bite some

particular Persons: And draw after
it such a Golden Chain of Inventi∣on,
as challengeth not onely ap∣plause
from the most Cynical Moro∣sity;
but is irradiant with the two
Poetical Jewels; Profit, and Pleasure.
In the Translation of Owen, it was
not necessary to be curious, in elect∣ing
here and there an Epigram; by
reason He carries an even strain:
and if I had omitted some in the first
three Books; I could not have in∣serted
more ingenious. I made it
my devoir to be Brief; Perspicuous.
And I hope from six hundred Pen∣fulls
of Ink, not many blots have
fallen upon my Author. Out of
artial, I selected his most Heroick
ok, of Rarities to be seen at
me. And because Variety is de∣lectable;

I have subjoyned fourty
out of Sir Tho. More; And a Centu∣ry
of my Own. Although no part
of Poetry, but is at my command: I
have made choice of Epigrams, as
the very Nerves of this exquisite Art.
For if a Poem be good, it consists of
nothing else, but various Epigrams;
cemented by a dexterous sagacity.
And not onely Verse, but Prose, is
dull, and languishing, unlesse the
sparkling Genius of the Epigram∣matist,
be artificially interwoven.
That Plaudit, the World were plea∣sed
to vouchsafe my Elegie, upon
the unparalleld Poet Mr. Cleeveland;
forbids me to complain of that carp∣ing
humour, notoriously predomi∣nant
in English men; in relation to
any Authors of their own Countrey.

The candid acceptance granted me
then, I have no reason to suspect
now; from ingenious, and deserving
Persons of all sorts. And as for a
Generation of Sciolists, that make it
their recreation to slight others, ei∣ther
natural, or acquired endow∣ments;
I crave at their hands, to give
the World as ample a Testimony of
their abilities, as I have done of
mine. And then if they think my E∣pigrams
routed; I shall desire them to
trie their valour, upon my Satyrs.

