



My Lords, and Gentlemen,
LUke Dedicated his Gospel, and the Acts of the Apostles, to that Honourable and Noble person Theophilus, Luke 1.1.

Act. 1.1. John dedicated (as I finde in Scripture-Record) his 2 Epist. to the Elect Lady, and his 3 Epist. to his friend Gaius, 2 Joh. 1, 2. Alexander on his death-bed left his Kingdome, , Optimatum Optimo, to him that was the best of the best. To your Ho∣nours I dedicate this worthless, yet painful peece, and I pray God it may prove profitable. I hope you will like it the better, because there is none of this subject extant that I do know of, or ever heard of in the world. The Age wee live in is all for novelties,This I can say for my comfort, that I could not bee at rest, nor at quiet, and at peace in my own heart and con∣science, till I undertook the writing of this peece, both to reprove such as go in the Seas, to do them good (when I shall bee gone) and to stir up your Honours to appear for the Lord, against that prophaneness that is in the Sea, and also to let my own dear Relations, and the world to know, That I made some use of my time, whilst amongst the Lords wonders in the Deeps. and high-strained Jigs of Musick (God in his good time alter it) and the newest songs are now adayes commonly best liked of for once, because they were never heard of before; but however I hope you will accept of it; and if that these Lines which were writ in a restless and turbulent Sea, may but obtain your much-desired countenance and

comprobation, I will couragiously speak it with the Orator, , I fear not any manscensure. Nec frons Catonis mo∣vebit me, nec Timonis lingua. Per∣haps some simple , will speak against it, or some low-bred Pedantick Ex aula Telema∣chi, or è Patrocli domo. But no more shall it, nor the Author regard them, than the Moon doth the clamouring and snarling Cur, in the Heavens, of whom the Poet sings,
En peragit cursus surda Diana suos.
Some of Davids Psalms,Insignis Ode Davidis, Tremel.  prae corona aestimatur hie Psalmus Right Honourable, and Right Worshipful, are called Michtam, which in the Hebrew tongue signifies a precious Jewel, or a Psalm of gold, Propter mirificam ejus excellentiam, which is of far better worth than its weight in gold, both for the matter there∣of, and the manner. And I hope that you will say the like of this: Aureum flumen orationis, said Cicero concerning Aristotles Politicks, there is in that book a golden flood of discourse. Liber iste auro contra

non carus, said another concerning the lives of the Philosophers writ∣ten by Diogenes Laertius, no gold is comparable to that gallant peace, how much more then may it bee said of this notable and precious Psalm that is here handled?
Ad votivas Insulas humanitatis vostra fortunatas navigo, and if I may but have Apparente Horizonte Phaebo scintillantis adinstar meteri, that is all that I desire, and look for from you. The Sea is neither (scribendi, studendi, neque commo∣randi, praeter pugnandi, & navigandi locus) a place to study in, nor to write in, it is no place (beleeve it) to tarry any long time in, it is onely a place for transportation, or navi∣gation, and digladiation: There∣fore I hope that your Honours will expect no Tullianum scribendi fluxum & amaenum from mee (that would better become a Coriphaeus, or an Eloquii sol, a bonarum literarum Phoe∣nix, a musarum decus, and a Leporum & delicium gratiarum unicum) neither words that are pickt, phrase choice, composition smooth, sentences fluent, cadencies sweet, language polite,

stile flourishing; look not for Tropes of Rhetorick, or Syllogismes of Logick, or Axioms of Philoso∣phy, nor words set in checker work, the Sea is no place to do it in (and indeed non benè Cymbalissant, quum nihil prater inconceptis verbis, those words are not very savoury that are delivered (rudi Minerva) raw, crude, and unpremeditated) for a ship is but a confused place to undertake the writing of any thing in, where Drums, and Trumpets, Pikes, and Muskets, great Guns, and Har∣quebusses, ranting Roysters, and Ear-deafing sails, and cordage, are evermore roaring about one, which make a far greater noise than the Cataracts of Egypt, by which, and through which, the Inhabitants that live near unto them are extraordi∣narily deafned. This Hulk, and poor Pinnace was builded, and meanly rigged a good while ago at Sea, and being ready to put forth, one storm or other arose, which cau∣sed it to lye by the Lee. But the weather now clearing up, and pro∣mising a calm, I have adventured and exposed it to wind and weather,

and the censuring world, hoping that those that will come on board of it, and truck with it, will finde some commodity in it, worth as much as the Merchant Venturer, (the Stationer) will ask them for it The Reasons why I shroud this. Book under your Honours, bee these, Right Honourable.
 1. Because it was hatched and slidged in one of your ships, and ne∣ver writ on land, but every syllable of it was penned and drawn up at Sea, and I have not had the leasure to polish it any more than it is, and therefore both the service of my body, and brain was yours then.
 2. Because at the first I designed it, and intended it to bee devoted to your Patronage.
 3. Because you have Authority and Power sufficient to cut the comb of that, which this Book so sharply slashes, and reproves in the Sea.
 4. Because I do esteem you worthier of it, and also it more be∣coming mee to present it to your Honours in the first place, than unto any other in the Land, in re∣spect you sit at the Helm of Sea-affairs.

But give mee leave a little.
There bee three things that I would commend to your Honours, and they are very much in my eye.
1. That you would keep up,It is well if there bee not as great a ne∣cessity for our ships to bee round about this land of ours to guard it, as there was for Solo∣mons bed, Cant. 3.7. They all hold swords, being expert in war; every man hath his sword upon his thigh, be∣cause of fear in the night. and maintain your shipping for the Sea.
2. That you would arise to beat us down that swearing that is in the Sea.
3. That you would have an eye over the factious and Anti-evange∣lical spirits that go in your ser∣vice.
1. That you would keep up, and maintain your shipping for the Sea. (Bonum exercitus, said Tho. Aquinas, ad bonum Civitatis ordinatur, an Army is not raised for any other end, but to maintain the peace, of the City and Commonweath.) If you do not this, then will your forein enemies vaunt it, and lord it over you. If Holland follow but the hu∣mours of her first founders, shee will then love war better than peace, and happily be enticed thereto by the old Prophecy that runs of her,


Marte triumphabis, Batavia, pace peribis.


Holland, by war thou shalt increase,
Thou wilt destroy thy self by peace.

What is said of Venice, I may say of England hitherto (thanks bee to our God for it.)
— Reipublica nescia sordidae,
Intaminatis fulget honoribus.
Thou hast tug∣ged thy part poor England with thine e∣nemies both by Sea and Land, and yet thou pro∣spers, I wish the plague of Division ruine thee not.Venice to this day, though all her neighbours round about her far and near have tugged with her both by Land and Sea, yet like the Con∣stellation Virgo amongst the Cele∣stial bodies, shee shines still amongst the Kingdomes of the world. Her Proverb is, (I wish the same to thee poor England.)

Venetiae non nisi cum rerum natura
Et mundi machina periturae.


Till nature and the universe de∣cline,
Venice within her watry Orb shall shine.

2. That you would arise to beat us down that swearing that is in the Sea. My Lords and Gentlemen, You are looked upon to bee either the supreme or subordinate Comman∣ders, and Lord Controulers of the Seas, and Sea-affairs, not wanting in the least for valour, courage, and undaunted prowess,I may say it, if visible powers were not more feared (at Sea—) than the invisible God, the Hal∣ter more than Hell, White hall more than the Devil, naturall men (I speak of rude and ill mannered —) being like to wilde beasts that are more sensible of the flesh, than of the bullet, the States ships would be over∣run with the surging waves of irreconcileable Discord. I am confident of it, that if a mortal man might but have the privi∣ledge (might it bee so spoken) to fit in the Throne of God one hour to behold the swearing, and abominable wickedness that is in some ships at Sea, he would in the very near let them all on a burn∣ing fire, Yet is the Lord merciful. which so much sparkled in that much talked-of Alexander, one of the worlds stout-sword-handling Lads and Conque∣rours. You have the power to say, either in the head of an out-braving Army, or unruly Navy, as once a great Warriour said when vexed at his Souldiers for their mutining and tumultuating, whom he Thunder∣struck with these words, Facessite hinc ocyus, neminem teneo; liberate oculos meos ingratissimi milites. Get you quickly out of my presence, and bee packing hence you unthank∣ful Souldiers, I cannot abide you.
Severus the Emperour dealt thus with his unruly Army, Discedite Quirites, said hee, Et incertum est an Quirites. Another said, that hee could with one stamp of his foot, with one frown of his face, and with one word of his tongue, quell the highest rage, and madness that is at any time in an Army. Seeing God hath put power into your hands, I hope hee both hath, and also will put a further degree of tenderness of his name, and of his honour into your hearts, you cannot beleeve the one half of that dishonour God hath by those that use the Seas, my heart even akes to speak of it,One would think that there were in ships, Nym∣phales Dryades, & infinita pene monstra qua vulgo decantan∣tur. and it is a very sword in the heart of mee when I think of it. Cap∣tains are loose and negligent in the punishing of this needless and soul-damning sin, and also in their re∣provings of Sea-men for it. I pro∣fess, were I a Commander, if fair means, and sweet perswasions would not prevail, I would hang them up at the Main-yard. There is such swearing in the Sea, as if both hell, the damned, and all the Devils in it were let loose, and set

at liberty. God bee merciful to them! There is swearing in the Main-top, cursing in the Fore-top, lying in the Mizzon-top, idle, pro∣phane, and sinful language upon all the shrouds about their ships, filthi∣ness in every part, and corner of their ships, Roysters betwixt Decks, Rioters, and Roaring boyes in the Steeridge, Mad-caps, and unsavoury wretches upon the Boltsprit, dam∣ming, and ramming in the Cook-room, fighting and scratching in the Fore∣castle, one Devil at the Helm,I am confident of it, that after the rate some Sailors swear in the Seas, should they but be strictly looked after, and fined ac∣cording to that act and penalty that is established in the Land a∣gainst it, viz. 12 for every oath, they would in one Voyage both swear themselves out of their wages, and also the value and worth of the ships they sail in, and if thus much in one Voyage, what would they not do in a great many? But, I have no minde to dishonour them, for compassion on their souls com∣mands mee to complain, and to direct them, in order to reform them. and another upon the Boltsprit amongst them, looking out for a sand-bank, or rock to cast them away upon, Job 24.25. And if it bee not so now (I have gone to Sea long enough to see it) who will make mee a lyar, and make my speech nothing worth? Ah Sirs, Lets down with swearing, if ever wee mean to pro∣sper at Sea.
3. That you would have an eye over the factious, and Anti-evangeli∣cal-ministerian spirits that go in the Seas, either to curb, suppress, or to keep them out of your imploy∣ments, for they do more mischief in them, than a thousand other per∣sons do, though prophane. I dare maintain it, that one godly, holy, and powerful conscientious Mini∣ster doth more good in an hour (mistake mee not, I countenance no prophane men in the Ministry) than such do,Travellers write that in Padus Justice is de∣scribed in a publick place betwixt a pair of Soules, and a Sword, with those two ver∣ses in her mouth, Reddo cuique suum, sanctis & legibus omne Consilio mort de genus ne cri∣mine vivat. These Verses have little handsomess or oothness in th to come from such a famous University, as it is renowned to bee yet it the sense extream good. And I hope that you th are in Power, will will by this soule towards them  the Sea. or can do, by their whole years service. Many quarrel with the Ministry, and alas the fault it not in the Sun, but in the Owl, Non crimen Phaebus, noctua crimen habet. Better might the Sun bee spared (said a people, of Chrysostome) than a preaching faithful Ministry. The Ministry is compared in Scripture to the most needful things, Bread, Salt, Water, Physick, Armour,

and who can spare any of these? What are Ships or Countries with∣out the Word, but Fabricks, and Nests of Drunkards, Adulterers, and piping Tiplers, yea far worse than Newgate? But I question not, but that your Honours are great fa∣vourers, and prizers of learning, and I pray God make them all so, that are in power, and authority over us (I hope you see enough of the folly, the hair-braindness, and giddiness of the illiterate, in this age, which swarms amongst us both at Sea and Land, and who so for∣ward, rash, bold, and precipitant as the ignorant, even upon every de∣sign that the Ignis fatuus of their stupid brain leads them to?Lapidandi sunt Haeretici non tantum sacra∣rum literarum argumentis, as— Let this age bee a president for future ages to have a care of themselves.) The University of Cambridge (I have observed) hath for her Arms a book clasped betwixt four Lions, and Ox∣ford, a book open betwixt three Crowns, hereby signifying, that Eng∣lish men may not onely study the li∣beral Arts closely, and quietly, but also profess them publickly, and openly, being guarded with the Lion,

and the Crown, protected thereby, and encouraged thereunto by Royal charters,The Lord knows I took little content∣ment in the Sea amongst that pack of rude, and dis∣orderly swear∣ing and pro∣phane wret∣ches that goe in it. Our Sa∣viour Christ hyed him to the wilderness amongst the beasts, and carried his Disciples with him, holding their fellowship to bee less hurtful, and dan∣gerous. Frater fui Draconum, sayes Job 30. Inter Scorpiones ha∣bitavi, said Ezek. chap. 2. Better live amongst Beasts, than beastly minded men. and Princely priviledges. The University of Heidelbergh hath for her Arms, a Lion holding a book in his paw, intimating, that per∣sons of honour, quality and autho∣rity, ought to bee both favourers, countenancers, and also upholders of all good literature. But to come to a period.
My Lords and Gentlemen, I do acknowledge my self to be much in∣gaged unto some of you, for which I am very thankful, & to come out of your debt, I knew no better way than the presentation of this small Trea∣tise, which I hope will prove both savoury, and also delightful in the reading. Your names are famous in this our Land, both for unknown valour, and unparalleld piety, the smell whereof, like the sweetness of the Panther, goes far and near, and travels both Sea and Land over.

God make you still instruments of his gory, and more and more mul∣tiply his graces in you, that you may bee pillars in our Church, adorning your Religion, which as your best ornament adorneth you, and gracing that truth by your holy profession, and practice, which above all other titles will most inoble you, and make you truly noble in this world, both in the sight of God, and all good men, and eternize you in the life to come.
The which shall bee the hearty prayer of mee, who present you with this peece of my hard pains, and of my experiences whilst in the Sea; And so shall ever remain much devoted to

From my Study at my Lady Hungarfords in Hungar∣ford house upon the Strand, London,
May 4. 1659.
