



Precious and Beloved:
THis Sermon is especially commen∣ded to your view, as being those which I judge have most right unto it, because of that near relation which was be∣tween you and the Author of it, a taste of whose savoury spi∣rit you may here behold, near his Death, which you have often heard and seen in his

Life; it is doubtless a losse, yea a very great losse, as to Sion in general, so especially to you in particu∣lar, to have such a painful Labourer taken out of the Vineyard, but I hope you have learned as in other things, so in this, to say,Act. 21.14. the Will of the Lord be done; this is our comfort, that GodMal. 2.15. hath a re∣sidue of the Spirit, and hee will never want Instru∣ments to doe his work by; if he take away Moses hee will raise up aJosh. 1.1, 2. Joshua, and if he take away an Elijah, he will2 King. 2.9: double his Spirit upon some E∣lisha; and who knows but God may take away such tall Cedars, that some low Shrubs may grow up, and be active for God, in their generation. Surely, every such Dispensation, as it is a spectacle of our Mortali∣ty, so it loudly calls us to our duty toJoh. 9.4. work whiles it is day, that with Paul, wee may have2 Tim. 4 7. fought our fight before we shall finish our course; and with David,Acts 13.36. we may serve our generation, (by the Will of God) before we fall asleep.
As touching the Work it self, which you are here presented with, it treats concerning the fear of God, (a Subject) which I desire may be as profitable, as it is seasonable in this our day; wherein though Gods JudgementsIsa. 26.9 have been abroad in the earth, yet the inhabitants of the World will not learn Righte∣ousness,Psa. 36.1 and the transgressions of the wicked doe plainly declare, that there is no fear of God be∣fore their eyes; and if wee look into the Lives of Professors, we have cause to fear that there is but little of this filial fear to be found among them, which should cause them toPsa. 4.4. stand in awe, and not sin; and too many there are that profess to fear God, that yet

fear not to sin, against him; but how much soever, this being neglected, yet it appears to bee our duty, and that which God calls for from us, by vertue of his Supremacy over us: If I bee a father, where is mine honour? and if I be a master, where is my fear? saith the Lord of Hosts, Malachy 1.6. but I shall not Expatiate upon this point, but referre you to the Discourse it self; for further information, con∣cerning which the Reader is to bee further premoni∣shed, that this Sermon being not intended by the Au∣thor for the Press, nor his Notes left behind him, neither being alive to correct it, it may want some∣what of that lustre, which otherwise might have atten∣ded it; yet however, to satisfie the desire of some god∣ly Friends, as also for the general profit, it is here presented to Publick view, as fully as it could be taken out of one Short-hand Copy, written from his mouth, and I desire that theDeut. 33.16. blessing of him that dwelt in the Bush, may goe along with it; that the fear of God may hereby be wrought where it is not, and in∣creased where it is, that those that fear not God, may be made to fear him, and those that doe fear God, may fear him more, and more.
And now (Dear Brethren) I shall leave it with you, as the words of your dying Pastor, not doubting but it will be of weight upon your spirits, and some satisfaction to you, to read his Works, when you can∣not hear his words; this only I shall adde, as my de∣sire to you, and of you, that you would not on∣ly read the words, but doe the works, that his words may be read in your works, and your Lives may bee as so many Volumes of his Labours;

that as on Earth you were his joy, so in Heaven you may bee his Crown; and as hee is gone be∣fore, you may follow after, and at last meet toge∣ther, and sit down together in the Kingdome of Glory; to which place, and portion, that you with my self may have a safe Conduct, is the ardent desire, and prayer of

