


Madam,
I Take the boldness to pre∣sent you with this small Treatise of my experi∣ence, travel, and hard pains (I took) during the time I was at Sea (which is the ve∣ry first printed fruits of my weak en∣deavours) as induced to think that the goodness, candor, and dulce of your nature is such, that you will bee pleased to accept of so small a present, as a little monument of that great respect I o∣blidgedly, and deservedly bear you. Artaxerxes, a Persian Prince, was so humbly minded, that hee thought it as well becoming a Royal mind, to ac∣cept of small things from others, as to give great things unto them. I hope

that your Ladyship will bee so minded too. I wish this piece may prove as de∣lightful to you in the reading, and per∣using, as Orpheus's Musick was to the stones, and beasts of the field, to their hearing, of whom History says, that they were not able to stay in their center, nor continue in their stations, but start up and dance after it. Historians relate, how stones followed Amphion to the Theban walls. That lofty Ossa, and high Panchaia danced when they over-heard the Odrissian Lyre, and Dolphins grew tame at the melody of Arions Harp, couching their scaly backs to bear him out of Neptunes foaming surges. Ma∣dam, if I tell your Ladyship, that I see these good things in you, since I came into your family (to whom I am much obliged, and shall ever acknowledge you as an instrument of much good to mee, God reward you) let it not bee thought by you, nor by the world, that I am of that temper, either to give you, or the world, flattering, and daubing titles for that is very much inconsistent with my constitution,Your motto may bee that of So∣lomons, Prov. 31.26. Shee openeth her mouth with wisdom, and in her tongue is the law of kind∣ness. and my Prin∣ciple.
1. I have observed that you are a ve∣ry great follower, countenancer, and encourager of a holy, good, power∣ful, and godly Ministry, which these sad, and black-nighted times of the world do so much undervalue. Mee thinks I wonder why people are so

sotitsh now a days. I hear neither any in the City, nor the Country say, that they are weary of the Sun for its shin∣ing, of the air in which they breath, of their food from whence they have their nourishment, nor of their rayment, and apparrel, which keeps off the cold from them, why then of the Word? What wrong has the Gospel done them? or the painful, and Godly Ministry in this Land, who preach themselves to their graves for the good of soules? certain∣ly, were the Gospel down (as our Eng∣lish Atheists could wish it) wee should long for it as much again, as those peo∣ple do for the Sun, of whom Procopius reports, that near to the Pole where the night continues many moneths toge∣ther, the Inhabitants in the end of such a long night, when the Sun draws near to make its appearance to them, will get up into the tops of all high trees, and Mountains, striving who should have the first sight of that glorious lampe, and caelestial luminary, that is set in the Heavens, for the comfort of the world, and no sooner do they see it, but they dress themselves in their best apparrel, as rejoycing at its appear∣ance, filling the air with many loud acclamations.
2. That there is a tenderness of heart, and spirit in you, mourning for and un∣der sin, which renders you Elect, holy, and beloved amongst the Saints that

know you. I would all the new up∣starts in England were of this good old sin-mourning temper.Rom. 7.24. Oh wretched man that I am, who— Acts 24.16. Herein do I ex∣ercise my self—
3. That you make it your constant care, and business, to look to your life, and conversation; and I do know it, that it is the desire of you soul, that it should bee such, and in such a way of holiness, as does become the Gospel of Christ, Philip. 1.21.
4. That it is the great care, and de∣sire of your soul, that all under you should bee engaged in the daily wor∣ship and service of God. Joshua 24.15. But as for mee and my house, wee will serve the Lord.
5. That you are a discourager of what you apprehend to bee evil, in your family. Psal. 101.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Hee that telleth lies shall not tarry in my sight. Were all Families so ordered, it would bee better both in the City, Coun∣try, and the whole Land, than it is at this day. Prov. 14.1. Every wise wo∣man buildeth her house.
6. That you are exemplary in your Family; and truly it is good so to bee; if the Mountains overflow with waters, the Valleys are the better for it, and if the head bee full of ill humours, the whole body fares the worse for it. Give mee leave now, my much Honoured Lady, to present a few things to you, which may tarry with you when Pro∣vidence may call mee from you.
1. Think of your dying day;It is said, that there stands a Globe of the world at the one end of the Library in Dub∣lin, and a Ske∣leton of a man at the other, it seems they that go into that Library need not stand long to study out a good lesson. What if a man were Lord, or Lady, King or Queen, of all the known parts of the world, yet must hee dye. I like not the Proverb, I no more thought of it, than I did of my dying day. It is written of the Philosophers, called Brach∣mani, that they were so much given to think of their latter end, that they had their graves alwaies open before their gates, that both going out, and coming in, they might bee mindful of their death.
There was once a discourse betwixt a Citizen and a Mariner, my Ancestours said the Mariner, were all Sea-men, and all of them died at Sea, my Father, my grand Father, and my great grand Fa∣ther, were all buried in the Sea; then sayes the Citizen, what great cause have you when you set out to Sea, to re∣member your death? I but says the Ma∣riner to the Citizen, where I pray did your Father, and your grand Father die? why saies hee, they died all of them in their beds; truly then saies the Ma∣riner to the Citizen, what a care had you need to have every night, when you go to bed, to think of your bed as a grave, and the clothes that cover you as the earth that must one day bee thrown upon you? You are wise, and know how to apply it.
2. Lay up treasure in Heaven; God

has done much for you, in the bestow∣ing the riches, honours, dignities, and great things of this life upon you, by making you taller by the head and shoulders than thousands, both in City, and Country are. Matth. 6.19, 20. Is a Scripture I would commend to your leasurable considerations.
3. Take heed of the bewitching ho∣nors, entertainments, and the deluding and heart-insinuating great things of this world. It was a good saying of Luther (I hope your Ladyship will make it yours) when offered great things, that hee protested to the Lord hee would not bee put off with the things of this life for his portion. Psal. 17.14. Men of the world have their portion in this life; That is all it seems, that ever they are like to have. The Rubenites (Numb. 23.) having taken a liking of the Coun∣try which was first conquered, because it was commodious for the feeding of their Cattel, though it was far from the Temple where they might have fed their souls, to enjoy it, they renounced all interests in the Land of Promise. It is said of the Locusts, that came out of the bottomless pit, that they were like unto Horses, and on their heads were as it were Crowns of gold, and their faces were as the faces of men, their hairs, as the hair of women, their teeth, as it were the teeth of Lyons, &c. (Rev. 9.7, 8.) in which Scripture

wee have quasi Horses, quasi Crowns, quasi faces, quasi teeth and quasi hairs of men. In part, such are all the ho∣nours, and comforts of this life.
4. Bee much in prayer, hard, and private wrestling with God in your closer for Heaven, and Salavation. If a man were assured that there were a great purchase in Spain, Turkey, Ita∣ly, &c. or some other remote parts, would hee not run, ride, sail, and ad∣venture the dangers, and hazzards of the Sea, and of his enemies also, if need were, that hee might come to the enjoyment and possession thereof? Hea∣ven is better than Earth, and a life in glory, than a life in this sinful World; and that you may prefer that above this, in this lower world, and may also live, and bee with the Father and the Lamb in the highest glory (when this life is ended) for ever more, shall bee the hear∣ty prayer of him
Madam,

From my Study in your own most Honourable House, and Family, London,
May 6. 1659.
