


Reverend, and Right Honourable Sir;
Uno non possum quantum te diligo versu
Dicere, si satis est distichon, ecce duos.
If I cannot in one verse my mind de∣clare,
If two will serve the turn, lo here they are.
SO great an honourer, and admirer am I of you, and the House and Family that you are descended of, and belong unto, that I cannot praetermit you, without the presenting of this small Tract, and Treatise, which is of no great worth, or value, but

onely an act, or an expression of that su∣perlative respect and service I bear you. Certainly if I should, I should then bee an Adinstar Niciae cujusdam Pictoris, (of whom it was said tantam in pingendo diligentiam adhibuit, ut saepe numero intentus arti cibum sumere obliviscere∣tur: & è famulo quaereret, LAVINE, pransus ne sum?) a very forgetful per∣son. I question not, but that you will find some thing in it worth your reading; al∣though you have travelled all, or the great∣est part of all the known parts of the world, in Books, and Study. Ennius could find, and pick out gold out of a Dunghil. The laborious Bee will fetch hony out of a flow∣er before shee leaves it, And, I hope that you will see some thing in this peece worth the relishing. I will assure you, it was never writ, studied, nor composed on Land, but in a turbulent Sea, where there is nothing but a Chaos of hurry, and con∣fusion, and so I hope you will pardon the weakness of the work, for had I been on Land, or had I had the time when on Land, I would have sent it out into the world more accurrately furnished, & accomplished. But, Quid moror istis? I cannot but speak of it to your praise, and worth, that I am very much affected, and taken with that good life and conversation, that you live and lead in my Ladies family, and bless God in my soul many times, for that gratious, and pious voice of Prayer that I hear daily out of your Chamber into my Study that is

adjacent, I pray God bless you, and be∣stow the riches of his grace, and sweet comfortable Spirit upon you, for that is the thing you daily press for.Quo pede caepi∣sti, progrediare precor. This I shall say, the more you pray, and the more ho∣lily, and spiritually you live, and walk, the more serviceable will you bee both to your good God, Nation, and Country. God has many times called you out of the world in∣to a Parliamentary way, and that un∣doubtedly to do your Country all the good you can; your Motto, and the Motto of the whole House now assembled, may, and should bee, Adinstar Alphonsi Regis Arragonum qui in Symbolo habuit lu∣men ardens, cum lemmate: Aliis ser∣vio, mihi consumor. Or if you will, Ludovicus's the King of France, Qui in Symbolo habuit Pelicanum revocan∣tem ad vitam sanguine proprio pullos emortuos:God grant that the affairs of this Land may bee carri∣ed on for the peoples good, and may re∣semble Virgils Eccho, where all things went well, Omnia sonant Hyla, Hyla. lemma: Sanguis meus estis, vivite. Thus should the whole House bee, and do for the Land and Country that has chosen them. I would have our Parliament House to resemble that good Bishop, Socrates tells of, who did (when a terrible fire was in Constantinople, fast∣ning on a great part of the City, and Churches in it) go to the Atar, and fal∣ling down upon his knees, would not rise from thence till the fire-blazing in the win∣dows, and flashing in every door was van∣quished, and extinguished. Do what in you lies to put out the fire of the sword, and the fire of Division, that is gone forth,

and broke out upon us in this Nation. (I have met with this passage,Non sit jam quod clamant. . i. e. O Jupiter pluit calamitates. that a certain Rustick having blamed Antigonus while hee lived, grew after some tryal had of his succession to recant his errour, and to re∣count his crime; and digging one day in the field, was questioned what hee did there, hee said, O, Antigonum refodio, I seek Antigonus again.) Oh dig, and delve for peace, that you may see both or∣der and decency in Church, and State re∣stored, and the Land left in a blessed frame to the Posterities that are to come after you, and betray as not in our good, and wholesome Laws, but maintain them; you certainly see enough of that profane, and giddy hair brainedness that has been all along in the heads of the illiterate, who have sought to bring the whole Land into confusion, and themselves into the saddle. Honoured Sir, I take my leave of you, I present this peece unto you, I pray accept of it, and the God of Heaven bless you, and guide you, shall bee the prayer of him who is,
Sir,

From my Study at my Lady Hungarfords in Hungar∣ford House, upon the Strand. London.
April 20. 165.
