



Right Honorable, and most prudent Patriots;
IT is the divine observation of Ecclesiastes the Sonne of David King in Ierusalem,Eccles. 3.1, 7. To every thing there is a season: A time to keepe silence, and a time to speake. Truly it hath seemed to be a time to keepe silence in some by-gone yeeres in England, when theAmos, 5.13. prudent Ministers of God were necessitated to keepe silence through the e∣vill of the times, having beeneIsa. 29.21. made offenders for a word, as if their doctrine had beeneAmos, 7.10. conspiracy a∣gainst the State, and the land not able to beare all their words. Howbeit for the EnglishIsa. 62.1.6. Zion and Ierusa∣lems sake, the Lords remembrancers could not hold their peace nor keepe silence in secret: butIsa. 26.20. entring into their chambers, and shutting the doores about them, to hide themselves as it were for a litle moment, have powred out their complaints and supplications before the Lord (who isPsal. 65.2. a God that heareth pray∣ers, andMath. 6.6. seeth in secret) waiting on him till the in∣dignatiō should be overpast. But now it seemeth there is a time to speake in England, (AndProv. 15.23. a word spokē in due season how good is it?) sith1. Cor. 16.9. a great doore & effectuall is opened by a longed-for hopefull Parlia∣ment. Oh how admirable it is, even to amazement!
that the hearts and tongues of the people of God throughout the English nation, have beene so graci∣ously enlargedHos. 14.2. in taking words with them, (not on∣lyZach. 12.12, 13, 14. in their humiliations apart in families, but also) on the dayes2. Chron. 20.3.4. appointed by authority for solemne prayer & fasting; toEzr. 8.21. seeke a right way for themsel∣ves, and for their litle ones, and for all their substance; speaking and crying unto the Lord,Amos, 7.5. Cease we be∣seech thee, by whom shall English Iacob arise? for he is small. Yea, and is it not exceedingly marvellous al∣so? how after supplicating God in such sort, theirAct. 17.16. Spirits were stirred in them to speake to your Honors of the cure-all-court of Parliament in their manifold Petitions for Reformatiō, contributing votes by thou∣sands of severall Counties. And what though1. Cor. 16.9. there be many adversaries that doe murmur and repine at thoseLuk. 19.39, 40. wel-approved zelots? May it not be thought that if they had held their peace, the stones would im∣mediately have cryed out?
The blessed tidings of this reviving state of English affaires spreading abroad in sundry countreys, is come also into the Vnited Netherlands, to refresh (asProv. 25.25. good news is wont from a farre countrey) such of us of the English nation, who have been enforced by home-op∣pressions to seeke for liberty, imployment and liveli∣hood (as the2. Chro. 11.13, 14. Priests & Levites in Israel did on som∣what the like occasion) who yet in our measureIer. 51.50. Psal. 137.5, 6. re∣member the Lord afarre of, not daring through forget∣fulnes to let goe out of minde our most endeared na∣tive countrey.Psal. 122.6.9. Let them prosper that love and seeke the welfare of England.
Hence your Honors most humble advertiser con∣vinced of not2. King. 7.9. doing well to remaine altogether silēt,
readily tooke hold on the opportunity of the ensuing treatise (asLuk. 19.3, 4. Zacheus climbed up into a Sycomore tree to see his Saviour, because of the presse, and litle∣nes of his stature) to insert a word, to be asMark. 12.42. the wi∣dows farthing, some addition to the great stock of more able qualified seekers of Reformation.
Most noble and right worthy Sirs; It were much to have beene wished, t'had never beene2. Sam. 1.20. told in Gath, that thePsal. 12.1. Mic. 7.1, 2. godly men have ceased, and the faithfull fai∣led in England: Woe is us, tis too notoriously knowne, how that divers worthies of the Lord of b. m.2. King. 2.12. the chariots and horsmen of the English Israel, who byPsal. 46.4. the christalline streames of pure doctrine made glad the citty of God, had theirReve. 11.7. untimely deaths hastened by sharpe tempests of persecution raised against them by the Hierarchie through their Summoning, Tradu∣cing, Reproching, Suspending, Excommunicating; Depriving, Fining, Imprisoning, & trampling on them as unsavory salt, or as broken and despised vessels cast to the wals. Others have beene constrained to provide for their breathing as they could by removing into for∣raine parts, after much suffering at home, and thereby exposed to the bitter miseriesPsal. 56.8. Isa. 16.3, 4. of wanderers, being debarred of the pleasant land of their nativity, ancient habitations, naturall kinred, familiar acquaintance, mea∣nes of subsistance, accustomed aire, and wonted man∣ners of people; and instead thereofEzek. 3.5, 6. cast into a land of strangers, and of a strange language, as a greater aggra∣vation of their most disconsolate condition. Yea &Psal. 44.17. all this come upon them, onely for theirAct. 24.16. endeavoring to keepe consciences void of offence towards God, & towards men; in refusall of conformity to some super∣stitious ceremonies, & subscription to the Canon (al∣beit
they never refused to subscribe according toStat. Q. Eliz. 13.12. the law of the land) whereas otherwise they were ortho∣doxe and painfull in their ministery, and unblamable in their conversation, approving themselves to the2. Cor. 4.2. consciences of their adversaries. Moreover they were such as highly prized the Church-assemblies of En∣gland, and diligently frequented and joyned in the so∣lemne administration of the word, Sacraments, and prayers, so farre as they could free themselves from their owne personall pollutions and defilements, asMat. 23.1, 2, 3. our Lord Christ directeth in such case.
A true report of some Prelaticall pro∣ceedings in Chester Diocesse.May it please your Honors to receive a hint of some Prelaticall proceedings, exemplified mostly in the par∣ticular of your humble advertiser; who was called to the work of ministery many yeeres agone in such place of Chester Diocesse, where he could execute his func∣tion, without such officiating as is usually required of incumbents, that take the Cure in Parishes. In processe of timeNow B. of Dur∣ham. D. Morton became Prelate, who taking knowledge of divers Non-conformists in this Diocesse,H. Commission pretended ag. Papists in Lancashire chiefly bent ag. refusers of superstitious ceremo∣nies. sent out letters missive to summon some of them to the high Commission Court then kept at Chester. Which being divulged, it pleased God to stirre up some of the eminent & wel-affected Knights & Esquires in∣habiting in that Diocesse, to consult & agree together to write a letter to the Bishop in these words; A copie of a letter sent to the B. of Ch. from some worthy gentlemen of the dio∣ces, in behalfe of some non-conformists. Right Reverend, &c. Whereas wee understand that divers of our painfull and discreet Ministers, are lately by letters missive from your L. & others of his Majesties high Commission for causes Ecclesiasticall within the Diocesse of Chester, enjoyned to appeare before you, to answer to such matters as shalbe objected a∣gainst them: We have thought fitting to acquaint
your L. with our opinions of these our Ministers, whose names are subscribed, for the better prevēting (if need require) of such sinister and malitious infor∣mations, which in these cases are frequently stirred up against men of their sort & quality, somtimes by lewd & profane persons remaining in our owne Church, & many times by the disguised, subtill, & superstiti∣ous Romanists, & Church-papists, whose hearts are wholly against us, all the while their faces are see∣mingly with us. First therfore we have observed (soe farre as we are able to judge) in these our Ministers, Integrity of life & conversation, orthodoxall sound∣nes of doctrine in their teaching, diligence & painful∣nes in their places; sobriety, & peaceablenes in their dispositions, free from factiousnes. In regard wherof, as also the great good and profit which our Congre∣gations where they remaine have abundantly re∣ceived from their ministery; we are emboldned eft∣soones to intreat, &c. The letter was delivered to the B. atThe B. had besi∣des his Bishoprick the Parsonage of Stocport, being the greatest benefice in all Cheshire. Stocport, who having read it, let fall these words. They whom the letter concerneth are the worse to be liked, for the good testimony the Gentle∣men give of them: And then speaking to me, (being one of the Subscribed in the letter) required a pro∣posall of any argument against the use of the Crosse in Baptisme; that so he might instantly discover (as he boastingly spake) our weaknes and folly in refusing to conforme. But I desired to de∣cline disputes with him, partly sith my errand at that time was to obteine his favour for release from the High C. Court, if it might be procured; and partly sith He vvas to be the chiefe judge in our cause, which might prove prejudiciall to us in case of a
denyed dimission. Nevertheles when he pressed his demand in the presence of many persons of quality (lest I should seeme to betray a good cause in being unwilling or1. Pet. 3.15. unready to give answer, when a reason of my profession vvas asked) I propounded an argumēt, stating it according to the fairest pretence of urging the signe of the Crosse in Baptisme, even as the Canon in∣terpreteth the use of it: For the dedicating of the party baptised to God. Whence I proved that the signe of the Crosse in Baptisme was superstitious, sith such dedicati∣on signified by it, is an usurpatiō of an office besides di∣vine institution, & consequently unlawfull, asLevit. 10.1, 2. Galat. 1.8, 9. by two texts of Scripture alledged & applied I did evince. Af∣ter some debate about this argument, & of a non-sense distinction used by him, viz. A dedication of consecra∣tion, and a dedication of protestation, &c. He then said, he could not beleeve that the Canon was so expla∣ned, & therfore sent for the booke of Canōs; but being therby further convinced, & not knowing what to an∣swer, he passionatly wished, that either it had beene o∣therwise expressed, or that noe explanation had beene added to the Canon. In fine he ingenuously acknow∣ledged his former neglect to study these controversies, having hitherto esteemed lightly of them; yet sith oc∣casion seemed to require, he now resolved to apply his studies a while this way. Heerupon he was pleased to undertake our dismission from the H. C. C. till he should first have assayed to winne us to conformity in a scholasticall way, sith he discerned in us (as he said) some schollership above his expectation. At the same time he ordered us, severally to set downe in writing within the space of the moneth following (& then to bring to him) 3The B. would not dispute at all about the greatest grievāce of the Non-confor∣mists, viz. intollera∣ble subscription unto 5 books in severall points questionable and faulty. arguments, against the Crosse in Bap∣tisme,
the Surplisse in divine service, & kneeling at the Lords supper. His order was accordingly observed, al∣beit a desired successe failed. For some of us shortly af∣ter were againe summoned by letters missive, to the H. C. Court, & then dealt with in a vexatious sort. I was compelled to travell 30 miles from my dwelling, three severall times in 14 daies. On one of these Court daies M. Nichols of b. m. a most pious and learned Minister, being required to give an accompt of his arguments he had delivered to the B. was in open Court by the B. & D. Snell scornfully taunted & giered, as if what he had written was raw, and should therfore be rosted, when they were not able to gainsay the wisedome & Spirit, by which he spake. At the same time (I having beene immediately before sharply spoken unto by the B. and Commissioners, & deferred to the Court for the weeke following) one of the Bs cheifePrelates have gentlemen to wait on them, but they are such for the most part, as are notori∣ously debauched, as is commonly obser∣ved. Gentlemen, accom∣panied with two Popish Gentlemen, belonging to a great Earle then in Chester, plucked me a litle aside, & did idly & disdainfully upbraid me of simplicity, & re∣proch me as if I were conjuring, because I looked to the ground, & answered nothing; they therfore also con∣cluded I should goe to Hell, sith my looks seemed thi∣therward. Such their vile language uttered likewise with blasphemours swearing & cursing, in the hearing of many thronging about us, occasioned a Gentleman that was present to complaine of their uncivill behavi∣our, & in humane cariage: whereupō they being much inraged, thrust him on the suddaine to the doore of the palace, and cast him headlong dovvne the staires, to the endangering of his life. When the Court was risen the B. was privatly informed of his mans insolencies, who seemed to be somwhat discontented towards him; yet
sayd, that vvhat his servant had disorderly done could be noe disparagment to him, that was his master. At my comming to Chester the weeke follovving, as I had beene ordered, the B. vvas not vvell in the morning of the Court-day, & in that respect kept his chamber, yet having notice of my attending, sent for me, & lying on his bed reasoned & expostulated with me touching the Ceremonies a full houre, letting fall by the way some complaints, that his remisse course with us, had beene prejudiciall to his preferment to Lincolne Bishoprick, vacant about that time. Soe that in great passion he threatned to suspend, excommunicate, degrade, and make the land too hot for me; asking me what I would doe. I ansvvered in the words of the Prophet,Mic. 7.7. I will looke unto the Lord, I will wait for the God of my sal∣vation: my God will heare me. He retorted, God would not heare a blasphemer, a blasphemer of his mo∣ther the Church of England, & that despised her ordi∣nances. I ansvvered againe, that I desired to feare God, & abhorred blasphemy; & that a refusall of conformity to superstitious ceremonies, esteemed by the Prelaticall party to be things indifferent, was neither blasphemy nor contempt. In conclusion he vvas pleased to dis∣misse me at that time vvithout any censure, save of pay∣ing large fees to officers of the Court, tovvards paymēt vvherof he gave ten shillings. Not long after this the said Prelate printed a booke in defense of the 3 no∣cent Ceremonies, pretending to ansvver our argumēts given in against them,Abridgm. was gi∣ven to the B. by M. Midsley sonne of fa∣ther Midsley. They both had beene Vi∣cars of Ratsdale in Lancashire, & de∣prived for inconfor∣mity to Ceremonies. The sone after de∣gradation became a Physitian, & was prosecuted for not kneeling at Sacra∣ment. & also that unansvverable A∣bridgment of the reasons of the Ministers of Lincolne Diocesse, so farre as it argued against them. But the vveaknes of his Defense and pretended ansvver is fully & effectually discovered by the learned D. Ames in his
printed Reply therto: And in his Fresh Suit against hu∣mane Ceremonies in Gods vvorship, or Triplication to D. Burgesse his Rejoynder for D. Morton.
The translation of the said Prelate to Lichfeild neere the same time, became occasion to D. Bridgman, the Parson of Wiggan in Lancashire, to succeed in the Bi∣shoprick of Chester; vvho for a space moved not much against any, pursuing rather his vvorldly affaires, save only that he suspended a fevv Non-conformists, andAt Knutesford a market towne in Che∣shire a Gentleman of the countrey being vainly disposed, did cause a beare passing through the street to be led into the Chap∣pell: which the Bishop hearing of suspended the Chappell from having any divine service or sermons for a long time, as being profaned by the beare. Knutesford Chappel. But vvhen D. Neale the Prelate of Winchester, could not resist the title of Grace, but vvas removed to York, & should visit in Chester Dio∣cesse, being in that Province; then the said Prelate of Chester, pretending feare of the Archb. of Y. in case that at his Visitation he should finde any Non-confor∣mists, & soe taxe him of negligence or partiality, did therfore send for & inhibit privatly most of the Non∣conformists in his Diocesse. About the same time, upō notice given, I went to him at his house in Lancashire, & desired his favorable conuivency as formerly; which he denied to grant, lest (as he said) he should hazard the favour of his Prince. Yet he required to heare at that time what I could say against kneeling at the Sa∣crament. I alledged our Saviour Christ his argument against it. ForMath. 15.9. Mark. 7.7. he esteemeth it a vaine worshipping of him, when mens precepts are taught for doctrines; which by a just inference I applyed against kneeling at the Sacrament. Now all the ansvver the B. gave was that he expected from me a more learned argument. And then said, He thought I would have insisted in the gesture used by Christ at the institutiō, which he would shew me what manner of gesture that was, to convince therby how unseemly the use of it would be in the
Church. And so he gravely laid himselfe along on a bench by a table in his parlour, leaning on his elbow: & then affirmed Christs posture all the Supper was such; which he said, I was not able to contradict, especially if I understood Greek, sith the originall word used in the Gospells, implied soe much. I replied, that what ever my understanding in the Greek tongue was, yet un∣doubtedly the Translaters of the new Testament were skilful therin, & had rendred itMath. 26.20. Mark. 14.18. Luk. 22.14. Iohn. 13.12. Sitting. Yea & D. Mor∣ton, his predecessor, notwithstanding he kept a stirre a∣bout the translatiō, yet cōfessed, it was a kinde of sitting.
About two yeers after (whē 'twas thought the storme of the Archb. Visitation had been blowne over) meanes was used againe to the B. of Chester to obteine liberty of preaching; but failing, there were procured from Y. 3 writings, signed by the Register of the H. Com. in the behalfe of three of us in Cheshire, giving way to our going on in preaching as formerly. But within three moneths following, attachmēts were brought from the H. Com. (no letters missive having preceded) to appre∣hend & bring us to York, & there to imprison us till we should give security to satisfy the Court, in all their de∣māds. In this strait (having had some notice through the good providence of God, before the attachments could be served, & knowing too much already2. Thes. 3.2. of the absurd unreasonablenes of that Court) we withdrew ourselves as the1. King. 17.5. Prophet Eliah somtime escaped the fury of A∣hab. Howbeit the inquiry of these H. Com̄issi. was not only such, as was after theIbid. ca. 18.10. Prophet in publik intimati∣ons in our Parishes in Cheshire, & taking the messengers oath he foūd us not, but also in sōe kinde more malicious: for they fined us in great sum̄es of money, & agravated our fines one Court-day after another, & then returned
them into the Exchequer at London, where they were extended for the Kings use & then begged by M. Tirill a servant to his Maj. with whō we were enforced to com∣poūd for present money paid in hād to our great impo∣verishmēt, as being otherwise liable to greater troubles. I humbly beseech your Honors to pardon this boldnes thus farre animated by your garcious aimes & endea∣vours to vindicate the liberties of your distressed coun∣trymē: Wherin I should still have remained patiently si∣lent, both in my owne & brethrēs behalfe, had our suf∣ferings beene all (although the Hierarchie could not countervaile the dam̄age to our King & nation) & had there not now beene an opportunity of some redresse.Esth. 7.4. I crave leave therfore to suggest a few of the wofull fruits ❀ & sad consequents of Prelaticall proceedings.Sad consequents of Prelacy. For evē hence it is come to passe that, I. Some well affected Pa∣rents have beene discouraged from training up their hopefull sonnes in such learning as should fit to the Mi∣nistery. II. Some conscientious yong men, having at∣tained to a good degree of learning, have diverted, & ap∣plied their studies otherwaies. III. Some in the Ministery concerning the faith have made shipwrack, or schismed dangerously, entertaining unsoūd, & unwarrantable o∣pinions & courses, turning to be Anabaptists, Separa∣tists, Semi-separatists, &c. and others become licenti∣ous, or meerly formall and careles in the execution of their calling. IV. Some of the2. Pet. 2.2. people have follovved their pernicious & deceivable waies of Anabaptisme, Separation, Independēcy, Popularity, & Profanesse, by reason of whom the way of trueth is evill spoken of.Hos. 4.9. Like Priest, like People. V. But behold greater scandals thē these; for henceEzek. 8.3. the image of jealousy, which pro∣voketh to jealousy, even2. Thes. 2.7. the Mystery of iniquity hath
beene more bold to lift up the head, &Ezek. 8.12, 16. chambers of imagery have beene raised at the upper end of Chācels, & Altars placed theron, and worship directed towards the East. VI. HenceIn the yeere 16 17. D. Mortō B. of Che∣ster framed the direc∣tions for the first li∣berty grāted to sports on the Lords day; at the same time he soe eagerly prosecuted the Non-conformists a∣bout Ceremonies. a wide gap hath beene opened to Libertinisme, in the audacious profanation of the Lords day; grosse contempt of the faithfull ministery; scorning at the performances of family duties; bolstring of ignorance, the stepdame of devotiō; countenancing of Wakes, Rush-bearings, Mixt-dancings, May-poles, Beare-beatings, Stage-playes, Revellings, Healthings, & all manner of the like disordered courses, with a censu∣ring all strictnes in religion, & circumspect walking to be foolish precisenes & Puritanisme. VII. Hence have followed those irregular confusions in the popular and independent governmēt of the Brownistically affected, breaking in pieces againe and againe to their great re∣proch; & yet discovering therby, that theirAct. 5.38. nevv way is not of God, sith it doeth daily come to nought, by their owne disuniting and unchurching of themselves. viii.Iudg. 5.15. Hence have risen those great thoughts of heart a∣mongst brethrē, occasioning bitter contentions, fruitles janglings, censorious words, tart & galling writings, a∣lienation of affections, strangenes of countenance, breach of Christian fellowship, interruption of prayers, & neglect of necessary mutual offices. ix. Yea & hence doubtles hath issued (as from the proper originall) that unworthy Remonstrance against Presbytery, represen∣ted to the house of Peers from divers Noblemen and Gentlemē of Cheshire, as appeareth by a printed booke under the name of Sir Thomas Aston Baronet, 1641. The greivous scādal & offence wherof may in some part be evinced by these short animadversions following.
Animadversions on the Cheshire Remon∣strance.I. The title of it; A Remonstrance against Presbytery.

ANIMADVERS. Of the title the same may be said, which was observedDeclaration a∣gainst Vorstius. by the great & wise king Iames of famous memory, touching the title of Bertius his booke de apostasia sanctorum, viz. The title only were e∣nough to make it worthy the fire. Because I. The holy Scripture approveth of Presbytery, as a divine ordināce both for the1. Tim. 4.14. impositiō of hands, & also for1. Tim. 5.17. the ex∣ercise of rule & government. II. Presbytery is establi∣shed in the neighbour Reformed Churches, which are precious in the eyes of the Lord, & of all well-affected to the reformed religiō in England. III. Prelaticall men are not wont in their writings to contradict it simply. How commeth it then to passe that some in CheshireNumb. 12.8. are not afraid to speake against Presbytery?
II. The pretended occasion of the Remonstrance against Presbytery, alledged by the contriver & subscri∣bers, is, A Petition; & Positions preached at Chester, & Knutesford, annexed to the Remonstrance.
ANIMADV. The occasion of the suggested pretence, is but a meere pretence, having noe just ground at all. For I. Neither the Petition, nor Positions anexed to the Re∣monstrance doe seeke forPresbyterian disci∣pline mentioned in the positions in grea∣ter characters seeme to be the words of Re∣mōst. not of the Prea∣cher, disaffected to Presbyterian govern∣ment. Presbytery, but seeme rather to affect a popular government. II. The Patrons of po∣pular government (contended for in the positions) are for the most part either Separatists, or Semi-separatists, who are as opposite to Presbyteriall governmēt, as they are to Prelacy; as is well knowne to them that know them. And therfore it behooveth Cheshire men toIohn. 7.24. give righteous judgement, when they take upon them to censure, & in-no-wise confound & jumble together opiniōs & defenders of them soe directly opposite. For2. Cor. 5.10. we must all appeare at the tribunall of theGen. 18.25. righte∣ous judge of all the world, who will doe right.

III. REMONSTR. taketh for granted thatProvinciall & Di∣ocesan B B. are to be understood by the Remonstr. otherwise nothing is concluded. Provin∣ciall & Diocesan Bishops are of Apostolicall instituti∣on;Philip. 1.1. 1. Tim. 3.1. alledging in the margent two texts of Scripture for his proofe.
ANIMADV. Neither of the texts alledged doe inferre an Apostolicall institution of Provinciall & Diocesan Bishops. For, I. The originall words translated. Bi∣shops or Overseers, &. Presbyters or Elders, are equi∣valent names of the same office, & are soe used in theAct. 20.17, 28. 1. Pet. 5.1, 2. Scripture. II. The pleaders for Hierarchie doe grant that Bishops and Presbyters in Scripture phrase are the same. III. The text in the Epist. to Phil. 1.1. mentio∣neth Bishops in the plurall number, that is, such officers as did oversee the Church at Philippi, & not a Bishop a∣lone, superiour to other officers in degree, or govern∣ment, according to the opiniō of Hierarchicall men3. Iohn. 9. affecting preeminence. IV. The text in 1. Tim. 3.1. men∣tioneth also office, as well as Bishop, which office is de∣scribed in the1. Tim. 3.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. subsequent verses to be the office of the Presbyter. And this may appeare further by comparing therwith theTit. 1.5, 6, 7. Epist. to Titus. V. It is good to be wise according to sobriety in understanding some things in2. Pet. 3.16. Pauls Epistles & other Scriptures, lest for wāt of lear∣ning & stability they be wrested to destruction. This is an usefull item for Cheshire men & others also.
IV. REMONSTR. commendeth Bishops, that they were the great lights of the Churches; and Martyrs in primitive times.
ANIMADV. There is noe consequence to justify Pre∣lacy hence. For 1. Papists pretend the same thing, albeit unjustly, in the behalfe of their Romish Bishops & Hie∣rarchie. II. The name of Bishops or Presbyters is of∣tentimes indifferently by the Fathers attributed to
those great lights, and Martyrs: as is evident in their books, & sufficiently cleered by Orthodox Writers a∣gainst the Papists. III. Such Bishops as hadia superiori∣ty in those times,Ierom. Gomment. on Epist. to Titus. received it from the Church in hu∣mane policy, not by divine institution.
V. REMONST. asscribeth to Prelates the redempti∣on of the purity of the Gospell now professed in En∣gland from Romish corruption.
ANIMADVERS. This assertion seemeth to want the trueth of story. For 1. In the booke of Martyrs alledged by the Remonstr. the reformation of religion is referred to King Edward himselfe, & his Counsell, & Parliamēt. II. King Edward approved himselfe better then the best of the Prelates, in withstanding toleration of Masse to his sister, at the request of the Emperour. III. Archb. Cranmer acknowledged to M. Cheke that King Ed∣ward had more Divinity in his litle finger, then all they had in all their bodies. Let the Remonst. therfore hence∣forth take heed of detracting from Kings unjustly, to extoll the Bishops unjustly.
VI. REMONST. observeth that divers of the Prelates have beene great assertors of our religion against the common enemies of Rome.
ANIMADV. I. Divers of the Prelates have beene too great friends to Rome, as it is famously knowne, both heretofore, & of late also. II. The Prelates generally have more vehemently prosecuted the faithfull Mini∣sters refusing conformity to some popish ceremonies, (albeit of the same religion professed and established in England) thē the superstitious & idolatrous Papists, the grand enemies of the reformed religion. II. The Pre∣lates generally doe make use of divers arguments used by Romanists against Protestants for their Hierarchicall
discipline & Ceremonies. IV. The greatest assertors of the reformed religion amongst the Prelates make use against the Papists of the Non-conformists arguments against prelacy & superstition. V. Non-conformists & Ministers of the Reformed Churches, where Presbytery is established, have approved themselves oppugners of Antichrist to purpose.
VII. REMONST. urgeth a continuance of Prelacy, sith it is established by the laws of the land.
ANIMADV. I. It somtimes falleth out that1. King. 12.28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. unjust laws are enacted, &1. King. 16.26. Mic. 6.16. continued in a land professing religiō, touching both the Ministery & Ceremonies. II. Parlia∣ments doe aswell serve to repeale, as to enact laws, as just cause & occasion shall require. And accordingly English Parliaments have beene wont to proceed.
VIII. REMONST. affirmeth that in the doctrine of the Prelates generally taught nothing is found dissonant from Gods word.
ANIMADV. I. The Prelates generally have taught very seldome, soe that it cannot much be taken notice what māner of doctrine they teach. Queene Eliz. is reported to say, that when she made a Bishop, she marred a Prea∣cher. ii.2. Cor. 11.13. Deceitfull workers doe somtimes transforme themselves into the Apostles of Christ. III. It is well knowne that many of thē, & their favorites have beene deeply stained with Popish, & Arminian points. IV. The Prelates generally have countenanced Arminians ra∣ther then any way opposed them.
IX. REMONSTR. suggesteth a danger of tenents prea∣ched publickly, & of printed pamphlets, &c.
ANIMADV. I. SuchSee above 2. A∣nimadv. suggestion against tenents intima∣ted, doth not at all reflect on the seekers of Presbyterial government. II. Albeit 'twere to have beene desired, that
noe such unwarrantable courses had beene held by pre∣posterous and popular zealots, yet it is noe new thing thatMath. 13.39. Satā by his instruments should sow tares in Gods wheat field. III. Anabaptists in Luthers time were a great scandall to the begun glorious reformation, yet not any just ground of prejudice against it.
X. REMONSTR. conceiteth that the 26 Prelates are easily responsall to Parliaments, for any of their deviati∣ons from the rule of law.
ANIMADV. 1. Deviation that is2. King. 23.15. wholly devious is not at all responsall either to. God or rationall men. Such a deviation is Prelacy, considered as Prelacy, in the sense of theD. Bilson, D. Downham, D. Hall. rigid patrons of it. II. Prelates have not beene easily responsall to Parliaments at any time for their deviations in prelacy, till this present Parliament. III. There are more then 26 Ordinaries that dispense the Civill & Canon law, viz. Suffraganes, Chancellors, Cō∣missaries, Arch-deacons, Officials, Surrogates, Rurall deanes, Subdeanes, &c. IV. It is better toMath. 15.13. roote up the plants, which God hath not planted.
XI. REMONST. feareth future inconvenience may be found in the government of a numerous Presbytery in England, which may consist of neere 40000 Church-governors.
ANIMADV. I. No inconveniēce need be feared in esta∣blishing of Christs ordinance. II. The errors of Presby∣teries in their government are responsall to Classes & Synods. III. It was the honor of the land1. Chro. 23.3, 4, 5. of Israel in King Davids reigne, that there were numbred from the age of 30 yeers & upward 38000 Church-officers. And would it not be the honor of England in the reigne of King Charles to have 40000 Elders to oversee the Lords houses in the daies of the Gospell? IV. It is much to be
feared (such have beene the unhappy fruits of Prelacy) that they that should be chosen to oversee in Parishes, wilbe2. Chro. 29.34. found too few, soe that there wilbe great need of uniting or combining severall lesser Parishes ad∣joyning into one Presbytery.
XII. REMONSTR. apprehendeth that presbyterian government may prove to be inconsistent with Mo∣narchie, and dangerously conducible to Anarchie.
ANIMADV. I. Monarchie in the civill state and Pres∣bytery being both Gods ordinances are not inconsi∣stent one with another. There may be aMatth. 22.21. rendring to Caesar, the things that are Caesars, and to God, the things that are Gods, in one and the same Common∣wealth. II. KingBasil. dor. Epist. to reader. Iames of b. m. knew and found a consistency of Monarchie and Presbytery together in Scotland. III. King Charles findeth the same in Scotland at this day. IV. The Vnited Netherlands doe finde by experience that Presbytery is noe way conducible to Anarchie. But had the reines of Pres∣bytery beene loosed, as the Arminians affected, what might have ensued may easily be guessed by some be∣gun commotions of that party.
XIII. REMONSTR. feareth that the consequents of Presbytery would be the utter losse of learning & lawes.
ANIMADV. I. TherePsal. 53.5. are some that oft feare, where noe feare is. II. Learning and lawes doe flourish glo∣riously in the reformed Churches, where Presbytery is established. III. Prejudice and losse of learning and lawes have in great part beene occasioned by Pre∣lacy. For 1. Is it not through the default of Prelates, that there are soe manyIsa. 56.10.11. unlearned & unable to pre∣ach in the ministery? 2. Is it not by the negligence of Prelates, that there are soe many negligent Ministers,
suffering their gifts to decay by seldome preaching? 3. Is it not from their qualifications and dispensations, there are soe many Nonresidents, & Pluralists, as that other Schollers of better desert do want encouragmēt? 4. Doeth not the Parliament well enough know & un∣derstand who are the Seekers of the subversion of the lawes, and of introducing an arbitrary government?
XIV. REMONS. is subscribed by a numerous sort of the Nobles, Baronets, Knights, Esquires, Divines, Gentle∣men, Freeholders, & others inhabitants of Cheshire.
ANIMADV. This is indeed the sad consequent of Pre∣lacy in Cheshire. Ah & alas, thatCheshire the cheife shire. Cheshire not long agone reputed & deservedly esteemed for theProv. 12.26. pro∣fession & power of religion more excellent then their neighbors, shouldIer. 2.21. now turne to a degenerate plant of a strange vine to the Lord! Especially the Ministery that had their spiritually gloriousExercises at Northwich, Nampt∣wich, Knutesford, Macclesseild, Bow∣den, Frodsham, Bud∣worth, Torperley, Tarvin, Ince, Mot∣terum, &c. monethly Exerci∣ses, & solemne assemblies (besides their blessed Sab∣baths) frequented by sundry of the renowned Gentry; & very many wel-disposed people, wherby1. Tim. 3.13. they pur∣chased to themselves a good degree in Christianity & great boldnes in the faith, which is in Christ Iesus. But yet it may be thought in a charitable construction, some excuse of the greatnes of their error, that either the most of thē subscribed the Remonstrance2. Sam. 15.11. in their simplicity, not knowing wherto it tended, or els in an inconsiderate hast, beingThe letters sent to the severall Hun∣dreds required a hasty dispatch. urged to doe quickly, what they did, sith dispatch was the life of the busines, & noe copies permitted to be taken. However, its not to be doubted, but thatReve. 2.1. He that walketh amidst the golden candlesticks,Reve. 3.4. doeth graciously take knowledge of ma∣ny names in Cheshire (1. King. 19.18. it may be 7000) that asHos. 11.12. Iuda doe yet rule with God, and are faithfull with the Saints.

Right honorable, there is no feare of your abundant wisdomes in discerning of these greivous Prelaticall ma∣ladies, nor of your compassionate faithfulnes in apply∣ing seasōable remedies; sith all mē must needs acknow∣ledge, that its1. King. 10.6.7. a true report, they have heard of your acts & wisdome, exceeding the fame thereof.Luk. 1.68. Blessed be the Lord God of England that hath visited and re∣deemed his people.Psal. 118.2. Let the Churches of the Saints in England, Scotland, & Ireland, now say, his mercy endureth for ever. Let the Non-conformists (Psal. 83.3. Gods hidden ones in those lands) now say, his mercy endu∣reth for ever. YeeIudg. 6.12.14. mighty men of valour, the Lord hath beene with you hitherto,1. Sam. 17.36. subduing the Lyon & the Beare (even the High Commission court, & Starre chamber) that did prey upon the flock. Goe on in this your might to save from (that uncircumcised Philistin) the oppressing Hierarchie. And let it be1. Sam. 25.31. noe offence of heart to your Honors to2. Pet. 1.12. be stirred up to goe for∣ward, making the word of God thePsal. 119.24. man of your counsell. And for your better helpe andAct. 8.31. guidance, may it please your Honors to make use of the labors of godly-learned Interpreters, that have beene the excel∣lent lights of the Reformed Churches, bothCalvin, Beza, G. Bucer, Didocla∣vius, &c. abroad & also inCartwright, Tra∣verse, Vdal, Parker, Bayne, &c. England; observing withall the Apostolicall advertisment touching1. Cor. 11.16. the Custome of the Churches of Christ, and theirColos. 2.5. comly order, even of the purestScots, French, Dutch, &c. reformed Churches from all Antichristianisme, both in doctrine & discipline. These Reformed Churches have in their citties, townes, and villages1. Tim. 4.14. Presbyteries;1. Tim. 5.17. consisting of teaching & ruling Elders, chosen by the plurality of their voices, consented unto by the Con∣gregation, & approved by the Magistrates and Classis. TheseAct. 20.17.28. Elders doe take heed to the flock, over which
the Holy Ghost hath made them Overseers; They or∣daine Officers, admit to the Sacraments, admonish and censure offenders, according toMath. 18.17. Christs rule of disci∣pline: and they signify to the Congregation what be∣longeth to thē to take knowledge of, either to consent unto the same, or except against it, as just cause shall re∣quire. And in case some difficulty doe appeare in the affaires of the Church, that cannot be decided well by the Presbytery, thē they have a liberty (& are wont) to appealeAct. 15.2. & seeke helpe & assistance from the Classis, consisting of neighbour Presbyteries, (called by some also Presbyteries) with which they are combined in an equall power & authority, noe One exercising any pre∣laticall preeminence. And if the matter controverted cannot satisfactorily be determined by the Classis, thē there is a referēce to the Provinciall Synod, consisting of the Deputies chosē by the severall Classes, of equall power & authority. And if yet agreement be not made, then the matter is to be brought to a Nationall Synod, cōsisting of Deputies sent frō the Provinciall Synods. In their severall Presbyteries, Classes, & Synods, Pro∣vinciall & Nationall, they have Presidents and Scribes chosen from amongst themselves for the more orderly menaging of their Sessions. And in Synods some cheife Magistrats are present to see order observed. This way of Christ, walked in by the Reformed Churches, is the way of peace, liberty, & edificatiō, though carped at by someIude vers. 8.16. that speake evill of what they neither know nor understand. And for the more cleere & pregnant de∣monstratiō hereof, the following treatise touching the power of Elderships, Classes, & Synods may be of sin∣gular use; written by anMath. 13.52. able, judicious, & pious Divine, instructed to the Kingdome of heaven, having
beene well studied, and diligently exercised in the doc∣trine & practise of discipline above 30 yeeres together; whilst he was Pastor of the English reformed Church in Amsterdam; where was speciall occasionMatth. 25.20. to put forth his talent, by reason of the cheifest of the Sepa∣ratists that sojourned there at the same time. And al∣beit the Author lived not to finish, & review his paines, yet through divine providence, a Timothy1. Cor. 4.17. who knew his waies (trained up in the Scriptures, & other good learning in Schooles, and Vniversity, and for present2. Tim. 2.15. a workman that needeth not to be ashamed) hath brought the2. Tim. 4.13. parchments he left behinde him to pu∣blick use, for the common benefit of the English na∣tion in a time of need, calling for helpe2. Sam. 15.34. & counsel to defeate the dangerous projects of all Achitophels.
Right honorable, ye are as2. Sam. 14.17. Angels of God to dis∣cerne good & bad, & to speake comfortable words to your afflicted & banished Countreymen; Yee are the great Counsellers, Iudges, and State-physitians of En∣gland. NowIsa. 9.6. the Wonderfull, Counseller, the migh∣ty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace furnish your Honors more & more with theIsa. 11.2. Spirit of wisdome & understanding, the Spirit of Counsell and might, the Spirit of knowledge & of the feare of the Lord,Psal. 20.4. & fulfill all your counsells which are for the1. Cor. 10.31. glory of God, for the1. Pet. 2.17. honor of our gracious King Charles, and for the trueIob, 22.30. welfare of England, Scot∣land, & Ireland; even soe prayeth

