




Sir,
TWill be quered, why in the autumn of my dayes, and in this Presse-sweating genera∣tion, I should thrust my self into print, who never before peep'd in the Presse, beyond the letters of my name. To the reasonable and religious I render these accounts: some whereof point the fin∣ger at

1 Your self.
2 My self.
3 Your and my Antagonist.
4 Your and my Christian Friends.

1. For your self. I must confesse I owe you
Pauls praises and Pauls prayers, as he to O∣nesiphorus, 2 Tim. 1.15. At my return from New-England to London, you sought me diligently and found me out, And ever since have refreshed me with an annuall as personall countenance to my Lecture at Penrin, and contribution to my Labours at
Mylor.
Let these lines (when I am dead) speak Pauls prayers;ver. 16. The Lord give mercy to the house of Onesiphorus; the Lord grant you may find mercy in that day. In the mean, may you honour your God (who hath honoured you) with the choisest of your increase,Pro. 3.9. pracipuum pro ventuum. with your person, posterity as purse. And may your and my Enemy, who hath persecuted you for malignity, me for perjury, be therein still found (as he is found already) a liar.
2. For my self. I have not been without solicitations to commend some of my late labours to a publick viem, but could not be induced to such condescendency, till providence put into my hand this medium to purge my repute from the venome of that slanderous tongue, which hath bedirted my fame through many places of this nation. I was loath my posterity should have a rotten fathers name flung in their fa∣ces, while my ashes mouldred in the grave, when a living opportunity bids me cleer my blasted in∣nocency.
3. For my Doctoriall,S. B. D.

Featly.
Don.
 martial Ad∣versary (so his name and books proclaim him,) I shall use Martials weapons to foile him with,
Stat contra, dicitque tibi tua pagina, fures. You know, Sir, and many knowing Mini∣sters here, that his Sermon on Rom. 12.1. is done, horis furtivis, without trope or figure, being scored from the two Doctors,
verbatim, paginatim, lineatim: sed si forte suas, &c. and the Jack-dawes fur∣tivity is nakeded. Though he imprecate curses on himself, if ever stole two lines from them;Rom. 12
1. yet to a runner as reader, 'tis evident mo then half of that Sermon preached before the Committee of Assembly of Divines, May 20.
1646. is as the hatchets helve, borrowed; or he robbed a theef, who inhumanely stole the sheets from the two Doctors, after they slept in their Graves. 

Surely,Jer. 24. if he be one of
Jeremies figs, 'tis of the worst basket;Jer.
6.1. if of Esops tongues, 'tis not the best in the Market; or if of Jeremis fronts, 'tis such as cannot blush.
For his Alarme at Pendennis, on Psal. 106.9. both title, text, some of the Epistle, and main prosecutions, with small variation of phrase, are formerly beaten by Doctour Feat∣ly, as is cleeer to an unprejudiced comparer. But I'le leap him over in the front, till I meet him in the reare.
4. For your and my Christian friends, Justices, Gentry, Ministers, and Corporati∣ons, and my endeered parishioners, who have attested my life and labours beyond my de∣sires, and deserts; let these syllables re-at∣test my gratefulnesse; truely, you came forth timely to help the Lord against the mighty, even the Lords Truths against one of the mightiest falshoods was ever dawbd in the teeth of a Gos∣pel Minister.
'Tis well mine adversary shuns godly Mi∣nisters societies, by this they shun the gunshot of a fiery serpentine Arrow. For most of them know, what places he hath lived in, he hath ap∣peared cometicall, carrying a Titio of Conten∣tion in the tail: the Lord quench it, make him truly humble, and fit him better for the labours of Christs vineyard: which will be the rejoycing of
From my Study in Mylor,
the 27 of May, 1652.
Sir,

