



Right Honorable!
FEaring this little-no∣thing—Pocket—Pam∣phlet might com to your view by som o∣ther hand, it was thought need∣ful to prevent prejudice, by assu∣ring your Honors, they are the scriblings of two friends divided by places, to satisfie each other about som practicable pieces of

several kindes, especially looking at

Religion;
The Poor;
Justice;
Law;
Navie;
Merchandise;

Which now are the breeders of manie thoughts amongst Eng∣lish men. And truly as hee is foo∣lish, that would dare to pre∣scribe to your wisdoms; so is hee unfaithful, that would keep a mite from your treasure.
These are the chatterings of your ignorant and ruder servants, who onely beg pardon of all sorts for

their wishing thus, even that all the work of the Nation may bee carried on faithfully, and with the least charge: facile est inventis addere. Everie head here may pro∣cure a volume.
And it is desired, that no man of anie profession would despise these small things, or the daie of them; but seriously attend them to enlargment and practice: for doubtless, an honest heart and a quick head will soon enliven all these.
Your Honors know you are the Remainders of much win∣nowing: You know as your travels have been great and dan∣gerous,

so verie successful: you know to whom you are indebt∣ed: this good wee have alreadie under you, that men may bee as good as they can, but not so bad as they would. You may bee assured the highest Libertie Eng∣land gape's for is an open daie once in a year or two to choos a well∣charactered Representative, who may tread in your steps of faith∣fulness and truth; which work (they saie) you are en∣gaged in, and is neer perfecting. It is humbly conceived, Repub∣licks sow the seed of their ru∣ine in faction: which wise men saie cannot bee cured but by fre∣quent

elections, and cleer and plain dealings betwixt men in place, according to Mat. 18. And then who can saie a Go∣vernment of so manie praiers and tears should perish? when after-ages shall read written on your doors, and practis'd by you and your successors:
Haec Domus odit, amat, punit, con∣servat, honorat,
Nequitiam, pacem, crimina, jura, probos.
This Hous hate's sin, love's peace, and vice corrects,
Maintein's just Laws, and honest men protect's.

Then which nothing is more heartily wished by

Junii 7. 1651.
