


Gracious Sir,
NOt only freewill-offerings and gifts were acceptable to God, though they had a member, or members superfluous, or were deficient in some, and so had much imperfection, so it were not of the nature of unsincerity, in which respect they behoved to be without ble∣mish;
(Levit. 22.23.) but in trespass-offe∣rings also, which were commanded and not left free, if the Party was poor, not only a single Tur∣tle, or young Pigeon was accepted (for the other was for an Holocaust) but a single meat-offer∣ing, a very little Flower or Meal, and a little Salt to it, were accepted for both Holocaust and trespass-offering under one: (Lev. 5.7.) which being doubtlesly in use from Noahs time, or A∣dams rather, as elsewhere I hope to make it appear, gave as undoubtedly the beginning to that practice and proverb among the Heathens (Heathenism being but an inveterate corruption of heresie and schism from the Religion delivered by God to A∣dam, and Noah, as shall also God willing be made appea) molâ salsâ litant, qui non habent thura; such may acceptably sacrifice to God with meal and salt, who have not frankin∣cense. The like debonnairety to accept of mean gifts from good mindes, hath also been annume∣rated to the heroick indowments of the greatest Kings. Thus Artaxerxes disdained not a pitcher of water from a Paisant. And Plu∣tarch in his Apophthegms shows by one of them, the property of a royall disposition to have been esteemed this; Non minus est regium parvula accipe∣re, quam largiri magna, It is no less Kingly to accept of little things, than freely to be∣stow great matters.
And this, Royall Sir, is my humble request to your saered Majesty at this time; That you will graciously accept a mean gift from a mean giver,
and by your royall return of justice and bountie to enable me to serve God, and your Majesty with better; God himself inviting you thereto by his example, who allowed even of poor freewill∣offerings, made to him of purpose, to obtain his bountifull returns of some eminent benefits or fa∣vours. And yet a mean gift, Sir, I call this of mine, not that the work it self should be so ac∣counted, but my work about it; which is but a Translation. For the Book though in bulke but small, in its concernments is very rich; and, as highly commendable in it self, so not much less in the Author. In its natural language it made its first address to Cardinal Mazarine, in order to have set his Majesty of France on conquest of the great Kingdome of the Amazone to himself. But having these five years at least, that now it hath been abroad, not made use of it that way, it comes now by me to beg your Majesties favourable ac∣ceptance, in hope of that large retribution to your self, when your Majesty shall think fit to apply your thoughts to it, for which it was intended to another. It was by an old servant of your Ma∣jesties Royall Fathers, and Gandfathers, I. L. D. brought over, and communicate to one of your Ma∣jesties most expert Seamen, C. W. who from his youth up, and often times since, hath been in, and knowes perfectly all the coasts of the Southern A∣merica. Both these are very confident, at least wish heartily, and my self with the like affection do now humbly present it also, That your Majesty would so consider of that great Empire, as if it
were already your own; as it may be with much ease, if your applications be seasonable, and suita∣ble to its worth. For it is possest by the barbarous Natives only, except in two Skirts; Brasile on the East, where the Portuguaise pitched; and Peru upon the West, where the Spaniard is divided from the Inland by the tract of the Andes, or Cor∣deliere hills: but in the Peninsular great conti∣nent your Majesty may dresse an Empire of near nine thousand miles in circuit, of the pleasantest, fertilest, and richest continent in the world, whe∣ther for air, waters, or soil; to which no Prince can pretend, much less lay a claim. For the disco∣veries of that River by the Portugaise, and Spa∣niards, were more to satisfie their curiosity, than that they could then hope for a conquest. And the Natives not only in their forlorn condition, but by singular junctures of providence, call for the Christian Religion from us, while others cease from that duty, as the man of Macedon did Paul to help them while he was hindred to go into Bithy∣nia, Act. 16.7, 9, 10. and others have been hin∣dred hitherto to go to them for such end; but they may also easily be made to receive your Ma∣jesties Government with friendship, if wisely dealt with. For while neither Portugall, nor Spain, nor France pursued the design here offered, God in in his providence amidst, your Majesties and your good Subjects troubles, seems not obscurely to have been designing this for you, and your Brittain; as may be hoped from ancient prediction, not liable to exception from the solidest and soberest wits (as
at another occasion I may fullier clear, if your Ma∣jesty command it) and so much the more, as his providence hath prevented your projecting, having already made way and brought to pass for your Majesties interest an opportune and considerable Colonie, by that noble Lord Willoughbee of Parham, to his great travels, hazards, and vast expenses; both seeming to concurre with the fore∣said prediction, and to point out your Majesty for the layer of such a foundation both to Christ, and your self.
The Author of this work is a French Earl of a most ancient Nobility and descent from those famous and honourable Commanders in the holy Warres, who for their wise conduct and rare valour were imployed in places of great trust, and transmitted them with the Coat of arms and name of Pagan, (which was the badge of their great exploits in mating and killing the Pagans, or Infidels) to their suecessors of the same name and family, as the Author himself showes at large in the Dedicati∣on of his rare Book of Fortifications, to another noble branch of the same family: of whose rare ac∣complishments for gentile and manly learning, and Souldiery, lest I should here presume too much upon your Majesties patience, I shall leave further account of him to my Epistle to the Reader, and only present your Majesty with the summe of what he sayes to the Cardinal about the conquest; and that is; That it will neither be hard nor expensive, as neither needing great Armies, to give battels; nor great provision of Artillery, for carrying on
of sieges. There is need only of preparations fit∣ting for planting of five Colonies at the first a∣board. The first whereof is to be in the Isle of the Sun, for guarding the best entrie into the great Rivers mouth. The second on the famous Bosphore or Strait thereof, to defend, or keep this Rivers passage. The third on the renowned point of the Comanares, for the best seat of that whole Empire. The fourth near to the moun∣tain of Swana, whereby to be master of the gold∣mine there. And the fifth and last on the mouth of the River of Maragnon, to watch over the Frontier of that side of the Andes. And in fa∣vours of such a first establishment, there might easily be added the alliances of the Illustrious and renowned Nations of the Homagues, of the generous and noble Yorimans, of the vali∣ant and redoubted Topinambes; and order given for a Fleet-volant of about twelve men of Warre, continually to be visiting, and going between these Colonies: because the distance by sailing, of the farthest of them from the others, will be at the least a thousand Spanish leagues and alwayes upon the channell of the great Ama∣zone it self. Thus he.
I call my gift also, a mean gift from a mean giver; not that I was, or am so mean in my self, as made so by the late troubles, and troublers of the times. For, Royall Sir, my Father Sir Robert Hamilton of Goswick, was Gentleman of the Privy-Chamber both to your Royall Father and Grandfather; and my Mother was by King
James himself preferred to his Queen, for one of her Maids of honour, and afterwards also by him∣self bestowed in marriage upon Sir Hadrian Dam∣mane, Lord Bisterveldt and Fair-hill; after whose decease my Father married her. My Fa∣ther, and any estate I should have had by him, I lost through the troubles of the times; and have wanted them now these seventeen years; for repa∣ration whereof, and coming hither to wait for it, I left one place of considerable value in Scotland, and spent here in three years attendance for repara∣tion, what I could then bring with me; and then embracing another place here in England, not much worse than the former, was not only again put from it, before I had enjoyed it full two years to an end, for keeping my fidelity to your Majesty in refusing to subscribe an engagement, or allegi∣ance (for so it was indeed, whatever they called it) to another Soveraignty; but suffered also four or five years banishment, to the almost irreparable de∣triment of my health and estate both; yea, and re∣fused all preferments from the usurpers, and the least compliances with them, both before my ba∣nishment, and now for seven years after, though I was wooed thereto, and might have got conside∣rable advancement with ease, could I have embra∣ced it with complyance; but would never so much as commence suit under them; though but for re∣covering some debts, or defending my self from others unjust pursuits. And that these losses, Sir, wherein consisted all my estate, and that a conside∣rable one too, when your Majesty shall know the
particulars, should make me poor, is little wonder; and that poverty through its disadvantages, and my former disparity of life, should ruine my health, is as little wonder; and that all the disadvantages, that a ruined health, and poverty can bring a man to, should disable me to do such thing as otherwise I could, and would have done, to present your Ma∣jesty with, is yet as little strange, as the former: but that I should yet be alive, poor as I am, to offer this poor gift unto your Majesty, that is the wonder. And indeed it is Gods good hand to∣wards me, whom I hope he hath reserved for doing himself, and your Majesty some greater service, before I be called hence. For, Royall Sir, God hath not made me so poor in gifts of minde, (of which as I may not brag, but by glorying in him, and in my infirmities or sufferings for him; so may I not ungratefully conceal, lessen, or undervalue to his dishonour, what they are, but with modesty confess, when just occasion flagitates and extorts it from me) through his blessing, if your Majesty will but pa∣tronize me (I shall not say Mecaenas-like; for that is too little for you, though it was truely said of him, Mecaenas atavis edite regibus! but Angustus like rather, beyond whom himself your Majesty is in this also, that you can number more Kings of your Progenitors, than were in all the Roman race of Kings, and Emperors both, either before, or after Augustus to this day) I hope to honour your Majesty with such gifts of mine own store, as never a King in Christendome for these sixteen hundred years, ever had Subject, that did
the like, though many have attempted, absint & jactantia, & invidia verbo: but your Majesty must midwife them, and my self both into the world again, and then by Gods assistance shall I renew my strength and youth, as the Eagle, & sublimi feriam sidera vertice.
If here it be wondred, that thus I implore your Majesties justice and favour, and made not ra∣ther a privater address, for repairing of my losses; I shall humbly and truely profess, that I have not left privater wayes unattempted; but finde all so obstructed with difficulties, and non-considerancies, or cold layings to heart of my case, that neither the health of my body, nor the strength of my purse would suffer me to hope for much good otherwayes, and from Courtiers, than thus by ushering in my Petition; and then I hope more seasonably, and succesfully to reap the fruits of a privater appli∣cation. I thought often of that course, that the poor Widow took with Philip of Macedon, the Fa∣ther of Alexander the Great: who when she had attempted by Courtiers, and Favourites to get justice done her, but could not prevail with them to preferre her business to the King; resolved to attaque him her self, the best she could, come of it what would; though of him at worst, she hoped much better, than of any of his Courtiers, as I al∣so do of your Majesty now. Casting her self there∣fore in his way, when she knew, he was to ride out, with high vociferations she cryed after him, Help my Lord, O King; help O King! He com∣manding to stand, and see what ailed her; she
desired him to read and answer her Petition with justice. He answering that it was unfit then, and that he had not leasure for it; she replyed up∣on him boldly, That then he should not be at leasure to be King, if he could not have leasure to right his meanest Subjects, when all their pa∣tience and endeavours were otherwayes frustrate and wearied out. Upon which he was so far from being dissatisfied with her, that rather admiring her resolution, he most generously and heroickly gave her a present hearing, and full right of her wrong. Sir, my way is not so course, as hers was, but by a gift (which both with God, and all noblest spirits among men, finds acceptance) though but a poor onee, to have the softer access to your Majesties favour, and a cordialler consideration of my case, when it comes to your Majesty in a more particu∣lar way; and an easier grant of privacy for imme∣diate imparting your Majesty with some things, which is more for your Majesties good, than for my particular. Thus wise Abigail not only pacified David towards an unthankefull and churlish Na∣bal, but made way for her self for such a surplus∣sage of favour, as she little dreamed of, to become a Kings wife, and royal bedfellow, and her issue pre∣ferred in the entail of the Crowr, before all other of Davids children, except Bathshebaes. It is re ported of Alexander Severus, the Emperour, b∣Aelius Lampridius in his life, that be quarrelledy with every vertuous person, that be knew, who ei∣ther asked nothing of him, or but little. Quid est (inquit) quod nihil petis? An me vis tibi fieri
debitorem? Why ask you nothing of me? Would you have me to die in your debt? Sir, lest I presume too much upon your Majesties great affairs, in exceeding the bounds of an Epistle to so great a Prince, for the length whereof already I humbly beg pardon, my hopes and desires are that you shall not come short of any of those Worthies, or of the most heroick Princes, but surmount them all, in all royall endowments, to your becoming the Crown and rejoycing of all the reformed, in prose∣cuting their interest, which is Gods, and becoming their uniter and head, that you may be Carolo magno major, as undoubtedly you will, if thus you do: and which that you may do, Long may your Majesty live in all piety, plenty, and peace; or else just and happy triumphs here; and hereafter in the joyes and triumphs of heaven, where there is nothing but glory, triumphs, and joy without end. So prayeth


