



Madam,
THey that dedicate their writings to some Great Person, are commonly led (as I conjecture) by one of these three Ends; either the honour and immortality of their o∣therwise-perishing and private Names; or the shelter and protection of their Conceptions, which are expos'd to all weathers, in a most rigid, censorious, and inhospitable world; or else an in∣nocent Ambition (as a lasting Monu∣ment of their Gratitude) to proclaim and publish their obligations. From which soever of these three my present Ad∣dress unto your Ladiship may be derived, there is not a Person or a Name in the
whole Book of Honour, to which (in comparison of your Ladiship) I can De∣dicate my papers, with equal Discreti∣on of Choice and Duty. For
If my ambition were no more Christian then to raise an obelisck to my memory, and (when I shortly shall cease to be) to leave behinde me some Tokens that I have Been, I could not use a better Arti∣sice whereby to steal an Immortality, then thus by thrusting out my Essayes un∣der so faire, and so legible, and so great a Name. But I doe verily believe (though by some sorts of men I doe not expect to be believed) that to be mentioned by poste∣rity in the same volume with your Ladi∣ship, is no Inducement to my Address. For I am much more concerned in the health and safety both of my Body and of my Soule, (which are the real essentials of what I am,) then to cast away my care upon the Nothingnesse of my Name, and to mispend my kindnesse upon a fugitive mouth-full of vulgar Breath: which
many times is not so sweet, as that a man should desire it to perfume and preserve his Reputation. I know how much it im∣ports and concernes us all, to send before us (out of the world) a very good Trea∣sure, to carry with us a good Consci∣ence, and to leave behinde us a good Example; but so far am I from compre∣hending any degree or appearance of what is good or lovely in the Duration of a Name; (unlesse it stands in conjunction with a most imitable Tenor and Tract of life) that I expect to sleep best, when I am bedded in the most silent and darkest Sepulcher.
But of the second end of Dedications I may stand in some need, for although the utmost that I intended (in those two or three Sermons at first delivered from the Pulpit and since improved into a Treatise to be delivered from the Press) was wholy spent upon nothing but Sin and Satan, and is still directed to no other end, then that upon the Ruins of Satans Kingdome, I
may humbly contribute to build up Christ's; yet there are that are as ready to preach and write against me, as I can be to preach and to write against sin. There are some in the world, who are sure to be displeased with other mens writings, meerly because they are other mens, they are immoderately angry with men of my plain meaning, because we are not of their complexion, nor digest our meat with their stomachs, nor behold our objects with their Eyes, nor frame our manners according to their Educations. Although we make it the very business and designe of our studies, to shew the use of Gods word, and advance the Glory of Gods Name, and to be doing his Great work, in promoting the Interest and Good of Souls, yet (to such as preach Christ even of
Philip. 1.15, 16. strife and envy) the very best of our performances are unaccepta∣ble things, unless we follow their me∣thod, and use their way. If we are not doing something as fellow-labourers with them,
they will say that we are scandalous and uselesse Drones; but if we labour more abundantly in the word and Doctrine, they will count us worthy of
1 Tim. 5.17. dou∣ble dishonour. If we have not their very Mode and
2 Tim. 3.5. forme of Godliness, they will say we are scanda∣lous ungodly livers; but if our wayes are quite of another
Wisd. 2.15. fashion, so as we live inoffensive and blameless lives, they will brand us with the Title of moral men. If our opinions and Judge∣ments were but agreeable to theirs, they would look upon our Actions with kinder Eyes, and impute the worst of our doings to the Infirmity of the flesh; but now that we are seasoned with different princi∣ples and notions and wayes of reasoning, they call our Piety Superstition, our Fi∣delity perversness, and our Acts of just dealing our glittering sins. From such un∣reasonable men I cannot hope for good u∣sage either of what I now publish, or ever shall doe. For they will never be reconciled
to any the best of my Indeavours to beat down the Empire and grouth of Sin, unless I will doe it by those doctrins by which I finde so many others have lift it up: but from such men as these, I hope your Ladiships very Name will be some pro∣tection. For they will possibly be ashamed to avow their hatred of what a Person so Important shall please to favour. And even in meer self-kindness, they will not run into the danger of such disgrace, as to calumniate any otherwise then in secret Corners, what your Ladiships better Judgment (so very discerning in it selfe, and yet improved by as sublime and as un∣usual a Converse as hath been found in France or England) shall publickly ho∣nour with Approbation.
But Madam, there is behinde a strong∣er motive to my Addresses. For since your Ladiship is the Authour of the most visi∣ble Contentments which for some years past I have injoyed, I doe not think it suf∣ficient that by my daily prayers for your
Ladiship, I have been privately thankful, who by your Ladiships many favours am more then privately obliged. It is by your Ladiships Donation that I enjoy a good Portion, and (which is more) a good People. Whose more then usual In∣tegrity, and more then ordinary affecti∣on (as I am apt to believe when I look a∣broad) have made me much more happy in my contentment, then all their possessions put together can make me Rich. And as they were a Treasure which (under the providence of God) were by your Ladi∣ships care, as well as favour, committed to my charge; so I am able with some comfort to give your Ladiship this accompt, that how few soever I may have gained, I have not lost so much as one. Were it not for this comfort, I should think that my pre∣sent possessions (though most freely con∣ferred by your Ladiship) had been bought by me at too dear a rate; it having cost me a sequestration from your Ladiships presence, and from the incredible pleasure
which I injoyed in the Education of your son, whose choice endowments of nature, having been happily seasoned and crowned with grace, gave him at once such a wil∣lingness and such an aptness to be taught, as reconciled my greatest pains with ease and pleasure. I should not think my self secure from the great danger of imperti∣nence, by putting this into the number of my greatest obligations, if I were not able to affirm it as a very great truth, that the education of my dear Lord was not so much my employ ment, as it was my re∣creation and my reward. And though these are but some of the many great fa∣vours, which because they are ever pre∣sent with me, require a gratitude no less immortal, yet am I not quite so forgetful of your Ladiships quality, or of mine own, as to think it pertinent or civil to give your Ladiship a Narrative of all Iowe. I have already been too indulgent to my constant fault of prolixity; who find it alwayes ve∣ry easie to begin Epistles to your Ladiship,
but not so easie to make an end. Yet this I can plead in my excuse, that I have all a∣long studied, not how much I should say, but in how many things I should be silent. I have not made a Panegyrick (as most have done in such cases) but a meer Dedi∣catory Epistle. Being religiously fearful of making your Ladiship to live in pain, by my offending your modesty with needless Eulogies of your merit. Which I the ra∣ther call needless, because the persons of greatest honour are become their own Theaters; the every scene of whose lives is so generally known (whilst the world is a spectator either to deride, or to applaud them,) that 'twere impardonable arrogance in a man of my mediocrity, either to think of adding any thing to your Ladiships lu∣stre, or to believe I need open my readers eyes.
I shall therefore betake my self to the usual subject of my devotions, and contend for your Ladiship at the Throne of grace; that since your Ladiship hath been tempted to
very equal excesses of joy and sadness, (by having lost as valuable temporal blessings as can be possibly injoyed, and still injoying those blessings which are e∣qualy valuable, & equaly lyable to be lost too) you may want with comfort what God hath taken unto himself, and injoy with moderation what he hath left you. And that nothing in this world, either of sweet, or bitter, may interrupt or divert you in the great business of your life; (even the making of your calling and election sure,
1 Pet. 1.10. Phil. 2.12. and the working out of your salvation with fear & trem∣bling,) is the most passionate desire of his enlarged soul, who doth believe himself as much as he ought to be, because as much as he is able,
Madam, 
