



Dearely beloved in the Lord.
AS Jesus Christ (by the ap∣pointment of the Fa∣ther) hath purchased Redemption, brought in an everlasting righ∣teousnes, and obtained eternall Salvation, for a certaine num∣ber of the race of fallen Adam; so, the blessed Spirit is designed by the Father and the Son, not onely to make appli∣cation of Christ, and to bring soules into the relation of Sons and Daugh∣ters thereby; but also, to beare testimo∣ny of their standing in that blessed Re∣lation. To encourage unto a waiting for, and to give a knowledge of, the
witnessings of the Spirit, is the de∣signe of this Treatise.
And now (Deare friends) I beseech you rest not satisfied without a per∣swasion [from the Spirit of Adoption] that God is your Father. Give over carnall reasonings, and give all diligence to make your Calling and Election sure. Though you be under the hidings of Gods face at present,Isa. 8.17. yet waite for the light of his Countenance, and the is∣sues will be glorious. When Josephs brethren were in their greatest di∣stresse, then Joseph maketh knowne himselfe to them. Gen. 45. v. 1.3, 4. So, when many charges and accusations are brought in against you, and many seemingly hard passages are met with∣all, and that from Christ himselfe, and your hearts are ready to sinke downe lowest, & your fears to rise highest, yet then may your Assurance be nearest.
Christ, your spirituall Joseph (as with Reverence we may speake it) will be able to refraine no longer, he cannot but cry out [I am Joseph your Brother].
And if you injoy a testimonie of Di∣vine love at last, you will not repent you of all your waiting: It will be as a cluster of grapes from the Celestiall Canaan, that will give you a fore∣knowledge, how good the Land is.
This, will sweeten your bitterest cups, and your worst conditions to you: this will be enough, that God is your Father.
Your hearts are now fearefull of medling with promises, and this is the language of your soules, it is true here are precious promises, but what is this to us? we know not whither we have any right to them or not: such a testi∣mony will assure you, that all the pro∣mises are yours, because Christ is yours in whom all the promises are Yea, and Amen. Indeed when you want Assu∣rance yet it is your duty by faith to take hold of promises sutable to your conditions, but Satan hindreth often∣times therein, when you cannot see your interest in Christ. Hereby also you will see your liberty for neare ap∣proachings
unto God, and that with a holy boldnes, because he is your Fa∣ther, and may hope of being succesfull in all your drawings neare to him.
Hereby you will have freedome from, or establishment against many temptations, which a doubting con∣dition exposeth you to: you will not be so ready to have hard thoughts of God, or murmuring, discontented thoughts at his dispensations &c. as you have been. Hereby you will be rendred thankfull for your mercies, whereas now you are apt to Call the most speciall mercies Common.
And that such an abundant entrance may be administred to you, into the e∣verlasting kingdom, and that you may be filled with peace and joy in belee∣ving, even joy unspeakable and full of glory, shall be the prayer of him, who is,
Sandcroft 4th Mo: 20th day. 1654.

