



Sir,
YOur most obliging Resentment of the late un-Neighbourly usage which I have publickly received from that strange Person, whom you mention so severe∣ly under the Title of Mr. Waspe, is that for which I must thanke you, but chide you too. For what use do you make of your Philo∣sophy, and that Government of the Will which we are wont to talke of, whilst you appear to be so deeply and oversensibly concern'd in any mans swaggering a∣gainst the innocent and careless MOON? The very worst that you can say of my Dear Antagonist (whose pretious Soul I do protest is dearer to me then my Eyes) is in effect and substance no more then this, that he is vehemently Angry without a Cause, and bitterly reproachful without a Reason, and most Inventive of Accusations without the least Ground. But what ne∣cessity could there be that you should express his misdemeanours by such an austere Hypotyposis, as [That He foames upon my Name, and offers violence to my Closet, and committed great lewdness with my bashful-reluctant-unwilling-Papers, and that now in a

Libel of above thirty sheets He even tears and scratches and incessantly biteth my Reputation?] might not this have been cloathed with cooler words, if you had not been a little heated by his great Fire? I for my part will not answer him according to his Folly. And whilst in Revenge of my Doctrines, [That Sin is none of the Objects of God's Absolute Decrees, but of his real Hatred and sincere Detestation; that God decreed to punish no man without respect unto his Sins, nor to save him any otherwise then as being in Christ; that Christ is intentionally the Saviour of all; and that none can continue to have an Interest in Christ without Obe∣dience as well as Faith, or without Repentance, New Life, and Perseverance unto the end,] I say, whilst Mr. Barlee doth, in Revenge of these Innocent Do∣ctrines, load my Person and my Papers with such un∣friendly Appellations, as [unconscionable, and Grace∣less, Proud, and Stomackful, Insolent, and Malepert, Frontless, and Impudent, of an Adulterous Forehead, and Atheistical, Slanderous Dragon, and Satanical Blasphemer, raging against Heaven, and belching out Blasphemies against the Scriptures, Poisonous, Triobo∣larie, and Diabolical, nay, worse then Diabolical witti∣ly wicked,] with an innumerable company of such like things, I am content to expresse them after the manner of the Psalmist, by saying that he hath Psal. 35. 21. opened his mouth wide against me, and Verse 20. devised deceiptfull words against them that are quiet in the Land. A Verse 11. 12. false witness is risen up, and (rewarding me evil for Good) hath laid to my charge things that I knew not.
And I pray Sir tell me, why should you be so offended with his irreverence towards me, who (in his Doctrine of Decrees) speakes much more

If you desire some exam∣ples without the labour of searching for them, you may turn to that which I have spoken in my follow∣ing discoveries, Chap. 1. Sect. 5. p. 23, 24, 25, 26. and chap. 3. Sect. 31, 34, 35. and chap. 4. Sect. 21. 24. 28, 29. and from Sect. 33. to the end. and Sect. 28, p. 110, 111, 112, 116. hardly of his Creator? If he hath been so un∣happy as to abuse himself, and me, (but most himself, because me,) the first should only serve to exercise your pity, and the second only your pardon. For in this we should follow the example of David; who how∣ever impatient of a prophane Goliath that of∣fer'd indignities to his God, and affronts to his Religion, yet he slighted the railings of cursing Shimei, because they reach't no farther then to his Person. I confesse it is my duty, when I finde a slander cast upon the will of our God (whom we have the honour and the happinesse to serve and wor∣ship) to be affected as David was, and as you your self now are, with equall resentment and Indig∣nation.
But, Sir, you know who tell's us, that Muliebre maximè & pu∣erile est vitium, Sene. de irâ, c. 16. Testinesse is an unmanlike and childish vice. They are feeble and sick bodies which groan and complain upon every touch. Though we cannot say with Seneca, or with Maxi∣mus Tyrius, that a wise man and vertuous cannot be . Max. Tyr. Dissert. 2. In sapietem non cadit Inju∣ria. Sen. ad Serenum. injur'd, yet we may venture to say with Sorates, that such a man cannot be . hurt. Indeed a judgement that is blinded with Pett and Passion is not wont to di∣stinguish betwixt Injury and Harm. Because anger (as well as Fear) Wisd. 17. 12. betrayeth the succours which Reason offereth. But that that there is a distinction appears by this, that God himself may be injur'd, who yet (we know) can take no harme. He hath communicable Attributes, as well as Attributes incommunicable; not only Impassivenesse, but patience too. And if we

will but 2 Tim. 1. 6. stirre up the gift of God which is in us, we are able to be patient, though not impassive. Why should you or I be troubled at those extravagant in∣ventions and bitter speeches, which are only cast at me, but do not hitt? of what concernment is it to me, that an Enemy is sick with the overflowing of the Gall, so long as I (God be thanked) injoy my health? if he * wearieth himself to commit iniquity, the more is Jer. 9. 5. his misery, and my compassion. My compassion (I say) of him, who hath done me the wrong, and not of my self who have reciev'd no harm by his injustice. For though he aimes at my head, he strikes nothing but my Helmet. That he hath provok't me above expres∣sion, (as you rightly phrase it) inferr's nothing on my part, but an occasion to forgive him. And the excesse of his injustice doth but adde to the Lustre of my for∣givenesse. Mine indeed is the injury, but his the mis∣chief.
Besides, we may learn so much Christia∣nity among the . &c. Arrian Ep. l. 1. c. 29. . Stoicks, as not to make our selves unhappy by our not being Ma∣sters of an other mans Tongue. If a man in Musick shall call Nete, Hypate, or discour∣sing of Geometrie, shall say the Lines are not equall which are drawn to the Circumference from the very same Center, will a Mathema∣tician be therefore Angry? why then should you, or I, because my Neighbour mistakes my name; I am not sure the lesse Orthodox for being called a Pe∣lagian, a Socinian, a Jesuite, or a Ranter, any more then the Apostles were the lesse sober, because they were said to be Act. 2 13. full of new wine; and not only said, but Ver. 25. supposed to be drunk. St. Paul was not the worse

for being said to be a Acts 28. 4. Murderer, nor yet the better for being said to be a Ver. 6. God. I am no more a Heretick for being said by Mr. Barlee to lay Correp. cor. p. 22. a snare for the worthy Gentlemen of the Country whereby to bring them into Boggs and praecipices, then God himself is a Seducer, for being said by Mr. Barlee to p. 79. he saith he is not at lei∣sure fully to open in what sence. But he had partly told us, but 14. lines be∣fore, where he saith expres∣ly, God deter∣mins that sin shall be done, not as a duty; but as a fact, that shall fall out by the sinfull will of the creature. Nor can he meane a conditional de∣termination who is all for absolute. And he saith p. 86, 87. God doth not only determine all things and actions, but their severall modalities too, as to the manner of their being, whether as necessary, contingent, or voluntary. Now sin must needs be a thing, or action, or a modality of thing or action. And withall it must needs be either necessary, contingent, or voluntary. And of all such modalities, he saith that God is the supreme cause, p. 87. Again he saith, (p. 60, 61.) that God doth stir up wicked men to acts as acts which to the Actors are and will be un∣just. As if God could stir up David to pollute Bathsheba, without stirring him up to his adultery, or else that Adultery become no sin. See what I shall say. ch. 4. p. 42, 43, 44. tempt men un∣to sin. who instead of excusing, doth commend the expressions of other men, whilst they say that the wicked do run into sin, by God's Impulse, by his com∣mand, by his will, by his compulsion, by his Decree, and Prostitution. All which I shall display (with a desire to convince, and not to shame him, unlesse I shame him by accident in his refusing the glory of true Repentance) when I discover the sad estate of his 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60. and some following pages. All which shall be consider'd in the ten last Sect. of my 4th. Chapter.
The use that here I make of it is only this, that we should not think our selves hurt by being rail'd at. Every man is not thunderstruck by a long suffering God that bringeth up an ill report of his waies and dealings. And although we may punish any libeller by making it appear that he is such, yet at the very same time, we must give him our pity and pardon too. The truth is, that if he had done me no greater injury, then to drag my name through the dirt, by telling all the world I

am in a state of Correp. Cor. p. 43. & 174. damnation, and (which is more to my prejudice) that I am neerely allied to the p. 15. Jesuites and Socinians, and express my reverence to the Augustan Confession (which is well known to be Protestant) meerely out of love to the * Masse of Ceremonies, that ** p. 92. ceremonious * litter, thereby making me lyable (as much as in him lies) not only to sequestra∣tion, but death it self (for you know that Michael Servetus, procu∣rante id Calvino, vivus ex∣ustus est Genevae, Anno 1553. libenter fateor (in∣quit Calvinus de se) ac prae me fero, ex me prodiisse Accusatorem, Gro. in Vo. pro. pa. Ecc. Spero capitale saltem fe∣ret judicium. Calvin. in Epist. ad Farellum. Servetus was burnt at Geneva for lesse then being a Socinian, and what would be done to that Papist that should hold a Parsonage here in England) I say if this had been all, I had not now put pen to paper. For I consider that breeding people are ever apt to be pettish, and I should easily have hoped that all that frowardnesse of Mr. Bar∣lee had been meerely the effect of a teeming brain. Which I can as heartily forgive, as men do their Wives the Qualmes of breeding, or torments of Child∣birth. I meane the peevishnesses and petts, which are usually incident to such as beare and bring orth. I know, that my Neighbour hath had very hard labours; once he terribly miscarried with what he had long been impraegn'd against a Manuscript Copy of what I printed (if yet a thing so mangled may be called mine,) & it is much more then nine moneths, since he hath been travelling with that which he hath now brought forth. And whether we consider the great This I should never have said or thought, if Mr. B. himself had not assur'd me under his hand and seal, [that being a Prebsbyterian he affected much to proceed by the common counsell of the Presbytery.] Which makes me amaz'd at the injustice of his Dedicatory Epistle (p. 7.) where he accuseth me for suggesting that thing to him, which had been more then suggested by him to me. As if he thought it mcrime, to beleeve the truth of what he told me: and which however he told me in words at length, yet have I a better opinion of those men, then to think them all guilty of what they were so very early accused to me by Mr. Barlee. company of friends who were imployed in his assistance, or the many and

long Teeth with which the childe of his Invention did eat its way, we cannot chuse but conclude that his pangs and throws were very tedious, and that the effects of his Impatience should only be matter of good mens Pity. Which was indeed one Reason, why I resolved at the beginning only to punish him with my silence. For commonly those punishments are most useful to the Offenders which are most opposite to the offence. And therefore as I approve of the Senate at Ephesus which decreed that his At bene con∣suluerant E∣phesii, Decreto memoriam te∣terrimi homi∣nis abolendo: nsi Theopmpi Ingenium in historiis eum suis compre∣hendisset. Val. Max. l. 8. c. 14. name should not be mention'd, who had burned their Temple, meerely to be talk't of; so that ambitious sort of weak scriblers, who (like un∣clean and ravenous Birds) are not affrighted with the stench, but love to feed upon the Carcasse of Reputati∣on, and have an impotent desire that their Names should live, and be immortal, by the woeful preservatives of being loud, and troublesome, deserve (I think) to dye in silence, and (to prevent ill smells) to be quietly buried in Oblivion.
But now in consideration of these few things, first, that my Neighbour hath committed a publick Riot (I doe not say upon my Name and Papers only, but) upon all that is dear and pretious to me, my Friends, my Religion, my Reverend Fathers in God, my dearest Mother the Church of England, my Conscience, my Faith, my Saviour, and my God too; Secondly, That he hath quoted my private Letters by scraps and pieces, not as he ought, but as he pleaseth, and as he hopes may tend most to his Advantage; Thirdly, that he pretends my Necessity of sending my Notes into the world was not given me by him, but page 9. selfe-created; Fourthly, that under colour of confuting my little Book, he hath only us'd Tricks to write a great one, which

he hath fill'd (not with Arguments, but) with Invectives and Railings against my Papers; nor yet so much against my Papers, as against my Person, and my Party, (to use the cleanest of all his phrases) against my Name, and my Principles, my Parishioners and my Parsonage; Lastly, that he referrs his Reader to such and such pages of my Book, where I say the very contrary to what he would have me, (nor do I speak of any written, but printed Copie, which he falsifies as boldly, as if he took it for granted, either that no body that reads him would read me too, or else that every body would trust before they try him,) and as if that were not sufficient, is faine to father some There is a notable ex∣ample p. 39. where he pretends me to have baost∣ed, that I am above Sin, and by my own power could abstain from it. And p. 73. That I am a∣gainst all se∣cond Marria∣ges of Mini∣sters. And very many the like in o∣ther places, which are as groundless as these two, (enough to let you taste what is likely to be your entertainment.) Fictions upon bare Report, which have not only no ground, but no similitude of Truth, and for which he cites no∣thing but a simple Heare-say, and which if the Rea∣der should beleeve upon his bare word, would render me as odious as any Antichrist; I say in consideration of these five things, I doe consent to publish the disco∣veries which I have made at twise Reading over the seventy first pages of his voluminous Invention. It being fit that my Judgment should be conformable to yours, which is in this, as in other things, so conformable to Reason. Why I trouble the Press with no more, I shall satisfie my Reader before we part. And shall say to you at present no more then this.
Ajax took it so heavily that Ʋlysses should be pre∣ferr'd Sophocles in Ajace flagelli∣fero. Erasm. in Adag. before him, and that in the Judgment of Aga∣memnon, as that with overmuch grief he ran quite Madd. Nothing now would content him but sweet Revenge; both on the wicked Ʋlysses who had gotten

the Armour of Achilles (which was the subject of their Contention) and on the filthy Agamemnon, who had decree'd it. Ajax drew out his sword, and (Fancy suc∣ceeding in the place of Reason) he valiantly charged a Herd of Swine, supposing them to be the Graecian Army. There were two great Sow's of extraordinary Bulk, which he singled out as a peculiar sacrifice to his Displeasure, taking one for Agamemnon, and the other for Ulysses. These foure-footed Grecians he hung up on a Beam, and gave them such Correptory Correction with Tongue and Whipcord, as made them utterly un∣capable of any more such Combats. This act of ven∣geance did so affect him with insultation and laughter, that [] became a Proverb.
What think you, Sir? should the Graecian Army have face't about, (and have quitted their main Pro∣ject towards which they were marching,) to revenge themselves upon Ajax, because (in enmity to them) he had fearfully mangled a Herd of Swine? or should Ulysses and Agamemnon have set their witts against Ajax, for having cruelly insulted over a couple of dead Sows? was it not punishment enough, that he lost the Armour of Achilles, and after ran out of his witts? mistook a Herd for an Army, and a Sow for an Ene∣my? Nay, when he came out of his Reverie, and found the grossenesse of his mistake, his vexation and his shame made him Impatient of his Life. For having drawn his Sword at his Fancy, he put it up into his Bowels.
To apply this story were long and needless, and I must now take care, that my Gate be not bigg enough for my City to run out at. Lest Mr. Barlee tell me once more, (who yet had surely less reason then any

man living) that Correp. Corr. p. 44. I am terrible long ere I can get into my Trappings or Geers. I have perhaps already worne out your patience, and presum'd too much upon your leisure. The usual freedom which you allow me must be attended with respect, as well as kindeness; for although you are not either a Lord, or a Lady, (as the shrewd Hariolator doth seem to think) yet you are certainly a Person as well of Honour, as of Inte∣grity. And since I have been so observant of all your strict precepts, That I should never reveal your Name, I may say without danger of interessing your modesty (how much soever to the displeasure of our Correptory Corrector) that I honour your vertues and Erudition, more then your Fortune, and your Blood. And that I am equally obliged to speak my selfe
Sir,

