



HOnourable Senators, Your patient attenti∣on unto, and thankefull acceptance of my un∣deserving paines in this Sermon (now ac∣cording to your Order printed, and in all humility presented unto you) emboldens me againe to reinforce my exhortation that you would be of good courage, and goe on zea∣lously to work with God, untill he be pleased to make you and all Gods people happy and blessed in ordaining peace, perfecting Re∣formation, and working all your workes for you.
Nothing is so preiudiciall to your proceedings, nothing so much hinders good things from us, as many grievous provoking sinnes in the midst of us. Hence is it that when peace and free∣dome with Truth in purity have beene flowing in toward us as a River, the Lord hath caused them as Iordan to be driven back∣wards: the night seemed to be past, and the day of the glorious Gospel with peace on earth seemed to spread it selfe over us; but now the shadowes are againe stretched out, black clouds hang over our heads, still threatening a day of darkenesse and gloomi∣nesse.
The profanenesse and incorrigiblenesse of the multitude de∣clare that we are ripe for iudgement, indisposed and unfit for
such mercies as have beene ever since the happy beginning of your sitting tendering themselves unto us: The vitals of this Kingdome are fearefully distempered, the whole head is sick and the whole heart faint: Our sinfull distempers threaten the dis∣solution of the whole body: Therefore through the wrath of the Lord of Hosts is the Land darkened, and the people are as fuel for fire, and their carkasses lye torne in the midst of the streets: for all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.
Certainly it will be acceptable to God, available to the heal∣ing of the Land, and reducing us to a fitnesse for Reformation, if you could, as you have begun, set up a faithfull Ministery, and establish iudgement and iustice in the Gates. If iudgement had its free course in Citie and Countrey, the course of Gods iudgements would determine. Let your zeale for the Lord burne; and this burning which the Lord hath kindled would be quenched. Phinehas stood up and executed iudgement, and the plague ceased.
Let not the sonnes of Belial say, There is no law now: Let them not be as when there was no King in Israel, every man do∣ing that which was right in his owne eyes: let them know that the Kingly power resides in his High Court of Parlia∣ment. Let your terrour be on all the wicked: bring the wheele upon them, or make them flee into desolate places to cut up the mallowes by the bushes,Job 30. and Juniper roots for their meate. If iniquitie were purged and the wicked tooke away, God would leave off melting,Jer. 6. Satan would be rebuked, the enemies unarm∣ed: no weapon formed against you should prosper.
Every knowne sinne suffered amongst us, if not prevented nor punished by you, will be as yours, and will give the enemie advantages:Greg. Moral. 10..20. Therefore some thinke that Satan is said to stand at Ioshua's right hand, and so of his fellow reformers, as ha∣ving iust accusation, and therefore too hard for Ioshua and his fellowes: Nam dextra fortius aliquid & majus significat: to this purpose they bring that in the 109. Psalme, Let Satan stand at his right hand, and thus expound it: fac ut Satan in judicio superiores habeat partes: The reason why they thus thought was, because Ioshua did not carefully oversee and in∣struct
the people in Babylon; he was not zealous in exciting to the building of Gods Temple: And although we read not that he was faulty in marrying a strange woman, (as some say, (but without Scripture) he did) yet this was accounted his sinne that his brethren and somes by his neglect or sufferance had done so,Rabb. & Hieron. As Sanctius hath it. Ezra 10.
Thus farre this is usefull; to excite you to prevent sinne in others, and to take away occasion from all that seeke occasion either to asperse, or hinder your pious proceedings in building the Lords House, and setting up his Worship and Ordinances in puritie: O be carefull lest the Adversary get advantage; for you are not ignorant of his devices.
Iustice also requires that you should make speed to heare and to releeve the innocent that cry to heaven, that cry to you as Gods on earth; let not their eyes faile with waiting.
Be zealous for Christs cause: delay not to establish his go∣vernment and discipline with vigour: proceed so on in your reforming and treating, that glory may dwell in our Land; that mercy and truth, righteousnesse and peace may meete together, and kisse each other.
Let your wisdome find out a way so, that for circumstantiall differences there be no rent made by those who are one body: The wisdome which is from above, which is pure and peaceable, so direct you, that you may take away all pretences of separation or schisme; that every mouth may be stopt, that brethren may dwell together in unitie, serving the Lord with one shoulder; that the God of love and peace may be amongst us.
Your religious approbation, and expediting of the Directory for Gods worship, is no small refreshing to the spirits of all the godly: you have gone farre, but forget the things that are be∣hind, and presse on toward the marke: So long as the Iewish builders and reformers minded more themselves and their owne houses then the House of God, Satan prevailed by the Kings wicked Counsellours in Babylon, and the Samaritancs about Iudea, to hinder their counsels and endeavours: you have given good proofe that you exalt God, and preferre his glory with the hazard of the depressing of your selves and yours. (The Lord is faithfull who will not forget your unparallel'd zeale and la∣bour
of love) Continue in your integritie, and the Lord will continue a Sunne and shield to you;Psal. 105.14. he will for your sakes rebuke Princes; he will rebuke Satan and all his malignant Instru∣ments, that they shall be as still as a stone: Although Satan be at your right hand, feare not, so long as our Mediatour sits at the right hand of God: feare not, if you (with Ioshua) stand before the Angel of the Covenant: continue to stand before him as your Master whose worke you are about, expecting what he will prescribe, or enioyne. Continue in his worke, that you may be found so doing; so acquit your selves, that he may say, Well done good and faithfull servants, you have beene faithfull in all my house, enter into your Masters ioy. Stand before this Angels as your Iudge, to whom in all your iust proceedings you may appeale and have reliefe. Stand before him as your Ad∣vocate, who hath undertaken the Patronage of your righteous cause, and the promoting of your pious undertakings in heaven with his Father; there he speakes good; there he pleads for you: and the Lord will answer him with good words, and comforta∣ble words concerning you, and concerning his Ierusalem. To his powerfull Patronage, constant care, and gracious guidance, you and all your weightie Affaires are commended in the daily prayers of

