


SOme prophecies speak plainly of CHRIST, and can not be understood of another; Esa. 9.6. Vnto us a child is borne, unto us a sone is given,—his name shalbe called Wonderfull, &c. Some ar typical or delivered with coveres of thinges signifying Christ, his offices and benefites. And of these some ar spoken of the type or thing signifying, and can be understood only of the thing signified, and some ar true both of the type and of Christ ether in the same or in a different maner, that is, some ar true of both in a proper sense; some ar true of both in a tropical or figurative sense; and some ar true of the one properly, and of the other figuratively. All these sortes ar manifest in sundrie prophecies: here I touch one for all. 2 Sam. 7.12. When thy dayes be fulfilled, and thou shall sleep with thy fathers, (sayth the Lord unto David) I will set up thy seed after thee, which shall proceed out of thy bowelles, & I will establish his kingdome. This wes true in the persone of Solomon and of Christ too properly. V. 13, He shall build an house for my name. This wes true of Solo∣mon in the proper acceptation of the word house, & figuratively of Christ, who sayd Mat. 16.18, Upon this rock will I build my Church. It followes; I will establish the throne of his kingdome for ever. This wes not true of Solomon in respect of his persone (for he died) nether of his posteritie, from whom Iacob had foretold that the scepter should departe at the coming of Shiloh Gen. 49.10, but of Christ it is true: for his throne is established for ever and ever Heb. 1.8. v. 14. I will be his father, and he shalbe my sone. This is true of Solomon in respect of adoption, and of Christ in respect of eternal generation. Fiftly it is sayd there; If he commite
 iniquitie, I will chasten him with the rode of man—but my mercie shall not departe from him, as I took it from Saul. This is true of Solomon, and not of Christ (who wes free of sin) unlesse we underst and his members, or their sines imputed unto him. V.
16, Thy house and thy kingdome shalbe established for ever before thee: thy throne shalbe established for ever. This can not be understood of David or Solo∣mons house or kingdome (as experience proves now for the space of 1600 yeers and more) but of Christs house and kingdome, which shall never faile. By this one passage it is manifest,
1. how miserable ignorance it is, to expone all the prophecies after one and the same maner or in a proper sense only; 2. that the Euan∣gelistes and Apostles exponing these prophecies in a spiritual and figurative sense, doe not wreste them, even albeit these have been fulfilled some way before; but according to the intendment of the Spirit they bring them unto CHRIST, who is the end of the lawe and scope of the Prophetes. So the promises of delive∣rance from Babel hade their own accomplishment in the dayes of Ezra and Nehemia: but that wes not all the meaning of these prophecies, which wer in another maner and more fully per∣formed by Christ: for this cause it is sayd Col. 1.12, Giving thankes unto the Father, who hes made us meet to be partarkers of the inheri∣tance of the Saintes in licht, who hes delivered us from the power of darknes, and hes translated us into the kingdome of his deare Sone, in whom we have redemption through his blood: and Rev. 5.9. thou hast redeemed us unto God by thy blood out of everie kinred and people and natione. There is our Redeemer more glorious than Ezra or any other: there is our inheritance and kingdome better than Ieru∣salem: and there is a redemption from all nationes. Now when these prophecies ar fulfilled once in respect of the type, and againe in a more transcendente maner by Christ; If we denie what God hes done, we ar false and ungrate: and if we expect them to be fulfilled yet again in the type, it wer a worse returning than that of the Galatianes c. 4.9: that wes unto the types of his priestly, and this unto the types of his kingly office:) and Christ is become of none effect unto such. The elect Iewes did not rest upon the Mosaical types, but all the Prophetes gave witnesse unto Christ, that through his name whoseever believes in him shall receive
 remission of fines Act. 10.43. they believed that through the grace of the Lord Iesus Christ they should be saved even as wee, Act. 15.11: in this faith they all died, Heb. 11.13, I say, This faith, because as faith is one in respect of the object, Eph. 4.5, so the Apostle de∣clares our faith by the exemple of the antientes. Neither did they rest on the promises as only earthly, but
they desired a better countrie, that is heavenly, Heb. 11.16: and
when they wer tortured, they wold not accept deliverance from their tormentes, that they micht obtain a better resurrection v. 35. Wes that an earthly hope? no: they be∣lieved the redemption of their soules by the Messias Psal. 34.22; that he wes to be wounded for their transgressiones, and bruised for their iniquities, and the chastisement of their peace wes to be upon Him, and that they wer to be healed by His stripes, Esa. 53.5. And Symeon waiting for the consolation of Israel, when he sawe Him, blessed God, and sayd,
Lord now let thy servant departe in peace—for my eyes have seenethy salvation, Luk. 2.29. He craves not longer lyf to reigne with Christ on earth, but wes content to departe, having seen the salvation of God, the licht of the gentiles and glorie of Israel. And neverthelesse many Iewes sought richteousnesse by the workes of the Lawe, and not by faith, Rom. 9.32, and they looked upon the promises with a bodily ey only, as if the Messias wer to erect an earthly Monarchie at Ierusalem: and looking thorow these spectacles they could not think that Iesus Christ is the Messias, and so they stumbled at his worldly basenesse, & being miscaried in their braines they could not see His spiritual power and benefites. After their miserable exemple others acknowled∣ging Iesus Christ to be the promised Messias, and not considering the difference of the promises have not attained fully unto the trueth of them, and so have erred in mistaking His natures and benefites. Thus Ebion thought him to be a man and not God, as if all the promises could been performed by a man endowed with singulare grace. Cerinthus lykwise held that Christ is only a man, and because he sawe Him not sitting on the throne of David, he held that Christ is not risen from the dead as yet, but shal rise and reigne in Ierusalem 1000 yeeres, and all His subjectes shalbe satis∣fied with all maner of pleasures in meat, drinke, mariage, festival dayes, and offer oblationes and sacrifices, Euseb. lib. 3. c.
25. Vpon
 this occasion the Apostle Iohn wrote the gospell againe, and more largely than any other of the Euangelistes speakes of Christs Godheid, his wonderfull workes, his kingdome, resurrection and his coming again, especiall that the Sone of man is now glorified c.
16.33. that he hes overcome the world c. 16.33. that his kingdome is not of this world, and if his kingdome wer of this world, his servantes wold feight that he should not be delivered unto the Iewes, but now is his kingdome not from hence c. 18.36: & of the cōdition of his subjectes he sayth, Remember the word that I sayd unto yow, the servant is not greater than the Lord: if they have persecuted mee, they will also per∣secute yow c. 15.20: Verely I say unto yow, Yee shall weep and lament, and the world shall rejoyce, and you shalbe sorowfull, but your sorowe shalbe turned into joy: these thinges have I spoken unto yow, that in mee yee micht have peace i he world yow shall have tribulation, but be of good cheer c. 16.20.33: And of his coming again he sayth, In my Fathers house ar many mansiones—if I goe and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto myself, that wer I am, there you may bee also c. 14,2: now you have sorowe, but I will see you again, and your heart shal rejoice, and your joy no man takes from you c. 16.22. All which wordes wer written flatly aganst the errores of Cerin∣thus, and teach us that Christs kingdome is not an earthly king∣dome, nor delayed for one or two 1000 yeeres, but now is his kingdome, now he hes overcome the world, his subjectes ar not to live on earth without persecution and sorow, and when he comes again, he will receive them with him into his Fathers mansiones, and their sorow shalbe turned into joy, that shal never be taken from them. After Cerinthus we read nixt of Papias, of whom Euseb. lib. cit. c. 39, writes thus; He reportes strange para∣bles of our Saviour, mixed with fabulous doctrine, wher he dreameth, that the kingdome of Christ shall corporally here on earth last the space of 1000 yeeres after the resurrection of the dead: which errour (as I suppose) grew heerof, in that he received not richtly the true and mystical meaning of the Apostles, nether deeply weyed the thinges delivered of them by familiar exem∣ples: for he wes a man of smal judgement, as by his bookes plainly appeares: yet heerby he gave unto diverse Ecclesiastical persones occasion of errour, who respected his antiquitie, namely unto
 Irenaens and others, if ther be any found lyk minded. Then lib. 7, c. 22 and 23, he writes of Nepos, Coracion and others in Egypt infected with this errour about the yeer 250: whom Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria did convince in a synode by Demonstra∣tiones and doctrine of the holy Scripture, and did reclame them from their errour. Thus he speakes ever of these opiniones as of erroures contrarie unto the holy Scriptures. After Lactantius (who lived about the yeer 320) this errour wes univer sally abhorred, so that Hierome on Esa. l. 18, & Augustin ad Quodvultd haeres. 8, write of it as a damned errour, & we read of few or none in this opinion till in this last age it comes apace with the Anabaptistes and some English Novatoures: few write aganst it, because the argumentes ar so sillie and ridiculous, that everie understanding persone reading them, findes not only the weaknesse of the groundes, but even out of them doe gather pregnant argumentes in the contrarie. Albeit these Authores doe aggrie in the time and place of this imagined Monarchie, yet they write one aganst another in many circumstances therof, as is marked heerafter. They speak not now of feastes and sacrifices, as Cerinthus did but if they will mantaine this opinion, I see not how they can e: ject them, seing the Prophetes speak als expressely of them, asof Christs kingdome, Jer.
33.17, Thus sayth the Lord, David shall never want a man to site upon the throne of the house of Israel, nether shall the priestes the Levives want a man before mee to offer burnt-offer∣inges, and to kindle meat-offringes, and to doe sacrifice continowally. See v. 21.22. Zech.
14.16.21. But that these and such other tex∣tes should be exponed spiritually, it is plaine by Mal. 1.11: wher incense and offeringes ar not restrained unto the Iewes at Ieru∣salem, but made commune unto the gentiles everie where: and more plainly in the New Testament. If the Millenaries will ex pone with us these textes of spiritual sacrifices, they can not shew any probable reasoun, why the prophecies concerning Christs kingdome should not lykwise be exponed spiritually. And Hie∣rome in Esa. 65, lib. 18 sayth, If we grant these wordes to be ex∣poned carnally, let them hear the lyk promises made unto Sodome as unto Ierusalem Ezek. 16.53.
When I shall bring again their capti∣vitie, the captivitie of Sodome and her doughters, and the captivitie of
 Samaria and her doughters, then shall I bring again the captivitie of thy captives in the midst of them—: when thy sister Sodome and her doughters shall returne—then thou and thy doughters shall returne. Wherfor (sayth Ierome) these houses
[mentioned Esa. 65.21] must be understood vertues, or the diverse mansiones beside the Fa∣ther—and of such houses our Saviour speakes Mat. 7.24, I will liken him to a wise man, who buildes his ho
n a rocke. And the Apostle sayth 2 Cor. 5.1, we have a building
 house not made with handes, eternal in the heavens. Because we
 heaven in such maner as it is, it pleaseth  our affectiones by similitudes of thinges
 teach us faith by sensible thinges: and therfor we  on these borrowed wordes, but know that the thing desc goes beyond the earthly similitude. I knowe, some Milleraries will take it hardly, that they ar called the off-spring of Cerinthus, seing they differ from him in sundrie particulares; and some say, It's no mater, who hes sayd it before, whither Cerinthus or Swenkfeld, if it be true. I answer, Scarcely any heretike did ever renew an old heresie in all the particulares; and neverthelesse it is truely called the same heresie: and we call them so, no more than they be such: And when any opinion hes no other father nor abetoures, but heretikes, it is odious. By this historical narration, Beloved in the Lord, you may see that this doctrine is no new licht reveled in this last age (as yow have heard some teach) but an old Jewish fancie and Cerinthian fable: old erroures ar lyke old whoores, that is, the more to be abhorred. What I have done here, is for your good, for 1 you have heard this errour preached in stead of the doctrine of Christ (albeit it wes first broached by the enemies of Christ) by some of the Authoures of the Apologe∣ticall narration for Independencie, who hade in their congrega∣tion not only Millenaries, but grosse Anabaptistes: and so their practise manifestly declares what they write obscurely in that Narration pag. 12, saying, Wee took measure of no mans holy∣nesse by his opinion, whither adverse unto us, &c. Towit, what∣soever Noveller is welcome unto them. Their Dinah is libertie-of-cōscience: their grand amunition is anarchie or no-discipline; and they call it a bondage to be tied in the faith. 2. the book of
 M. Maton called Israels redemption, hes been oft put into your handes, and upon several occasiones of my declaring the trueth in this point, you have been intreated to put that book into my hand: wherfor you had need of an antidote. Peruse this plaine refutation of it: wherby (I hope) you shall see, that the reward of your serving Christ is not meat that perishes, but everlafting lyf, which the Sone of man shall give unto you, Joh. 6.27, and that the kingdome of God comes not with observation [or wordly respect and attendance] but behold! the kingdome of God is within you, Luk. 17.20; and as the wicked can not have hope of long immunitie from just punishment of their bodies and soules in hell, so our deliverance from the bondage of cor∣ruption, into the glorious libertie of the childeren of God, shall not be long delayed. Walk you therfor in holynesse with since∣ritie and cheerfulnesse, as it becomes the heires of so great salvation, and give all diligence to make your calling and ele∣ction sure: for so an entrance shalbe ministred unto you aboun∣dantly, not into an earthly Monarchie, but the everlasting king∣dome of our Lord and Saviour IESUS CHRIST.
Auguste 1.
1644.
