



Madam,
COnfusion and Con∣troversy, the con∣sequence & com∣panion thereof, like two blacke clouds, cover the face and glory of this visible Crea∣tion.
The comfort and content, the heaven and happinesse of the creature, is overspread and hid
with the thick vailes and shadowes of death and darknesse.
What peace then, or prosperity is to be expected here,Ps. 119.96 Eccl. 1.2. Es. 23.9. in the midst of such perplexities? Vanity and mortality is written upon all sub∣lunary and earthly perfections, and will staine them. Increated light onely cannot be comprehen∣ded by darknesse. Joh. 1.5. Jesus Christ in the spirit was seene by those that were spirituall in the darkest times: We beheld his glo∣ry (when the Jews and others saw onely his shame and (assumed) basenesse) We saw it, as the glory of the onely begotten Son of the Father, v. 14.
But when men waite for (crea∣ted) light, behold obscurity: when they looke for the brightnesse (of the earthy and created state) they walke in darknesse.
The Sunne of this world goes downe into a night, yea, it sets at noon-day, and the earth is dark∣ned in the cleare day: Did not A∣dam dye when he was risen, and as∣cended to the Meridian of his crea∣ted
life? And did not, even then, the sable cloud of death oversha∣dow all the inhabitants of his Ioynes, and eclipse all that Beau∣ty, splendour, glory, excellency and perfection of his created state? You are therfore admonished from the Lord [the Glory of whose ma∣jesty when it ariseth, will terribly shake all earthly foundations, car∣nall confidence and fleshly Princi∣ples] to cease from man,Gen. 2.7. [from that man, that Adam] whose breath is in his nostrils, as one not to bee accounted of. What reckoning should you make of that dust of the ground, that earthly Adam who hath (only) breath breathed (but) into his nostrils? The earthy and fleshly Microcosme, or that little world, Man, with all that he hath, which is beneath heaven, which is not of an heavenly nature, shall be destroyed when the floud of the spirit is poured out upon all flesh, though it hath the breath of life in it, the life of the first Adam, as once the old world was by the de∣luge of waters. No man (no not
the first Adam) did ever ascend to an heavenly state: None but Jesus Christ the second Adam, this Son of man which came to earth from heaven,Io. 3.13. Eph. 1.3. & 2.6. and was in heaven upon earth; He, and He onely ascendeth to heaven, and raiseth up those that are in him to heavenly places, a condition, state, righteousnesse truly heavenly. Adam had his root and rise but in and from the earth; how then could his righteousnesse be heavenly or spirituall? as is the tree, such is the fruit: Men do not expect grapes from thornes, nor figs from thistles. I never heard of any tree so tall, whose root was in the ground, and the toppe touched the skyes. The Tower that was in∣tended to be carried to that height,Gen. 11. could never be finished: the work∣men were scattered before the worke was perfected. How vile and void of understanding is vain man, to thinke to escape the vengeance of heaven, the foundation of whose security is laid in earth?
And yet how are the childrens teeth of this generation set on edge
with the sowre grapes that their Fathers have eaten: bad presidents in the parents are of mischievous consequence to their posterity. A∣dam had but a terrene Paradise at best, yet by the fruit of knowledge therein he aspired to an equality with God: and how doe his chil∣dren still banker and long after that earthy excellency of his? How do they struggle and strive to creep up unto that terrestriall glory? How doe they hunger and thirst af∣ter that goodly appearance of his spiritual & heavenly know∣ledge, falsly so called, supposing it to be really and properly of a coe∣lestiall and divine perfection? This is the (earthy) Mountaine that the Fathers have worshipped in, and their children doe not yet know the way to Sion. Many there be that say, Wee will follow our Fathers; but few call to remembrance, how they have sinned with their Fathers.Ier. 44.17. Ps. 106.6.
The entrance, progresse and pat∣terne of confusion is laid downe, Gen. 11. and every generation of
Adam takes up an exact imitati∣on.
For when men take their jour∣ney from the East, when they for∣sake the spring of light, the mor∣ning of the day, the Day-star; that bright and Morning-star, Jesus Christ, the Sun of Righteousnes; when they depart from the fountaine of light, life and living waters, they digge and drinke at the broken Ci∣sternes of earth; they finde a little plaine, smooth, faire-promising plat of ground in the first Adam, and they dwell there; they take up their habitation in this Land of Shinar; Jerusalem, the Vision of peace, is built upon the High and Holy Hill of Sion, the Mountaine of the Lord; Babel, the confusion of the creature is founded in the plaine of Shinar;Shinar, what it meaneth. the low valley of the earthy Man. Shinar signifieth the watching of one asleepe, or the changing of a City. The farther men goe from the East, the more they leave Christ (who awa∣keneth the sleepy, and giveth life to the dead) the more dull and drowsie they become, they watch
and are awake no more then one that sleepeth; they may have wa∣king dreames of Adams rich, full and plentifull state, but when they shall awake in the spirit of Christ, it will be with them as with that hungry man, Es. 29.8. Or as with the Church of Laodicea.Rev. 3. Those that take sanctuary, and seeke refuge in Adam and his perfection, do change a new and heavenly City for an old and earthy one.
This City they build with brick made of the earth with hands, not of that linging stone cut out of the mountaine without hands: they lay the foundation of their Tower and City, upon Adams purity, in∣nocency, righteousnesse, they pitch themselves in Shinar, &c.
This building upon the man, A∣dam, alwaies hath beene, still is, and ever will be carried to a great height: some in every age of the world strive to make it reach to a spirituall and divine nature, but the top thereof never yet touched Heaven: God blasteth the building with confusion, and calleth the
worke Babel, before it can be finish∣ed;Mar. 12.10 Luk. 17, 25 and al1 because men will build with brick instead of stone; The Foundation and chiefe Corner stone is rejected of the builders: Je∣sus Christ in the spirit is sleighted, as a meere Europia, a world in the Moone, a Chymaera, a Castle in the aire, having existence onely in sup∣position, notion, and a deluded fancy. The language of men is confounded; one cals for Presby∣tery, and a multiplyed Episcopacy is brought up; one cryes out, Here is Christ; another, Loe there he is; every man seeks to set up his form, and would have a shrine made for his owne Diana. Tis just with God to bring those downe, and leave them below under fleshly formes, and visible, sensible appearances, who (like Peter) out of a drowsie and sleepy temper, cannot be con∣tented with Christ alone in the spirit, and that righteousnesse of God in him, but must have a Ta∣bernacle for Adam also when he apppeares (like Moses and Elias) in his glory.

I foresee the cavill and excepti∣on; some say and conclude, that I (and your Ladyship hath had your share with me in the censure) deny all set order and established forme of Church government. These may goe to the plow-man for their an∣swer and satisfaction: He will tell them that by the continuall moti∣on of his Cart and Plow wheeles, he hath his businesse done, whereas if they stood still, he could have no seed sowne, no crop reaped, nor a∣ny profit at all made of his land; yet in the revolution of the wheel, no spoke therein is alwayes fixed either upward or downward. In Ezekiels vision you have a wheele in a wheele,Ez. 1.16. an internall mystery in an externall appearance, forme or dispensation; the spirit of life within keeps this wheele in moti∣on: God will have his people make a progresse; He will carry them from dispensation to dispensation; from strength to strength, and ne∣ver let them stand still (in any forme) till they appeare in the perfection and beauty of the Spirit.

Madam, I know you are remo∣ving from Shinar to Sion; from Ba∣bylon the City of men, to Bethel the House of God. Let it not trouble you to see the confusions that are in the world, or in your owne heart, concerning the first Adam: there is good hope and great like∣lyhood that the building of the earthy state will be at a stand. You are a gainer by changing rotten rags for rich, righteous and royall robes; there can be no losse of mor∣tality being swallowed up of life. I have heard one (and it hath been mine owne case) miserably com∣plaining once of the confusions, di∣stractions and division of heart; in∣deed the Babylonish yoke and cap∣tivity is a sore bondage; fightings without, and feares within, trou∣bles on every side, will give the flesh no rest; such heavy and grie∣vous pressures will make sad and amaze a true Israelite, whose heart is upright before the Lord: Yet I told you (not long since) that John did grow and wax strong in spirit in the Wildernesse,John sig∣nifieth be∣loved.Luke 1.80. The
seed of Gods love may lye under the rough, un-even, earthy clods and thoughts of mans heart; but will at last breake through, and grow up above them; this seed thrives in the night (of insensible∣nesse and dis-apprehension of the flesh) as well as in the day (of sight, sense and feeling:) When man sleepeth, as well as when he awaketh; in winter as well as in summer; the day and the night are the Lords; he made summer and winter; the sharpe, cold and frosty winter nights of trouble and di∣squiet are for the chastening of the weeds of flesh, that the old and outward man may perish, but that the inward and hidden man of the heart may be renewed day by day.See 2 Cor. 4.26, &c. Divine favour is not of such shal∣low rooting as to dye and wither a way in the time of the creatures grudgings, murmurings and con∣fusions.
The Sun of Righteousesse is not turned into darknesse, but gives light, and shineth in its strength and glory to the coelestiall and spi∣rituall
part and principle, when by reason of a cloudy skye of fleshy frailties, it hath but a weak influ∣ence upon the terrene and sensible part of man. The way by which God will comfort his people throughly, is by consuming their supposed comforts, and withering their carnall confidence. See Es. 40.1, &c. to verse 11. God would have his people comforted, and the Voice was to cry, All flesh is grasse, &c.1 Cor. 11.7.Adam was as the greene grasse of the ground, and Eve was as the flower of the field, the glory of the earthy man: but neither the flow∣er, nor the grasse, could endure the scorching heate of the Serpents temptation.Ioh. 4. The earthy and crea∣ted excellency of the first Adam, is unto man as the Gourd was to Jo∣nas: It may cover his head in the night, and give him the shadow of rest and peace in his naturall con∣dition, and the time of his Igno∣rance; but when the Sun ariseth, when Jesus Christ the greater light breaketh forth to discover the darknesse of that light, it withers
away and shrinkes into nothing; this; like the Meteors and Glow∣worme, hath its sparke and splen∣dor from the earthy glory; it shines onely, and is seene in the dark state of the Creature: a worme at last, that deadly and never-dy∣ing worme will smite the root of it: Adams righteousnesse will not, it cannot succour the soule in the great and terrible day of the Lord.
Two great rocks lye hid in the deep heart and sea of mans nature, which make the voyage to heaven dangerous to the passengers; of which I would give your Ladyship warning before hand: earthy ex∣cellency is one, the other is fleshly Formes. The first derives its de∣scent from Adam, and therfore will claime precedency and primogeni∣ture; the second, though they come into the world to wait upon the sons and heires of God, during the time of their nonage and mi∣nority, yet would share and divide the inheritance with the children, when they are of full age; the ser∣vant would abide in the house
with the Sonne. The Church in her captivity complaines of two great evils, as the aggravation of her calamity,Law. 5.2.8.viz: Strangers posses∣sing her Inheritance, and Servants ruling over her. Among all the vanities which Solomon saw under the Sun,Eccl. 10.7. he took notice of Servants riding on horse-backe, and Princes walking like Servants upon the earth.
What a stage of Vanity is this world, where every Art and Sci∣ence is made up of madnesse and folly? Would you not take it as an affront to your selfe, and a dispa∣ragement to your friends, if a stranger, that lives upon the meere charitable benevolence of your Fa∣ther, should (by a base Parasiticall insinuation into your neare relati∣ons) bear more sway in the family then your selfe? If a proud, saucy, malupert Intruder should dip his hand in the dish before you,This you have seen, and had patience and borne it. and most uncivilly snatch the meate from you? Sleight, scorne and jeer you to your face at Table? Would it not trouble you and undervalue
your Fathers love, if you must make way to him by a base, beg∣garly, upstart fellow, who (like a Stage-player) hath but lately put off the rags of a slave, now appears in the habit of a Master? I came not (Madam) sneaking under your Fathers roofe, to sharke and slocke away your Treasure and Jewels, but to warne your Ladyship of those theeves and cheaters which lye in waite to steale and rob you of these heavenly treasures, Joy, peace, comfort, and a quiet spirit. Created excellencyes and glory, the the faire shewes and specious forms of the flesh, are but strangers and forraigners to the New Jerusalem a∣bove, servants onely in Jerusalem below; keepe your heart with all diligence, these else will slinke in∣to it, flatter your fancy, deceive your understanding, delude your judgement, worke upon your will, cheate your affections, and keepe under the High-born Heire of Hea∣ven Iesus Christ, the King of Righ∣teousnesse, and Prince of peace, shall be in low esteenie, it once these get
too much favour: This Prince must walke like a servant on earth; attend and waite upon the necessi∣ties, wants, faults, frailties, and serve the sinfull Righteousnesse of man so long,Splendida peccata. till he is wearied with his iniquities, Es. 43.24.
I doe not prostrate this small Present to your Ladyship for Pa∣tronage, but peruse all; and though it come to your hands without former acquaintance, yet (I be∣lieve) not without a candid accep∣tance. One part concernes you lit∣tle, by the other you may get some∣thing. I must not live long with you, This may be a Testimony of my respects when I am gone from you. I came not to you to make my abode with you, but to put you in remembrance of your departing from your selfe. Your owne selfe is the last Cottage you live in here, and that but a poore, mean, earthy one neither: When this is dissol∣ved, and, like a shepheards tent, re∣moved, your soule rakes possession of an heavenly Mansion. When Selfe is conquered, the Soule is
crownd: But this victory is not got not gained by might and power of fleshly force, but by the spirit of the living God; all the auxiliary ad∣ditions and contributions of the first and naturall Adam, will not helpe so much as hinder in this combate and conflict; no lesse then a coelestiall Army, a multitude of heavenly hosts can doe this worke. Not he that boweth downe upon his knees, that kneeleth upon the ground, that worshippeth in the earthy Adam, but he that keepeth on his legs, that standeth on his feet, he that standeth stedfast in the everlasting Gospell, Doctrine, Righteousnesse and faith of the Lord Iesus the heavenly Adam▪ not he that lyeth downe and takes his rest at the earthy springs and foun∣taines of fleshly, naturall, created perfection, excellency, joy, satis∣faction, &c. but he that onely lap∣peth and away): He hath that. Midia∣nisish man, that enemy Selfe, that carnall minde which is enmity a∣gainst God: He it is, I say,Canis ad Nilum. that hath all enemies delivered in to his hands, and subdued under his feet. And
yet how many forsake their feet, their wal∣king in Christ Jesus the Lord, and the faith of the Gospell; kneeling upon the ground of the earthy Adam, under pretence of de∣vorion and divine Worship to God. Gide∣ons souldiers were to be proved at the wa∣water, Iudg. 7.4, 5. And Israel provoked God at the waters, Psal 106.32. Your tri∣all also is like to be at the waters of the first Adam, out of whom all humane glory and perfection (as ail things at the begin∣ning were brought out of those waters, Gen. 1.2, &c.) is produced, formed, and (as it were) created. Though Christ (like Gide∣on) bring you to the perfection (and further then that) of the natural and created state, tis nor that you should lye downe and live in it, but rather lap at it & leave it. Cleanse not your soul with water only, but bathe it in that open Fountain of water and bloud, Zech. 13.1. 1 Io. 5.6. This (like the river Bre∣cos) will turn black into white,Es. 1.18. scarlet and crimson into the likenes of wool and snow: this is the Iordan in Israel,Joh. 9.7. where leprosyes are cleansed, the pool of Siloam (or sent, i.e, whither you are sent) that restores to spiri∣tuall sight from naturall blindnesse.Rev. 3.18.
The gold I present your Ladyship with may happily be soyld a little on the outside, by the earthen vessell it is brought in; an expe∣rimentall construction & a spirituall inter∣pretation will make it bright & glistering. I know no other treasure that will enrich your heart, nor is there any thing else worth your acceptance, frō the hand of him whose heart doth, & ever will exceedingly rejoice in the prosperity and stability of your foul.
