



DEarely beloved and longed for,Phil. 4. 1. Rom.
9.1. my joy and crown of rejoycing, I speake the truth, in Christ and lye not, , my conscience also bearing me witnesse, that my hearty desire for you all is, that you may be saved,Ch. 10. 1. Acts 20.20. and that to this end I have both publikely, and from house to house testified both to small and great, to all sorts of people repentance towards God, and faith towards our Lord Iesus Christ. How weighty a burden hath layen upon my Shoulders, and how long and with what cheerefulnesse I have borne it, is not unknown to you, neither doe I yet shrinke from it, or sinke under it. I have often said with S. Paul, you are in my heart to live and to dye with you
2 Cor. 7.3. Though (as the same Apostle in the same Epistle complaineth, 2 Cor. 12.15.) The more aboundantly I love you, the lesse I be loved of some among you: but I intend not to accuse my owne Nation, neither is it equall that J should charge the petulant miscarriages of a few prejudicate Spirits upon a whole parish, wherein I have found so much true hearted affection, so many reall and royall expressions of love, and wherein there are many (J speake it with comfort and thankefulnesse) that if it were possible, would even pluck out their owne eyes to doe me good, as S. Paul magnifieth the love of his
Galatians 4.15.
And now to testify unto the world that I am not in∣sensible of so great love, I have adventured to publish & to dedicate unto you these indigested meditations, pro∣vided
for you but elsewhere delivered, which (though rude and unpolished) I desire you to accept as a pledge of my thankfulnesse, and an earnest of farther inde∣vours, if I may be permitted.
I weigh not any mans censure, but rest satisfied in the sincerity of my own intentions: it is not applause that I aime at, I am no selfe-flatterer, no man can have a mea∣ner esteem of me or of my labours then I my selfe have, Apostolorum minimus (as S. Paul said) I am the least of the Apostles, nay  lesse then the least. Eph. 3.8. Yet am I not hereby discouraged from attempting to doe what good I can in that place and station which the great Shepheard and Bishop of our souls hath allot∣ted to me, and who knowes whether this Sermon (read of many) may not through the blessing of God rouze up some hard hearted sinner out of the sleepe of security, & cause him to bring a bucket of teares toward the quench∣ing of Gods wrath and fiery indignation that is kind∣led against our Hierusalem? this is my desire, my hope, wherein, if I shal faile of my expectation, I shall sit down and weep with my Saviour, that after so much planting and so much watering with the dew of Gods heavenly word, there followes so little watering with the teares of true repentance.
But I hope better things of you (dearely beloved) and things that accompany salvation: the Lord in mercy open all our eyes, that we may at length discern the mi∣series that hang over our heads by reason of our sins, that we may weepe night and day for the manifold pro∣vocations wherewith we have provoked him to anger: so prayeth.

