



GOd in his providence, and goodnesse, hath so ordered the holy Scriptures, so adapt∣ed them to all sorts and conditions of people, so fitted them for us, according to our several wits, our several capaci∣ties, and apprehensions, that every one (whosoever with due and requisite preparation addresses himselfe to the search of the same) may receive benefit by them. Here is strong meat for the best stomack, and milke for the tenderest babe; here are depths (ac∣cording to Gregories resemblance) where the Ele∣phant may swim, and shallowest foards where the lamb may wade, without danger of drowning,
here are some things closed, and sealed up, that a Daniel cannot understand, Dan. 12.8. some thing againe so obvious and manifest (like Habakkuks vision) that he that runnes may read. From this extent and fulnesse of the holy Scriptures, me thinks I hear resounding that of the Prophet Isaiah, Ho, every one that thirsteth, come to the waters. If God hath thus prepared them for the general good of all, thus furnished them to give satisfaction to all the thirsty desires of our soules: is it not equal that every one (without exception) should take notice of them? challenge his interest in them? improve them to the intended good of his soul? God brooks not our igno∣rance in them; if God have written unto Ephraim, the great things of the Law, and then (ungrateful fair such a favour) if he so neglect them that they be counted as strange things, Ephraim shall hear tell of it, God by way of complaint will charge it against him, as you see, Hosea 8.12. But now from the per∣fection of the holy Scriptures, you may easily dis∣cerne the imperfection of this ensuing Sermon; for although it be derived from the Scriptures, and for the substance and matter of it, be wholly terminated in the same; yet herein it degenerates, and becomes unlike them, in that it affoards no depths for Ele∣phants, nor strong meat for stronger Christians, no entertainment for men of higher endowments. As
Job brings in the creatures, returning their answers concerning the place of wisdome, The depth saith It is not in me; the sea saith, It is not in me, Job 28.14. so if you should enquire here for these arcane, hidden sublimities, into which Eagle-ey'd ingenuity especially delights to pry, this poore piece would an∣swer accordingly, that none of these mysterious sub∣tilties are found within the barren region of these in∣cult lines. And therefore not to prejudice sharper wits, more exercised in the things of God, but to leave them to the height of their wonted speculations, lest after they have read it over, they finde cause to complaine with him in the Comoedy; Pol ego ole∣um & operam perdidi, I have lost no lesse then my time, and labour about it. If it were in my power to make choice of my Readers; I would admit none but such as could dispense with that, which the A∣postle calls milk, wholesome, but common and ordi∣nary food, and that drest up after a plain countrey-fashion. As for your selfe (worthy Sir) to whom in the first place it stands directed, although there be no Adamant, nothing of worth in it, to attract your acceptance; yet I know you cannot, but affoard it a courteous entertainment, if in these respects you be pleased to reflect upon it; as first, how it was preached at the funeral of your dear mother, that honoured La∣dy, the Lady Anne Reade. Or secondly, how (ac∣cording
to your love to the Lord Jesus) it stands imprest with the image and superscription of Christ, bearing that name in chiefe which is (as Bernard exalts it) as honey in the mouth, musick in the ear, Jubilee in the heart, that name which is all fragrant, and odoriferous, as an oyntment poured forth, Cant. 1.1. that sole and only name, that imports salvatton, Acts 4.12. Or Lastly, (being a discourse of that happy life, we derive from our blessed Saviour) how it may fortifie and strengthen your hopes against that fear, wherein the hope of the wicked faileth, Prov. 11.7. even the fear of the King of feares, death. As for the publication of it, had not the im∣portunity of some (whose desires were equivalent to commands, whose requests brook no denial) over∣come mine aversenesse, I had never adventured to tender such a poor mite to the publike treasury, such worthlesse goats-haire to the service of the Taberna∣cle. For (according to the unexpected suddennesse of the occasion) as it was hastily formed, (not ha∣ving the happinesse of these , those second revising considerations (to which all things accurate and polite are beholden;) It was put off in an ordinary vulgar habite, without all requisite po∣lish that might make it fit for open view. But now sith it must abroad to visit the world, (and I cannot withhold it) not to dismisse it without a benediction,
let it go, and prosper; a little sparke blown up a∣midst drie fewel, such as is apt and fit for combustion, easily kindles, and breakes forth into a flame, so a weake word (if stirred up by his Spirit) of whom it was said, Did not our hearts burn within us, whilest he talked with us?) may warme affection, inflame zeal, effect something that is good in an ho∣nest heart. If therefore your selfe, your vertuous wife, your deserving sisters, Mistris Anne Ogle, Mistris Judith Robinson, Mistris Martha Empson, whom I ever honoured for their piety, and goodnesse, or any other of your faire flourishing family, who for the diseased Ladies sake, may peradventure be plea∣sed to take notice of it, or any other of Gods people, any where belonging to the household of God, may in the influence of it (the Spirit of God working by it) receive any furtherance in the wayes of God, and hereby gaine any nearer communion with the fountaine of life, our blessed Saviour; my desired end is accomplished. Thus with the tender of all unfeign∣ed respect (and herein I cannot but remember him as interessed in the same) whom mine obliged thoughts suffer not to forget, your dear Father in law, Sir Charles Crofts, mine honoured friend, together with the very good Lady, the Lady Crofts, his prudent, vertuous, and duly respected wife;) I shall ever pe∣tition the Father of mercies, that your Tabernacle
may be peacefull, your cup overflowing, your wayes prosperous, your children gracious, your dayes many, your death comfortable, your salvation sure, and that through him that loved us, and gave himselfe for us, Christ our Lord: To whom be glory for ever, Amen.

