



MADAM,
THe cause which hath induced me to consecrate upon the Altar of your exquisite me∣rits this little Of∣fering

(composed for the ruine of so manie Phleboto∣mists of our Age, who most commonly are the cause of the losse of so manie persons of all ages, qualities, & sexes, by reason of their undue Administra∣tion of this Chirur∣gicall Operation, viz. Phleboto∣mie)

is, the obser∣ving of so manie excellent and tru∣ly royal Vertues, shine and dart forth their splendor in you, which are more to be admired, than known; more to be known, then imita∣ted; and more to be imitated, then e∣qualized, And which have receiv∣ed

birth; and being from the exquisite perfections of your Divine wit, the Fame whereof, serves as a subject matter, for the most fine Wits to com∣mend; and for an example of well do∣ing, to the most magnanimous souls. Your fair actions, are as so many glit∣tering

Stars, which imbellish and illu∣strate the Heaven of our Fraunce. Fraunce, who may from hence-forth, glorie, for having bin delivered from the devouring Gorge of a storm of miseries, by the sage providence of a Queen; yea, the most wise of Queens

that ever governed it. A Queen, with how great honours loaded? with what respects honoured? with how manie Triumphs cloath∣ed? and with how manie Laurels a∣dorned? As manie humane mouthes, so manie Trophies to your Grandure; as manie hearts, so

manie Temples e∣rected to your Ver∣tue; as manie souls, so manie Vowes and sacrifices to be imo∣lated upon your Al∣tars. In brief, Your Vertues are such, that I shall not ad∣venture to handle, rashlie, the praises of them, because I cannot arive there∣to, but in admira∣tion,

nor recount them worthilie but in silence. This ayr is too clear for the flight of my dull Plume; wherefore by the example of the Swallows, which presage Rain, I will content my self to couch to the sur∣face of the Earth, to beseech You (Madam) on the

behalf of our Chi∣rurgerie, that you will be pleased to dart forth the Rays of your sweet fa∣vour upon this lit∣tle scantling of its Operations. For whatsoever appre∣hension I have had of the greatness of Your Merits, and the weakness of my judgement; it hath

not bin able to with∣hold me from offer∣ing it up unto You for a Testimonie, rather of my good will to the Pub∣lique, then for anie thing that is in it, vvorthie to see the Light under your Royal Authoritie, and Divine Great∣ness. If it have the favour to be vvell

accepted, I doubt not, but being pro∣tected by the Buck∣ler of Your Mi∣nerva, it vvill easi∣lie beat back all the assaults of envie, & be looked upon by all, vvith a favou∣rable Eye. And for my part, I shall therein take so great contentment, that my desires

shal be more strong∣lie redoubled to ap∣pear; and be ac∣knovvledged all the rest of my life,
MADAM,

