



MADAM,
GReat is my Confusion when I wou'd ap∣proach; an humble Awe checks my Ambition; and I am afraid to lay so mean

a Trifle at the Feet of Your Royal Highness. But as with Heaven, a devoted Heart at∣tones for a worthless Offering; so Most Excellent Princess, let the fervent Zeal, which in∣clines me towards your Ser∣vice, excuse this too too bold an Undertaking.
You are a Princess whose Presence creates an Universal Joy and Veneration in all your pleas'd Beholders. We view in your Majestick Lineaments, the August Air of Royal Ancestors: Whilst with this be∣coming Majesty, something so agreeably affable is join'd, that your humble Creatures find their Access both easy and de∣lightful:

And those who have the Honour and Happyness to attend your Royal Person, plain∣ly discover those Moral and Princely Virtues, refin'd with sincere Christian Piety, which Beautify and Reign in your Heroick Soul: and the unequal'd Character they give, raises the love of Virtue in the Breast of the most stupid.
'Tis said Example goes be∣fore Precept; and that of all Examples we are fondest of those our Princes set before us. How incorrigible then are these polluted Times, when You, Illustrious Madam, stand a Pattern most Excellently Glo∣rious?
The Prayers of all good Men daily importune Heaven on your behalf, nor are their Prayers in vain; nor do the bounteous Powers barely be∣hold such worth, without re∣ward; Blessings crowd around, and leave (I hope) no wish unsatisfied.
Blest in the Royal Partner of your Bed, that Great Good Man; words that but seldom truly join; Blest your Self, and blessing all, in that Lovely Blooming Prince, the Duke of Glocester; whose forward Youth Wings the breath of Fame; and were her Tongues innumerable, when she reports of him, some wonder must be

left untold. Joy of the Pre∣sent Age, and Darling hopes, on which the future one de∣pends. Oh may he Inherit the Extracted Virtues of all our Brittish Kings; the Courage of our Present Soveraign; but a Fortune peculiarly Great, pe∣culiarly his own; Conspicu∣ous, and far above whatever went before: that Succeeding Worlds, may to his Glorious Name, justly add the Epithet of Happy.
I ought now to say some∣thing, in reference to the fol∣lowing Sheets; but my ra∣vish'd Pen hath been enter∣tain'd upon so sublime a Theme, that it disdains to descend;

and my heart full of Rapture, that is, full of your Royal Hig∣ness, will only give me leave to endeavour the expressing, how much I am,
Madam,


