



Most Noble, and ho∣nourable Senators,
FOrasmuch as you were pleased, so to own mee, and this rude, & plain speech of mine, as to com∣mand me to the Pulpit, and or∣der it to the Presse.
I now humbly present it to you, with a small portall (or short Epi∣stle) for the Edifice, it self, (being so little, and built with so many unhewne stones,) deserves not a great Porch, or Gate before it.
That which I intended in this Discourse, and that which I do, (and shall) aime at and endea∣vour, in my whole Course, was, and is the Exaltation of Christ, and the humiliation, and aba∣sing of the Creature.
Christ was once humbled that wee might be exalted, and he is now exalted that wee might bee humbled. I may say without flat∣tery, that God hath honoured you much, and you have honoured him not a little: Yet observe that Ho∣nour is a fore-runner, either of the raising of Christ in mens hearts,Deut. 4.24 and esteem, or a signe of the utter ruining, breaking and sinking of them. The Lord is jealous for his owne, and zealous for his Sons glory;Esa. 9.7. and though he bee willing to impart his grace unto all,Esa. 42.8. yet his glory hee will not give to any other.

There bee two hard Lessons, which are as the Alpha and O∣mega, in Gods Book. The one is to deny our selves, and the o∣ther, to give glory to God: And hee is the compleatest Scholler in Christs Schoole, who is best vers'd in this divine learning.
Yee Worthy Rulers (of our Israel) Consider how God hath exalted You in the hearts of his People, over the heads of your Domestique Enemies, and in the eyes of your Foraigne foes. Now what doth the Lord require for all this from you againe? but that you walke humbly, and give his Highnesse his deserved, and due Glory.
Though Moses and Aaron, (two choyce Christians, and Cham∣pions) did lead and govern Isra∣el for a long time,Num. 20.12. (notwithstan∣ding many dangers and difficul∣ties)
yet they were at last shut out of Canaan, because they did not sanctifie God, at the waters of Meribah. Also Eli (who was forty years a Priest of the Lord) was taken away,1 Sam. 2.29. and his posterity cut off, because he honoured his sons above the Lord. Would you stand your selves, and keep the ho∣nour which God hath given you? and would you have your posteri∣ty to prosper, and to have a name in the world, when you are gone out of it? then make it your businesse to exalt Christ. Oh remember that God puls downe some,Ezek. 31.14. to the end that others might not ex∣alt themselves. The Lord of Hosts (saith Isaiah) hath purpo∣sed to stain the pride of all glo∣ry, and to bring into contempt all the honorable of the earth.Esa. 23.9. There is a day comming, when all flesh shall be humbled, and
the Lord alone exalted; & that day shal be upon every one that is proud and lofty,Esa. 2.11.12. and upon e∣very one that is lifted up, & he shal be brought low. Humble your selves therefore, and exalt, neither your hearts, nor your gates, Seek not great things for your selves,Jer. 45.5. and let there not bee a lye in your right hands,Esa. 44.20 Mal. 2.16. neither cover violence with a garment. Propound nothing to your selves to seek for, but the honour of Christ, and the Saints, and Nations inte∣rest, (wherein your interests and safeties are involved, and inclu∣ded.)Neh. 5.14.18. Imitate good Nehemiah, who did twelve years hard service freely. And that because the bon∣dage was heavy upon the peo∣ple. The Lord hath hitherto made you friends to the Saints, and Fa∣thers to the Nation. So that the former hath been countenanced,
and both preserved through Christ, by your means.
Likewise your zealous and glo∣rious Acts of Justice against sin, and your religious Acts of Grace (to the soules of men) in the propa∣gating and promoting the Gospel,Especially those of Wales. doe, and will remaine engraven, (not in Marble but) in the mindes of us and our posterity.
And for the making of your actions yet more incomparable, (if your more publique and weighty businesse permit) to set some time, and persons aside, to hear, and re∣lieve the private petitions, and grievances of the widdows, distres∣sed, imprisoned, oppressed, and those that have suffered for Christs cause and your:Job. 31.16 19. that you may be able to say with Job: That you have not withheld the poore from their desire, nor caused the eies of the Widdow to faile: nor
seene any perish for want of cloathing, nor any poor with∣out covering.
Another desirable thing is, that all the REMAINDERS of Pa∣ganisme, Popery and Supersti∣tion, may be taken away, and that the places formerly consecrated, by Bishops, and still adored by the ignorant and superstitious (who call the Churches, and houses of God) may be declared to have no inherent holinesse in them: Also that the heathen names of dayes, and months may be abolished, that so the people may learne to speake the language of the Scriptures, and not of Ashteroth: and that Jehovah & not Jupiter; Christ and not Saturn, may be named; and written by us who professe our selves to be among the best, and the resormedst of Christians.
And that you may (to use the
Apostles phrase) be perfect, and wanting nothing, to represent you excellent and eminent: Learne to say with Nehemiah, that though the former Governours were chargeable to the people:Neh. 5.15. and even their servants bare rule o∣ver them: Yet so did not I (wee) because of the fear of the Lord This shall bee the prayer of him (for you) who can say as Debo∣rah:Judg. 5.9. My heart is towards the Governours of Israel (England) that offered themselves wil∣lingly among the people, blesse the Lord.

