



My Lord, and you of the Councel,
I Am moved here, humbly to present you with one piece of the
Councel of God, which concerns the dispo∣sing of the external condition of his Saints, who of all people, are most near and dear to him: For they are his anointed ones, his first-born, his blessed seed in the midst of States and Kingdoms; what are Christians, but the parts and members of Christ? They are as the very apple of his eye, his Jewels, his
Prophets, and Royal Priesthood. And hath not Gods care and protection of his people, in all ages been most eminent, though few for number, though weak for power, and contemp∣tible for their outward state and condition? Yet by his omnipotency hath he preserved them in the midst of devouring Lyons. And hath not Gods proceedings with all States, Nations, and Kingdoms, with all Kings, Em∣perors, Rulers and Governors, been according to their dealing with his people and their Families: If they have dealt
gently with them, and have suffered them to dwell quietly amongst them, their Thrones have been e∣stablished in
mercy; but when they have dealt unkindly and rigidly with them, it hath been their ruine. It is not simply the having of
Gods Saints, nor the multitude of them, nor the
best of them amongst you; but it is your using of them
kindly, and your countenancing of them, which is your best and most considerable interest: Even as it is the greatest danger to Rulers, and to the interest of Government, to deal cruelly and unjustly with them; who being as the salt of the earth, keep it from corruption and ruine. Now this truth you shall find clearly held forth throughout the whole Scripture, that as States and Kingdoms have prospered by their care and protection of the Saints, so have they been broken in pieces through their cruel dealings with them. Remember the four Kings over∣thrown by Abraham, remember Edom and Tyre, with the Assirian, Grecian, Persian, and Roman Empires; was it not for their Tyrannies, cruelties, op∣pressions, persecutions, and for their rigid and cruelly severe usage of Gods Saints, that they were destryed? I beseech you consider what a great body of
Saints is committed to your care in this Nation; by these I mean not one party of men, for I could not express the
title of Saints to any one Sect or Society of men, but apply it to all that are called, chosen, and faithfull, who shew their interest in Christs death and resurrection, by their conformity to his pattern and example; these are your
richest trea∣sure, and your highest interest. If then the Saints of England are the best strength and interest of
England, O then maintain, defend, and pre∣serve this
interest, by cherishing and countenancing of them, by suffer∣ing them in their various waies and appearances, freely and comfortably to serve and enjoy God.
Be like Cyrus, Gods anointed Chirub, stretching your wings of tender∣ness and protection over all good people, that none may have cause to com∣plain, or mourn through
oppression.
 Consider that it is the will of God that the Saints should live a godly and a peaceable life under
Magistrates. This they are to pray for, and this is their due, according to the Law of God, and the light of nature; the first of which commands us to love our neighbours as our selves; the second, to do to others, what we would have done to us again. In what these two meet, they make up but one Law, which is the will of God; which ought to be the only rule, both of your publick and privat actions▪ for in the performing of this only, you will find the true peace and tran∣quility of spirit.
For a Christians will is perfected no where but in the will of God; and nothing creates perplexity and disquietness of spirit, but the contrariety of motion betwixt the will of God and the will of man: For when mans will runs cross to Gods will, he fights against his Maker, and brings trou∣ble, guilt and misery upon himself.
How cautious then ought you (especially who sit in the
high places of Government) to be in the creating and making of Laws, which are of publick influence and concernment, lest you publickly oppose the will and inte∣rest of God, especially in reference to the freedom and just liberty of the Saints, which is a thing of very great moment, and that which is tender∣ly eyed by our most wise God.
Now these things I have been pressed in my spirit to present to your Highness and your Councel, first, in regard there have been, and still are so many parties on foot, who designe and carry on their own particular interests; some of which make it their work to insinuate and creep into the favour of the
Highest Powers, to draw them to countenance their particular interests, and discountenance others whom they have an
anti∣pathy against, though it may be, far more innocent and
righteous then them∣selves; and really, to give such men much power and liberty, who are so much confined to people of their own
stamp and model, and so ready to entrench upon the just freedom and liberty of others, is neither safe nor reasonable.
2. In that you have made an Ordinance for the
Ejecting of Scandalous and Ignorant Ministers, which by the abuse of it, hath been, and still is made an
Engine of persecution, to condemn Saints, and throw them out of their Estates and livelihoods; and really I cannot see what else was like to come of it; it being intrusted into the hands of many fierce, rigid, narrow spirited men, who have in some things a kind of unlimited arbi∣trary power; as in their Judgement of Ignorance and Insufficiency, and this without any Appeal for the redress of those who may be unjustly condemned and ejected by them. Now what sad inconveniences may yet flow from this Ordinance thus
established is apparent, by considering the rigid temper of those Commissioners who are most active, and the late
prastices of some of them, against those who in spiritual
knowledg, and a holy conversation, are beyond themselves. And in truth you will find by experience, that the
Commissioners, who are most active, will, as they now do, and have done already, I say will turn the edge of their power a∣gainst those that enjoy any glorious discoveries of
God, above and beyond their systemes and forms of
Doctrine, and judge those Scandalous and Ig∣norant, that differ from them in judgement, though they be of ever so ho∣ly a
conversation. And thus many pretious Saints will lie under the mi∣sery
 of Ejectment, pretended scandal and ignoaance, because they see not by the same
measure of light, nor believe in one proportion of faith, nor give such interpretations and glosses of Scripture as suit to their darkness: And thus the civil power received from
God for the punishment of evil doers, is, and will be used against the more spiritual administrations of God, and the all-glorious Spirit of Revelation, pure Wisdom, and
Pro∣phecy must be made subject to the Laws, Ordinances, Forms, Measures, and Wils of men: And is not this to limit the holy one of Israel? And will not the establishment of such Laws, left to the arbitrary use of such Judges, without any
further appeal, destroy that due Libeity, both
civil and spiritual, which is the best Interest of States and Nations? How much then doth it concern you, who are entrusted with the Government of this Nation, seriously and speedily to reflect upon, and consider the Ordi∣nance, and those in whose hand it is put, being it hath been, is, and is like further to be made use of against the Saints of the most high; I say, how much doth it concern you, by reflecting upon these things, to make some speedy redress, either by limiting the arbitrary Power of the Commissio∣ners, and granting an Appeal, or
breaking and nulling the Ordinance. And that there is great reason for the speedy performance of some such thing, will appear by looking into the subsequent Relation of my
Tryal, in which you may see envy and subtilty meeting in my accusations, partiality and prejudice appearing in managing the Examinations, with injustice and
cru∣elty concurring in sentence and condemnation. And I really believe, had you seen this true Narration of my Case, before I had appealed for a re-hearing, it would have been so different from these false and abusive in∣sinuations of my
enemies (by which they have subtilly endeavoured to prejudice you, and all others against me) and so much tending to clear my innocency, that certainly you would have favoured a righteous Cause and me so much, as to have granted are-hearing. But my addresses have yet been frustrate, and my Petition rejected; but upon what grounds, is best known to your consciences. I must here therefore take the
boldness (be∣ing pressed in my spirit, by reflecting upon the
cause of God, the just inte∣rests of many
Saints, and your own good) to put you in mind of those so∣lemn
protestations and engagements, made before this present
Govern∣ment, and of that solemn and publick Oath, taken at the beginning of this Government, to see Law and Iustice equally administred, and the Saints due Interests and
Liberty preserved, and of some passages in your High∣nesses late Speech, viz.
That you desired not to keep the Government any longer then you may preserve England in its just Rights, and may protect the people of God in a just Liberty of their consciences. And that
p. 20, 21. it is your glory that you know a cause, which yet you have not lost, but do hope you shall take a little pleasure rather to lose your life, then lose; which Cause your Highness had before expressed, to be the interest of those who have an interest in a better world, and their liberty to wor∣ship with the freedome of their consciences, and freedome in their Estates and persons. Now these Engagements, Pro∣testations, and Declarations, are
eminently good and righteous, and worthy to be
recorded in Characters of Gold, to be seriously
reviewed by you, and I hope may prove instrumental to stirr you up to the taking of some course (in reference to the Ordinance for
Ejecting of Ministers;
 made by you) which may be suitable to, and
correspond with all these open protestations, and solemn ingagements. For, whether the leaving it, as now it is established without any appeal, though in point of the greatest
injury; I say, whether the leaving of it so, be not contrary to the former protestations, I appeal to your own
consciences. For when subor∣dinate Governors shal turn the edge of it against the meek lambs of Christs Fold, who walk faithfully before God, and righteously toward their neigh∣bour, and make use of it to ruine them and their Families against the
Law of this Nation, the rule of equity, and the just
liberty of mens con∣sciences and persons: I say, when these things are so, and yet no Appeal admitted by the higher Powers for redress, 'tis clear that Iustice is not
e∣qually administred, and neither the Spiritual nor
Civil right of Christi∣ans preserved. And truely if this should continue, some of the dear Saints of God would find their conditions more sad (as to this particular) then it was in the time of the
Bishops Persecutions, when there were Courts of Appeal for those that were oppressed and injured, and would be driven as in
those times
His High∣ness Speech, p. 18. to seek their bread from strangers, and live in
howling Wildernesses, and be otherwise abused and made the
scorn of the Nation. And truely there be some already, who are of sound Principles, and an un∣blameable conversation, that are persecuted as Blasphemers, and evil doers, and so oppressed by those, who in the Bishops times cryed out for
Liberty, as then oppressed themselves: The baseness and evil of which practice, your Highnese condemns in your late
p. 18. Speech. Except then, that you and your Councel either break the power of those fierce men, or grant an Appeal to some of more large and tender spirits, all the evils and hainous sins, which cannot but be committed in the persecuting, condemn∣ing, and
ejecting some of Gods precious Saints, must
unavoidably revolve and bring guilt upon you all, because they act from your power, and may be strained when you
please. But whatever you shall hereafter act in refe∣rence to this (though many cannot but expect either the nulling or
limit∣ing the Ordinance by an Appeal) I have discharged my conscience in pre∣senting these things to be considered of in reference to your own happi∣ness, and the
good of others, who may (by sufferings) be concerned in it, as also performed my duty, (as to my own Case) in appealing to you, and presenting my grievance, in expectation of redress; but whether the pre∣sent necessity and justness of my cause, did not call for more then a reje∣ction of my due request, let all sober Christians and your own consciences judge. And I pray God this
denial be not laid to your charge in the day of visitation. And if you yet persist in the resolutions of granting me no Appeal, and giving me wholly up to the oppression and
cruelty of my ene∣mies, I shall appeal to the great
Iudge of men and Angels, resigning my self and
Family into his hand, who (I hope) will deal more mercifully with you in the time of his Iudgement, then you have yet with me and mine in the time of our distress: Which is the cordial and sincere desire of,

