


Right Honourable, and Right Worshipfull,
IN this plaine Sermon (Preached, and published by your Call, and Com∣mand;) You have presented unto you the two principallest points in all the Scripture, viz. The glorifying of God, and the perfecting and finishing of that great, and ever-admired worke of mens Redemption, and Salvation by Iesus Christ.
In the former of these two, (to wit, in glorifying God) you are to strive to be followers of your Soveraign, and Sa∣viour: And in the latter; you are to stoope and submit
to his Majestie and Excellency,2 Pet 1.16. Isa. 35.2. and to be humble Seekers, that you may be happy sharers of this preci∣ous price, and purchase. Hee that was a Soune, became a Servant, and hee that was equall with the highest, became inferiour to the lowest,Phil. 2.6, 7, 8. that GOD might be ex∣alted, and lost, undone men, redeemed, and saved. The great businesse acted by CHRIST in time here below, was contrived,Zach. 6.13. & 9.11. and agreed upon (betweene GOD and CHRIST) before time in Heaven above. If you would see all in one, and one in all, then cast your eyes upon Christ,Col. 3.11. Col. 1.19. Ephes. 1.10. Col. 2.3. who is all in all, in whom dwel∣leth all the fulnesse of the God-head bodily. What can you thinke on, speake of, delight in, or desire to have, but you may finde them in Iesus Christ. If you would know God, as a reconciled God, and as a Fa∣ther, you may know him, and must know him, (for there is no other meanes but in & through Iesus Christ. If you would goe to GOD, or have GOD come to you, there is no other way but by him. He is that Ladder that Iacob saw,Gen. 28.12. with Joh. 1.51. which reached from Earth to Heaven, upon which the Angels of God ascended and descended. If you would climbe up this Ladder, then must you begin in the lowest steps and staves thereof, even in the suffe∣rings of this sweete Saviour. Christ crucified is the first lesson you must learne,1 Co. 2.2. and that being well learned, it leades by the hand to all the rest. To see your sinnes laid on Christ, and your selves virtually in Christ, when he suffered, (as you were in Adam when hee sinned) is the first sanctified, (and soule-satisfying) light.
Nothing humbles, nor melts the heart more, then to see the bloudy wounds of this loving Lord: if then you would be pe∣nitent, oure,Phil. 3.10. self-denying, & weaned from the world, get a sight of Christ upon the crosse, and a feeling of that
fellowship betweene his person, and your persons in his death. Meditation upon the intent of Christ in dying, faith to believe the extent of of his death to you, and a fee∣ling of the efficacy of his death in you, will raise up your hearts to a high measure of admiration, estimation, and affection of him, and to him. After you have knowne the death of Christ, and the benefits thereby (viz. the put∣ting avvay of your sins,Heb. 9.25. Ephes. 2.14. First labour to be Gods sons, and then his publique ser¦vauts, as Christ was. making peace betvveen God & your persons; & making sure your salvation) Then consider, and study the goodnes of his nature, the goodlinesse his person, the greatnesse of his love, the freenesse and ri∣ches of his grace, the sweetnesse and preciousnesse of his promises, the beauty and comelinesse of his Church, and people, and the transcendency and eternity of his glory.
The best, next, and surest way to become sound and true Christians, is to know that Christ hath done all for you,Isa. 26.12. Phil. 2.12, 13. and without you, and that he must doe all in you, and by you. And being true Christians, (which is the wel-being of men) to live on him, and walke to him, who hath given you the name, and the nature, which makes you to be so ac∣counted. And seeing God hath honoured, & glorified his Sonne, after hee had finished his worke, let that encourage you (Honourable Senatours) to goe on in the work that God hath called you too: Christ hath done, and suffered much for you, Oh be you willing to do, and to suffer for him also. Doubtlesse if you own his cause & crosse & choose his will, and doe his work, as he hath put chains of gold about your necks here, so he will put crowns of gold upon your heads hereafter.Luk. 16.2, 3, 4. Remember you are Stewards entru∣sted with your Masters treasure, and must give an account you know not how soone, be sure therefore you lay out all for your Lords glory, and the good of his Family. Per∣severe in the way you have begun, and prosecute the good
worke you have entred upon (especially your late & excellent Petition.) Stand far, (and strive together) to obtaine the pure Gospel, to guide mens souls in spirituall things, and plaine Laws to direct men in civill things. Be for Christ resolutely, and for true Christians really: execute justice impartially, regard, and relieve the oppressed and needy speedily,Neh. 6.3. and say as Nehemiah said, I am doing a great worke, why should the worke cease whilst I leave it? Doe not take off your hand from the Lords plough this yeare, for this may be the year of visitation, and the next of jubilee. The greatest honour is like to be lost or got this yeare: the Lord be honoured by you, and honour you in himselfe. Which is, and shall be the prayers of him that craves your pardon for his boldnese, rudenesse of speech, and for adding one use, which time prevented me then, to deliver.

