



My Lord,
I Humbly beg leave to use your ho∣nourable name in the dedication of this Book, thereby to present the expression of a thankful Soul, to my deceased Patron, your most Honourable, and prudent Father; who even from my Childhood continued his ma∣nifold favours to me, and ceased not untill he had planted me in an imployment and probable sub∣sistence in the Church; where I continued peace∣ably during his life, and untill the pressures of these unhappy Times dislocated not onely me, (though too low God wot, to be an object of pub∣lick wrath) but also the strongest bones, and principal joynts and nerves of our once most re∣nowned Church.
To his memory do I owe the first fruits of my publick Labours; nor can I offer them at any other shrine so proper as your self, my Lord, who are his living Image, whose Name and Title you worthily bear, whose Honour is revived in you, and the pious and thankful memory of him, du∣ring my life will not be obliterated in me; seeing the very Heathens fansied their Sen. de Be∣nef. l. . c. 3. Charites (which were but the Emblems of gratitude) to be Virgins, and alwayes Young, to teach us, that thankfulnesse should not be Corrupted, or decayed by time and age; and their great Orator although he was one of the most deadly enemies of Caesar, who had been newly murthered in the very Senate-house, yet he confessed that he could not find fault with the faithfulnesse of Cic. lib. 11. Epist. 240. Matius, for honouring him that was dead, who whilest he lived had been his Friend and Patron. The Church hath tght us further, that death it self doth not dissolve Christians Communion, Hier. in Proaem. l. 18. in Esa. Vi∣ventium, & Dormientium eadem Charitas est: & Aug. de Ci∣vit. l. 20. c. 9. Animae piorum mortuorum non seperan∣tur ab Ecclesia hâc. The Church Triumphant and Militant are but one Church, and therefore did the Primitive Christians honourably by name Commemorate their pious, and worthy Be∣nefactors at the very time of their Sacred Eu∣charist, although they were long before departed out of this life. So seeing I have not any other meanes to commemorate my deceased Lord, I have ma  if this, to professe hereby, Mihi erit nomen  benedictionibus; but to you, my Lord, do I present the Book, because possibly it may do some good to the Living.
For, the subject and matter here handled, is the most noble and high cause in the World, and the most neerly concerning the glory of God, and the salvation of man; to which I was drawn by the importunity of some Learned, and Religious friends; and also by the iniquity of a most blas∣phemous Book lately Printed, and called, A Com∣mentary on the Hebrewes, written by a name∣lesse Doctor of Divinity, who new resideth in this Countrey, but formerly in Broad-gate Hall, (so it was then called) wherein he hath vented such blasphemies against Jesus Christ, as (with∣out special revocation and repentance) will in the end bring both himself, and all his seduced Secta∣ries to that wofull Broad-gate of which mention is made, Matth. 7. 13. Lata est porta—quae ducit ad perditionem.
The Controversies are not concerning the mighty and glorious reformrtion of a square-cap, a Surplisse and Crosse, and a painted glasse-win∣dow, or the like, (which have been an out-side pretendment amongst Vulgars, to bring upon this Land innumerable Calamities): But that Com∣mentary hath laid the axe to the root and foun∣dation of our Christian Religion, by un-Godding Jesus Christ, and blasphemously denying his grand, and most gracious Work of Redemption; and it is feared, that the pernicious doctrines therein contained, have many abetters and favou∣rers in these dangerous Times; albeit this Commenter is the first of all the Serpents nest, that dared to peep out and appear in our English print, who both by this Book, and by his personal insinuations, hath already (as we know) perverted

many from the saving truth of the Gospel, to the evident danger both of theirs, and of his own soul; and his ipious ambition to be the Ring∣leader in this blasphemy, hath in this Countrey procured to him such a Title and Character as was fastned on Marcion the Heretick by Poly∣carpus, when he called him Euseb. hist.  4. c. 14. Primogenitum Sa∣tanae.
Wherefore, setting before me the honour of Jesus Christ, and the service which I owe to the Church, and to my Countrey, and also the care which a Father ought to have of the soules of his Children; I have endeavoured both to detect the blasphemies of this Commentary; and also to set down (with all such possible plainnesse as so weighty a cause would admit), the evidences of our most necessary and precious Christian faith in the Eternal Son of God; both by shewing his Divine nature, and glorious Godhead, who is our True, Onely, Supream, and Eternal Jehova, and also the Incarnation of this our God, by assu∣ming an humane body and soul, and thereby the inestimable benefits which our Redeemer, and Saviour hath acquired for us. First, in exempt∣ing his servants from eternal death by his obe∣dience Passive, in suffering death in our stead; and, Secondly, by meriting eternal life for us by his Obedience Active, in performing the whole Law of God as a Surety, and Undertaker for us.
These things have I endeavoured to set forth, not onely by the sacred evidences of the holy Scriptures, and by the constant doctrine of the Church-Catholick in several ages thereof; but

also by humane illustrations, and the probable correspondence of our Christian faith, with right reason; Which thing hath been formerly much wished, and thereupon laudably begun in some of the high mysteries of our Religion long ago by a Writer of good antiquity, to supply the defect thereof in the elder Writers; whereof he saith, Rich. de St. Vict. de Trin. l. 1. c. 5. Legi de Deo meo, quòd sit Unus, & Trinus,—sed undè haec probentur, me legisse non memini—Abundant in his authoritates, sed non aequè argumentationes; (i.) We read the high and holy Mysteries of Christian Reli∣gion evidently, and abundantly affirmed by authority of Scripture; but where to read the proof thereof by humane arguments to con∣vince our Carnal reason, we find not.
This task I have taken upon me now especial∣ly in these dangerous Times, for that the aboun∣ding of moral iniquity, and dogmatical impie∣ty, maketh me fear that Christianity is upon the point of departure from our dear Countrey, as it hath done formerly from most places both in Asia, and Africa, and also from some parts of our Europe, where it once flourished as high as ever it did here: I see false prophets multiply with great applause, and that the greatest number of the true, godly and learned Prophets are disgra∣ced, discountenanced, silenced, and left speech∣lesse; and in their places, God knowes, (for which this Kingdome generally groaneth) a new Succession is sprung up, like Darknesse succeed∣ing light; Which by an Ancient and Wise States-man was observed to be a forerunner and symptom of a Lands destruction,

Naevius apud Cicer. de Se∣nect. Cedo quî vestram Rempub. tantam amisistis tam cito?
Proveniebant Oratores Novi, Stulti, Adole∣scentuli.
For the like pressures which we now suffer extorted such a sad expression from the holy and learned Bishop Gregory Nazianzen, when by reason of the insolencies of the domineering Secta∣ries, he was fain to resign his Church of Con∣stantinople, saying in a publick Oration, Naz. Orat. 46. ad Nect. Deus Ecclesias, & vitam hanc deseruisse videtur. He feared, that God had withdrawn his providence from that Church and State. Indeed God did in after-time remove the golden Candlestick from thence, when he suffered the Turks to possesse that City. God in mercy with-hold the like Judgment from this Land, both in our dayes, and for ever after us. But yet when for the present we see so many most impious blasphemies not onely printed, and published, but also in shew licensed and connived at, and that in so many Congrega∣tions unlearned intruders are crept in, and take upon them to teach others, what themselves never learned, it seems to me a visible representation of our Saviours words, foreshewing a fall: For ifMatth. 15. 14. the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch: at least it seemeth to be like that which we have often seen, a poor blind man led by a dog.
Certainly these things must needs make godly Parents very anxious, how their posterity can be instructed in the succeeding generation. I have heard a most learned and prudent Gentleman in

these Times professe, That (for the reason before alledged) he would be careful to provide some printed Books of the true old Clergy of England, that in them the necessary doctrines of Christia∣nity might be had, when such will not be found in the new verbal time-serving, and men-pleasing Sermon-makers. This I confesse hath been a great motive to me for the penning and publish∣ing this Book, that so I may in some measure lay up both an antidote, and also a store for the good of the soules of mine own family, and of others also. Which consideration, my Lord, I am firmly perswaded is deeply printed in your honourable and pious heart, as being tenderly affected to your own noble off-spring, the surviving Jewels of your most vertuous and dear Lady, already with God. Which care is imposed upon Pa∣rents, by the intimation of God himself to Abra∣ham the great Patriarch of the faithful, Gen. 18. 19. For I know him, that he will command his children, and his houshold after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord. This, that your posterity may perform, the Lord grant▪ It shall be the hearty prayer of

Norw. March 21. 1647.
