



Gualter Postlethwaite wisheth grace, mercy and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord JESUS CHRIST.
Brethren and beloved,
SOme thoughts have of late (more then formerly, and more sadly (visited my heart, that I wish may prevaile more upon your hearts. First, the thought of the greatness, the soveraignty and sove∣raigne

perfection of God: the foo∣lishness of God is wiser then men, and the weakness of God is stronger then men. He is the onely Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords, and that in the most undoubted right, that has made all things of nothing, by the word of his mouth, for himself. Vaine man would be wise, al∣though he be borne like the wild asses colt; he will provoke God to anger, transgresse his Laws, change his ordinances, and breake the everlasting Co∣venant. But who is this that darkens counsel by words with∣out knowledge? shall he that contendeth with the Almigh∣ty instruct him? He that repro∣veth God, let him answer it. Do we provoke the Lord to anger? are we stronger then he? Adde not unto his words, lest he re∣prove thee, and thou be found a

lyar. The world, yea, the hight of the people do languish, because the earth is defilled by deniati∣ons from the laws, ordinances, and Covenants of God: 'Tis mans deformitie, to walke ac∣cording to his own invention in any thing, & will prove his own destruction. Can God endure to be prescribed by creatures? Shall Man coin Laws for Rules of acceptable walking with God in Spiritual, Civil, or Ec∣clesiastical things? It would be and is horrible impudence for any to do it. All the sin and misery in the world, brake in at this door, viz. by hearkning to Reason▪ against Institution. 'Twas Israel's sin, to do that was right in their own eyes, in Civils, Judg. 17. 6. much more in Ecclesiasticals. The Apostle held a war with reasonings and thoughts of men, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5.

These are no competent judges of the doctrine of God in Christ, but must be overthrown.
Secondly, the thought of the fatal miscarriages of man mana∣ging any thing by his own wisdom and strength. Eve became the mother of mischief to all living, by trusting to carnal Sense and Reason in judging of the tree of knowledge of good and evil. The sons of God brought the Deluge on the old world, by taking such wives as they chose. Israel provoked God to anger with their own Inventions, not onely in point of Worship, but in the matters of their Com∣monwealth, when they follow∣ed their own fancies, and the Customs of men; but in deter∣mining what kinde of Govern∣ment to set up in the Nation; and were convinced of their mistake by a signe from heaven,

God thundering his displeasure against them from heaven, and raining tokens of his wrath up∣on them: and the tyranny that followed was as teaching of the same, God giving them such re∣compence of their error as was meet. Gedeon would have a new way of remembering the victory by a costly Ephod, and Israel went a whoring after it; which thing became a snare to Gedeon, and to his house. Alas! 't is but a shew of wisdom, that is in Will-worship, Col. 2. 23. and by this means men are be∣guiled of their reward, vers. 18. and righteousness exalts a nation, but sin is a reproach to any people, Prov. 14. 34. We think by our own inventions to get us glory among the Nations, whilst we conform our selves to the worldly glory of their govern∣ment: but our way were to keep

to Gods statutes and judgments, without adding or diminishing; then the Nations would say, Surely this great nation is a wise and understanding people: Deut. 4. 6.
Thirdly, the thought of the per∣fection of the Scriptures: They are able to make us wise unto salva∣tion, 2 Tim. 3: 15. to teach us how to behave our selves in the Church, 1 Tim. 3. 15. how to behave our selves in the Com∣monwealth: David teaches the Church to pray, Give the King thy judgements, and thy righteous∣ness unto the Kings Son, Psal. 72. 1. The Scriptures are able to make the man of God perfect, throughly furnished to all good works, 2 Tim. 3. 16.
Therefore, my beloved bre∣thren, accept no Law-giver but Jesus Christ, neither in Church nor Commonwealth. Let this be your profession: The Lord is our

Judge, the Lord is our Law-giver, he is our King. And though o∣ther Lords besides him rule over us, let us b him onely make men∣tion of his Name, that will in due time save us from devilish government in the Church, when he shall give the body of the Beast to the burning flame, and cast the Beast and false Pro∣phet into the lake of fire that burns with brimstone; and from all worldly government in Commonweals, when the Stone cut out of the mountain shall smite on the toes of the Image: Then not onely the Clay, but the Iron, and the Brass, and the Silver, & the Gold-government shall be broken to pieces, and be carried away like dust by the wind, and no more place shall be found for them; no, not for the goodliest Government that e∣ver was invented by the wit of

man. And till that time, change of Governments will be the disease of the world, whilst Crowns and Diadems are trans∣posed from one Man, and from one People to another. I must say it, although I delight in it (considered in it self) as little as others that complain of the great cry of Overturnings, wherewith the world is now Alarm'd. There will be over∣turnings, till he come whose right it is. Oh the stupidity of men! that apprehend not Gods displeasure against the Govern∣ments of this world, by the often changes that are made: 'Tis to be feared that this is Ju∣diciary, that God may leave Europe, and the wise Nations thereof, unto themselves, to walk in their own counsels, be∣cause they trust in, and leave no∣thing of their own doings, nor

of their stubborn way, whilst, he passes over to America, and thence to the East-Indies, to set up the government of Jesus Christ amongst the Barbarous Nations. The Lords word, brethren, is to me, to you, Love the Truth, and Peace: Let us not, of a fond affection to Peace and Ease, lose Truth; yet in our striving for Truth, let us strive lawfully, or else we shall not be crowned: Wherein I would have every one be wary, not with a carnal, but spiritual wa∣riness; walk in your Warfare by a divine Rule, act from a di∣vine Spirit, keep to a divine Frame of Spirit, and stand eve∣ry one in his place, striving for Truth.
I hope, in what I have done in this following Treatise, I have not exceeded. As one of

the Lords Watchmen, I must warn men. I hope I have spo∣ken from the Spirit of God; I am sure 't is after many prayers and tears; and so long I have delayed, till Conscience made me speak, and the guilt of my delay began to stare in my face; and I think I speak not beside the cause: that was the Disci∣ples fault, that they spake beside the cause; and from this, Christ argues the carnalness of their spirit, that would have fire come down from heaven on the Sa∣maritanes, Luke 9. 54, 55, 56. Is it not the time of Antichrists war, whilst Christ is consuming him with the breath of his mouth? If any, judging of my frame of spirit by my phrase, think me too bitter, let them but take this along with them, That I speak not of persons, but things, that can't be too ill spo∣ken

of, when vicious, and con∣trary to the Word of God. And for the text I have for what I say, if I abused it, I shall be glad the righteous should smite me for it. Read, and judge; and as you see cause, correct my mistakes. My time cuts my E∣pistle to you, shorter then I in∣tended. I beg this, That as the three thoughts before mention∣ed led me into this Treatise: so prepare to read it by the medi∣tation of them; and I shall pray to the Lord to make both profi∣table to you, who am


