



REverend and Dear Brethren in our Lord Jesus Christ; At your command this Sermon was preached, and at your request its printed; and to your Patronage its now presented. Litera scripta manet;
Quod scriptum habetur semper vcat ad legen∣dum, cum vacat legenti; Ne one∣rosum sit prae∣sens, quod cùm voles sumitur, cùm voles poni∣tur. Aug Epist 1. it may lye by you, as an hearty Memorial of my Respect, and as an humble Mo∣nitor of your Duty, to continue and double your care (as there is occasion) concerning Spiritual Salt. Ex quolibet ligno non fit Mercurius. Salt is not made of e∣very sort of water; Though (almost) every Mechanick thinks he can shape a satisfactory Answer to the Apostles Question,
. 2 Cor 2. 16 Who is sufficient (fit or meet) for these things? Yet
1 Tim. 5. 22. Probem ego de ordinatione ac∣cipi—Diu explo∣randus est qui praesicitur Eccle∣siae. Ne si quod vitium liabet i dogmate aut vi∣ta, veniat ordina∣tor in culpae par∣em, tanquam obfirmator. Gretius loc. lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partakers of other mens sins. Keep your selves pure.
Its too true; the children of your people still are talking a∣gainst you—as God said to the
Ezek. 33. 32. Prophet; But let not their foolish prating, hinder your faithful practising;
Ra∣ther imitate the Emperour Severus, of whom its reported, that
. Melch. Adam de vita Jo. Bugen∣hagii. p. 316. he was careful of his own carriage, and carelesse of the peoples calumny concerning himself. Austin
Agrigentinum Siciliae Salem per∣hibent, cum fuerit admotus igni velut in equa fluescere: cum vero aquae adjungitur, velut in igne crepitare. Aug. Epitom. per piscat. Tom. 1.
p. 283. mentions a Salt in Sicily, that when its put into the fire, it swims as if it were in water; but when its put into the water, it sounds as if it were in the fire. Retain your
 saltnesse in all conditions and estates.
Mark 9. 50. Ha∣bete intra vos sa∣lem, qu in∣ter caetera
, coagulat, stipat, ac jungit, h. e.
 pacem colite: Paces enim sym∣bolum sal ae vitae.
Hims. Have Salt in your selves, and peace one with another.
While the Ene∣my is sowing Tares, be you sprinkling Salt; while others are throwing bones of dissention, be you fastning the Bond of brotherly union. If the bundle of Arrowes remaine fast bound together, it is not easie to break them; if the bond be loose or broken, its no hard matter to break them one after another. I am therefore bold to conjure you in the words of the Apostle.
1 Cor. 1. 10. Now I beseech you brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no Divisions among you, but that ye be perfectly joyned together in the same minde and in the same judgment.
What an honour and happinesse will it be to say with Myconius
Concurrimus, certavimus, pug navimus, VICI∣MVS & VIXI∣MVS semper conjunctissimè, ut admiratione afficerentur plurimi super illa rara fratrum , & conjunctione. Melch. Adam de vita Frid. Myconii p. 177. We have run and wrastled—conquered and conversed together alwayes unanimously, even to the admiration (I will not say the envie) of others. But if in these distracted and divided times there cannot (or will not) be onenesse of mind, yet let there onenesse of heart. Oh! let not difference in judgment produce diffe∣rence of affection. Now the good Lord enable you to exert the power and property of good Salt; and the blessing of hea∣ven go along with your holy labours, which is the continual and cordial prayer of

