



SIR,
IT is reported of Valens
Jubet Valens edictum de Ba∣silio in exilium mittendo con∣scribi, quod cum sua manu ratum facere conaretur, ne apicem qui∣dem unum ali∣cujus literae fa∣cere potuit; si∣quidem ruptus est calamus, neque id semel sed iterum ac tertio accidit. Ac cum impi∣um illud Edi∣ctum confir∣mate impensiùs laboraret, con∣cussa est dexte∣ra, tremorque eum occupavit. Atque cùm a∣nimo esset prae metu prope attonito, char∣tam manibus dilaceravit. Theodor. Eccl. Hist. l.
4. c. 17. (that Arrian Emperour) that as he was attempt∣ing to signe an Edict for the banish∣ing of Basil, he could not write one tittle of a Letter, Providence brea∣king his Pen three several times; at the fourth assay his hand was stricken with a shaking Palsie, and thereupon as a man affrighted with his own hands, he tore in pieces the Paper. In this you might have imitated him, if the spirit of horrour had seized on you, when you first put Pen to pa∣per to print your conference with Master Eaton. Howsoever, you are beholding to free grace in spa∣ring you, who have not spared to rob Jesus Christ (as much as in you lieth) of his Deity. I have no leasure to reply to your whole book (though its fea∣sible, being for the most part but a Magazine of the rusty Armour of Arrius, Samosatenus, Servetus, Socinus, Valentinus Gentiles, &c. scoured up
 and trim'd anew) I have only pitcht upon one Scripture, and the rather because you
The words I confesse at the first blush seem to stand on your side. Confer. p. 11.
hint, it speaks most clearly for Master Eatons cause. And if (but) this one Fort be maintained against your scaling Ladders, battering Peeces and powder Mines, you have no great reason to cry VICTORIA (though you may be beaten off from the rest too, notwith∣standing your desperate assaults.) I have (accord∣ing to the advice of your High-flown Epistoler) studied to reason and not to revile, especially you being so much as by face unknown to me. Beseech∣ing you to draw (with an unbyassed judgment and an unbrib'd affection) your own
Conference p. 30. f.
rule into Act: Be∣take your self to reason, whereby the spirit may con∣vince you of WHOM the text under Examinati∣on is to be understood. Let all be taken by you, as tendred by me, with a spirit of love and meek∣nesse. And the Lord give you the Spirit of a sound mind and understanding in all things, which is the Cordial prayers of him who is

