


Right Honorable and Noble Senators,
Qui advos audent scribere, ignorant magni∣tudinem, qui non audent, humanitatem. That which none are willing to owne, most men have endeavoured to embrace, and practice, Hypocrisie. All men (if you will beleeve them) will be for God at their death, here and there one that will stand for his cause in the time of their life, When in these wars men were called to come forth, to the help of the Lord against the mighty, & most meal mouth'd Mini∣sters had their lips sealed, and fals-hearted people stood with their hands in their pockets, not with their feet in the gap, to make up the hedge before the Lord, that he might not destroy the land; then this Sermon in a publick place, before an eminent and publick personColonell Mssi, that couragi∣ous, vigi∣lant, and faithfull Governer of Glocester, (once a member of this honorable House) was preached; whose eye-observing diligent attention
in hearing, publick respect and thanks in the face of that po∣pulous audience, immediatly after the delivery of this Ser∣mon, are not the causes of the publishing hereof; but the disregard of one of Glocester Committee in his uncivill de∣parture out of the Congregation, before ever hee heard me either pray or preach, pressed mee to commit this to the Presse: who shewed disrespect to the Sermon, for the per∣sons sake, when as he should have manifested respect to the person for the Sermons sake, There was no necessity (I be∣leeve no) (I am sure no humanity) for any of that Commit∣tee to cause a Sermon to be preached in another Congrega∣tion, at that very instant by that very Minister, who then was sick, and desired to be eased from preaching that turn and time, in the Colledge of Glocester. When this Sermon at a publique fast was preached, (how ever it may seem now un∣seasonable, coming so late to the presse) was welcome (I am confident) to most that heard it delivered in the pulpit. The Sermon, I confesse, was somewhat long, it was the businesse of the day that then required it. But what is added in the point of Countrey Committees, was not then specified; for I then imagined, that such qualified persons were not in re∣rum naturae. And what is inserted touching flattering Mini∣sters that have betrayed the trust that God and man have committed to them, was also unhandled; both which are proper to the subject here in discourse, as main causes of the people halting between those two different opinions, in the then common Cause of the Kingdome.
Omnia dat qui justa negat, he that denieth that which is just, gives liberty to speak any thing.
If I have unjustly blamed one of the said Committee (whose advice, as another Achitophel in those parts, was so highly ac∣counted of, as if a man had enquired at the Oracle of God) in that censure against me, before any witnesses in that cause were examined by me, (though many of the Committe, by
the procurement of one, certified under their hands the con∣trary, as grosse untruths, as if they had subscribed that there is no light in the Sunne, nor heat in the fire, or that the Pope in person sits daily in the Parliament House) to the great losse of my livelihood, danger of my life, and dishonour of the Parliament (had I not been relieved) let me suffer more in name, person, estate: Whosoever knowes what hath hap∣pened unto me, as many thousands have heard, may guesse that I am necessitated to publish this Newes for Newters.
He that was once an eye-hearer of this Sermon, beleeved in heart, and subscribed with hand, that I had the harder u∣sage for the message sake, else that Committee man could not have so posted out of the Colledge, when hee saw me in the Pulpit, unlesse he had almost as much feared my message (whom he never heard in publique in his life) as hee dreaded the roaring of the Cannon when he hasted out of the Citie immediatly before the Kings Army came to besiege the same.
What in publick I have spoken, done and suffered for the common Cause, hundreds have, and thousands will testi∣fie: yet all praying, preaching, doing and suffering, must be buried under the beastlike skin of Scandall, to provoke and satisfie the greedy appetites of a New Committee man, an old Hangman, and a posted Malignant, and a professed Newter.
I attended eleven dayes (during part of which time this newes was related) to see these hideous November-Articles I was to answer, yet could not all that time have a sight of them, till that quick-sighted much knowing justice, Colonel Bromwich told the Committee it was a shame to make me wait so long for the said Articles. Then had I December-Articles, and those concerned the Committee themselves, because they would be sure to strike a deadly blow against such a Traytor. Then had I January-Articles preferred, and
had I not appealed to this Honorable Assembly, I thinke I should have had February-Articles, and so ad infinitum; that no moneths malice might be left unattempted to ruine him, whom the Parliament had published and declared, 1643. to honour.
I was accounted by the Plundering warrants of Malig∣nants, at the siege of Glocester, an aider to the Rebels, meaning this Parliament: and by the said warrants had my goods and Cattell taken away; That the same Parliament Committee, after I had appealed to the Parliament it selfe from them, they under their hands denying me Copies of depositions, taken a∣gainst me, and denying me to be present at the examination of wit∣nesses, was by the testimony of divers members of this great Assembly, deemed unparallel.
As these things with the effects thereof, to me have pro∣ved a burthen (almost) intollerable (the scarre of discredit it being incurable) so to all men may seeme incredible, that a constant sider with the Parliament should, unheard, out of his living be ejected, and himself and his family be to all mi∣sery exposed, (when that right-discerning, and Parliament-promises-promoting Justice, Mr. Anthony Clifford, opposed in my absence, the rest of my ruining unjust Judges:) If I should forbeare, the stones would cry aloud, in the eyes and eares of the world, for justice against this matchlesse, malici∣ous abominable censure.
But the blessing of the Lord for ever be and abide on the heads and hearts of the honorable Committee for plunde∣red Ministers; and in particular, on Mr. Millington, Mr. Rouse, Sir Arthur Hazelrig, Mr. Tate, who oft afforded me patience, audience, countenance. If I should repeat every member of that Committee, I might seeme to flatter: if I should not mention you, I should surely be ungratefull: My Countrey-man Mr. Pury was one of the first that after my freezing and long waiting, broke the Ice for my return: and
Mr. Edward Stephens, and others, quickly apprehended, and couragiously reported the injustice of the proceedings a∣gainst me: Whereupon I had an Order of restitution to my Priviledges and Arreares, till the matter be heard; notwith∣standing which Order of Restitution, that active Commit∣tee man hath been an Instrument to place (for my supplant∣ing) in my Chappell, to enjoy those profits that are almost the one halfe of my little livelihood, a Minister that hath been taken in Armes against the Parliament, and hath beene ejected out of his living in Monmouth-shire, for being con∣tentious against his neighbours, a common Drunkard, a Rayler a∣gainst the Parliament: who also said, since he was obtruded on my Cure, a Cavaliere I was, a Cavaliere I am, and so I will continue. Whether such a Committee man in permitting such a Malignant Minister, that hath been so often active in Armes, to be placed and officiate within three miles of Glo∣cester Garrison, hath thereby promoted the honour of the Parliament, and the safety of that Citie, let all men judge: If I have been illegally proceeded against by this principall A∣gent in that Committee, as my worthy, constant, free and faithfull friend, Mr. Pryn, hath by tongue and pen maintai∣ned, I shall account it a great honour from this Honorable Assembly, to have an Order and Commission to some Gen∣tlemen, I shall nominate, to examine all proceedings of this Committee man, and the combination of such malignant, malicious persons, as have been unjust practizers against me, that I may receive such reparations from them, as the merits of my cause, and their cruelty shall require. All which is committed to the serious consideration of this honorable Senate, for the relief of

