



Right Honourable,
IT was enough to impose that piece of penance on your selves, to give this unpolished Sermon the hearing; but it is much you should put your eyes to further expence of pa∣tience. But since you are pleased to desire (which to me is a command) my hand against my self, by testifying my weaknesses in the exposing this mean discourse to publick view,
I obey. But then give him, whom you have so far emboldned, leave to minde you, that the Sermons your Lordships have heard, or should have heard, are to be reckoned in the inventorie of your receipts from your God.
Auistis, lauda∣stis, verba recepi∣stis verba reddi∣distis; Deo gra∣tias, at haec fo∣lia sunt, modo fictus quaeiur. Aug. To hear, and to read, is but to carry in; you are also to bring forth; not only the leaves, or the ossomes of good words, or resoluti∣ons;  fruit: Those of your sphear enter the lists of comparison with vines and olives,
Jud. 9 8, 9, 10. the choisest of trees in Jothams parable: and if a vine be fruitlesse,
Ezek. 15.23. it is worthlesse, and wil not yeeld a pin to hang an hat on. You are fixed in an higher orb, and attract all eyes unto you: You, as a snail, or the  in the sea, leave a shining track : Your example hath a potent  that stand on the lower grou;  multiplie imitaters, as one  a stone in the water,
Non qua , sed qua itur. Sen. begets an hundred. Infe∣riors love to go the way Superiors use to go, rather then the way they shovld go; and care not much though they perish, so it be on such credit. Besides, the greatnesse of the
personage greaters the guilt;
Omne animi vi∣tium tanto con∣spectins. Juv. the height of the exalted heightens their sin. As wee say in Arithmetick, , in the first and lowest place is but one, in the second place 10, in the third 100; and so higher, and higher. And as the whitest ivory makes the blackest coal; the most generous wine the sharpest vinegar; as the shrewdest tempests come of∣ten out of the warmest corners, so the great∣est injustice, and most unworthy demeanor wee fear from Nobility and potency dege∣nerated. Governours actions are like Jere∣mie's figs, or Origen's Works; if bad, very bad. Greatnesse dis-joyn'd from Good∣nesse is rather a swelling excrescence, then a true, reall magnitude: You are to give ac∣count at the great Audit-day, not onely as Christians; but as Nobles, as Judges, as Se∣nators, as Magistrates. 'Twere good you contemplated with an holy emulation the presidents of untainted Religion, unsway∣ed integrity, incorrupt justice, inconquer∣able patience, facile moderation, surpas∣sing temperance, that the sacred Scripture
and other Stories are sertile in.
When you read that Manlius Torquatus took off his own sonnes head for irregular running afore a command, though his in∣tents were fair, and his designe successefull; think with your selves, that it is not fit to suffer your Deputies to be occentrick, arbi∣trary, unlimited in their proceedings, where no Order or Ordinance of yours enables them. When you read that Quintus Cince∣nius was taken from the plough, and made Dictator of Rome; and when hee had done his Countrey the utmost service hee concei∣ved hee could arrive to, hee returned to his former meannesse; it will quench soaring ambition in you. When you finde in Story, that Lucius Valerius, a Roman Consul, and so dying, having long the custody of the Treasury of Rome, was yet so poor at his death, that the Common-wealth was fain to defray the charges of his Funerall; you will,
Exod. 18.21. like Jethro's Justicers, hate that ignoble dry drunkennesse, covetousness. When you meet it storied of Fabritius, and testified by
his enemy, that the Sun could sooner be ju∣stled out of his Orbe, then he out of the Orbe of Justice; you cannot but be dispas∣sionate, unprepostest, unprejudiced Judges. Instice is painted with scales in her hand, not to weigh gold, but right. When a wo∣man kneeld to Francis I of France for Ju∣stice; Stand up (said he) woman, Justice I owe thee; if thou beg any thing, ask mer∣cie. When you read that Alphonsus King of Arragon read over the Bible with Commen∣taries fourteen times, you will study the Scri∣pture more. Oh let not purblind Heathens, that had no better conduct then the glow∣wormes twilight of divine Nature, and un∣renewed Reason; Let not blindfolded Pa∣pists cast you behind them, and rise in judge∣ment against you. God expects you should outvie and outdoe the most advanced Mora∣lists: Your helps Heavenward are more and mightier then theirs, your light cleerer, your obligations to God more, and greater: God hath honoured you above others, who are but of the same mold with others, as the








ground of the Rainbow is but a common ex∣halation, onely the Sun it is that gilds and enamells it with such various colours.
dete quod in  est hanc oriam ad illum ferre, a quo est,  vulis e rdere, aut certe rdi ab ea. Ber. . p. 207 minium non cipere, sed da∣e dignitati. ustin. l. 6. Study as much as in you lies, to returne honour to him from whom you had your honour, if you would not lose your honour, or at least be lost by it. Epaminondas so carried his ho∣nour, that he seemed rather to contribute lustre to, then to borrow it from his honour. It will be worthy you to be a dignity to your dignity: An undeserving Person honoured, is but as a dwarfe, set him on Ossa or Olympuc, he is but a dwarfe still; A worthy person ho∣noured is a Colossus, great, though in the bot∣tome of a pit. Your honour it a Talent with which God betrusts you, which if you em∣base, he that gave it can recall it. Dignity, like oyle is airy, and slippery. Henry the 4. the Emperour, who fought two and fifty pitcht battells, was compelled by pover∣rie to Petition for a Prebends place at Spyre to maintain him in his old age. And Comminez saith, that he saw the Duke of Excester, who married King Edward the
fourths sister, begging bare-foot in the Low-Countries: But I forget my self; and should crave pardon, and Apologize for the length both of my Sermon and Dedication, but that would but make me the longer. May you live and die full of Honour: May you be Instruments of Gods Glory here, and Vessells of eternall glory here∣after, is, and shall be the Prayer of

