





Dear Daughters,
AFter the expira∣tion of three score and ten years (the ordi∣nary date by Moses allotted to mans life) finding weak∣nesse with age to creep up∣on me,
Psal. 90.10 and summoning me continually to prepare for a Change: I have often be∣thought my selfe what Le∣gacy of my Love I might
best leave unto you, being the only Survivors of the nine children that God had blest me with, by your long since deceased Mother.
Acts 3.6 Silver and Gold have I none (as I may well profess with the A∣postle) and you know it too well.
Mat. 13.44 46. But what is all worldly pelf to that Treasure and Jewel, to purchase which, we should be happy to part with all that we have.
My Education (as 'tis well known) and course of life hath not led me to make you great in this world; if it induce you to be good, and fit you for an heavenly Inheritance, it is all that
I aim at; and the utmost from me you can expect.
Your Mother was known to be a religious and mo∣dest Matron in all the course of her life, extraor∣dinarily addicted to Prayer. A Sampler from whom I exhort you to take, especially in that behalf. To wch purpose I have framed these ensuing Directions, to set you on∣ward. I make no doubt but your loving Husbands wil herein be my Seconds; whom those that know must con∣fesse to be Learned, Pious and painful Ministers; and I think you happy to have met with such above
divers that hold themselves of a higher pitch in this world. You know who pro∣testeth,
Psal. 84.10 He had rather be a Door-keeper in the House of his God, then to bear a greater sway in more esteemed Mansions; and intimates the Sparrow and Swallowes condition, almost to be envied at, that have admittance to nestle and lay their young so near Gods Altar. Besides your Names should mind you of good old Sarah in the Old Testament, and Elizabeth in the New, what excellent Patterns you have to follow. And when you read that Ti∣mothy
(S. Pauls famous Pupil,
2 Tim. 1.5 and first Bishop of Ephesus) had the first ground of his Catechism, from his Grand-mother Lois, and Mother Eunice; you should cast about how you might perform the like to your lit∣tle ones whom God hath blest you with abundantly. That your Sons may grow up as the young plants,
Ps. 144.12. and that your Daughters may be as the polished corners of the Temple; plants grow∣ing to trees, that will bring forth seasonable fruit, and corner stones that will hold together, and set forth a buil∣ding.

To conclude, I may not o∣mit one passage of that fa∣mous Martyr, Dr. Row∣land Taylor, (which should take the more with you, because by your Mother you are lineally descended from him); the Chaine of Pearl he only left your great Grandmother, his dear wife, (when he last parted from her to suffer Martyrdome) was no other but the Book of Common Prayer; in contriving of which, he had a hand, and which he used only in his Imprisonment, as holding that Book (above all other, next the Bible) the most absolute Directo∣ry
for all his effectual De∣votions. The same Book commend I unto you and yours (my beloved Daugh∣ters) as fittest for your use and most complete and war∣rantable for the grounds it stands upon.
2 Tim. 4.3 Take heed of itching ears, and damn∣ed devourers of wi∣dows houses, who under a shew of making long prayers,
Mat. 23.14 mislead silly wo∣men, to be ever learning,
2 Tim. 5.7 and never come to the knowledg of the Truth. You see what mischiefe such Reformers have wrought; which the piety and prudence of manyages are scarce likely
in a long time to recover. The Lord keep you and all his from the snares of such Hunters and Stools of wickedness,
Psal. 94.20 which imagine mischief as a Law.
Luke 1.74 That we being delivered from the hands of our enemies, both spiritual and temporal, may serve him without fear, in holinesse and righteousnesse all the dayes of our lives, Which is the hearty Prayer and Conclusion of

