


SAint Paul telling us what enemies we must expect to encounter withall in this life, Ephes. 6.12. among others lets fall this hidden passage, that we are to wrastle against , the worldly or the sublunary rulers of the darkness of this age, and this age is every age: for since the fall of Adam 'tis the same world still, and we have the same enemies only God, who is higher then the highest, and is exalted above all Prin∣cipalities and Powers, restraines or lets loose the malice of our enemies, as our sins are lighter or heavier in the scales of his justice.
, sometimes the Trojans, sometimes the
Graecians got the worst, as Homers deity in∣clined the balance upon mount Ida. Tis a truth to be found in Holy writ, when sometimes Israel, sometimes Amaleck (understand it of any enemy) prevailed. So in our unna∣turall broiles, sometimes the balance hath inclined on this, sometimes on that side, but in the mean time both sides did abuse themselves, and were abused (God justly suffering it) by others, I mean, those now mentioned , spiri∣tuall adversaries of our Temporall salvation as well as our Eternall: for the evidence whereof examine 1 King. 22.20, 21, 22. And the Lord said, Who shall perswade Ahab, that he may go up, and fall at Ramoth-Gilead? and one said on this manner, and an other said on that man∣ner, and there came forth a spirit, and stood before the Lord, and said, I will perswade him. And the Lord said unto him, Wherewith? and he said, I will go forth, and I
will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his Prophets. And he said, Thou shalt perswade him, and prevail also; go forth, and do so.
Had not the Lord been highly provoked with us, as with
Ahab, and given a Permission, not to say, a Commission, to evil Angels to infatuate and benight our understandings, so that we were judicially given up to a spirit of delusion, could we have thus fallen out
, for points and pins, when the , the essentialls of the Realm were acknowledged to be sound? I can safely mind you of one instance; with what a phrensie were Church-win∣dows battered down! and if they were not broken into useless shivers, we were afraid that the curse of doing the Lords work negligently would stick upon our consciences. And what I say of this, may be said of other our brainlesse furies, that have demolished things in themselves indifferent, and to unprejudiced men, as inoffensive as painted glasse.
A sad presage it was, that those errors that could never have got in at our Church doors, should creep in at its bro∣ken windows; and the eyes of Sampson being put out, the light of Israel was not long after quenched. But as we say, there is never smoke without some fire, so there could not have been that universal distast without some male admini∣stration, and that in a long peace through mans corruption come to an height and consistency. For as in the body the sharper diseases arise rather from its own discrasie and di∣stemper, then from an infectious air; so all Regiments are more effectually destroyed from within themselves, then from any violence without: that now we clearly see through the pro∣spective of our late miseries,
1. That the Church of England could not have fallen but by the heates of its own Ecclesiasticks; a grievance in
Constantines dayes, that more damaged the cause of
Christ
then all the ten famous Persecutions from the hands of Hea∣thens; for when violence is from those that are without, then that saying holds good, Semen Ecclesiae est sanguis Martyrum, The seed of the Church is the bloud of its Martyrs; but when tis from within, then,
Sanguis Eccle∣siae est semen Haeresium, the bloud of the Church is the seed of Heresies: Loose conceptions in matters of Faith as naturally growing out of a disturbed Church, as In∣sects from a putrified carcase.
2. That the Country will never mischief the Court, un∣lesse the Court first minister occasion of offence, either seem∣ing or real. It is the fatal unhappiness of Courtiers (as well as other men) to mistake their interest, either by preferring their private interest above their Masters, or their Masters above their Countries, and so wrong either themselves or their Prince, and often both: Either they monopolize their Soveraign to themselves, a vain attempt, as if the Sun should not shine but through the pin hole of my paper; and more dangerous: for could I obtain a burning glass to con∣tract all its beams, 'twere a rare indulgence from heaven, if whilst I used it I did not burn my own fingers: Or they would perswade their Prince that his interest is distinct from his Subjects, a most apparent mistake, which the blind Poet saw, who ever called his Agamemnon  the Shepheard of his sheep: and there is no Shepheard that will leave all the fleece to one sheep, and no skin to another. My Loyalty to my Prince, and my love to my Country, are so far from being Contraries, that they are not Disparates, they are one and the self same thing: He loves not his Country that loves not his Prince, and he loves not his Prince that loves not his Country. And as there will never want Court-dis∣contents, so they will be ever watchful to mis-represent Court-favorites to the Country, through whose sides the
Prince sometimes bleeds: I shall desire the one to remember who it is that giveth favor in the sight of Kings, and for what end; and the other, that the King of Kings never pleaseth all men. May the one and the other preach to them∣selves, Pro. 19.13. A foolish son is the calamity of his father, and the contentions of a wife are a continual dropping. It is as much a Political as an Occonomical truth, that till then the servants of the houshold will not fall out.
3. That the throne of England cannot fall by the body of its Subjects; which, as your present Loyalty to our lawful Soveraign doth abundantly manifest, so the abhorrency and disavowing of the late unparallell'd assassination of his Royal father, by the mockery of justice, the ahhorrency, I say, in those that proceeded to a Reformation by the sword, doth as fully evince.
4. Tis the Subjects advantage to keep the prerogative of the Crown unviolable. A King is evermore the father of his Country, therefore the whole must be preserved. Faith is said to be mysterious, sometimes above Reason, but never against it: so his Authority must be sacred, sometimes, if need be, above Law, so as not against it. Tis beyond your knowledge to make provision against all evills. In our Ar∣ticles of war there are some things left to discretion, so in those of peace; there must be arwayes some reserved to a Princely prudence: And here I cannot but mind you of the judgment of a Gentleman, who some weeks since sent me a paper, wherein, among other passages he thus delivers him∣self; The health of the body consists in the due temperament of the parts, when the Soveraign power and the peoples inter∣est are justly balanced: The dispute about it cost this Land dear in the unhappy Reigns of Henry 3. and King John, where the prevalency of one party demanded, and the neces∣sity
of the other granted, what was unjust and dishonourable for the one to require, and the other to consent unto, had Law and calm debate thereon been the judges; and that was the reason their peace was never lasting: But these wayes of working did interchangeably take place for some scores of years, till this poor Land was almost ruined.
And now, Gentlemen, the result will be this, That vain man, that would be wise, takes a great deal of pains to ruine himself. Perditio tua ex te is the charge against the State-sinner too; God also allowing to evil spirits to make us drunk with Cebes's
 cup of Error, with which God punished
Israel, Isa. 29.9. I am sensible that these lines are swollen beyond the measure of a Dedication to the ensuing Discourse, and I am more than sensible that I shall be censured for an ultra crepidam: Sure I am, that if the Ministers of the Gospel are commanded to tell Jacob his transgressions, they are by the same rule authorised to direct his feet in the ways of peace. And if there are any staid and inviolable rules of Truth, devested of interest and self∣conceit, I have not much swerved; but if the prophaneness of any age shall say that it consists onely in Fancy, I can justi∣fie my self by the same argument that I shall be arraigned. I have nothing in my eye but the beauty of the Church, the dignity of my Prince, and the safety of my Country; which you have more endearments from the world to defend than I have.
Therefore I shall conclude with this request, that seeing your forefathers thought it their duty to remember their de∣liverance from the Gun-powder plot by an anniversary Thanksgiving, you would recognize this your escape out of one of twenty years standing, that had really taken effect, and blown up the Estates of the Realm, and the Laws and Liberties of the Subject; and that in due time, when it shall
be judged convenient, some book might be bestowed on every Parish Church, to shew by what means and methods we were ensnared into a Civil war, how far it was heightned, what calamities we felt under it, how God wrought salvation for us, when all attempts to ease our selves of slavery were fruitlesse; that as it should stir up in us thankful hearts to the God of our mercies, so it should be a perpetual Caveat to us for the future, how we let out the waters of contention, lest in washing of the dirt from our streets, we drown our own houses.
And Your Petitioner shall ever pray, &c.

