



Righ Honour.
I Have four yeares since put forth a booke in answer to Mr. Thomas Patients book, cal∣led the doctrine of baptisme, and the di∣stinction of Covenants, and I did expect, that, Mr. Patient would have replyed to mine, and therfore I did by reading provide my self in part for a reioynder, but seing he hath not replyed, I have made bold to present to your Honours, something of what I had gathered together, and by what I have obser∣ved from the Anabaptists and Quakers amongst us: I have drawen up, I think the breifest relation that hath been hither∣to, of the most remarkable passages both of Doctrine and practice in Germany 139 yeares ago, and so forward. In which, the Judicious Reader may observe, how near these Sectaries in these Nations have advanced both in Doctrine, and practise to these in that in Germany. And consider∣ing how God hath raised up your spirits, and how Instrumen∣tall your Honours have been, in the hand of God to
suppresse their insolent, tyrannicall usurped Authority, which they exercised over Gods people in this nation, to inslave us to their insatiable lusts, and also how God hath prospered your Honors indeavours therein, beyond what we could in natural reason expect, in so short a time. Which plainly demonstrates the work to be of God, and yet we may and ought, and that upon well grounded reason own your Honours, as Gods instruments, to be the three chief worthyes of Ireland, in this blessed work, and though there are many other gallant spirits in this land, that have acted their severall parts, and are most honourable, yet none have attained to the Honor of the first three. I therefore humbly beg leave to dedicate my service to your Honours, as your dues and my duty. First for that your earnest care and en∣deavours for the defence of the protestant religion, and the law∣full liberties of the people have manifestly appeared to all men. Secondly, that I may hereby acknowledge my humble thankfullnesse First to God the author of all good, Secondly to your Honors in hope of being a sharer in this mercy of delive∣rance, as I have had a sad share in suffering, under their tyranny and wickedness, I humbly beg pardon for my presump∣tion, and I beseech the God of heaven, to keep your hearts humble, and to deliver you from every evill way, untill he bring you to his Glory, which is the prayer of him, who is.
February. 1659.

