


Renowned Sir,
TO none doth this Sermon more properly belong, now prin∣ted, then to your selfe, that heard it preached. After the relation of which newes against Newters, you re∣turned beyond my desert and expectation publick thanks in the face of that populous Congregation.
In those then siding-unsiding times, this Text at that time was seasonable I yet beleeve; though the sight of my person in the Pulpit, at that time, formidable perhaps to some there, that had never heard me preach in their whole life. One of which departing out of the then Congregation, had he stayed, you told me, at your Table, might have suspected himselfe to be like the Hedge-bogge, I mentioned in my Sermon.
The truth of many of the particulars mentioned in my preceding Epistle, you know to be true: but I shall manifest the whole to be so, if from the Honorable House I obtain my conceived just request, to have liberty to examine the combina∣tion and unjust proceedings of my malevolent, yet potent Committee-adversary.
Sir, you beleeved and subscribed as much under your hand, that this Sermon was preached with much zeale against newtralitie; and in that subscription (out of which I transcribe your own words at this instant, having the copy now at Ox∣ford before me) you are pleased to approve of my (then) Doores of Hope for the suc∣cesse of the Parliament cause.
In respect whereof you say further, I then had merited, and you beleeved, I should find favour from this Parliament. You beleeved also, I had hard measure in my bu∣sinesse; and that this Sermon was some occasion of my harder usage, though indeed the two poynts (here touched) concerning Countrey-Committees, and flattering Ministers, were not then bandled.
If you enquire after newes out of your once Glocester-shire, I beleeve many that were but Newters in your time of abode there, are in heart now most strong Ma∣lignants,
perhaps it is because too much savour hath been extended towards them. The inlarged vast difference betweene those at home that should be reconciled friends, to oppose the common foe, makes many continue in a balting condition e∣ven to this day: And those that were then seeming friends, to become now ene∣mies to the common cause. That which was a fiction long agoe, seems to be now put in action.
The Eagle (they say) bad a nest on the top of the Tree, where she had her young; the Beare had her Den, where she had her whelps under the bottome of the Tree: The Cat had liberty to run from the bottome to the top, and to be a speedy messen∣ger between the Eagle and the Beare; tells the Eagle if she flye from her nest, the Beare waits to devoure her brood, and tells the Beare, if she peepout of her Den, the Eagle will make a prey of her whelps. And thus perswades them to keep close in their holes, to the starving of themselves and their young ones, that all might be∣come a prey to the crafty Cat. My professed Malignants, and their Neighbour Newters (Gallemoufrean, hotch-potch-ambo-dexters, time-serving weathercock-linsee-wolsie-turn-coats, Jack on both sides, or rather Nick on no side) perswade the people in these most dangerous times, that the rigid Presbyterians will keep them in more slavery then ever Bishops Government did: and that the Indepen∣dents will have all things common amongst them. And this is the deepest policie that all the Devils in Hell could ever invent to prevaile with people to sit still, at Marcus Cato, and Metius Suffetius, the Succoits, and the Meroshites did, that so professed Malignants might have the more easie opportunity to make the inhabitants of the land to be made meat for their gaping mouthes.
If God ever joyn the faithfull of the people together in a firme and sincere uni∣on, to preserve the Kingdome from slavery and ruine, he is little better then a De∣vill, I am sure no friend to the Kingdome, that endeavours to rend peoples affe∣ctions asunder.
Sir, I am in my journey, therefore make bold to break off abruptly, leaving you to the direction of him who hath been your protection. Both which shall be the subject of the prayers of

