


THE Copie of this Trea∣tise (Right Honorable) having for a yeares space in these times of dan∣ger, been buried in the ground, when other my bookes that lay open, were plundered a∣way, was secure, and by Gods provi∣dence, for some better use, I hope, re∣served.
If in the Prophet Ieremies time,Jer. 23.10. the land did mourn because of oathes, why may not such a cause produce such an ef∣fect now also?Hosea 4.1.
If in Hosea's time the Lord had a con∣troversie with the inhabitants of the
land, because by swearing, &c. they brake forth, and blood touched blood: i. bloo∣dy punishments, bloody sinnes; why may not this heaven-daring sinne be a speciall promover of the fury of Gods wrath, so hotly incensed against this na∣tion, at this time?
I know not any one sinne more uni∣versally spread over Court, Citie, Coun∣try, then this Laws-outfacing Gangren.
That Gods sword may bee sheathed, mans must be drawn forth, out of the scabbard of silence, connivence, by re∣prehension, by correction. It requires the labour of most skilfull Chirurge∣ons, to put to their helping hearts and hands, to the healing of this festered wound,Ezek. 22.30. to make up the hedge, to stand in the gap before the Lord, for the Land, (which is as the Bush in Moses time,Exod. 3.2. bur∣nin, though not consumed) that hee may not fully destroy it.
Such searchers of these soares have need of Eagles eyes, and Lions hearts, as well as Ladies hands.
Knotty pieces require the more blowes to break them, foule linnen the more water to cleanse them, Drossie
silver the more refining, and dusty gar∣ments the more brushing.
If this Epidemicall sinne were more frequently, more fervently, preached a∣gainst by Ministers, I think it would not be so freely, so fully persisted in by men, against the Lord.
The ensuing Summons for Swearers will discover how this sinne of swearing hath been punished by God, by men, Christi∣ans, heathens.
Some Errata's you may meet with in the booke, because while part of it was in the presse in the Citie, the Author was in pressure (and that (almost a thing incredible) under the authority of the Parliament) in the countrey, by the ma∣lice of malevolent, and malignant adver∣saries. The Devill is more delighted with the quenching of the fire of zeale in the hearts of Peachers, then the Pope is pleased by the sprinkling of holy water upon the faces of the people.
Your inflamed Resolutions against this, and other like sinnes, this Tract will no whit retard, I hope, but rather ani∣mate, enliven, enlarge. Renowned, indefa∣tigable, reforming, eternizable Senators:
consider God hath done great things by you, for you, that you may doe more for him still.
You may be bold to trust God upon triall.
These are times of warre, and who are to be accounted Souldiers, if you are not? You may bee as confident as the Souldier that Eràsmus speakes of, who being told of a numerous Army com∣ming against, answered, Tanto plus gloriae referemus, quanto sunt plures quos superabi∣mus: The greater the opposition, the more illustrious the conquest shall be to you,2 Tim. 4.7.8. considering all Christs Souldiers shall have a crown, though sometimes enforced to swim to the same in streames of blood. In Exodus 32. wee read of three sorts of fire; of the Israe∣lites by sinne, of God by judgements, of Moses by zeale. The first made way for the second, the second for the third.
Hannibal by fire made a way over the Alps: so shal you by zeal over all moun∣tains of oppositions.
What powder is to bullets, a clapper to the Bell, fire to wood, wings to a bird, wind to sailes, sailes to a ship, an
edge to a razor, wine to the spirits, me∣tall to a horse, a soule to the body, viva∣city to any creature, that is zeale to a Christian, it acts his soule, it moves his affection.
It is oft winter within, when it is Sum∣mer without: In the cold climate of this countrey, let the fire of your zeale bee seen more and more to unthaw this icie corruption. Why should there not bee in superiors a liberty of punishing, aswel as there is in inferiors a liberty of sin∣ning? The frantick man returning to his wits, thinkes him his best friend, that bound and beat him most.
He that withstands a man in the pro∣secution of this or any other sin, though he beares away frowns & heart-burnings for a time, yet when the offending party comes to himselfe, he recompenseth his former dislike, with so much the more love, and so many the more thanks. The Lord himselfe will for all eternity speak of such a man, such a Parliament, as som∣times he did of Phinehas, This man,Numb. 25.11. this Parliament that was zealous for my glo∣ry, hath turned away my wrath from the children of Israel, from the people of
England. This was the great Councel of England, that first successfully hindered the blaspheming, and effectually furthe∣red the sanctifying of my glorious Name; that was carefull to banish swea∣ring, 1. out of their own hearts, 2. out their houses, 3. out of the Land, before swearing had banished them out of all. By so doing your active spirits may the rather expect your other workes to bee the more prosperous, your labour bee light, your sorrowes easie, our warres hushed, our peace permanent, and your own salvation certain: which hath been, is, and shall be the prayer of

