



GOOD Wine is not the worse for wanting, nor bad wine the better for having a green bush before the Doore. Cu∣stome claimes by prescripti∣on, that such Books as come under the Presse to be made publick, should be ushered with an
Epistle: which if it want, it calleth into sus∣pition, that either the Author hath no friends of worth, or that the worke is not worthy patronage. There are two principall ends (Right Worshipfull) of Dedicati∣on; either that the Patrons should counte∣nance the subject, or that the subject should work upon the Patrons.
That I may bee assured to bee exempted from flattery, I exclude my selfe from neither of these ends: Seeing swearing is a sinne, whereunto both religious and irreligious are too prone, the one by their common, rash, and wilfull swearing, the other by their care∣lesse, cold, cowardly reproving the same: therefore cannot wholly be unfitting you, in which side soever you are to be ranked. The subject being a sinne so universally spread in Court, Citie, Countrey, it hath need finde some that may countenance and patronize it from the biting tongues of those, whose wounds it labours to discover and cure. I know very few who need not to have the edge of their zeale sharpened by the whetstone of Gods holy word, and mens daily remembran∣ces, the Ministers of the Lord. In many things we sinne all, and in all things some: If you be free from this Epidemicall disease,
both in the active and passive part, blesse God for it, who hath wrought this admi∣rable cure upon you, seeing by nature eve∣ry one is so propine unto it, which occa∣sioned God to bound this precept with so sharp thornes and threats, saith Muscu∣lus.In Loc. If you are not yet fully free, the Au∣thor intreats the work may have leave to doe its best to make you free. Neither doe I de∣dicate this Tract unto you, onely that you might shelter it (being a subject of this na∣ture) from the many stormes of malevolent tongues: for I know it is sit, that whosoever publisheth any thing unfit, should beare the whole burthen of his own fault; and who∣soever ventureth to appeare in print, must expect the common lot of all Writers, to bee variously censured of various dispositions: Some (as Nebuzaradan burnt the Temple, but kept the Gold) will be content to take the matter, yet blame the Author.
Others will happily (or rather unhappily) read it, not out of conscience, to make them∣selves good, but out of curiosity to censure o∣thers to be bad. In all these I would never desire friends to defend, nor feare enemies to deprave me: for what is good will de∣fend it selfe; and to flatter others (fearing
their censure for what is bad) were rather impiety towards them, then policie towards my selfe.
To feare any mans censure (in so censori∣ous an age) were imbecillity; and to think so to speak or write as to please all, were to aime at an impossibility and either to endevour, were meer folly.
But your names in a selected sort I make bold to prefix, and that the rather, seeing all of you by office and place, I know should be, and most of you by affection and practice, I be∣leeve, are professed enemies to this soule-killing, heaven-daring, land-loading, peace-disturbing, and hell-hastening sinne.
If these poore and unexpected papers find such kinde and expected entertain∣ment in your hearts, as the Author oft hath undeservedly found in many of your houses, I doubt not but your publicke weekly pra∣ctice in life, will be as powerfull as my pul∣pit Sabbath precepts by voyce, to work upon your Servingmen in houses, your Tenants and many other inferior inhabitants in your Parishes, that have necessary recourse unto, and daily dependance on you.
Touching the Treatise it selfe, I confesse my manner of handling things therein, is
like my selfe, plain and homely, without any gorgious garment of Rhetoricall Orna∣ments, because I hold it a Maxime (for my selfe ever to keep unto) to desire rather to speak to the edification of the hearers and readers, then for the ostentation of my selfe in speaking or writing: yet I dare pro∣mise the matter to be like them from whom I received it, sound and good, fit to feed all those Christians that desire rather to have their hungry soules fed with the sincere milk of Gods word, then their itching eares tickled with the enticing speech of mans wisedome.
I say no more concerning it,Deut. 25.13. but Non sit in vobis nec mensura major, nec mensura minor, that is, as some inter∣pret it, and as I here apply it, substract not from this much, little, old, new nothing, what is due unto it; nor ascribe unto it what it doth not deserve.
As God doth, so men should esteeme of the labours of Ministers, not according to the e∣vent of the work, but according to the in∣tent of the Author.
Thus fearing to make the windowes or gates too wide, when the house and Citie is but little, I commit you heartily to the
Lords undeceivable direction, and this Treatise humbly to your favourable constru∣ction, willing application, needfull pro∣tection, and doe rest

