





Primum laetitiae signum clamare, secundum
Plaudere; vox ego sum, carmina bina manus.


Triumphant joy cries, and applause demands:
I am the voyce; these verses my two hands.



May it please your Majesty,
I Am so much a Christian, that I could not distrust those preci∣ous divine promises, that like filings of Gold, or dust of Dia∣monds,
are scattered in Holy writ; those soveraign cordials against fain∣ting fits of unbelief, (namely, that the patient expectation of the righ∣teous shall not perish for ever, Psal. 9.18. Prov. 10.28. and the rest:) yet I durst not hope to live to see those promises thus miraculously ac∣complished, to the amazement of all the world, and to the unspeak∣able joy of your MAJESTIES Loyal Subjects, among whom I have been ambitious to be reckoned, in the worst of times. Who would ever dis-believe that great and good God, whose words are deeds, whose promises are performances? Silence, admiration, astonishment, I confess are the best Rhetorick to expresse these ravishing providential dispen∣sations;
yet vouchsafe (Great Sir) to condescend so farre below your Royal Self, as to accept this lisping, stammering, but unfaigned congra∣tulating acclamation from a lame Mephibosheth,
2 Sam. 19.26. who wisheth he were able personally to attend our David, to present on his knee this Ave Caesar. My first thoughts designed for your MAJESTY an Art of memory, which lies ready by me, compos'd during my weakness, that the varie∣ty and novelty might divert or allay my pain, and the sad impressi∣ons, that the late Dogdays of A∣narchy and confusion in the pub∣lick wrought on me; but my second thoughts prompted to me, that an Art of Forgetfulness is now more seasonable then an Art of memo∣ry,
your Majesty being graciously pleased to offer an Act of Amnesty. And surely if any people under hea∣ven need it, we are they, though we least deserve it; So that your unmerited mercy may well be styled the kindness of God, (since men use not to shew such) as David asked after the survivors of Saul's houshold,
2 Sam. 9.3. that he might shew them the kindness of God. May your Crown, Royal Sir, that like your Saviours hath alass, too long been lined with thorns, flou∣rish on your head, and may your Scepter, like Aarons rod, bloome and blossome in Peace, Piety, and Righteousness, is, and shall be the dayly Prayer of

