



Beloved Brethren:
IT's surely an error in practise, when upon a plea of error in judgment, men write actually and effectually one against ano∣ther, discharging themselves as guns loa∣den with prejudice, wrath, and discontent; giving out but little light, yet roaring and wounding exceeding much. We desire to be found innocent from this transgression, and do present what we have writ∣ten as for you, and not against you; having had it in our hearts to design, if possible, some communication of light, however some provocation of Love: whilst you see our help, from the (seeming at least, but to us) real countenance of the Scripture, you may finde reason to beleeve, we are nes presumptuously wilful, though extremely weak.
We may not conceal two things as heavy weights upon our spirits, when the Lord was calling us out to minister unto him in the publication of this work; which though we have been inabled to cast from us, yet we are jealous lest they may lie as stones of stumbling in your way, and obtain sen∣tence of condemnation to pass upon us as criminals, before you have heard us plead our cause.
1. The exceeding great abuse of that liberty we plead

for, whereupon we had almost said, Let us not do good, lest evil come thereof. But in this we were satisfied con∣sidering, 1. That the having and reading the Scriptures in our tongue, is the first occasion of the manifold errors and divisions found amongst us; yet the loss of that liberty would be an intolerable loss. 2. Did Ordination pass up∣on every Preacher, there is no such virtue in it to make pure, or to keep pure: as some vessels under that mark bring us gold and silver, so some are loaden with little else, but apes and peacocks. 3. The allowableness of an act is founded in the authority by which it is performed, when attend∣ed with dueness of circumstance, not in issue, success, or uncertain event: the active humiliation of our blessed Lord was the greatest-stumbling block, and an occasion of the saddest blasphemy to the Nation of the Jews, that ever any people were acquainted with; yet therein he was obedient, and therefore honored. Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8, 9. 4. Such men as are through Grace , taught of God, and through gift . apt to teach. are as vines and fig-es, where the cursed fruit of error and division with obstinacy persisted in, is not found; and for such only we plead.
2. That we hereby keep open bleeding wounds, which had need be healed: the answer whereunto we trust also of a good conscience, is this: It is a duty to contend, Jude 3. although to be contetious is sin: a contending Spirit may be healing, a contentious spirit is wunding evermore. We profess our selves bound for peace, as far as the shooes of the Gospel will carry us; and say with Calvin, Opranda quidem est pax, summoque Caivin de vra Christianae pacifi∣is, & c∣clesiae reforman∣deraione. studio querenda: sed ptius quam redi∣matur ulla pietati au veritatis jactu∣ra, Coelumterra sipus est misceatur.
And because the many controversies concerning Officers issue from a diverse apprehension of the nature of the Church it self, we shall crave leave in a few

words to give an account of our perswasion thereabout, with the grounds and reasons thereof.
It is unto us clear as the shining light, That a Church formed unto fellowship in New-Testament-Ordinances (we would not found a controversie upon a word) a Church ca∣pable of Officers, immediately to be set in it, and over it, who may take heed to all the flock, o∣versee and feed it, which also must know Act 20. 28. 1 Thes. 5. 12, 13. Heb. 13. 7, 17. them, obey and submit unto them, as to such as watch for their souls; is a particular company of Saints in mutual union for mutual fellowship in the means of worship appointed by Christ, for the glory of God, the edification of their own souls, and the good of others.
1. It's a company; one cannot be a Church. Tell the Church, is not, Tell the Bishop; though some have had it, and still would have it so.
2. It's a particular company: indeed there never was, never will be a company existing in rerum naturâ, any other then a particular company: we grant an Universal company of Saints in a reformed sense, comprehending ever indivi∣dual Saint-member thereof, whether formed unto fellowship, or unformed; but as Saints, not as Churches of Saints: as the world is universal, of which all Creatures are a part, yet did a man stand where he might see all Countreys and all Creatures, he should see but a particular world, really par∣ticular, but intellectually Universal: so when all Saints shall be gathered together at the right hand of the Lord, ther shall be seen a particular company of Saints, really particular, though intellectually universal; this being apprehended, viz. here are all, there are no more: it's otherwise with Compa∣nies of Saints formed into fellowship; did a manstand where he might see all Corporations; all particular civil Societies of men, he might acknowledge the general nature of Corpora∣tions existing in either of them, and yet deny an universal Corporation consisting of them as parts thereof: So were all

the particular Churches represented to his view at once, he might grant that the uni∣versal Universalis natura est una in multis. nature of a Church, is in either of them, yet deny an universal Church consist∣ing of them as parts thereof.
Neither can we understand how that Scripture, 1 Cor. 12. 28. so often pressed into the service of the Catholick Church, can be found really a friend thereunto: for God hath set some in the Church, is equivalent to that which is written, ver. 18. God hath set the members every one in [the] Body; now if this hath no strength, God hath set the members in the Body, Ergo, There is a Catholick, Body; then this is weak: God hath set some in the Church, Ergo, There is a Catholick Church. And let not our Brethren impute it to a spirit of faction and division in us, that we renounce the name and thing of a Church, of Churches, or of such a visible Catholick Church: for,
1. Every part is incompleat, not having the power of a whole in it: but every particular Church rightly constitu∣ted, hath in it the power of a whole Church, therefore 'tis not a part: & whatever our Brethren deny us in our Congregati∣ons, yet may they obtain a concession for a National Church∣constitution, we doubt not but they would be therein Inde∣pendent, and not allow the Authority of any Nation, or of all the Nations in the Christian world, to impose a form of or∣der or Government upon them, wherein they are not satisfi∣ed; acting in all Church-work, not as a part, but a whole: which they could not regularly doe, if but a part of a Catho∣lick Church.
2. Every whole is really distinct from every part, and from all its parts collectively considered: they are constituting that is constituted; but where that Church is, which is re∣ally distinct from all particular Churches, or wherefore it is, we profess we know not.
3. There is no Universal visible meeting to worship God, Ergo, no Universal visible Church. The Synagogical

meetings of the Jews were the meetings of several parts of that Church, and there never was in them the power of the whole Church; and we know not how it can be stiled, a Na∣tional Church (unless it be from a national meeting, Statis temporibus) the word  being never used, either in a civil sense, as Act. 19. 32, 41. or a Sacred sense, but propter Conventum, either in fieri or in facto esse, because the persons were met, or under engagement to meet toge∣ther: yea the Church of the first-born, however dispersed and scattered upon the Earth, yet doth as an invisible Church meet invisibly and in Spsrit to perform the acts of worship re∣quired of such a Church: we are confident, whatever it be is called , assembling together is the formal reason of that denomination, which is Coetus con∣vocatus, or the Congregation, as 'tis every where Coetus à Coeundo. translated by Mr. Tindal in his translation of the New Testament.
4. There are no distinct Officers appointed for such a distinct Church, ergo there is no such Church: Diocesan Bishops, Provincial Arch-Bishops, National atriarchs, universal Popes, would surely have been found in the Scrip∣ture, had a Diocesan, Provincial, National, or Uni∣versal Church been found there.
5. There is no Church greater then that which hath the power to hear and determine upon offences committed in the Church; but that Church is particular, Mat. 18. 17. We know dissenting parties lay claim to this Text on both sides: we say but this, If it means the Congregation, it excludes all other; if it means the any other, it excludes the Congregation; which is unscriptural, irrational, ab∣surd.
Obj. If notwithstanding all this, some may judge, that although Churches do not meet in their members actually, yet they may meet in their representatives, which being met, may be called, The Classical, Provincial, National, Universal Church.

Answ. We answer each of us in the words of Zuingli∣us, to a like argument, Representativam credo veram esse non credo: i. e. That such a Church is a repre∣sentative I believe, but I believe not that it is a true Church.
3. It's a holy company, a company of Saints, Rom 1. 7. 1 Cor. 1. 2. said therefore to be in God the Father, and in Jesus Christ, 1 Thes. 1. 1.—
1. It's the Kingdom of Christ, the Body of Christ, the Church of Christ, yea Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 12. implying neerness of relation unto him; but none visibly related unto Satan, as the visibly uncalled are, can be respected as vi∣sibly related unto the Lord Jesus; therefore not of his King∣dome, Body, Church, &c.
2. The visibility of that which constitutes a member of the invisible Church, declares a man meet to be received unto Communion in the visible; but the Heavenly Call constituteth a member of the invisible Church, ergo the visibility of that Call declares a man meet to be received un∣to Communion in the visible, the members whereof are Saints by calling: no Churches of Christ by institution, but are Churches of Saints by constitution, 1 Cor. 14. 33.
3. Every Body is to be considered, first in its essential state, before it can be determined such a body in its inte∣gral, or organical state: as man is compounded of soul and body, and so constituted an essential whole, who hath fur∣ther more eyes and ears, hands and feet, parts and mem∣bers, which put him under another notion; yet cannot all his parts and members which are integral, compleat him in the being of a man Univocally, if he be deficient in any part which is essential: so is every aggregate in forming a flock of sheep; 'tis necessary to consider the nature of the creatures to be formed; and none, not sheep, can be numbred to such a flock: in forming a Church of Saints, 'tis necessary to consider the nature of the members to be form∣ed; and  Saints visibly, can be numbred to such a

Church: Invisible unbelievers may as well belong to the invi∣sible Church, as visible unbelievers to that which is visible.
We forbear multiplying arguments for further proof, be∣cause we have the consent of our Brethren in the general: as to the necessity of Saintship, the whole strife being at the door of visibility, and about the rule for the judgement thereof; which some mistaking, have their charity so large, as to embosome nations of men, Separatim & conjunctim, as Saints, upon the account of a bare dogmatical faith, espe∣cially if it be not contradicted with enormous scandals; reckoning it among the errours of Jus Divi∣num Regim. Eccles. pre∣face. the Independents, that they affirme, the matter of the visible Church must be (to the utmost judgement of discerning) such as have true grace, real Saints. Concerning therefore a judgment of visible Saintship, we are thus minded according to rule.
1. Errours of judgement overturning the foundations of faith, are inconsistent with grace & Saintship, Tit. 3. 10, 11.
2. Errours of life everturning the foundations of holiness, are inconsistent with grace and Saintship Gal. 5 19, 20, 21, 24. and thus far we suppose our Brethren will walk with us.
3. Total ignorance of the way and working of Christ in the heart, is inconsistent with grace and Saintship, 1 Pet. 3. 15. We ask our Brethren, what rule they would walk by, in applying comfort to particular souls? if they would not enquire after truth of grace, what experience of sins burthen? what experience of Christs relief? yea further we would know, what reason they have to justifie a practise of enquiring after truth of grace in order to Communion in the Lords Supper, and yet condemn us for the same practise in order to the Communion of Vindication of the Presbyteri∣al Govern∣ment, and Mi∣nistry, printed 1650. Saints, who write thus: He that would come to the Sacrament must examine himself: 1. In general, whether he be worthy to come, &c. 2. In particular, whether he have true faith in Christ, with∣out

which he cannot worthily eat this bread, nor drink this cup. 2. Whether be truly repent, &c. 3. Whe∣ther he be truly united by love to Jesus Christ & his members &c. Vind. p, 52. 53. They further say, that such as are grosly ignorant (and such they intimate them to be, that cannot examine themselves, their faith, re∣pentance, &c.) should be kept from the Sacrament by Church-Officers, upon diverse reason: else, 1. Church-Governors should be very unfaithful Stewards, 2. They should be guilty of polluting and prophaning the Sacra∣ment. 3. They should express much cruelty to the Soul of him to whom they give the Sacrament, because they give it to one who will eat and drink his own dam∣nation. 4. They make themselves accessary to his sin of unworthy receiving. 5. They grieve the Godly mem∣bers of the same congregation; and as much as in them lieth, defile the whole Congregation, For know you not (saith the Apostle) that a little leaven doth leaven the whole lump? 6. They bring down the judgments of God upon the Congregation, pag. 54 55. 56. Upon this they build a third proposition, viz. It is the will of Christ, that Church-Governors have some way suffici∣ent to discover who are ignorant, &c. page 57. What they would do at the table, we would do at the door, and entrance into the house, receiving thereinto all those whom the Lord hath received (to the best of our di∣scerning) and no more; knowing no rule for an ordina∣ry suspension of compleat and owned members of the bo∣dy, from the priviledges given, and by our Lord be∣queathed thereunto.
Let not any stumble at the corruption found in some of the Gospel-Churches: an incestuous person was a member in that of Corinth; and more disorder may be found in it: to which we say, filthy matter may be found in a Church rightly constituted, which is not fit mat∣ter in the constitution thereof. It were absurd to affirm,

an unclean person may de jure be a Church-member, be∣cause a Church-member de facto was unclean. As for the National body of the Jewes, we respect it as a typi∣cal president: purge out the leaven, remove the leper, him that hath an issue, that is unclean by touching of the dead, &c. and we are satisfied concerning the matter of the Church.
4. It's an united Company. A Company however qualified, are not a Church, except an united Company: Member-hood speaks relation: relation, if Political, is founded in consent: my brother indeed is my brother whether I will or no, this relation is natural; so beleev∣ers are brethren without consent: but my companion not so, the mutual relation found in Companies and So∣cieties of men, is not so. We would not quarrel about a word, expressing the meaning of union; may we obtain a grant of the thing it self, call it consent. agreement, covenant, or joyning, Act. 5. 13. Thus we argue, That whereby a number of fit persons are joyned together, to walk and worship God together in the same Ordinan∣ces, is the form of a particular Church. But by Cove∣nant, consent, or agreement, a number of fit persons are so joyned: Ergo. The Minor we prove thus: That which giveth being of Member-hood, distinction of Churches, and power of Ecclesiastical operation, is that, by which a number of fit persons are joyned together, &c. But Covenant, consent, or agreement, giveth being of mem∣ber-hood in a particular Church, distinction of Church∣es, and power of operation: Ergo.
1. The being of Member-hood is conveyed in Cove∣nant: not in profession or baptism, Ergo, in Covenant: the excommunicate Corinthian was a visible beleever, and also under baptism, before he was received into the Church again by consent; yet till then, he was no mem∣ber.
2. The distinction of every member, and so of the

whole Church, from other members and other Churches is by Covenant. The members of Smyrna are not mem∣bers of Ephesus, nor è contra: the distinction is not in place: Phebe is a member and servant of the Church at Cenchrea, when she is at Rome. Did the Church of Smyrna convene at Ephesus, and do an act there, it were the act of the Church of Smyrne, asmuch as if it had been done in Smyrna, where ordinarily they meet and walk to∣gether: nor is the destinction from profession: what is common to the Members of every Church cannot be the form of any Church; but the destenction is from mutu∣al ingagement. The power of acting as Members one towards another is hereby; when a way is solitary, work solitary, a man may walk alone work alone; not so where social: how can two walk together except they be a∣greed? The Associated Pastors and Churches in Wor∣cestershire upon their debate about consent, conclude: We have reason to require, as things now stand, a more express signification of our peoples consent to our Ministery, and Ministerial actions, and their Membership of our particular Churches: Christian Concore, pag 11. Which conclu∣sion is strengthned with many reasons, wherein they urge Antiquity, Reason 11. Conveniency, Reason 12. and speaking of the Primitive Churches to that Question, Whether express consent were required then, among other things they (or M. Bxter for them) affirm, that without the peoples express consent none could then have ruled them by meet Ecclesiastical rule. pag. 15. Who have there∣fore the form of a covenant drawn up and added to the profession of faith to be taken by the Members of every particular Church respectively.
And the late Assembly in their answer to the reasons of the dissenting Brethren, against the instance of the Church of Jerusalem, attribute so much to consent in a Church organical that although they say Elders receive their power and commission for the whole Church of

Christ. yet they may not exercise that without a Call; and the mutual assent and agreement of the persons a∣mong whom and to whom they should exercise it is pro∣ximum fundamentum exercitii, pag. 10. So it is of every act of special duty, by one man in reference to another, according to Mat. 18. 15. that should a man proceed upon that rule in dealing with one not in special covenant in∣gaged, he would soon see his error, and that he had no call, because no consent.
Our Brethren need not be so much offended, that we make consent the form of a congregational Church, when themselves, as it seemeth unto us, make it the form of a Presbyterial: For granting that the Elders of a borde∣ring Presbytery (though Neighbors) may not intermed∣dle with the congregations under, another Presbytery, they say, They take themselves bound in a special relation to those Congregations, who are associated in that Pres∣bytery, in those things for which they are as∣scciated; and their mutual consent and agree∣ment Assemblies Answer. gives them that relation and calling to those things. pag. 11.
Moreover, considering how far our Brethren are a∣greed in this matter, we much wonder at their offence at our Covenant or Agreement: for they will grant,
1. That the members of particular Churches are under special engagement, to special duty in taking the care of, and in watching ever one another; so that the Church neglecting duty herein is guilty of the sin of every member, as the Church of Corinth of the sin of the incestuons persons, 1 Cor. 5. and the seven Churches of Asia of the sin of their several members respectively: and not otherwise.
2. That members of a particular Church ought by the institution of Christ to walk together in Ordinances; and that walking in Ordinances with another Church, and not with the same Church, is sinful separation.

3. The obligation upon a member to walk with a parti∣cular Church cannot be dissolved by the private will of that member, nor by the consent of any other Church, but that of which he is a member; according to the known Rule, Ejusdem est destituere cujus constituere: onely in this they are contrary unto us, That they judge the remov∣ing of an habitation a disanulling of former relation: but if cohabitation gives not member-hood. though that cease, member-hood is not taken away; but co-habitation, giv∣eth not member-hood, no, although joyned with profession and baptism: the incestuous Corinth excommunicate had all these, but no member-hood, until by consent received again into the Church.
These things considered, we plead but the way of com∣ing under an acknowledged institution, whereby members in their private personal capacites altogether free, be∣come engaged to fellow members; which we apprehend to be by mutual Combination, Consociation, Consent or Co∣venant; and know not what rock of offence is herein for any to stumble at; b believe, as white Wine, put into a blew-coloured Glass, is in appearance blew and not white; so the innocent Truth observed in a glass of Prejudice, appeareth prejudicial, and not Truth.
5. A company united unto fellowship in means of wor∣ship, appointed by Jesus Christ: all worship is either natural, i. e. founded in the nature of God, and know∣able by the light of Nature, as Faith, Love, &c. which are invisible: and hearing what God doth speak calling upon God, Singing praises unto God; which are visible parts of worship: Or instituted, i. e. founded in the will of God, and knowable by the Scriptures, as Baptism by Water, breaking of Bread in the Lords Supper, &c. No worship is founded in the will of man, but Will-Wor∣ship.
The Papists whose Church is so full of power as to make Decrees of equal authority with the ten Command∣ments,

yet are modest in the reason of this power which they plead, because say they, The Church hath the Spirit to guide her, and the Decrees thereof are from the same Spirit whence the ten Commands were; but we are sa∣tisfied concerning Revelations, and shall expect none, re∣gard none, in nova materia, in new matters to be revealed, yet shall plead them, and pray for them in novo actu, in new acts of discoverie of that which in Scripture is revealed; being perswaded that hee which hath entred into his rest hath ceased from his work, as God did from his; from his Priestly work, in bearing ini∣quity; Heb. 4. 10. his Regal work in destroying Satan, Death, and the Grave; from his Prophetical work, in gi∣ving Laws and Ordinances, to his holy Church; the Sabbath-work of the Son (as the Fathers also) being a∣nother kind of work then that which was antecedent to his Sabbath.
But we shall say no more of this, our Brethren being not baptized into a belief of the same truth, asserting Presbyterial Government to be from heaven, in the Jus Divinum of Church-Government: although the confidence of our late Assembly could speak no more but this: The Scripture doth hold forth, that many particular Congregations The third Pro∣position in the Assemb. present∣ed to the Parlia∣ment. may be under one Pesbyterial Govern∣ment: may be they would have said. Must be, had they seen the stamp of Jus Divinum upon it.
6. The end of this fellowship is the glory of God. Edification of members, good of others; in this also we are agreed: and truly Brethren, we desire to end in agreement; but we are jealous lest the displeasure of some may be provoked against us, not onely for our judg∣ment, but for our pactice; declaring it in contra∣diction to men of such eminency, engaged against it: As therefore we have gaven an account of the reason of

our Judgement, suffer us also, in a few words to give an account of our practise, which is this: A pit hath been dig∣ed, & layes uncovered some time, divers have fallen there∣into, crying up the Arguments to which we reply as un∣answerable probably because not answered: whilst o∣thers cry down the Congregational men for their silence, as more Papistico, because they now cease replying unto Books extant against their practice: the pit must be fil∣led up or covered; in which attempt let us not be smit∣ten for speaking, and also for holding of our peace.
But why do we come so late into this service? Ans. We waited to have seen it done by others before this time, supposing the next of the kin, viz. some principal man, would have espoused this truth, and raised up a seed to his elder Brether. We acknowledge our selves in the relation; if none else will we must raise up the name of the dead upon his inheri∣tance. Ruth. 4. 4, 6.
We are threatned (as We hear) with an Answer: we fear it not, onely let it be the answer of a good Consci∣ence; and let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamour, and evil speaking, be put away. Brethren, Grase be with your spirits.
So pray the unworthiest of the Lords Servants, who yet desire to love Christ in his, and his in him.
