


Reader,
IT's matter of Lamentation, that Errors and errone∣ous Opinions do so abound in our days, which be∣ing baptized into the name of Truth, and coming with specious pretences, obtain, get entrance, and take possession of the Heads and Hearts of many; who being influenced thereby, become unfriendly unto Truth; making her a sufferer like Princes Children, who oft∣times smart because they are of the Blood Royal. But however Truth appears to the purblinde eyes of men, and be oppressed; yet she is lovely; beautiful, glorious, and shall not always lie amongst the pots. Truth is of such esteem with the Lord, that he magnifies it above all his Name, and loveth Truth more then all his Saints: for it's Truth which sanctifies them, and makes them lovely; and in case they make Truth to suffer, he will make them sufferers for it. There is nothing in this World more dear unto Iehovah, then his Truth, Hence these injunctions are laid upon men: Buy Pro. 23. 23. 2 Tim. 1. 19. Jude 3. the Truth, and sell it not: hold fast the form of sound words, and contend for the Faith. Thus should the Children of Truth do: but such is the un∣happiness of our times, that some deny Truth, others corrupt Truth, many question Truth, and most are so contentious against Truth, that if the Lord did not raise up some Worthies to plead for, and rescue her, she would be carried away Captive, or lie fallen and oppres∣sed in our Streets. The learned and judicious Authors of this Treatise; hath the Lord stirred up at last to vindi∣care

some Truths, which seemed to them to suffer wrong: therefore are they come into the Field; and whether they quit themselves like men, the ensuing Discourse will declare. It's of a Polemical Nature; and Con∣troversies are seldom managed without heat: in such engagements men are apt to offend persons, whilst they defend Truth; and proceed too far upon the account of their own interest; minding not so much what's to be said for Truth opposed, as what's to be laid upon the Opposers. These Brethren, and Friends to Truth, have no such Spirit in them: they contend for the Truth, yet are not contentious; like Moses and Michael, they are milde and meek, having nothing provocative in their Lips or Pens: their Moderation will appear to all men: more love, sweetness and candor, in a work of this na∣ture, can hardly be found or expected.
Reader, wouldst thou know whether men unordained may warrantably preach; whether Election or Ordina∣tion do give the Essentials to a Minister or Church-Of∣ficer; whether such an Officer relate to the Church universal, or to a particular Church, which are things of great concernment: consult this Tractate, read it with∣out prejudice, weigh things seriously, and doubtless thou wilt finde much satisfaction, and see cause to bless the Lord for the labours of these his Servants. That the God of Truth would give us all hearts to love the Truth, and receive the love of the Truth, is the prayer of

