



May it please your Excellency and Honours.
ALthough the olde enmity between Sathan & Saints
hath been alwayes improved by power and policie,
yet the Serpents seede appearing in or opes, and
the Serpents head applying his traps, have beene
hitherto crush't by the fooe of truth, and the 
thereof; It is hard to say whether Israels Assist∣annt,
and Israels Assaultant, have more hotly disputed in combates
or counsels: but frequent experiences, and faithfull promises doe a∣boundantly
certifie, that neither weapon nor wisdome shall stand a∣gainst
God; yet Balack and Balaain, the Prince and the Priest
(as of old, so now) from Pisga to Peor (or Pulpit to Pulpit) pr∣sume
to blesse the Lord by cursing his Armies, as if God would ex∣change
the blood of his people for that of Buls and Goates,; for their
talke of Reformation, give them (the longing of their soules) the
Armies destruction:Numb. 25. 24. Neverthelesse the people shall rise up as a
great Lion, and lift up himselfe as a young Lion; hee shall
not lye down till he eate of the prey; and drink the blood of
the slain. It is not one of the least advantages of Israels adversa∣ries,
that they know their colours can speake their language, un∣derstand
their word; by meanes whereof their deceitfull spies come
to their counsels, finde out their purposes; nay sometimes get under
pay, procure preferment, and draw out parties, as Absolom did,
400. men, that in the simplicity of their hearts, knowing nothing,
did follow their Leader) to their own ruine; the inconsiderate sub∣scription
of so many judicious, grave, and learned men to that abu∣sive.
Letter sent in private to your Excellency and generall Councell
out of their Christian amity, and published in print to procure your
infamy, scandalously aspersing the High Court of Justice, delivered
Jan. 18. 1648. doth abundantly argue the yet living efficacie of

that Serpents subtlety, which (with Gods words in the lip)
cheated our first Parents into most deceitfull actions. Su
some Judas or Jesuite under the shape of a Brother, 
their Function, hath got this subscription, since the publishing 
(as a due punishment (they have run the gauntlet, each tongue & 
hath a lash at their nakednesse. For although it be your glory to passe
by your injuries, yet it is our duty to vindicate your innocencie; ey
charge you with perjurie for keeping your Covenant, in bringing Di∣linquents
to condign punishmeut; they charge you with ,
for a judiciall execution of the grand murtherer of this latter age;
they charge you with break in the Parliament, for not permitting
them to enslave & ruine (their Lord) the Kingdome. Honour'd ,
suffer not their chantings to obstruct your proceedings; they pretend a
message from your Lord and theirs; containing an inhibition of his
expresse commandNumb. 35. 16, 17., and a plain contradiction to their fello. Minist∣ers
opinionIohn Knox his history of the reformati∣on of religion in the Realme of Scotland, l. 4. p. 397. wher he asserteth it to be the judgement of Calvin, and of the most god∣ly and most learned Pres∣byterian Di∣vines that ce in Europe, that the infe∣riour Magi∣strates, and upon their fi∣nall default, the people may & ought to execute their Princes for murther∣ing & destroy∣ing their liege Subjects.. I have not the least enmity against lawfull Magistra∣cy,
nor the smallest reluctance against the publique Ministery, the one
and the other being Gods Ordinances for our present & eternal good:
but whom Magistrates shall enslave, and Ministers deceive, and
both officiate for their private interest, they are most noxius to pub∣lique
benefit: when that Caleb leades Israel that will follow the
Lord fully, and that man is found out that will seek judgement &
execute the truth. Wee may hopefully expect our duction by the 
into the land of Promise, though through severall combates 
sons of Anacke, and our happinesse by the other through a pacificati∣on
of an angry GOD, who will spare the NATION by just
execution: The presence of GOD, and the prayers of his people
(whose guard you are in those troublesome times) shall ever attend
your just attempts: And although your zealous Enemies, under the
specious pretences of a pious Reformation, and deepe devotion, doe
fast for strife and debate, and to strike with the fist of wickednesse; yet
while you loose the bonds of wickednesse, & und the heavy burtens,
free the oppressed, and breake every yoke; your light shall breake forth
as the morning, and your health shall spring forth speedily; your
righteousnesse shall goe before you, and the glory of the Lord shall be
your rearwardIsa. 58. 8.: so prayeth, and so believeth

February 18. 1648.
