



Sir,
FAwning Flattery spoyls many; but
plain dealing is every mans duty:
The wounds of a Friend will heale,
when the kisses of an Enemy will
hurt. The City Remonstrance is
no caracter of the Cityes excellency: Nor your Vin∣dication
thereof, of your Perfection. And the truth
is, the former Expresses of this worthy City, and the
common observation of your old Profession, quit∣ted
our expectations of such a Remonstrance from
them: And such a Vindication from you. For as wee
doe not expect Grapes from thornes, so neither sowre
Sloes, from generous Vines, as not Figs from thistles,
so neither prickles from Figge-trees; But it is the City
above which is only pure, and the man at Gods
right hand, who is only Perfect: And therefore:
As the Moon is not defineable by her Spots, Jewels

by their flawes, nor Gould by its drosse; so, is not the
City by their Remonstrance, nor your selfe by your
Vindication thereof, (though I must needs say, the
pleading for evill, is worse then the evill it pleads for,
and therefore your Vindication, then the Remon∣strance
it selfe but yet the greatnesse of the temptati∣on,
(viz. your presumption of the Cityes favour, and
Popular applause) calles for more Graines of allow∣ance
concerning your selfe, in the thoughts of your
Friends. I confesse you are once more assaulted with a
fresh temptation, viz. to hate your friend, (even to
revenge) for his plain dealings, and how it prevailes,
your future deportment towards him and his
Friends, I mean the Servants of God, differing in
Iudgement from your selfe will helpe mens intelligence
were wee to know men after the flesh, your former
acquaintance, and your kindnesse to me, had held my
hand from this present worke, but Selfe denyall is
both your duty and mine; Your strange siding, and keen
penning it against your Bretheren, makes them af∣fraid
of you, lest you should be one of those many, who
in the latter dayes shall be offended at the name,
of Christ, betray one another, and bate one ano∣ther;
beleeve it, how ever you may flatter your selfe,
you are already come to a neerer degree of open persecu∣tion
of the Saints of God, then Haza was unto those

blouddy executions against Israel of old, when he said to
the Prophet, (lamenting at the fore-sight thereof) Is
thy Servant a Dog, that he should do this great
thing, 2. Kings 8. 13. the present distance wherein
you stand, from such proceedings, is not so great as the
former was from your present practises, during the time
of your old profession; those that begin, not only to for∣sake
the fellowships of their old Companions in the
wayes of God, but also to make them obnoxious to the
Stroake of the Magistrate, as you have done, are posting
apace to that irrecoverable sin, of doing despite to the
Spirit of Grace, Heb. 10. 29. I know Sir, these are
cutting words, but their propper tendency, is your perso∣nall
good, and the timely prevention, through Gods
mercy, of your future evill, for how ever you take me,
my heart-knowing God, and my thoughts-knowing
conscience can witnesse for me, that I am,

