



THou Royall Crosse, with Age and
Honour crown'd,
That stand'st i'th mid'st of the
Kings Bath, renown'd
Both farre and neer, such Cures
thy Bath hath wrought,
As thousands unto thee for help have sought,
Who by thy warming Waters healed were,
Whose Stilts there left thereof do witnesse beare,
And to thy Honour, on thy top are placed,
To shew with what great vertue thou art graced:
Neer to thy Springs my agitating Muse,
Hath made a Book which doth report some Newes
As from thy self: Her Book craves at thy hand
It under thy renowned name may stand.
And I the Author choose to make my moan
Uuto thy self. For why? As senselesse stone
Most hearts are now become. Therefore from
thee
An equall good may well expected be,

Through devious wayes & sundry suddain fears
My Pilgrimage in this sad vale of tears
Hath past, In Schools, Camp, and Court, poor I
Have seen the change of times variety;
And learn'd to know worlds best prosperity
Is but a state of wretched misery.
I then began my thoughts for to remove,
From things beneath unto those things above
And then my heart all sweetning comfort
borrows.
From him who was a man of woe and sorrows
In this base world, which then I did forsake,
And once again unto my books betake
My self, God then of his free grace did call
Me to that Warre which is spirituall,
And lawfully by Church-authority,
I was admitted to the Ministry;
And being thus by Gods great mercy brought
Unto his work, I have his Battels fought,
Full fourty yeers, and never yet did cease,
Next to the Faith, for to preserve the Peace
Of holy Church, as did become a Sonne;
All her commads by me were justly done:
And yet the heaps of followers did me wrong,
I could not mend't but all the way along,
In the whole course of my poor Ministry,

I was acquainted with adversity.
And did at last all means of living loose,
That hope fail'd me which I to trust did choose;
The Letters from, and Orders of that Court
Of High-Commission shall of me report
No thing but well, who please to see them may,
And hear on my behalf what truths they'l say:
But once grown poor from England then I went
To Ireland, where I might with good content,
Have lived but that Rebellious fatall curse
Drove me from thence, to a Rebellion worse,
And now poor man in this thy City Bath,
I am alive as buried in my grave;
With grief I see the wofull misery
Of honest, poor, dispised Poverty.
The Prophet of his time did hit it right,
That every one was found an Hypocrite.
Yea, now that Hell-born sinne doth wound and stain.
The greatest number, who as yet remain
Professed Christians without Charity:
In such I'me sure ther's most Hypocrisie:
And for this cause that Book doth swiftly flie,
Which lamentation, mourning, woe doth cry
To every Soul. This Truth though seen, and
kown,
The greatest part from ill to worse are grown.

And seeing this, I have the world forsook,
A help from thence it is in vain to look:
Yet went I on with my well-meaning Book,
From first to last with hardship undertook.
And though the means appears dispis'd & weak,
And men may think it doth but vainly speak,
To stop Rebelious course that's grown so strong
Joshua. 6. 4. Seven Trumpets of Rams-Hornes. Judges 7. 16. Gdeons 300. broken Pit hers. 1 Sam. 17. 49. Young, little, and unarmed David with a Stone and a Slinge to overcome and slay the triple armed Gyant great Goliah. By weaker means God hath destroy'd the throng,
Of stronger Enemies as you may see,
In holy Writ recorded there to be.
My self, my Book poor and dispis'd though thought
Yet by such means the mighty God hath brought
Great things to passe, yea, works of wondrous
fame.
That glory might be given to his great name,
A happy Peace that precious Pearl to gain.
My Book with Gods assistance may obtain,
Or further the Obtainment and not hinder,
What may a Peace to King and Kingdom
render.
Kind Crosse, I pray thou wouldst accept it then,
For thou art kind unto all sorts of men.
To Poor, and Rich, to th' Lesser, and the Great,
To all thou dost afford a warming Seat
As is thy self, my Booke's a Bath for Health,
To heale the Aches of the Common-wealth,

If some therein to bathe will wisely trie,
It would them heale of Treasons Leprosie,
And thus (kind Crosse) I humbly take my leave
Thou wilt not me of any hope bereave.
And what thou art, I must resolve to bear,
My proper Crosse is unto me my share,
Which I'le take up, and joyfully will kisse,
So following Christ to my eternall blisse.

