



WHen I understood you had pleased to designe mine unworthy self to this weighty service of preaching at your publike Fast; Although I could not but ap∣prehend it a work far above my fitnesse, yet might I not think of flying from it with Jonah, or making objections against it with Moses, for your power and his providence,Brod. 3.1. and 4 10, 13. who is higher then the highest, meeting together in this appoint∣ment, made it both impossible and unlawfull to desert the ser∣vice. And indeed, these calamitous times that are come upon us doe call upon all men, to shew themselves willing, if they have any hope they may be able to doe any thing for a perishing King∣dome, to use their best endeavours with all alacrity unto that end. That noble resolution of the souldier so much commended, is most worthy imitation, of whom it is reported, That having lost both armes and legs in services, and having nothing but the trunke of his body remaining to him: yet would needs be in the breach. If (saith he) I can doe no other thing, yet perhaps I may keep off a blow, or blunt the edge of some sword drawne to the foyling and wounding of some other; although he had neither hands, nor feet, he wanted not an heart to do what he could, and shewed himself willing, when he was able to doe little; how meane soever our abilities are, the times will permit none to be silent that are called to speake, nor idle who are called to work. The lion (saith Amos)
hath roared, who will not feare?Amos. 3.. the Lord hath spoken, who can but prophecie? I did unfeigned∣ly desire to speake a word in season, and thought no subject more
sutable, then what might serve unto that end whereat you aime, which is to divert anger, and prevent utter ruine. I therefore made choice of such a Scripture as did discover the cause of our continued miseries, and so did direct unto the cure of this wounded and languishing Nation, by removing that cause, the great core is impenitencie under smiting.
The people turn not to him that smiteth them: For upon the one hand there are the divisions of Reuben, causing great and sad thoughts of heart, and on the other, the stupidity and profannesse of the mul∣titude which causeth great droopings of spirit; these things doe sadden the hearts of the Seers, and servants of God, and doe fill many with feare and doubt as well as sorrow and griefe; seeing how little this last meanes doth prevaile with either party, Hom. 8.
 17. . it is hard to say what sin hath been forsaken of the multitude, since God began to smite the Kingdome, as farre as I can discerne some sins are rather much increased then at all abated, as name∣ly, that of drunkennesse, a sin so much the more to be lamented, abhorred, and restrained, as it is more unseemly in it self, more unsutable with the present condition of the Kingdome, and more unsufferable, where reformation should begins for it is (I doubt) too true which Chrysost. hath briefly noted of this sin, that no∣thing
is a neerer friend to the divell than it, and that it is the fountaine and mother of all other vices, that by which the Divell drew the Hebrewes of old into idolatry, &c. and that which doth make swine of men, and men worse than swine, the sow doth wallow in the mire, and is nourished with dung, but such spread a more abominable table for themselves, thin∣king upon impure mixture and wicked loves, yea, they are as men possessed with the Divell, and whereas they are the ob∣ject of our pitie, these of our hatred, because they of their owne accord bring fury and madnesse upon themselves, nei∣ther is there any more filthy thing then a drunken woman. These and such like passages he hath there and elsewhere, with many other of the antient and latter Divines, which I mention,
because we live in such times as have farre more tollerable thoughts of this sinne which is so common among us, and com∣mitted openly in the sight of the Sunne, and not thought to be in the number of those vices which might occasion shame. It were to be wished that in asmuch as no instructions nor admo∣nitions will worke on such men, the bluenesse of the wound might be applyed, which is a purging medicine for such like evils:Prov. 20.30. which while they raigne there will be little hope of any thing tending to a through Reformation found in such men. Now the way to turne away anger, and to stay the destroying hand, is to cause the people to turne to him that smiteth them, this (most noble and renowned Senatours) is that which this wounded and much weakned Kingdome calleth for at the hands of her State-Physitians, and being dangerously sicke of her wounds, which seeme mortall, if they be not speedily cured, she cryeth unto you from all quarters of the land, as the man in the Gospell unto Christ in behalfe of his son, which had a dumb spirit,Mark 9.17. and 21. that did of∣times cast him into the fire and water to destroy him. If you can doe any thing have compassion on us, and helpe us, This is a worke worthy your wisest endeavours, if it may be, to become healers of a distressed Kingdome, unto which, if this meane piece might contribute the least mite, the unworthy Author should have his end in choosing this Text, preaching and publishing this Sermon, which is now (although somewhat late) presented to your view, sooner it should have been, but being much mista∣ken in the time of preaching it, by reason of the silence of the clock, I was constrained, when I did perceive I had exceeded much the bounds allotted, to passe over many things, and dis-rank others which caused the more labour to place them right, and to supply some of those I did then omit, and transcribe the whole, about which I have spent all the houres that I could ever since, spare out of those publike Attendances, unto which I am tyed. I have not made any materiall addition or alteration, although
here and there something was of necessity to be supplyed. It is now (such as it is) humbly presented unto your patronage and acceptance, whose it was preached and is now published. If any of you shall happily cast an eye upon it now printed, as you were pleased to lend an attentive eare unto it when it was preached (and in stead of blaming me for mistaking my time, to shew your good acceptance of my weake endeavours) I hope it may be of some use, at least to remind you of that which must steere your course in all your endeavours for the Kingdomes safety and Churches good, which is to remove the maine obstruction, by causing (if it be possible) that the people may turne to him that smiteth, which if it may but in some good measure be effected, we shall not need to feare or doubt the audience of our Prayers, and crowning your other endeavours with such successe as shall move not only them that now live and pray, but the generations to come to blesse and praise your God and theirs both with and for you; which is continually begged of God at the throne of his Grace, who is exceeding abundantly able to doe above all we aske or thinke, by

