



TRuly Honored, I here present you with a few small peeces, observing that smaller Tractates have been of greater use among many, and still are; especi∣ally such as speak Scripture to us in power and plainness. The lesser peeces of Mr. Perkins, viz. His grain of Muster-seed, Golden Chain, Govern∣ment of the tongue, like to Pearls, even much desired and esteem'd as bearing the more lively impression of the strength and spirit of their Maker. And such is that little Book (which for Honors sake I mention) entituled, Christ set
forth, an entire peice worth its weight in Gold, wherein the Author upon that Argument, the cheif of all de∣sirable Truths, hath satisfied his Rea∣der more abundantly, even to the ful. It was told me once, that Aquinas being asked, What if all Paris were his? answered, I had rather be the Author of the imperfect work of Chrysostom; a small and broken Tra∣ctate. Also greater Volumns have their use, such as Mr. Foxes Book of Martyrs, a Volumn composed for the good of England, if ever any, a Book that can never be out of date; and I believe is of the Cabinet with most wise men; for seldom any work of industry and eminency ap∣pears, but savors much of the spirit, and rich experience Treasured in those Alles. I mention this the rather, because perceiving the Eng∣lish of this age to be under a very rich blessing of an encrease of Sacred Knowledge, next unto the Sacred
Scriptures, the Wells of Salvation, those of our Nation would come and draw here, rejecting the watry Pamphlets so much abroad, enfee∣bling mens spirits, yea, our choicest wits have bin most infected by them.
As for those thicker and grosser sort of souls amongst us, I mean the prophane and ignorant multitude, I am much at a loss in my thoughts for them, and yet I think again, had we such provision on foot as would reach them, I cannot think but a good account might be given of them, as there hath been of late of the like, in some parts of Wales, even to admiration; for as I dare not en∣tertain such a thought, as if God had appointed these poor people, we speak of, all of them to misery; so I hope in due time, it will not be found impossible to rescue them out of Satans power, of whom they are taken at his pleasure.
For when those prophecies shall
be fulfilled, which say, That the veil shall be taken off from all hearts, and the kingdoms of this world, become the king∣doms of our Lord, and of his Son Christ, and the sinners of the Nations, both Gen∣tiles and Jews shall have the Spirit of Grace poured upon them, and shall look upon him whom they have peirced, and mourn after him; in that day there shall be a Fountain opened for them to wash in, even from sins of separation.
Truly Honored, I know you are of the Bride chamber, and do expect the coming of the Bridegroom, as all the wise Virgins do. May it there∣fore ever be your Care, and Crown, to have your Lamp trimmed, and your Vessel filled, I mean an abundant en∣crease of Heavenly Wisdom and Watchfulness; so shall that day be to you as the Hinde of the Morning, an early day of entrance upon an e∣ternity of rest and refreshing.

