



MOst Religious and Judicious SENATORS, I here
present to your saddest thoughts and serious deliberati∣ons,
an abstract of sundry most scurrilous, scandalous,
seditious railing Libels, lately published to the world
in Print, by some Anabaptisticall Independent Secta∣ries,
and New-lighted FIRE-BRANDS; where∣in
the undoubted Priviledges, Ordinances, just Proceedings of Parlia∣ment;
the Reverend Assembly of Divines; our Brethren of Scotland;
the Church of England, with her Government, Ministers, Worship;
the Nationall Covenant, Directory, Presbytery; professed Defenders of the
Parliaments Priviledges, Ordinances against their Licentious Schisma∣ticall
Practises, (according to their Solemn Vow and Covenant) are so
audaciously affronted, oppugned, slandered, railed against; and the
Common people so earnestly excited to mutiny against the Parliament
Assembly, Presbytery, Government and Ministers of our Church of
England, that I am confident no former Age did ever produce such
Monstrous Insolencies, such detestable virulent Libels, which neither
the Honour, Justice, nor Wisdome of that Soveraigne Court of Justice
wherein you are Assessors, nor the Peace and Safety of our Religion,
Church, State, nor your own personall security, nor the Nationall Vow
and Covenant, (engaging both your Honours and all others who have ta∣ken
it against these pernitious Mutiniers) can any longer suffer you pati∣ently
to tollerate (as hitherto you have done) without exemplary pro∣ceedings
against, and punishments upon the Authors, Printers, Pub∣lishers,
Dispersers of these most scurrilous and mutinous Pamph∣lets.
Wherein they most injuriously and falsly revile, traduce all
such for Persecutors, Fighters against Christ and his Kingdome, Enemies to
the wayes of Christ, pulling his royall Crown from off his head, his
kingly Scepter out of his hand, Oppugners of the most religious, con∣scientious,

Godly, best-affected Party (as they Pharisaically and falsly
terme themselves) dividers betweene the Parliament and their best,
their faithfullest Freinds; Prophane Apostates, Popish Jesuiticall Incen∣diaries,
haters of Gods people, and the like; who out of conscience, solid
Judgment and cordiall affection to the safety, tranquility of Religion,
Parliament, Church, Kingdome, dare openly by word or writing,
maintain the undoubted Jurisdiction of Parliaments, Synods, Ma∣gistrates
in Ecclesiasticall affaires, or oppose their factions, schisma∣ticall
Independent wayes and Innovations, destructive both to Magi∣stracy,
Ministery, Vnity, Parliaments, and that blessed Reformation
so much desired.
For my owne particular, I have with much Patience and Contempt
endured, without any Reply at all, their false unchristian Invectives a∣gainst
my self, only for Writing in Vindication of the undoubted Ec∣clesiasticall
jurisdiction, directive and coercive power of Christian
Emperours, Kings, Magistrates, Parliaments, in matters of Religion
and Church-government, in my, Truth triumphing over Falsehood, An∣tiquity
over Novelty, published with Your speciall approbation; and
my Independency Examined, (which have much incensed this waspish
Generation, unable to give any satisfactory answers to them) and I
should have continued silence still, had my own private interest only
been concerned. But when I discerned them to be so audaciously licen∣tious,
presumptuous, as ToPsal. 73. 9. set their mouth against the Heavens,
toExod, 22. 28. Acts 23. 5. revile the very Gods themselves, and curse the Rulers of the people;
2 Pet. 2. 10. to despise Government and speak evill of Dignities, to bring railing
accusations against, and2 Thes. 2. 4. resist the Higher Powers, publishing Li∣bell
after Libell, against the Proceedings, Ordinances, and Jurisdi∣ction
of the present Parliament and Assembly, yea with Antichristian
pride, to2 Pet. 2. 11. Rom. 13. oppose and exalt themselves above all that is called God, or
that is wershipped (as they have lately done, in the Pamphlets hereaf∣ter
mentioned, and in the Nativity of Sir Iohn Presbyter, &c. freshly
published since the rest; every of these latter Libels being more se∣ditious
and pernitious then the former) andMar. 15. 7. Barrabas like, to stirre up
sedition and insurrection among the people, against the Ordinances,
Votes of Parliament, and that Ecclesiasticall reformation and
Pre-byteriall government You have resolved to establish;Jer. 4. 19. My bowels;
my bowels were pained within me at my very heart, so that I could not hold my
peace, nor keepe silence any longer, because thou hast heard, O my soul, the
sound of these seditious Trumpets, and the alarme of this Schismaticall

Anti-Parliamentary war: Yea should I now refraine from writing,
the very stones themselves would immediately cry out against their
most infamous Libels and mutinos presumptuous Practises, opposite
to all publike Order, Government, Authority.
And the rather am I necessitated to this ungratefull worke, because
their very Libels, actions, speeches proclaime a plotted avowed Con∣federacy
among some furious Ringleaders of these Independent Secta∣ries
(though I presume the more moderate are not guilty of it) against
the Parliament, Assembly, and all their Resolves in matters of Reli∣gion
or Church-Government, yea, against our very Church, Ministers,
and Tithes the meanes of their support; as their Libellous Passages
against the Ecclesiasticall Power, proceedings of the Parliament and
Assembly; their publike oppositions against the Nationall Covenant,
Directory, the Ordinances prohibiting disorderly & unlicensed Printing
of Libellous Scismaticall Pamphlets; against Lay-mens preaching in
the Army or else-where; for due Payment of Tythes, &c. recited in the
ensuing Sections, will at large declare.
And that which further confirmes me in this opinion, is: First, the
New Seditious Covenants which the Members of some Independent
Congregations enter into; To adhere, defend, maintain, to the utmost of
their powers, and contend for, even unto blood, the establishment of that Inde∣pendent
form of Church Government which themselves have set up and sub∣mitted
to, and oppose the Presbyterian, in contempt of the Parliaments
Authority: in truth meere Anti-covenants of the Nationall League
and Covenant, which they utterly refuse to take, and rayle against.
2. Their menacing predictions to the Assembly and Presbytery in their two lastMartins Ec∣cho. p. 5. 6. The Nativity of Sir Iohn Presbyter, p. 5. 9. 10. 1. Libels; wherin they print, That the time hastens the peo∣ple
will call them to an Account, and repell and confound them by the
sword; That the life of Sir Iohn Presbyter is like to be neither long nor
good; That he wilbe brought to a sudden untimely end, Perhaps
HANGING. That Presbytry shall live but a short time to do mis∣cheife,
and then, THE COMMON PEOPLE will beg in to sing, Her
Tosse, The Devil's dead; Presbytery will quickly dye, the Synod be dis∣solved,
the divell chained up: and therefore follow the advise of old
Cat; Spem retine. Rejoyce O heavens, sing aloud O earth, clap thy hands
for Joy, O England-post nubula soles; thou shalt have a time of Quietnesse, of
pence, of content, for Presbytery will have never a Child to vexe thee, to
Imprison thy free Denizens, to sucke up thy fatte, devoure thy good

things and eat up thy bread out of thy Childrens mouthes, and himselfe
is not long lived, as I shewed before; and then farewell persecution for
conscience, farewell Ordinance for Tithes, farewell Ecclesiasticall
Supremacy, farewell Pontifical Revenue, farewel Assembly of Divines
dissembled at Westminster, you shall consult together no more, farewell
Sr. Simon Synod, and his son Presbyter Iacke.
Gens antiquaruit, multos dominata perannos, &c.
Which passages, presage and intimate nought else, but a plain con∣spiracy,
confederacy, against the Assembly, Presbytery and presbyte∣rian
party.
3. Some late seditious speeches of two preaching Captaines of this
Schismaticall Confederacy; who being apprehended and questioned
by Sr. Samuell Lukes Officers for preaching in Newport-Pannell, and o∣ther
places neare adjoyning, in contempt of an Ordinance of Parlia∣ment
made the 26. of April 1645. which ordaines, That no person be
permitted to preach who is not ordained a Minister▪ threatning condigne
punishment to the offenders against it for their contempts; enjoyning
Sr. Thomas Fairfax, the Lord Major, the Committee of Militia for Lon∣don;
the Governours, Commanders, and Magistrates of all Garrisons, Castles,
Places of strength, Citties, Townes, Forts, Ports, and the respective Com∣mittees
of each County, To see the same duly observed in the Army and
places aforesaid, and make speedy representation to both Houses, of such as
shall offend therein. These Captaine preachers; (far wiser then that
devout Centurian Cornelius, who feared God with all his house, and pray∣ed
to God alwaies; yet never turned Preacher to his owne Band, for
ought we read, but by Gods own direction from heaven, sent for the Apostle
Peter to instruct him and his family, Acts 10.) among other speeches a∣verred;
That they were illegally used by Sr Samuel in being apprehended
(for their contempt against this Ordinance;) most fasly and seditiously
affirming, That the Generall & all the Colonels in the Army were deep∣ly
engaged. IN THEIR DESIGNE: That they would acquaint their
FRIENDS IN THE HOVSE OF COMMONS of their bad u∣sage,
that they had done nothing but taught the Word of God;
(among other things, that wee had no true Church not Ministry, and
that the children of Beleevers had no more right to Baptisme then those
of Infidels, &c.) which they would justifie, and those friends likewise:
That they had Commission from the Parliament for what they did, &c.
Whereupon one Capt. Oxford answering them; That he was confident

there were few or none in the House would uphold them (against an
expresse Ordinance of both houses) and that the Generall and Collo∣nels
would not side with them in this case: The said Pedicant Captains
replyed; That should be tryed speedily: For they were resolved
to make this businesse THE LEADING CASE OF THE KING∣DOME
FOR ALL THE GODLY PARTY:Note. adding; That if the
godly and wel-affected party were thus persecuted, they should be for∣ced
TO MAKE A WORSE BREACH THEN WHAT WAS YET,
WHEN THEY HAD DONE WITH THE KINGS PARTY:
and telling Ensign Ratford and his Souldiers, that they were worse
then Cavaliers; and that when they had made an end of the war with
the Cavaliers, THEY SHOVLD BE FORCT TO RAISE A NEW
ARMY TO FIGHT WITH THEM.
Certainly these seditious privy Covenants, Libels, Speeches, com∣pared
with the ensuing Sections, Letters, discover and portend no lesse
then a strong conspiracy among some Anabaptisticall Sectaries to op∣pose
the Power, Ordinances and Proceedings of Parliament, to extir∣pate
all other Governments but their own, and to set it up by the sword,
or popular commotions in despight of your Authority. And is it
not then high time for your Honours, with all other well-affected Per∣sons
to look about you? to Vindicate your own Power, Honour, Ju∣stice,
against these most seditious, audatious, contemptuous libellers
against your Soveraign Authority, your most Religious Ordinances,
proceedings in the desired waies of Reformation; and to make some of
them Exemplary Monuments of your Impartiall severity, to deter o∣thers
from the like unparalleld Insolencies, not read nor heard of in any
preceding Age, nor practised by any Generation of men, but these
New furious Sectaries: who to engage all sorts of people in their Quar∣rell,
proclaim a free Toleration and Liberty of Conscience, to all Sects, all
Religions whatsoever, be it Judaise, Paganisme, Turcisme, Arianisme,
Popery; (as all their Pamphlets manifest) And to interest the fe∣male
Sex, and draw them to their party, they (contrary to the1 Cor. 14. 34. 35. 1 Tim. 2. 11, 12. Apostles
precept) allow them not only decisive Votes, but Liberty of Preaching
Prophesying, speaking in their Congregations; yea, power to meet in
theirWhich they used in New port Paell, (contrary to the Gover∣nours Com∣mand. Nocturnall Conventicles, without their Husbands, Parents, Mini∣sters
Privitie, the better to propagate Christs Kingdome, and multi∣ply
the Godly party: Which, what confusion and Ataxy it will soon▪
produce in Church and State, if not prevented by your Honours ex∣traordinary

speedy Diligence, Wisdome, Power, I humbly submit to your
deepest Judgements.
I am certain your Honours have read theSlidan, Com. l. 5. 10. Gastius, de Anabaptist: Erroribus. Bullinger ad∣vers. Anabap∣tist. Guil. de Bres Cntr. Les Anabap∣stes. D. Feat∣lies Dippers Dipt, p. 199. 200, &c The History of the Ana∣baptists. Histories of the Tra∣gicall
Wars and Commotions of the Anabaptists in Germany; whose
Opinions where-ever they predominate, are fatall to the Government,
Magistracy, Ministery of all States, Churches, and bring in popular
Tyranny, and licentiousnesse, the worst of evils. O then let not your
Honours Patience or Indulgence to such Anabaptisticall Libellers in∣volve
both you, us, our Realm, in like German popular Sedicions, De∣vastations,
and bloody Massacres, which they threaten: but if these
New seditious Lights and Fire-brands, will needs set up New Chur∣ches,
Heresies, Church-governments, and vent their new errors or o∣pinions
against your Power and Authority, let them doe it onely in
NEW-ENGLAND, or other NEW-FOVNDLANDS, since OLD
ENGLAND needes them not, unlesse it be to set her all on fire.
As for those furious Champions and Emissaries of theirs who have
most presumptuously opposed your religious Ordinances, by word,
deed, and presuming on the strength of their Freinds within your Wals,
(the opinion wherof, with your former Lenity towards them hath much
increased their spreading Leprosy] intend now at last to try this issue with
your Honours; whether your just Ordinances, or their willfull Con∣tempts
against them shall take place; It is presumed you will so proceed
gainst them, and the Authors, Printers, Publishers of the execrable Li∣bells
hre presented to your veiw, that they and all the world shal know,
You ae a Soveraigne Court of Parliament; whose priviledges, Honour,
you have all joyntly Covenanted to mantain with your Lives, Power,
Fortunes; and to proceed against all such secret Underminers or open
Impugners of them, as Capital Delinquents: and these Mutineers experi∣mentally
know, that no one Member of your Honorable Assembly, will
so far dishonour himself, or violate his publike trust & Covenant, as to
countenance such audacious willfull offenders in the least degree; nor
yet for Fear or Favour of any Faction, any Person how great soever, de∣cline
one hairs-bredth from that straite path of Truth and publike Ju∣stice,
[the greatest Security and support of Parliaments, Kingdoms]
especially in these Leading-cases, wherein you are most concerned, and
as much obleiged to maintain your own Priviledges, Power, Reputa∣tions,
Ordinances, against Seditious Sectaries, as against Rebellious Cva∣leers:
or else dissolve, give over your intended almost-accomplished

Reformation; and so render your selves, with your Proceedings con∣temptible
to all the world: which God forbid.
If any should Object;Object. that the Punishment of these grosse Libellers
& Ring-leaders of sedition would discontent and disengage the Indepen∣dents,
with all other Sectaries of their opinion, who are a considerable
party now; which might prove dangerous to the state in this juncture
of our publike Affaires.
I answer:Answ. 1. That I doubt not all moderate and juditious persons of
that party wil willingly disclaime, if not excomunicate, banish them
their Congregations, and yeeld them up to publike Justice, as persons
worthy the severest Censures; else all the world will cry shame upon
them. Secondly, Admit your executing Justice on them should dis∣content
their party; yet thankes be to God (for all their vapouring]
they are not so potent, so considerable as to over-aw a Parliament from
doing Justice on such of their party, who Libel against, or affront their
power & proceedings; in which case, our whole three Kingdomes are so∣lemnly
engaged by publike Covenant to assist you to the utmost, with
their very lives and fortunes. Thirdly, The greatnes of the Kings Power,
party, hath not retarded you from executing Justice upon Strafford, Can∣terbury,
Tompkins, & sundry other delinquents: Shall then the lesse con∣siderable
Faction of Anahaptists and other Sectaries hinder you from
proceeding against a few seditious Libellers and Delinquents of their
party? Fourthly, Either you must permit them to go on to libel and af∣front
your Authority, Orders, proceedings still, without exemplary pu∣nishments,
to your great dishonour, infamy: or else proceed against
them now, whiles your Ordinances, and their contempts against them
are fresh, their party small: else they will plead prescription, and
you will be lesse engaged, lesse able to punish them hereafter, in case
they should grow stronger and more numerous. Principiis obstandum;
is ever the best policy. Fiftly, Let their party be as considera∣ble,
as potent as is falsely surmised by themselves, yet I humbly con∣ceive,
it stands neither with the Majesty, Honour, Power, nor Wis∣dome
of a Parliament, to be afraid of doing Justice (especially in main∣tenance
of their own Ordinances, Priviledges whoever they discon∣tent:
In such a case, Fiat Justitia, ruet Caelum; is the safest Resolution.
Majestrates and inferiour Judges (much more then supreamest
Courts of Judicature) must notPsal. 56. 4. Isa. 7. 4. Jer. . . 17▪ fear the faces nor Frowns of any
Mortalls in discharging their duties, but execute Justice and Judge∣ment,

what ever comes of it, and trust God with the Event.
Sixtly, The not doing Exemplary Justice in such leading cases of
publike Concernment, will render your Parliamentary Authority, Ordi∣nances,
Proceedings more contemptible to your own party, then ever they
were unto the Kings: yea, animate the Country Club-men and every in∣considerable
Sectary, not only to Jeat, contemn, disobey your Ordinances
and Commands, but at last to prescribe Laws unto you, [asSee 31. H. 6. c. 1. Iack Cade and
his Confederates did to the Parliament in the 29. of Hen. 6.] Which
will by consequence bring Parliaments into contempt, and so speedy
desolation upon all our Dominions, after so many successefull pro∣ceedings.
Up therefore and be doing Justice upon some few chiefe
offenders of this kinde for the present, to prevent execution upon ma∣ny
others, if not ruin on us all, for the future, and God himselfe will
no doubt be with you;Psal. 56. 4. You neede not fear what flesh can do unto you,
or Sectaries speake or write against you: whose ensuing scurrilous Li∣bellous
Seditious passages will so publikely discover their uncharita∣ble,
unchristian, Libellous, slandering, tumultuous dispositions, and
hypocriticall, false, froward, licentious tempers, to all the world, as
will render them odious to all sober minded, peaceable, consciencious,
modest Christians, if not to themselves, and all ingenious persons of
their own Sects; and so, through Gods blessing, reduce many of them to
the bosome of our Church, from which they have formerly revolted.
It is not my intention by any the premisses to soure or exasperate
your Honours in the least degree against any peaceable, Consciencious,
Orthodox, or truly Religious Christians, seduced by the Independent
party; or to stir up any kind of persecution against such; whose consci∣ences
will (I doubt not) in due time be fully satisfied, perswaded to sub∣mit
to that Presbyteriall Church-Goverment and Discipline, which you
have now resolved to establish in our Churches▪ there being nought there
in repugnant to Gods word, or which any well-informed Conscience,
can have cause to scruple at. Towards such as these, it is most just and
reasonable, all Christian Charity, meeknesse, long-suffering, bro∣therly
love, and fitting liberty should be Indulged for the present, till
God shall further open their eyes and turn their hearts unto us. For
whose better satifaction in the irregularities of their new concealed
Independent way, I have here-unto subjoyned some Letters and other
Papers lately sent me from the Summer Islands; whereby they may dis∣cover,
the faction; arrogance, pride and Cruelty of the Independent

Ministers there, and that the Liberty of conscience they plead for, & pre∣tend
they grant to Presbyterians, others; and the peaceablenesse of their
way, is but a meere fiction, contradicted by their practise; and like∣wise
discern, how they lead their followers by a meere implicite faith;
impose upon them a Popish blind Obedience; exercise a meere Pa∣pall
Authority and unlymited dangerous Arbytrary power over them and o∣thers;
pretending an Vtopian Government after the mind of Christ, which
is no where written in his word; nor in any classicall Authors, Ancient or
Modern, but founded only in their own Fancies, not yet fully discover'd,
nor set down in writing, nor agreed on among themselves, nor pub∣lished
to others for their better satisfaction. The serious Consideration
whereof may happily reclaime our Independents here from the error
of their seperating destructive ways, and ease the oppressed Planters of
those Islands from that Independent yoake of Bondage under which they so
much groane, as to cry out to You for releife of their sore oppressions
in their Letters: which I shall beseech your Honors in their behalfe
(since they have made their addresses to your Tribunall by my media∣tion)
seriously to lay to heart, and seasonably to redresse.
Thus humbly craving Pardon from your Honorable Assembly for
my true-hearted Zeale to do you faithfull service, by this unburthening
of my conscience, and presenting You with this Fresh discovery of those
New Wandring-starres and Firebrands who revile, oppugne your Ec∣clesiasticall
Jurisdiction, Proceedings, Ordinances; disturb the much∣desired
peace of Church, State, (which we should all earnestly endea∣vour
in these distracted Times;) I humbly recommend all your faith∣full
undertakings for the security, tranquility of both, to Gods
owne blessing with my devoutest Orisons to the throne of Grace, and
ever remaine,

