



Isa. 45. 15. & 46. 9. O God THE SAVIOUR of Israel, (of England too, anciently styled Mat. West. An. 1055. p. 422. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. . 88, 89. Regnum Dei, Gods Kingdome) Thou art God alone, and there is none else. Psal. 73. 25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee▪ and there is none upon earth, that I desire besides thee. Act. 17. 28. In thee alone I live, move, and have my being. Psal. 73. 26 Thou art the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. My 1 Thess. 5. 23. Rom. 11. 36. Psal. 139. 15, 16, 17. whole Spirit, Soul, Body, Parts, Endowments Naturall, Spirituall, are only of thee, through thee: O sanctifie them wholly for, and only to thee; to whom alone I desire intirely and eternally to devote them; as Psal. 100. 1, 2, 3. 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. Job 7. 20. Gen. 48. 16. due to none but thee, and that by right of Creation, Redemption, Resignation, Preservation, and that ex∣traordinary Tribute of gratitude I stand most deeply engaged to render to thy most gracious Majesty, for those many and manifold WONDERS of Preservation, Sup∣portation, Concomitation, Protection, Consolation, Absolution, Vindication and Restauration, thou hast

(of thy free Grace) most miraculously extended to me, the meanest and unworthyest of all thy servants) in, under, from all my former and late injurious, illegall Sufferings, Oppressions, Imprisonments, inhumane close Restraints, Exiles, in TEN SEVERALL PRISONS, CASTLES (some of them at remotest distance from all Acquaintance, Kindred, Friends and thy publick Ordi∣nances, under some Rude, Barbarous armed Gardians and Men of bloud, of purpose to destroy me, where thou was present with me, as with Dan 6. 16. Daniel in the Lyons den, 2 Tim. 4. 17. Paul in the Lyons mouth, the Dan. 3. 19, 20, &c. three Children in the midst of the fiery Furnance, Jona. 1. & 2. Jonah in the whales belly to, secure, comfort and supply me) for about ELEVEN YEARS SPACE; through the malice and cruelty of mercilesse men: yet (blessed be thy holy name) for no other cause or crime thy poor servants conscience is guilty of (his last close Imprisonments in three severall Castles being without the least Examination, Hearing, Accusation, Charge of any particular offence against him, or yet declared to him) but only his sincere cordiall desire to discharge his bounden duty to glorifie thee in his ge∣neration, by opposing the In my Hi∣striomastx, Healths sick∣nesse, Love∣locks, Cosens Cosening De∣votions, Brevi∣ate, Quench∣cole, Memento, Speech in Par∣liament, and other Books. dangerous wrath-provo∣king Errors and corruptions of the age in which he li∣veth; by contending earnestly for the faith which was once delivered unto the Saints, according Jude 3. Levit. 19. 17. Tit. 1. 13. to thy Commands, and for the setled fundamentall Lawes, Liberties, Rights, Government of his distracted Na∣tive Countrie, against all secret Underminers, open Oppugners or Subverters of them, to the uttermost of his Ability: By a consciencious inviolable observation of all those solemne sacred Oathes, Protestations, Cove∣nants and Obligations, (prescribed by those lawfull higher Powers thou commandedst him to Rom. 13. 1, 2. submit to under

paine of DAMNATION) wherewith he hath fre∣quently bound his soul, not so much to men as to thee, who art a most Deut. 7. 9. Neh. 1. 5. Pa. 89. . 28. to 38▪ & 110 4. & 11. 5. Jer. 33. 20, 21, &c. Heb. 5. 17, 18. Faithfull Promise-Oath-Covenant keeping God, especially of those Oaths and Covenants wherewith thou vouchsafest to oblige thy self even to meer dust and ashes, both IMMUTABLE and INVIO∣LABLE, never violating, nor repenting of them in the least degree, and obliging men both by thine owne example, and Gen 50. 5▪ 6 Levit. 19. 12. Num. 30. 2. Josh. 1. 17. & 6. 22. &. 9. 15, to 22. Psal. 15. 4. Hos. 10. 4. Zech. 5 4. Eccles. 8. 2. Ezek. 17. 16, 18, 19. Precepts to do the like, in all their publick or private Oathes, Vowes, Covenants to thee or men, under pain of temporall wrath here, and eternall exclusion from thy holy Hill: And for not daring to confederate or comply (against his Oathes, Covenants, manifold publick Engagements, Conscience, Judgement and thy sacred Prov. 24. 21, 22. Rom. 16▪ 17. 2 Ti. 3. 1, to. 8. Inhibitions) WITH THOSE WHO ARE GIVEN TO CHANGE; many of whose Calamities and Ruines are sodainly risen and fal∣len upon them, by the Divine justice (even from those they least suspected, and most relyed on for Protection) for the manifold changes they presumed to make against their Oathes, Vowes, Trusts, Protestations, Cove∣nants, and unrighteous oppressing of their dearest Chri∣stian Friends, Brethren, and thy suffering Servant among others. Now all Revel.  1, 2. Glory, Honour, Power, Salvation and Prayse be for ever rendered by me and all thy glorious Saints and Angels in heaven and earth, be∣cause true and righteous are thy Judgements: and be∣cause the deliverance of me thy oppressed Servant (with∣out any wound to his Conscience, dishonour to thy Name, or scandall to thy People) is exceeding Gracious and Glorious. Psal. 20. 5 6, 7, 8. Now Know I, (again and again) that the Lord loveth his anointed; that he hath heard him (and others praying for him) from his holy Heaven; WITH THE SA∣VING

STRENGTH OF HIS RIGHT HAND. Some (of his self-exalting Oppressors) trusted in Cha∣riots, and some in Horses; but he remembred the Lord his God: they are brought down and fallen, but he is risen and stands upright: Who therefore ever will re∣joyce greatly in THY SALVATION, and in the Name of his God will set up his Banners. Ps. 107. 16. For thou hast bro∣ken the gates of Brasse, and cut the bars of Iron in sunder: Thou hast sent thy holy Angel and knocked off the Chaines from my long fettered hands, and made the long-barred Iron Castle Gates (wherein I was close shut up) to open of their own accord (without any enforced long-expected Petition from me.) Thou hast rescued me from more then 4. Quaternions of Souldiers, who most strictly garded me day and night, as they did thyimprisoned Apostle Act. 12. 4, to 12. Peter, (and more narrowly then any formerly under the Prelats greatest Tyranny) and delivered him out of the hand of Herod, and from all the expectation of the People of the Jes; the Jesuits and Popish Priests, who marched freely abroad, not only preaching, but printing and dispersing no lesse then See the Beacon fired: and Nicolas Causins the Je∣suit's holy Court; printed at London 1650. in folio. 19. grosse Popish Books in defence of their Religion, and condemning ours for Heresie, whiles I (their chief oppugner) was shut up so close in three remote Castles, that I could neither write against, nor discover their Plots against our Church, State, Religion, nor yet send Letters to mine Imprisoners to demand my liberty, unless I would first give Copies of them to my Gardians, and then trust them to send them when and by whom they pleased, nor have admission to thy pub∣lick Ordinances for above two years space. In thankfull Commemoration of which my late and great deliverance from this Aegyptian Bondage, I doe here presume, in all humility at thy feet, and Dedicate to thee, the Great

Psal. 146. 7. GAOLE-DELIVERING, PRISONER-LOOS∣ING GOD, (who Isa. 49. 9. & 42. 7. sayest to the Prisoner GOE FORTH, and to them that are in darknesse SHEW YOUR SELVES) this mean and unworthy Gospell Plea, for the lawfulnesse and continuance of the An∣cient setled Maintenance and Tithes of thy Ministrs of the Gospell, (reserved to and by thy self AS THY. DEVOTED PORTION, DEBT, DUE) whereof many now by FRAUD and VIOLENCE, endevour Sacrilegiously TO ROB BOTH THEE and THEM; as the first fruits of my enlargement, a 1 Sam. 7. 12. Second EBENEZER, Hitherto hath the Lord HELPED ME, and a lasting Monument to Posterity of my gratitude and thankfulnesse to thee my God, for my late restitution to so much Liberty and Freedome, as to be able, thus once more publickly to plead thine owne and thy Ministers cause, against Jesuits, Anabaptists and all other open Op∣pugners and Subverters of our Church and State, and secret Underminers of the true Preachers and Preaching of the Gospell, who now Psa. 83 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. like Gebal, Ammon, Amalek, Edom, Ismael, Moab, the Hagarens, Phlistines, the Inhabitants of Tyre and armed Assur of old, have con∣sulted together with one consent, and are confederate against thee; and have said, Come and let us cut them off from being a Nation, that the name of Israel, may be no more in remembrance. Beseching thy Majesty most graciously to accept it, most powerfully to protect and so effectually to blesse, prosper it and thy servant against all these combined Confederates, that they may be no way able to Act. 6. 10. resist thy Truth, Wisdome, Spirit, appearing, pleading in it, by it, but either like 1 Co. 14. 25. convicted Seducers or Seduced persons, fall down flat on their faces before it, worship thee and report, that God is in it (and in thy

servant) of a truth. Or, in case of wifull malicious obstinacy, against thee and thy faithfull Ministers, Houses of publick worship, Truth and Gospell, Psal. 83. 9. 10, 11, &c. Do unto them as unto the Midianites, as to Sisera, and to Jabin at the brook of Kison, which perished at Endor and became as dung for the earth: Make their Nobles like Oreb and Zeeb, yea make all their Princes as Zebah, and as Salmunna; who said (as these doe now) LET US TAKE TO OUR SELVES THE HOUSES OF GOD IN POSSESSION. O my God make them as a wheel, as the stubble before the winde: As the fire burneth the wood, and as the flame setteth the moun∣taines on fire; so persecute them with thy tempest, and make them afraid of thy storme; fill their faces with shame, that they may seek thy name O Lord; let them be confounded and troubled for ever, yea let them be put to shame and perish: That men (these men) may know, that thou whose name alone is JEHOVAH, art the most high over all the earth. Psal. 79. 13. So we thy people and sheep of thy pasture wil give thee thanks for ever; we will shew forth thy Praise to all generations. And thy servant Davids resolution, Psal. 146. 2. & 104. 33. Whiles I live will I praise the Lord, I will sing praises unto my God, WHILE I HAVE ANY BEING, shall through thy Grace be both the Resolution and Practice of
 Swainswicke 1 Sep. 1653.
