


Christian Reader,
I Who have beene alwayes hitherto a Cordiall Desirer,
endeavourer of Peace, am here necessitated to present
Thee with a Discourse of Warre; to justifie The Law∣fulnesse
of the Parliaments present taking up of ne∣cessary
Defensive Armes. Which neither their En∣deavours,
nor my, with many others Prayers could
(with any safety to our Priviledges, Persons, Religi∣on,
Liberty, Realmes, now forcibly invaded by his
Majesties Popish and Malignant Cavallieres) hitherto prevent, or conjure
downe.
To plead the Justnesse of a Warre, of an unnaturall Civill warre, (the
worst of any) of a Warre betweene the Head and Members, may seeme
not onely a Paradox, but a Prodigie, in a Land heretofore blessed with
an aged, uninterrupted Peace: AndCivilis Bel∣li, l. 1. p. 1. Lucans
Bella per AEmathios plusquam civilia Campos, &c.
(now most unhappily revived among us) being but Historicall, and Poeti∣call;
may passe the world with lesse admiration and censure, than this harsh
Peece, which is both Legally & Theologically (like the Subject matter) Polemi∣call.
But as theApud veros Dei cultores e∣tiam ipsa bella pacata sunt; quae non cupiditate aut crudelitate, sed pacis studio geruntur Aug. de diuers. Eccl. observ. 7. Grati∣an Caus. 23. qu. 2. cap. Apud. Albericus Gen∣tilis de Iure bel∣li. l. 1. c. 5. ayme, the end of all just War, is and ought to be onely future
setled Peace; so is the whole drift of this Military Dissertation: not to fo∣ment
or protract, but end our bloody Warres; which nothing hath more ex∣cited,
animated, lengthened in the Adverse party, than a strong con∣ceite,
(if not serious beliefe,) that The Parliaments Forces, neither would,
nor lawfully might in point of Law or Conscience forcibly resist or repulse their
invasive Armes, without danger of High Treason and Rebellion, (which Bug∣beare
I have here refuted, removed) and the In-activity, the much ad∣mired
slownesse of many of our Forces, in resisting, in preventing their
vigorous Proceedings, which a little timely vigilance and diligence had
easily controlled.
It is a more thanPatriae dees∣se quoad vita supperat nefas est Livius, Rō. Hist. l 5. Barbarous Inhumanity for any person, not to put to
his uttermost strength, speedily to close up the mortall wounds of his blee∣ding,

dying Native Country; but to protract its cure, to enlarge, encrease
its deadly Ulcers, Stabs, Sores, and make a lasting trade of Warre, out of a sor∣did,
Militare non est delictum sed propter prae∣dam militare peccatum est. August. de Verbis Dom. Tract. 19. & Gratian. caus. 23. qu 1. sinfull desire of Gaine, of Plunder, to raise a private fortune by the
Republicks ruines, (a sinne, of which some perchance are guilty) is an
unparalleld, most unnaturall prodigious Impiety.
It was thought a great dishonour heretofore, for men of Honour and E∣states,
not to serve and defend their Country gratis, as our ownSee Little∣ton in his Chap∣ter of Gran-ser∣janty, Knight-service, Escu∣age, & Cook ibi. Lawbooks &
Histories plentifully manifest: and shall such Persons now turne sordid
Mercenaries; stirre neither hand nor foot without their Pay; and be more
diligent to get their wages, than discharge their Service? God forbid.
It isNumb. 32 Josh. 1. 12, to 18. Recorded of the Children of Gad and Reuben, after they had
recovered their inheritance on this side Jordan, that they went all up armed be∣fore
the Lord over Jordan, at their owne free cost, untill they had driven out all
the enemies in it before them, subdued the Land, and setled their brethren of the
other Tribes peaceably in it. And shall not Englishmen of Estates doe the
like for their Brethren now, in these times of need, when money (the
sinewes of Warre) is almost quite shrunke up, by reason of former Dis∣bursements
and want of Trade? We read,Judg 5. 19. That the very Heathen Kings
of Canaan when they came and fought in Taanach by the waters of Megiddo,
against the Israelites, THEY TOOKE NO GAINE OF MO∣NEY,
for their paines: Such was their Noble-generosity, which Debo∣rah
registers in her Song for their eternall Glory. And we heare of di∣vers
Lords and Gentlemen in the Kings Army, which serve against their
Country gratis; yea furnish out sundry Horse and Foote, of their proper
cost; of few or none such there who receive any Pay. And shall these be
more free, generous, active in serving, fighting against God, Religion, Lawes,
Liberties, Parliament and their Country; than those of like Ranke and qua∣lity
on the Parliaments party are in warring for them? O2 Sam. 1. 20. let not such
anignoble, unchristian Report be ever once justly told in Gath, or publish∣ed
in the streets of Askelon, lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoyce, lest the
sonnes and daughters of the uncircumcised triumph.
I know there are some Heroicke Worthies in the Parliaments Armies, of
whom I may truely sing with Deborah,Judg. 5. 9. 18. My heart is toward the Governours
of Israel, that offered themselves willingly among the people; and who like Ze∣bulon
and Nepthali, have freely jeoparded their lives unto the death, in the high
places of the field. Blessed be their Endeavours, and their Names for ever
Honourable: I shall now onely wish that others would imitate their lau∣dable
examples, that so our long-lingring warres, may be speedily and
happily determined in a blessed, pure, pious, secure, honourable, lasting Peace.

They are Tormentors, not Chirurgions, Executioners, not true Souldiers, who
desire, endeavour not speedily to close up and heale their dearest Countries
bleeding, festring wounds; for which I have prepared this Treatise, as a
Soveraigne Balme, to incarne and cicatrize them, not ulcerate, or inflame
them.
It was the Prophets Patheticke expostulation,Jer. 8. 20. 22. The harvest is past,
the Summer is ended, and we are not healed: Is there no balme in Gilead? Is
there no Physitian there? why then is not the health of the Daughter of my people
recovered? It may be Englands and Irelands expostulation now: The
Lord put it into the hearts of our great Physitians (the King, Parliament,
and Grandees of both Armies) that they may now at last with bleeding,
melting hearts and spirits, speedily poure forth such effectuall healing
Balmes into these two dying Kingdomes deadly wounds, as may effectually
cure and restore them to more perfect health and vigor than they ever for∣merly
enjoyed, that so they may lose nothing but their putrid blood, their
proud dead flesh, their filthy sanies and corrupt humours, by their unnatu∣rall
stabs already received: Towards the advancement of which much
desired cure, if these my undigested rude Collections (interrupted with sun∣dry
inevitable interloping Distractions, which may justly excuse their many
defects) may adde any contribution, or satisfie any seduced, or scrupulous
Consciences touching this present Warre; I shall deeme my labours highly
recompensed; And so recommending them to Gods blessing, and thy cha∣ritable
acceptation, I shall detaine thee with no further Prologue.
Farewell
