



DEar reverend Christian Brethren,
whom I cordially honour for your
Rom. 1. 1. c. 10. 15. 2 Cor. 5. 20. c. 6. 1. c. 8. 23. high and heavenly Calling; give
me leave, with that Christian Liber∣ty
which becomes me, without any
fear or flattery, to inform you; that
I have for many years by-past, with
a bleeding soul and mournfull spirit, taken special No∣tice
of some offensive Deviations from, and Negligen∣ces
in your Ministerial Function, (whereof many of
you are guilty) which have given great Advantages
to your Common Romish, and Sectarian Adversaries,
and just scandal to divers of your best-affected Friends,
some whereof I formerly endeavoured by seasonable,

timelyIn my 4. and 12. Serious Questions,  and Seasonable Vin∣dication of them. My 16 Important Questions. Sus∣pension suspen∣ded. Indepen∣dency exami∣ned. A full Re∣ply to brief Ob∣servations. Publications, to crush in the very shell, and
now deem high time to remind you of, being grown
Epidemical, yea almost destructive to your very Mini∣stry,
as well as perillous to our Church and Religi∣on.
Not to inlarge upon your own manifold intestine
1 Cor. 3 3, 4. sad Divisions between and against your selves; which
have separated you into several Opposite Squadrons,
(that I say not Factions, and Battalioes) of Presbyte∣rians,
Episcopalists, (or Royalists) Independents,
Interdependents; openly, secretly warring against, and
seeking to supplant each other, by the extravagant
power, proceedings of illegal Arbitrary Committees,
and new coyned Orders, Ordinances, Covenants, En∣gagements,
with other Machiavilian Devices, where∣by
you have endeavoured to eject, sequester, suppresse,
vex, ensnare, ruine one another under our successive
late publike Revolutions of Government. By which
you have now at last made your selves meer Tenants at
will, both in respect of your Benefices, Tithes, Mini∣stry,
to every New upstart power; a derision to your
Popish, a prey to your Anabaptistical and other Secta∣rian
Adversaries; who infinitely increase their Num∣bers,
Proselytes, by these your unbrotherly feudes; and
have no special Committees to restrain, eject, suppresse
them, but are crept into most Committees, and places
of power, to vex, molest, discountenance, persecute, e∣ject,
sequester many of you, at their pleasures; and
secretly encourage, countenance, abet our last insolent
spreading Romish Sect of Quakers, to disturb, affront,
revile your persons, Doctrine, Ministry, both in the
Church, Streets, and all other places, and to publish
their most rayling scurrillous Invectives against you,
to accomplish your speedy extirpation by these Instru∣ments
of the Pope and Devil, which they dare not
immediately attempt by themselves In which prose∣cuted
design of your utter speedy extirpation, all Ana∣baptists,

Sectaries concurre, and unite their forces with
the Jesuites and Popish party, as Iohn Canne demon∣strates
in his Second voice from the Temple, p. 2. where
he excites The Supreme Authority of the Nation, the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, to whom
he dedicates it, utterly to extirpate the National
Church Ministry, Worship, Government of England;
aud to starve, famish all the Ministers thereof (whom
he stiles, Antichristian Idols) by taking away the food
and maintenance whereby hitherto (and at this present)
they are ourished, fed, and kept alive. In regard of
which joynt desperate Cofederacy against you by these
your combined common Adversaries, I shall now ex∣hort
and advise you,
First of all, To lay aside and abandon all private a∣nimosities,
factions, feuds, contests, and persecutions
against each other; as not only unbeseeming the
Rom. 10. 15 Hbr. 13. 20. Isay 9. 6. Eph. 2. 14. to 22. Embassadors, Ministers of the God, Prince, Gos∣pel
of Peace; but as the most probable, unavoidable
means of your own speedy destruction; as these two
Gospel Texts will assure you, Mat. 12. 25, 26. And
Iesus said unto them, Every kingdom divided against it
self is brought to desolation, and every City or House
divided against it self shall not stand. And if Satan cast
out Satan (or one Minster another of a contrary par∣ty)
he is divided against himself; how shall then his
kingdom (or Christs, where his Ministers are thus divi∣ded,
and cast out one another) stand? And Gal. 5. 15.
But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed that you
be not consumed one of another. Among all the evils
that afflict the body politick of the Church or State,
there is none so pernicious as division, especially a∣mongst
the Ministers and chief Officers thereof,See Mr. John Daille His Apology for the Reformed Churches, ch. 2.
because it strikes at the very foundation of their being,
and poisons the original of their life and strength. Where∣fore,
I beseech you most especially to avoid, detest this
destructive sin.

2ly, Seeing all Ministers and Christians are speci∣ally
obliged by theJohn 13. 34, 35, c. 17. 20, 21, 22. Eph. 4. 3. to 17. command, and will of their
Master, and by their own welfare, safety, salvation,
to continue inseparably united one to another, and all to∣gether
to make up but one harmonious Body; I shall ex∣hort,
beseech, advise you all, toPsal. 133. 1. live and love like
Brethren;Phil. 1. 27. To be all of one mind and of one Spirit,
striving together for the faith of the Gospel;Ephes. 4. 3. To keep
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.Joh. 13. 3, 35. To ma∣nifest
to all the world that you are Christs disciples by
loving one another. And to pursue this pathetical ex∣hortation
of the Apostle, to cease the Contentions be∣tween
the Minister and people in the Church of Co∣rinth,
1 Cor. 1. 10. Now I beseech you Brethren in the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same
thing, and that there be no divisions among you; but that
ye be perfectly joyned together in the same mind and in the
same judgement.
3ly,Hab. 2. 1. Stand constantly upon your watch, andPhil. 1. 27. Jude 3.
unite all your studies, endeavours together against the
manifold plots, policies of Satan, and your Iesuitical, Po∣pish,
Sectarian common Enemies, who seek nothing but
the speedy ruine of your persons, Ministry, and of our
Protestant Religion, Church, State, being more active,
subtle and successfull of late years in this design, than
ever in former ages. And let their present joynt at∣tempts,
combinations against you, be a prevailing ar∣gument
to unite your affections, endeavours, studies to
countermine them.
4ly, Avoid all carnal, Machivilian Policies, all sor∣did
Compliances, andEzech 2. 6. Mat. 10. 26. 28. 31. base Fears of any Mor∣tals,
how great or powerful soever: And neverRom. 3. 8. act
nor consent to any evils, error, unrighteous, impious
Projects, or hypocritical designes, yea, hope that any
good may come thereby: but rather part with your lives,
liberties, and all worldly enjoyments, than with
a good conscience, and the truth or Ordinances

of God intrusted to your care.
5ly, Take Notice of some particular late failings
and scandalous sinfull Omissions or Neglects in the
discharge of your Ministerial Office, in which divers
of you have been and still are very peccant.
Whereas, by our former Liturgies (confirmed by
2 & 3 E. 6. c. 1. 5 & 6 E. 6. c. 1. 1 Eliz. c. 2. sundry Acts of Parliament yet in force) the Deca∣logui,
or Ten Commandements of God himself,See Dod, Downham, Bp. Andrews, El∣ton, and others on the comman∣dments.
(asserted by all or most of you to be Moral, and Per∣petual,
as they are a rule of Life and Obedience) were
to be publikely read in all Churches, (as heretofore
was usual) once every Lords day, and when ever the
Lords Supper was administred; to the end the people
might the better remember and observe them in their
lives and conversations. This godly custom, hath for
sundry years together been universally neglected, and
cast aside by all or most of you. By which means, the
elder sort of people have quite forgotten these Com∣mandements;
the younger sort are alltogether igno∣rant
of them, and generally know not, whether there
be any such Decalogue for them to learn, know, ob∣serve:
their Parents, Masters, not instructing them in
them in their private families as formerly; since discon∣tinued
publikely in our Chnrches; The number of
Antinomians is hereby augmented, confirmed in their
Error: the Knowledge, Sence, Conscience of sinnes
against these Precepts, almost quite obliturated: And
these Laws of God, with all other good Laws of the
Realm, quite cast aside, slighted, scorned, violated in
the highest degree, by many professed Saints of the
highest Orb, like Old Almanacks quite out of date or
force, especially the 5, 6, 8, and last of them, Thou
shalt not covet thy neighbours house, &c. nor any thing
that is his: now turned into an affirmative, or quite
expunged out of the Decalogue of too many English
Protestants, as well as theSee Ledes∣ma his Cate∣chism; Officium beatae Maiae, and Popish primers which expunge it. second Commandement
heretofore out of the Papists. And whether this o∣mission

be not a sinne against Deutr. 6. 1. to 10. c. 18.
18. to 22. c. 4. 9, 10. Acts 13. 15. Psal. 1. 2. Iosh. 1.
8. and other Scriptures, fit henceforth to be reformed,
let your own Consciences, with all Protestant Com∣mentators
on these Texts, and the Decalogue resolve
you.
2ly, Whereas the Summary Heads of the Christian
Faith, comprised in antient Creeds, (made,See Cy-prian de Sym∣bolo, Dr. Jack∣son, and others on the Creed: and all antient Greek and La∣tin Liturgies. used
in the Primitive Church, and continued in all Christi∣an
Churches, as most useful, necessary, ever since) were
usually repeated by the Ministers and people in all our
Churches heretofore, when ever they assembled to
worship God on Lords-dayes, and other Festivals or
times of Devotion; This Godly, profitable Christian
practice, hath been generally disused and set aside by
most of you for sundry years together: whereby the
old Principles of our Christian Faith and Creeds, are
quite forgotten, or neglected by the ancienter sort,
and unknown to the younger people, (not instructed
to learn or repeat them by heart as formerly, by their
Parents and Masters, since disused in our Churches by
Ministers) and a world of New Faiths, Heresies, Blas∣phemies,
Errors, have been set up and vented in oppo∣sition
thereunto, destructive to the very Foundations
of our Religion. Now whether this Omission be not
a great Misdemeanour or Oversight in you, repug∣nant
to the 1 Cor. 15. 1. to 8. Hebr. 5. 12, 13. c. 6.
1, 2, 3. 2 Pet. 1. 12, 13, 15. c. 3. 2. and other Texts,
let all Old and New Expositors on the Creed, deter∣mine,
and your own Consciences judge?
3ly, Whereas by the Laws of our Land, confirming
the Book of Ordination, and the Liturgies of our Church,
all our Deacons, Ministers, formerly on Lords dayes
and other times of publike Divine Service, were spe∣cially
obliged to read certain Psalms, with one Chap∣ter
of the Old Testament, and another out of the New,
in the Church, for the peoples better edification and

instruction in the Scriptures, and incouragement to read
them diligently in their Families and private Closets;
yet now of late years, contrary to their Solemn Pro∣mise
at theirSee the Book of Ordi∣nation. Ordinations, diligently to read the Ca∣nonical
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to the
people assembled in the Church, and contrary to Exod.
24. 7. Deut. 6. 1. to 10. c. 11. 18. to 22. c. 31. 11, 12,
13. Josh. 8. 34, 35. 2 Kings 23. 1, 2, 3. 2 Chron. 34.
29, 30, 31. Neh. 8. 1. to 19. c. 9. 1. 3. c. 13. 1. Isay 34.
16▪ Ier. 36. 6, 10, &c. c. 51. 61, 62. Luk. 4. 16, 17.
Acts 13. 15. c. 15. 21. 31. 2 Cor. 1. 13. Eph. 3. 4. Col. 4.
16. 1 Thess. 5. 27. Rev. 1. 3. c. 5. 4, 5. 2 Cor. 3. 14.
1 Tim. 4. 3. contrary to the practice of Gods own people
the Iews, of Christ himself and his Apostles; of the Pri∣mitive
Fathers, Councils, Church, Christians, asBish. Jwel Dfence of the Apology, ar. 5. . 9. dvis. 1. p. 489. 490. part. 6. p. 608, and His Reply to Harding, Art. 3. divis. 6. p. 117, 118 and Artic. 15. Of reading the Scriptures, p. 383, &c. Bi∣shop
Iewel proves at large, of allHarmony of Confessions, sect. 10. to 16. Protestant Chur∣ches
in foreign parts; the Practice, Canons, Rubricks,
and Liturgies of our English Church, and command of
God himself in the forecited Texts, most of our Inde∣pendent
Ministers have wholly cast off the reading of
all Psalms, Chapters of the Old and New Testament in
their Churches and Meetings (more particularly in
Pendennis Castle in Cornwall, where there was not one
Chapter, Psalm either sung or read, during my near
two years close imprisonment, in their Meeting-house
there;) yea, many Presbyterians and other Ministers
have overmuch failed herein, reading only either one
Chapter out of the Old Testament or New, and somtimes
only one Psalm, without a Chapter, now and then on
Lords dayes, and other Publick Dayes of worship. By
which ill president, the generality of their people (e∣specially
such who cannot read) are become wholly ig∣norant
of the Scriptures, and made a prey to every se∣ducer;
the constant reading of the Scriptures in privat,
is much neglected; the Scriptures themselves much
slighted; yea many turned professed Anti-Scripturists,
rejecting the Old and New Testament both together;

and others who retain the New Testament, have quite
rejected the old, as nothing appertaining to Christians;
though a chief part of the Churches foundation, & appro∣ved,
injoyned to be searched, studied, read by Christ himself
and his Apostles in the New Testament, Mat. 5. 17. 18.
c 7. 12. c 22, 40. c. 26. 56. Mar. 1. 2. Lu. 1. 70. c. 16. 26.
31. Acts 3. 18. c. 10. 43. c. 13. 15. 27. c. 26. 22. 27. c.
28. 23. c. 17. 2. 11. c. 18. 24. 28. Rom. 1. 2. c. 16. 26.
Ephes. 2. 20. c. 4. 11, 12. 13. 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11. 2 Pet. 1.
19 20, 21. c. 3. 1, 2. with other expresse Gospel texts.
And is not this a grosse sinful Omission now fit to be
repented of and reformed by you all, having produced
so many sad effects, and complying too much with
the Papists,Bsh. Jew¦els Defence of the polgy, part. 5. ch. 9. divis. 1. p. 499. and Mr. Harding, who stiles the pub∣like
reading of the Scriptures to the people in their mother
Tongue, The instinct and work of Satan?
4ly, Many Minsters and Congregationt (especially
Independents and Anabaptists) have wholly cast off the
Singing (as well as reading) of Psalms, Hymnes, and
Spiritual Songs, not only contrary to theExod. 15 1 &c. Numb. 21. 17. Deut. 31. 19 &c. Judg. 5. 12 2 Sam. 22. 1. 2 Chron. 29. 27. Ps. 18. 1. Ps. 92. 1. Cant. 1. 1. l. sa 5. 1. c. 26. 1. c. 30. 29. c. 35. 10. c. 38. 10. A¦mos 8. 23. c. 8. 3. precepts of
God, and Practice of the aints in the Old Testament:
but of Christ himself, his Apostles, Saints, Church in the
New, Luke 1. 13, 14. Mat. 26. 30. 1 Cor. 14. 15. Ephes.
5. 17. Col. 3. 1. Heb. 2. 12. Iam. 5. 13. Rev. 15. 3.
c. 5. 9. c. 14. 3. And is not this a sin fit to be redressed
by those who are guilty of it? unlesse they deem
our present Oppressions, Thraldom, and publick
Calamities such, as deserve to turn all our Psalms
into Lamentations, and Songs into Howlings, Amos 8. 10.
Ezech. 26. 13. Iam. 7. 9.
5ly, Whereas our Ministers heretofore by our Coun∣cils,
Canons, Liturgies were obliged to Catechise and in∣struct
their younger Parishioners in the Lords Prayer,
Creed, ten Commandements and Principles of Christian
Religion; and made a Conscience to perform it on
Lords dayes and other Seasons in the Church, to the
great edification and corroborations of their People a∣gainst

Heresies, Sects, Errors, Vices; The generality of
Ministers of late years have either totally rejected, or
in a great measure neglected this part of their Ministe∣rial
duty; contrary to Gal. 6. 6. Heb. 5. 15, 16. c. 6.
1, 2, 3. Deut. 6. 1. to 10. and other expresse Scriptures.
Whereby Parents and Masters have for the most part
given over this dutyin their Families; and so the peo∣ple
being generally ignorant, uninstructed, unsetled, un∣grounded
in the Principles of Religion, areEph. 4. 14. Jam. 1. 6. tossed and
carried to and fro with every wind of doctrine, made a
prey to all sorts of Sectaries and seducing Spirits, and
divided from our Churches into different separated
Conventicles, almost past hopes of reducing to the trth
and unity of the Gospel. How necessary it is therefore
for all peccant Ministers to reform this Sin, let the Pre∣face
to Mr. Crooks Guide, and others who have written
of the Vtility and Necessity of Catechising, inform
them.
6ly, Some Ministers (especially Independents) have
(contrary to Luke 9. 62. Rom. 1. 1. Heb. 7. 23, 24.)
See a Tran∣script of a Let∣ter om the Summer Hands at the end of my Fresh Disco∣very of Prodi∣gious Bending Stars. quite renounced their very Ministerial Ordination
and Function, preaching only now as gifted Brethren,
not as Ministers of the Gospel; and others of them
have either overmuch neglected or scrupuled the bap∣tizing
of Infants; especiallyMr. Henry Burtons Vindi∣cation. of these who are not of
their own independent Congregations: Which how repug∣nant
it is to the precepts and Presidents of Christ and his
Apostles; How scandalous to our Protestant Church and
Religion, how advantagious to our Papal, Anabapti∣stical,
aud other Sectarian Common Enemies, let Mr.
His Vindi∣cation of the judgment of the Reformed Chur∣ches, & Prote∣stant Diviues, concerning Or∣dination, Lon∣don 1647. Seaman, Mr. Baxter, Mr. Hall and others, who
have written largely on these Subjects of late times re∣solve
them; and themselves now reform with penitent
hearts.
7ly, The thing I shall here principally charge upon
the consciences of hundreds of Ministers guilty of this
Sacrilegious Crime, is, their many years wilfull discon∣tinuance

of the frequent publike celebration of the Lords
Supper to their Parishioners; against the very essential
duty and Office of their Function, as Ministers of Christ,
and Incumbents of Parish Churches, the Precept and Pre∣sident
of Christ himself, the Practice of the Apostles, Pri∣mtive
Church, Fathers, Christians, and all former Chur∣ches,
Ministers of Christ throughout the world; the Ca∣nons,
Decrees, Injunctions, Laws, Statutes of our own
and foreign Churchs, States in all ages, and the very Di∣rectory
it self; as I haveMy Sus∣pension suspen∣ded;  Legal Resolution of 2. Important Questions; A New Discovery of some Romish Emissaries and Popish Errors. elsewhere, and shall here
more largely manifest. By which Negligence and O∣mission,
I shall desire them now at last most sadly to
consider,
1. That they rob God himself of one chief publick
Ordinance, and part of his solemn worship.
2. That they rob Jesus Christ himself of one of his
instituted Sacraments, whereby they should principal∣ly
shew forth the benefits, fruits, and memory of his
death, till his Second coming, 1 Cor. 11▪ 25, 26.
3. That they rob their Churches and people of the
inestimable benefits, comforts of Christs most blessed
Supper. Wherein they are more culpable, sacrilegi∣ous
and injurious to Christs Institution and their peo∣ple,
than the Sacrilegious Popes and Popish Priests, who
administer this Sacrament to themselves in both kinds
every Masse, and give the People the Consecrated
Bread in all places, once a year at least, and the Cup too
in some places, by specialBish. Jew∣els Reply to Harding, p. 73. Fox Acts and Mon. Vol. 1. p. 910, 911, 912. dispensations: whereas
they deprive themselves and their people wholly of
both parts of this Sacrament for sundry years, and will
not dispence it to them at their and others earnest in∣treaties.
4. That herein they give as high, as grosse, as sinful
a Non obstante to Christ himself, the Primitive Church
and Fathers, in casting aside this Sacrament of the
Lords Supper for so many years together; as theSessio 13. Surius Concil. Tom, 3. p. 821, 822.
Council of Constance did, when it took away the use of the

Cup only from the Lay-people; and hereby justifie,
imitate, exceed this their Sacrilegious, Antichristian
practice.
5. That hereby they sinfully neglect, renounce one
principal essential part of their Ministerial function and
pastoral duty, which they were purposely ordained Mi∣nisters,
and presented to their Parochial Cures and Be∣nefices
diligently to discharge, (as I haveA Legal Rsolution of two important Quaeres. Har∣mony of Con∣fssions. sect. 10. to 16. elswhere
manifested at large) to wit, to administer this Sacra∣ment
to their people.
6. That they herein pointblank oppugn, contradict
theSee My Susperston sus∣pended. Tho. Beacons Cate∣chism. constant practice of the Primitive Church, Fathers,
Christians; who usually administred the Holy Commu∣nion
to all their visible Church-members every Lords
day; with the constant usage of all the Churches of God
throughout the world, in all former ages till this present,
who prescribed, practiced the frequent celebration
thereof, as a necessary, usefull, and most comfortable
duty.
7. That herein they have in a great measure imita∣ted
the tyranny and practice of Pope Innocent the 3d.
and the Popish English Clergy under him; who inter∣dicting
the whole Realm of England, Anno 1208. (by
reason of differences then risen between King John, the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and other Prelates) for 6
years, 3 moneths, and 14 days space; thereupon through
the Clergies obstinacy cessaverunt in Anglia omnia Ec∣clesiastica
Sacramenta praeter solummodo Confessio∣nem,
& viaticum in ultima neccessitate, et Baptisma par∣vulorum,
ad irrestaurabile damnum Ecclesiae, tam in
temporalibus quam spiritualibus, asHist. Ang∣liae▪ An. 1208, 1214. p. 239. 240. Mat. Par∣kr, Antiq▪ Ec∣cles. Brit. p. 148 149. &c. God∣wins Catalogue of Bishops, . 62. 63, &c. Fox Acts and Mon. Vol. 1. p. 324, 326, &c. Ho∣linshed, Speed, Grafton and o∣thers in tbe life of King John. Matthew Pa∣ris
and others inform us: The King hereupon by spe∣cial
Writs and Patents, commanded William of Cornhil,
Joseline of Cornwal and others, to seise all the Lands,
Goods, Livings of the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Pri∣rs,
Religious Persons, Clerks and Priests, that should
from the Monday next before Easter refuse to celebrate

divine Service and Sacraments to the people; and confis∣cated
them all as forfeited to his Treasury: Being driven
to use such austerity and sharpnesse against them, to en∣force
them to perform their Pastoral charge; asActs and Monuments, Vol. 1. p. 324. Mr.
Fox records out of the Clause Roll of 9 Johannis in the
Tower of London. And have not many whole Pari∣shes,
Cities▪ and Dioceses, well nigh for as long a space
or more, been actually interdicted in like manner, by
sundry obstinate Ministers, from all Ecclesiastical Sacra∣ments,
except baptizing of Infants, (and some of them
from that too) and from the administration of the Lords
Supper to such as lie at the point of death, which was not
denyed to any during that long Papal Interdict? And
do they not deserve then, as severe a seizure of their Be∣nefices,
Lands, Goods for this their wilful neglect of their
Pastoral duty for so long a season, as the Popish Clergy
then incurred for their negligence, obstinacy, and fear
of the Popes displeasure?
8ly, This Crime and Neglect of theirs is highly ag∣gravated
by sundry circumstances, which instead of ju∣stifying
or extenuating, doth elevate it to the highest
pitch.
1. It hath been carried on and acted by special Con∣federacies,
Combinations amongst most Ministers guilty
thereof; who have had sundry publike and privat mee∣tings,
yea some days of Humiliation (which is worse)
to carry on this Sacrilegious design; as the Popish
Priests and Prelates formerly had, for the Sacrilegious
taking away of the Consecrated wine from the Lay∣people
in theSessio 13. Surius Concil. Tom. 3. Fox, Vol. 1. p. 783. Council of Constance.
2. They have justified it both inDr. Drakes Bounday, Mr. Collings Juri∣dical suspensi∣on, & others. Presse and Pul∣pit,
as not only Lawful and Necessary, but their boun∣den
duty; yea the will and appointment of Iesus Christ,
as theSee Gerson, & D. Featlies Grand Sacri∣leg of the Chur: of Rome. Popish Preists have justified their Half Com∣munion,
and taking away the Cup.
3. They have miserably wrested, perverted, tortured
many Sacred Texts of Scripture to warrant this their

Sacrilege, as the Popish Priests have done to justifie
their depriving the people of the Sacramental Cup.
4. They have printed, preached against theMy short Vindication of 4. Serious Que∣stions. p, 17. to 29. & 47. ex∣presse
Letter of the Scripture, all Antiquity, the Arti∣cles,
Homilies, Liturgy, and these Writers of our Church,
and Confession of the Council of Constance it self, That
our Saviour never administred the Sacrament to Iudas,
but only to the other xi. Apostles; to justifie their Sacri∣lege
by this palpable untruth.
5. They have cast most vile aspersions upon this most
blessed Sacrament, to justifie this their practice, and
deterre the people from it; stiling it frequently in their
Pamphlets, Sermons;A Brother∣ly and Friendly Censure, p. 6, 7. An Antidote p. 6. [See My short Vindicati∣cation, p. 28. to 36.] Dr. Draks Bnday, and ohers. Deadly poyson: A Cup of
poyson, which will poyson and kill mens souls. An Ordi∣nance
of Christ, which hath no efficacy spiritually to quick∣en,
regenerate or convert men, but only to confirm such
who are already regenerated and really converted. And
asserting, That it belongs to none but real Saints, and
such as are truly sanctified; and not to all visible Mem∣bers
of the visible Church able to examine themselves.
6. They have pleadedDr. Drake, Mr. Collins, & others tendernesse of Conscience,
Duty; and partaking with unworthy Communicants in
their sins, to justifie their Non-celebration of this Sa∣crament,
which both in Conscience and Duty they
are obliged duly to celebrate; and by not doing
whereof they are not only partakers, but Authors, abet∣tors,
perswaders of their peoples sinful contempt and
neglect thereof.
7. They have deprived many thousands of Gods
dear, precious real Saints of the inestimable benefits,
comforts of, strength and growth in grace by this most
heavenly Ordinance, to whom they confesse it doth
of right belong, and debarred themselves also from it,
for sundry years together, only for fear such whom
they deem ignorant, scandalous, should partake thereof.
And is not this the extremity of injustice, impiety, un∣charitablenesse,
to debar Gods Children, and Christs

invited Guests from his Table, only for fear some un∣worthy
or unbidden guests should intrude thereto?
Certainly this is diametrically contrary to theLuke 12. 42. to 47. Of∣fice
of every Good and Faithfull Steward whom the Lord
hath made ruer over his houshold to give them their por∣tion
of meat in due season; who cannot expect a blessing,
but curse from his Lord when he cometh, and that he
should cut him in pieces, and give him his portion with un∣believers.
8. Some of them are grown so inveterately and tran∣scendently
malicious against the frequent publike ad∣ministration
of the Lords Supper, that they deem, prose∣cute
it as a scandalous Crime in other Ministers, for
which they dserve to be sequestred and suspended from
the Ministry: Some Ministers in Surrey, Middlesex,
and other places having lately been prosecuted, yea se∣questred
and put out of their Livings, and those of the
late Kings party all silenced and prohibited to admini∣ster
the Sacraments at once, principally upon this account.
When as those Ministers rather deserve suspension both
from their Office and Benefice, as Scandalous, who have
wilfully neglected the celebration of this Sacrament for
sundry years, and are guilty of all the premised aggra∣vations
of this their Sin and Sacrilege.
Now Dear Brethren, I beseech, I adjure you in the
Name and Fear of God, without prejudice or partiality,
to reflect on all these premises, so far forth, as any of
you are really guilty of them; and now at last to be∣hold,
consider, lament, repent, reform these transcen∣dent
Exorbitances and Excesses, into which the Policy
of Satan, the pravity of your own hearts, the ambitious
affectation of a New Ecclesiastical Iurisdiction over the
Sacraments of Christ himself, and the Consciences of
your flocks (the sourse of this New Sacrilegious extra∣vagance)
have hurried you by degrees: and2 Chron. 30 8. be no
more stiffnecked in the obstinate neglect, defence, or
excuse of all or any of them; Which I have faithfully

represented to your view in their proper colours & just
aggravations; not with the least intention to cast any re∣proach
or infamy upon your Persons, or Ministerial Fun∣ction
(which I cordially honor, reverence, and have ever
supported, defended to my power;) but the more effe∣ctually
to convince you of the greatnesse, sinfulnesse of
these your Errors and Deviations whereinto you have
lapsed of late years; and for which especially (in my
weak apprehension) God hath brought so much neg∣lect,
contempt, reproach upon, and opposition against your
persons and calling, more than in former ages; of which
you all now so much complain in Presse and Pulpit, not
without just cause: You all well know,1 Sam. 2 27▪ to the end That the
kicking at Gods sacrifice and offring which he command∣ed,
and despising of God therein, was that which made
Elyes sons and their Ministry to be lightly esteemed, and
brought ruine on them and their families, and caused God
to translate the Priesthood from them unto Samuel. Yea,
you cannot but take notice of Mal. 2. 1, 2, 8, 9. And
now, O ye Priests, this commandement is for you. If ye
will not hear, if ye will not lay it to heart, to give glory
unto my name, saith the Lord of hosts, I will even send a
curse upon you, and will even curse your blessings; yea, I
have cursed them already, because ye do not lay it to heart,
Behold, I will corrupt your seed, and spread dung upon
your faces, &c. Ye have departed out of the way, ye have
caused many to stumble at the Law, ye have corrupted
the covenant of Levi, saith the Lord of hosts: Therefore
have I also made you contemptible and base before
all the people, according as you have not kept my
wayes, but have been partial in the Law. And may
you not then conclude from these two Scriptures; That
your kicking against the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
and casting this offring quite aside, which Christ com∣manded
you frequently to celebrate, with your depar∣ting
out of the way in all the forementioned particulars
(which hath caused many to stumble at the Law) are the

principal causes, that have moved God to make yo
thus contemptible and base before all the people? Yea,
hath not your casting off the Lords Supper for so many
years, occasioned many of the people to cast off all other
Ordinances, Sacraments? encouraged the Anabaptists to
cast off Infant-baptism; and thousands to reject both
your Ministry, Churches, and to turn Anabaptists,
Seekers, Quakers, Ranters, Independents, Papists; and
some professed Atheists? I shall therefore apply that
wholesom advice of our Saviour to the Angel of the
Church of Ephesus, unto you, at this season, Rev. 2. 5.
Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and
repent, and do thy first works; or else (you may justly
fear what follows) I will come unto thee quickly, and
will remove thy Candlestick out of its place, unless thou
repent.
Now because Christs own institution, practice, and
the practice of his Apostles recorded in the word, is
the or. 11. 1, 2. 3. Ephes. 5. 1. . Iohn 2. 5, 6. only rule you ought to follow in the admission of
your Parishioners and people to this Sacrament, and your
administration thereof unto them; give me leave to pro∣pound
these Observations to you from them, which
through Gods blessing may rectifie both your Erroni∣ous
judgements, consciences, practices in secluding o∣thers
from the Sacrament, without any Gospel
grounds.
1. It is clear, thatMat. 26. 26. to 30. Mar. 14. 22. to 26. Luke 22. 8. to 23. 1 Cor. 11. 23, 24. 25. Iesus Christ himself secluded
none from this Sacrament of his body, either for igno∣rance
or scandal; but admitted all his disciples to it at
first, without any pre-instructions that we read of, ei∣ther
of its nature or use, but what is recorded in the
very institution it self, done sodenly after the passeover, as
they sate at Table. That all his disciples were then ig∣norant
of the Article of his resurrection from the dead,
and would not believe that he was risen, within 4. dayes
after he administred this Sacrament to them (though
heMat. 20. 19. c. 26. 32. 27. 63. Mar. 8. 31. Lu. 18. 33. c. 24 25. 26▪ 45. 46. oft foretold them he should rise again the third day,

and the Prophets also predicted it) as is clear by Mat. 28.
17. Mar. 16. 11, 13, 14: where Christ himself appeared
to the eleven, and upbraided them with their unbelief and
hardnesse of heart, because they believed not them that
had seen him after he was risen, upon their double testi∣mony
to them; whose words seemed unto them as idle fa∣bles,
and they believed them not, Lu. 24. 11, 12. 21, 22,
&c. 37, 41, 46. John 20. 24, 25. to 30. Yet he admit∣ted
them all to his Supper, though thus ignorant and
unbelieving. And as he admitted all his Disciples,
though thus ignorant: so he likewise admitted Iudas
himself, though aJohn 6. 70, 71. c. 18. 2, 3, &c. c. 17. 12. 22. 6. Mat. 26. 14 15, 16. 47, Acts 1. 16. to 21. Devil, a Thief, a Traytor, a Sel∣ler
of him to the Iews for money, a Son of perdition, yea
cast away, and Christ then knew him to be such a
wretch.
2ly, It is most evident, thatMat. 26. 2. 17. to 26. Mar. 14. 14. John 18. 28, &c. all those whom Christ
admitted to eat the Passover with him, he likewise admit∣ted
to receive this Sacrament of his last Supper, without
secluding any of them. But all circumcised Persons what∣soever,
as well unregenerate, ignorant, or scandalous,
as the most regenerate, knowing and holy Saints (if
not totally cut off from the Congregation, and legally,
not morally unclean) were admitted to eat of the Passo∣ver,
Exod 12. 3, 4. 43. to 50. Deut. 16. 2. &c. Josh.
5. 10. 2 Kings 23. 21, 22. 2 Chron 30. 1. to 26. c. 35.
1. to 20. Ezra 6. 19, 20, 21. 1 Cor. 10. 11. 3, 4, 5▪
Therefore all such Christians and Church members (if
not actually cut off by Excommunication from the
Church) ought, by Christs own practice, to be admitted
to the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17, 18.
3ly, We read of no special Preparation Sermon made
by Christ to fit his Disciples to receive this Sacrament:
of no Classis or Presbytery appointed by him to examin
their faith, knowledge, graces, preparation, worthi∣nesse,
fitnesse before they were admitted to it; or to
seclude them from it, if adjudged unworthy, ignorant,
or scandalous by them. Of no such extraordinary pre∣paration,

prescribed to them ere admitted to receive it,
as is nowSee The Practice of Pi∣ety, Mr. Rogers of the Sacra∣ment. D. Drakes Boundary, Mr. Collings Juri∣dical suspensi∣on. peremptorily exacted, prescribed, as abso∣lutely
necessary ere men must approach, or be admitted to
receive it; and no other preparation or self-examina∣nation
then was requisite for the receiving of the Passo∣ver,
or other daily holy duties. All which our Savi∣our,
no doubt, would have absolutely prescribed at his
first institution and celebration of this Sacrament for a
pattern to all succeeding ages, if so absolutely necessary,
as ome over-rigid Ministers (now wiser, holier, and
more scrupulous than Christ himself, the Author of this
Mystery) now affirm in Presse and Pulpit, without any
precept or president from their Lord and Master Jesus
Christ, but their own fancies.
4ly, It is apparent from the 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17. The
Cup of blessing which we blesse, is it not the Communion of
the Bloud of Christ? The Bread which we break, is it
not the Communion of the Body of Christ? For we being
many are one bread: For we are all partakers of that
one Bread: That all the believing Corinthians and
Members of the visible Church of Corinth (except the
1 Cor. 5. 7. 3. incestuous Corinthian excommunicated from the
Church and all other Ordinances as well as this) did re∣ceive
the Lords Supper usually together: Yet many of
them were very ignorant; yea meer babes in Christ,
whom the Apostle fed with milk, and not with strong
meat, being not able to bear it; and some of them denyed
the resurrection of the dead, or were ignorant of it, 1 Cor.
1, 2. 3. c. 7. 10, 11. c. 14. 38. c. 15. 12, 13. &c. O∣thers
of them were in a great measure scandalous: 1 In
going to Law with their Brethren before unbelievers,
for which he reprehends them, 1 Cor. 6. 1. to 8. O∣thers
of them guilty of Adulterie, lasciviousnesse, for∣nication,
ch. 6. 18, 19. c. 10. 8. 2 Cor. 12. 21. Others
of them spiritually proud, and puffed up with their know∣ledge,
who did eat things sacrificed to Idols in Idols
Temples, and scandalized their weak brethren, ch. 8.

1. 2, 7, 8, &c. c. 10. 22, 23, 28, 29, 30, 32, 33. O∣thers
of them withheld due maintenance from Pal himself
& those other Ministers who instructed them, ch. 9. 6. to
20. Besides, their men and women were very disorderly
in their publike assemblies, and came together not for the
better, but for the worse, for which he reprehends them
ch. 11. 3. to 34. and ch. 14. throughout. More par∣ticularly,
when they came to receive the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper they were very disorderly, in not recei∣ving
it all together, and tarrying not one for the other;
in despising and not relieving their poor Brethren, and
not eating with them; yea some of them were drunken
when they came to receive; and they were also full of
schisms, contentions, factions; some being for Paul, others
for Apollos, others for Cephas, &c. 1 Cor. 11. 16. to 34.
1 Cor. 3. 1, 2, 3. Yea, the Apostle writes expresly
that he could not speak unto the generality of them, as un∣to
spiritual, but unto carnul, even as unto babes in Christ,
being carnal and walking as men, chap. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. Yet
notwithstanding all these disabilities, sis, scandals, they
were then freely admitted to the Lords Table, and not
secluded from it. And though the Apostle reprehends
them in this Epistle for their ignorance, these other vices
sins and disorders in their meetings; yet he gives no
order to their Ministers or Presbyteries to seclude
them from the Sacrament till better instructed, prepa∣red,
and reformed in their lives; but only admonish∣eth
them, to reform those their abuses themselves; to
judge and examine themselves before they eat and drink
of the Lords bread and cup; because otherwise they shall
eat and drink Judgement to themselves, and bring Gods
temporal Iudgements of sicknesse and death upon them:
yet no way dehorts them from constant and frequent
reception of this Sacrament by reason of this danger of
unworthy receiving, which they must take care to re∣form,
1 Cor. 11. 33, 34. but in no case omit the duty,
being Christs prescribed Ordinance, to shew forth his

death till e come, Verse 25, 26.
From which only Texts and Presidents in Scripture,
relating to this Sacraments institution and reception, it
is most clear to my judgement and conscience,
1. That Ignorance in Church-members and bapti∣zed
Christians of years of discretion, is no sufficient
ause to debarre them from the Lords Supper, no
more than from the preaching of the word. The
reason is most clear, because Christs Supper (asDe Trinita∣t, . 3. c. .
Augustine,Reply to Haring▪ See here, p▪ 8. Bishop Iewel,In his ▪  45, 42. See M Sus sus∣p , p. 30, 3. Thomas Beacon, and
others resolve) is both a visible and audible Sermon,
Word, and the Priest therein preacheth and declareth the
death of the Lord, with the fruits and benefits of his pas∣sion
to the Communicants, to instruct, teach, edifie them
thereby; as he doth by his other Sermons, reading and
preaching of the word at other seasons. Therefore the
best and readiest way to instruct and reform the peoples ig∣norance,
is frequently to call, presse and admit them to this
holy Sacrament, that theySee M. Jh Hms, his Second Vindi∣cation of Free admiion, p. 28. to 33. may be thereby edified, in∣structd,
comforted, inlightned by it, and not to seclude
them from it, year after year; which doth but conti∣nue,
and increase their former ignorance, and harden
them therein.
2ly, That no scandalous sins, crimes, unregeneracy,
or want of spiritual, saving graces, ought to seclude any
external Christians or Church-members from the Lords
Supper, no more than from hearing of the word, pray∣er,
thanksgiving, fasting, reading the Scriptures, or any
other publick or private duties of Gods worship: Be∣cause
they are peremptorily Cor. 11. 24, 25, 26▪ Luke▪ 22. 19 See hee, p. 50▪ commanded to perform
this duty in remembrance of Christs death, and thereby
to shew forth his death till he come, as well as to hear,
read, pray, fast, praise God, and the like, from which
no sin, nor unpreparednesse may exempt, or excuse any
man; yea it is a far greater, and more dangerous sinne,
wilfully to neglect, omit, contemn the performance of
this or any other holy duty, than sinfully to perform
and set about it, there being a total disobedience in the

one, but a partial obedience at least (through a failing
in the due manner of peformance) in the other. Which
I wish all Ministers and Christians would now sadly
consider: And so much the rather, because the Apostle
and Spirit of God in this Epistle (pointblank against
Dr. Drakes, Mr. Collins, and others conclusions thence)
make the Corinthians scandalous sins forementioned,
their resort to, and eating meats offered to Idols and
Devils in their Temples (a more scandalous crime than
any English Christians are now guilty of) not a ground
to seclude them from the Lords Table, Supper, Temple,
as unfit to communicate with other Christians; but
presseth their frequent participation of the Lords Table,
and resort to his Temple, his Ordinances, as the stron∣gest
argument to disswade, reclame them from these
scandalous sinnes; Witnesse these expresse words, 1
Cor. 10. 14. to 24. Wherefore my dearly beloved, flee
from Idolatry, I speak as to wise men, judge ye what I
say: The Cup of blessing which we blesse, is it not the com∣munion
of the bloud of Christ? The bread which we break,
is it not the communion of the body of Christ? For we
being many, are one hread; For we are all partakers
of that one bread. Behold Israel after the flesh, are not
they which eat of the Sacrifices partakers of the Altar?
What say I then? that the Idol is any thing, or that which
is offered in sacrifice to Idols is any thing? But I say,
that the things that the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice
to devil, and not to God: and I would not that ye should
have fellowship with Devils. (Mark this inference,
and that which follows) Ye cannot drink the Cup of
the Lord, and the Cup of Devils: Ye cannot be par∣takers
of the Lords Table, and of the Table of De∣vils,
&c. In which clause the word cannot, is not ta∣ken
physically or naturally (for they did actually eat,
drink of the Table, Cup of the Lord and Devils, for
which he reprehends them:) nor of a moral or spiritu∣al
cannot, as some interpret it; that is, You cannot law∣fully,

or spiritually, of right, drink of the Lords Cup, or be
partakers of the Lords Table, but ought to abstain or be
secluded from them, so long as ye partake of the Cup and
Table of Devils; which is clearly contradicted as false
by the 16, 17, and 20 verses: but of a rational and lo∣gical
Suh a can∣not as we read of, 1 John 3. 9. Gal. 5. 17. Lu. 14. 20. Mat. 6. 24. Acts 27. 31. Lu. 11. 7. Rom. 6. 1, 2. 2 Cor. 13. 8. Cant. 5. 3. which will well expound this cannot here. cannot; That is, You cannot (in reason, duty, ju∣stice,
convenience, experience) drink of the Cup, and
partake of the Table of Devils, or go to Idols Temples;
but flee from Idolatry, and not have fellowship with De∣vils;
because you all drink the Cup of the Lord, and are
all partakers of the Lords Table, and of that one bread,
which is the Communion of the Body of Christ. Which
argument is thus seconded, enforced in the 2 Cor. 6. 14,
15, 16. Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbe∣lievers:
for what fellowship hath righteousnesse with un∣righteousnesse?
and what communion hath light with
darknesse? or what concord hath Christ with Belial? or
what part hath he that believeth with an Infidel? And
what agreement hath the Temple of God with Idols? For
ye are the Temple of the living God; as God hath said, I
will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I will be their
God, and they shall be my people. Wherefore come out
from among them, and be ye separate, saith the Lord, and
touch no unclean thing, and I will receive you, &c. A
full Exposition of and Commentary on this former
Text. Therefore by the Apostles own argument and
resolution, the most scandalous Church-members, if
not actually excommunicated, not only may, but must,
yea ought to be admitted to the Lords Supper, and not
secluded from it; and their participation thereof ought
to be thus enforced on them by Ministers, as the stron∣gest
argument, and most prevailing reason, motive, to
reclame them from their scandalous Sins; which have
no rational fellowship, communion, concord, part, agree∣ment
or consistency with such a sacred Ordinance, but
ought to be abandoned as most incongruous, unsuita∣ble,
and repugant thereunto, and to their Christian

profession. Which is more agreeable to the will, mind
of Iesus Christ, and will be far more effectual upon the
Souls, Consciences, lives of scandalous Sinners, than
their many years sinfull seclusion from this Sacrament,
which doth but harden them in their scandalous sins,
and cause them to have more fellowship with Devils in
their works of darkness, than ever they had before their
seclusion from the Lords Supper.
3ly, That all visible Church Members as visible,
have an equal external right of admission to this Sacra∣ment,
and ought all equally to receive it in common,
without any seclusion, when administred, being that
wherein their common Christian communion principally
consists, and is testified unto the world: whence it is sti∣led
1 Cor. 10. 16. Here p. 5. &c. The Communion, and no other Ordinance but it
so termed. Therefore there is no Classis, Presbytery,
or other Church Officer appointed by Christ or his A∣postles,
to suspend or seclude any Church-member
from it, but rather (if any such Classis or Officers there
be) to incite and invite them to it, when negligent to
receive it: Isay 55. 1, 2. Iohn 7. 33. Rev. 22. 17.
4ly,See the Directory. That though preparation Sermons to the
Lords Supper, to instruct and prepare the people for the
more devout and diligent receiving, are commendable,
profitable, usefull, especially where the people are igno∣rant,
carelesse, and backward to receive it. And al∣though
an extraordinary self-examination, preparation,
humiliation and repentance be very profitable, advan∣tagious,
comfortable to such who have time and means
sufficient, before they approach to this Supper of the
Lord; yet they are not so absolutely necessary asMr. Rogers, of the Sacra∣ment, The Pra∣ctice of Piety, Dr. Drake his Boundary, Mr. Collins Juridi∣cal suspension.
many now assert them in print, and Discourse; nor the
want of them a sufficient cause for any persons to debar
themselves, or for Ministers or Presbyteries to seclude
others from this Sacrament; There being no other, no
greater preparation, qualification, or higher degree of

faith, love, charity, repentance, devotion, and other
Christian graces, required in our approaches thereunto,
than unto other publike and private Ordinances of
Gods worship, for ought appears by Scripture. And
that self-examination required of Christians when they
receive this Supper by the Apostle in the 1 Cor. 11. 28.
is required of all Christians at other times and seasons
by the same Apostle, 2 Cor. 13. 5, 6, and of all Saints,
long before this Sacrament instituted, as a constant and
daily duty, especially in times of affliction, and approaches
to God in other holy duties, Lam. 3. 39, 40. Psal. 4. 4. Ps.
119. 5. Hag. 1. 5. Prov. 6. 6. Jer. 8. 6, 7. Eccles. 5. 1.
5.See my Suspension sus∣pended, and Vindication of 4 Serious Qe∣stions. That the Ministers administring the Sacrament
to an ignorant, scandalous, or unworthy Communicant,
who eats and drinks judgement or damnation to him∣self
thereby, doth no wayes make him guilty of his sin,
or unworthy receiving; for then Christ and the Mini∣sters
of Corinth should have been guilty of Judas and
the Corinthians unworthy receiving. The reasons are
apparent, 1. Because the administration of it is theLuke 12. 42 c. 22. 19. 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17. c. 11. 23, 24, 25, 26. c. 9. 16, 17. c. 4▪ 1, 2.
Ministers bounden duty; and the receiving, the recei∣vers;
but the unworthy receiving, his own Sin alone,
and personal crime, to which the Minister is no party
or accessory, no more than the rider guilty of his hor∣ses
halting, stumbling; or the Musician of his instru∣ments
jarring; or Schoolmaster of his Scholars blots,
or misframing of his Letters; or the Physician or Chi∣rurgian
of their Patients distempers or disorders which
hinder the good operation of his wholesom medicines.
Or the Minister guilty of the peoples unprofitable hea∣ring,
whenEzech. 2. 1. to 8. 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16. Hebr. 4. 2. 7. the word becomes unto them the savour of
death unto death, and a means of their obduration by their
own defaults. 2ly, Because the good successe of the Sa∣crament,
and all other means of Salvation,1 Cor. 3. 6, 7, 8. Heb. 4. 1, 2▪ depends
not on the Minister, but Gods blessing on them, and the
peoples due receiving of them. 3ly, Because the

Ministers are unto God a sweet savour of Christ in them
that are saved, and in them that perish, as well in admi∣nistring
the Sacraments, as preaching the Gospel, 2 Cor.
2. 14, 15, 16. they being both ordained by God and
Christ himself, as well to beu. 2. 34. c. 8. 18▪ c. 20. 18. Isay 8 14. 15. c. 28. 16. Rom. 9. 33. 1 Pet. 2. 8. Ma. 10 14, 15. c. 21. 44. Mat. 16. 15, 16. Iohn 15. 22. Ezech. 2. 3. to 9 1 Cor. 11. 25. to 30. 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16. Heb. 6. 6, 7, 8. savours of death unto death
in a secondary and accidental respect, to magnify his justice
towards those who unworthily receive, abuse or contemn
them; as to be a savoar of life unto life to them who receive
them worthily, to the magnifying of his free grace to∣wards
them. Wherefore there can be no real ground
or scruple of conscience left for Ministers, not to admi∣nister
it freely unto all Church members, but only meer
design, to erect a new Iurisdiction and Presbytery, to
seclude men from this Sacrament only, under a pretext
of conscience.
5ly, ThatIsay 1. 2. to 21. Zp. 2. 1. E∣zch. 6. 1. to 9. Jr. 3. 1. to 24. 2 Chron. 33. 2. to 21. c. 36. 14, 15, 16. Mar. 16. 15, 16. Rem. 10 18 19, 20, 21. Tim. 1. 12. to 17. c. 2. 1. to 7. Psal. 65. 2, 3. Ps. 95. 6, 7. Ps. 96. 1. 2. to 11. Ps. 100 1, 2, 3, 4. Psal. 146. 11, 12, 13. Acts 9. 1. to 23. no scandalous sin whatsoever doth di∣rectly
and properly of it self debarre Christians from the
Sacrament, or any other publike Ordinances or private
duties, (the best ordinary means prescribed by God to cure
and heal their sins, convert and reclame them from them;)
but only consequentially, when they are actually and
judicially excommunicated, or cut off from the Church
and publick Assemblies for them,1 Cor. 5. 5. 7. 1 Tim. . 20. for the terror of o∣thers,
the prevention of infection by their Society, the
shaming, punishing of themselves for their scandalous sins,
and bringing them to repentance for them. That excom∣munication
it self doth not formally, specially and in∣tentionally
seclude men from this Sacrament, (as most
ignorantly fancy) no more than from any other pub∣lick
Ordinance; but only consequentially and indi∣rectly,
by secluding them for a time from theEusb. Eccl. Hist. l. 6. c. 45. Bishop Jewels reply to Har∣ding, p. 35. Church
it self, and Communion, Society of all the faithfull, where
the publick Ordinances and Sacraments are administred:
whence it is stiled and defined. A casting or putting a
scandalous Sinner out of the Church: A cutting him off
from the Congregation, and a delivering him over unto

1 Cor. 5. 5. 7. 13 Gal. 5. 12. 1 Tim. 1. 20. Tit. 3. 10. 3 Iohn 10. Bochellus Decreta Eccl. Gal. l. 1. Tit. 14. Summa Angel. et Rosella. Tit. Excommunica∣tio. Gratian, Causa 11. Qu. 3▪ Articles of England, Artic. 33. Harmony of Confessions, sect. 10, 11, 14, 15. Euseb. Hist. l. . c. 46. Satan; but never, a Suspension from the Lords
Supper, or other publike Ordinances; being only the
consequence, nor form or essence of Excommunication,
so much of late contested for, and so little understood,
by those who are most eager to introduce it.
6ly, I humbly conceive, that no greater measure or
degree of knowledge, faith, profession of Christ, Con∣fession
of sinne, and repentance, is necessarily required
by God, or to be exacted by Ministers, to enable men
now to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, than
in the Primitive Church was exacted by Christs own A∣postles
and Ministers in persons of ripe years newly
converted to Christianity, upon their admission to
Baptism; they being both Sacraments and Seals of the
Covenant of Grace alike, and requiring the self-same
qualifications. Hence our learnedReply to Harding, Art. 2 dvis. 25. p. 103▪ 104. Bishop Iewel
writes, It appeareth by St. Cyprian, St. Hierom,August. de Eccles. Dogma l 1 c. 52. St.
Augustine, and other old Writers, That they that were
baptized, as well Children as others, immediately
received the holy Mysteries in both kinds. St.Hierom. contra Lucife∣rium. Hie∣rom
speaking of one Hilarion saith thus. He cannot ad∣minister
Baptism without the Sacrament of Thanksgi∣ving.
Cyprian de Lapsis, Serm. 5. St. Cyprians words touching this matter
be these: Ubi solennibus adimpletis, &c. After the so∣lemnity
(of the Consecration) was done, and the Deacon
began to administer the Cup unto them that were present;
and among others there received, the childs turn being
come, by the power of the divine Majesty, she turned a∣way
her face, &c. Here by the way we may well gather,
That like as the Priest, the Deacons, and the people recei∣ved,
even so the child received too, without any manner of
innovation or difference. This Custome of administring
the Lords Supper as well to infants, as others, imme∣diately
after their Baptism in the Primitive times, pro∣ceeded
(as I conceive) from the very practice of the
Apostles. Acts 2. 38. to 42. where the 3000. Converts
so soon as they believed and were baptized, were immedi∣ately

admitted into the Apostles fellowship, and to the
breaking of bread, which most interpret of the Sacra∣ment
of the Lords Supper, comparing it with Acts 20.
7. & 1 Cor. 10. 2, 3. 16, 17. Now a verySee Mr. Blake his Covenant sealed, p. 233. small mea∣sure
of instruction, knowledge, faith, repentaece, confes∣sion
of sin, and acknowledgement of Christ, was reputed
sufficient in the Primitive Church by the Apostles and
Ministers of Christ, to qualifie and admit converts of
ripe years to the Sacrament of Baptism; as is clear by
Mat. 3. 5, 6. Acts 2. 38, 41, 42, 46, 47. c. 8. 12, 13, 16. 36,
37, 38. c. 9. 17, 18. c. 10. 47, 48. c. 11. 16, 17. c. 16.
15. 30. to 35. c. 18. 8. c. 22. 16. where all were instru∣cted,
converted, believed, baptized in one and the very
self-same day, and made profession of the faith of Christ,
upon the first Sermon they heard, without any further
delay or Suspension of them from Baptism. Therefore
they and all other baptized Christians of ripe years, im∣mediately
upon their baptism and conversion, ought
now to be admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper upon the self-same terms and qualifications, and
not secluded from it, under a pretence of ignorance or
unfitnesse to receive it.
7ly. Whereas some Ministers most insist upon the
1 Cor. 11. 27, 29. Whosoever shall eat this bread, and
drink this cup of the Lord unworthily, shall e guilty of
the body and bloud of the Lord. For he that eateth and
drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation to
himself (not to the Minister or other Communicants)
not discerning the Lords body: as the prime ground, and
reason to suspend ignorant and scandalous persons, in
their judgement, from this Sacrament. I beseech them
to observe, 1. What the Antient Fathers, andDefence of the Apology▪ part. 5. h. 16. divis. 1. p. 514, 515. Bi∣shop
Iewel out of them concludes against the Papists,
who object it, to prove a Transubstantiation in this
Sacrament Even soContra Cres∣conum, l. 1. cap. 23. St. Augustine writeth of the
water of Baptism. Baptismus valet alis ad Regnum,
aliis ad judicium. Again he saith,Contra Cres∣coum, l. 2. c. 23. Baptismum

multi habent, non ad vitam aeternam, sed ad poenam a∣ternam,
non bene utentes tanto bne. VerilyDe Tempo∣, Serm. 0. Saint
Augustine saith, Reus erit, non parvi pretii; sed san∣guinis
Christi, qui (fornicatione et adulterio) violat et
commaculat animam, Christi sanguine et Passione mun∣datam.
Againe he saith,De Tempo∣re, Serm. 120. Adultter reus erit aeternae
mortis, quia vilem in se habuit sanguinem Redemptoris.
D Pessi & ruc Domi∣nis. Athanasius saith, Adorantes dominum, neque ita,
ut dignum est ei, viventes, non sentiunt se reos fieri Do∣minicae
mortis.De Ablu∣tione Pdam. And St. Cyprian saith, Impiis in
morte Christi nullus superest quaestus, sed justissime eos
beneficia neglecta condemant. If thenSee here, p. 45, 46. Baptism be
received by some unto judgement and everlasting pain,
as well as the Lords Supper: If Fornicators and Adul∣terers
by defiling their souls made clean, by the Passion
and bloud of Christ, be guilty of the bloud of Christ,
though they receive not this Sacrament; If those
who worship the Lord in prayer, or any other sacred
Ordinance as well as this, and yet live not so as is meet
for the Lord, are thereby made guilty of our Lords
death; If wicked mens despising of the benefits of
Christ, doth justly condemn, and make Christ death
ungainfull to them, as well as unworthy receiving
this Sacrament: Then this Text can afford no Juris∣diction
or ground at all to our Ministers, or others, to
seclude any from the Lords Supper, no more than
from Baptism, or any other sacred Ordinance upon this
Account,  2ly. Observe what ExpositionDefence of the Apology, p. 515. Bi∣shop
Iewel in the same place gives of this Text. This
therefore is St. Pauls meaning, that the wicked resorting
unworthily to the Holy Mysteries, and having no regard
what is meant thereby, DESPISE THE DEATH
AND CROSSE OF CHRIST: and therefore are
guilty of the Lords Body and Bloud that are repre∣sented
in the Sacrament. To come nearer to the pur∣pose,[g] Aug. ad Bonef. Epist. 50.
St. Augustine saith, Habeant foris Sacramen∣tum
corporis Christi, sed rem ipsam amittunt intus

cujus est illud Sacramentum: ET IDEO SIBI JU∣DICIUM
MANDUCANT ET BIBUNT. Here
Saint Augustine saith, they are guilty, NOT BE∣CAUSE
THEY RECEIVE, BUT BECAVSE
THEY RECEIVE NOT THE BODY OF
CHRIST. Mark well these words Mr. Harding,
(and let others mark them now) they are effectual:
The wicked by St. Augustines judgement are guilty,
NOT BECAVSE THEY RECEIVE, but BE∣CAVSE
THEY RECEIVE NOT THE BODY
OF CHRIST. And if so, then I hence inferre, That
those who willfully neglect to receive the Sacra∣ment
of the Lords Supper, or keep off others from
it who desire and presse to receive it, are more guil∣ty
of the body and bloud of Christ, than those who un∣worthily
receive it; because theySee the  in the Common Prayer Bok▪ Heb. . 24. 30. Mt. . 14▪ 15. ct 13. 45, 46. 51. more neglect,
contemn, despise and undervalue Christs death and
passion represented therein, than those who in obedi∣ence
to his Institution make conscience externally to
receive it, when administred; and do neither exter∣nally,
nor internally, Sacramentally nor spiritually
receive the body of Christ: when as the others who
receive unworthily, receive it externally and Sacra∣mentally,
at least in the Elements: Which Judas
likewise did, as Bishop Iewel there asserts, out of
two Quotations inAug. Epist. 160. & in Psal▪ 3. St. Augustines writings.
3ly. Consider, that when our Saviour sent forth his
Apostles (and Ministers, who succeed them) to preach;
he gave them this Commission, Mark 16. 15, 16. Go
ye into all the World, and preach the Gospel to every
creature. He that believeth and is baptized, shall be
saved; BVT HE THAT BELIEVETH NOT
SHALL BE DAMNED. Which is likewise secon∣ded
John 3. 18, 36. 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16. If then the
damnation of those who believe not the Gospel preached,
authorizeth not Ministers or Presbyteries to seclude
any unbelieving Christians, or other unprofitable hea∣rers

from hearing the Word and Gospel read or prea∣ched
in the Church or elsewhere; then by the self-same
reason, this danger of eating and drinking damnation,
and being guilty of the Lords body and bloud, can be no
sufficient Authority, Ground or Commission for any
Classi, Presbytery or Minister whatsoever, to seclude
any visible unexcommunicated Church-member from
the Lords Supper, no more than from the Word prea∣ched,
read, prayer, or any other sacred Ordinance;
whichSee Perkins cases of consci∣ence, book 2. c. 10. Every man of years living in the Church, and being bap∣tized, is bound  conscience by the commande∣ment to use the Lords Supper. God commands them to frequent; which no
mortalsmay or can (without the highest presumption, u∣surpation)
juridically enjoyn them to abstain from, or
neglect; Seeing we ought herein to obey God, rather
than men, as the Apostle: themselves have twice resolved,
Acts 4. 17, 18, 19, 20, 29, 30, 32. c. 5. 20, 21, 28, 29.
&c. 42. and Daniel long before them, Dan. 6. 5. to
18.
All which particulars, with what else I shall subjoyn
in this Vindication, duely considered, together with
that Commission which every Minister publikely re∣ceived
heretofore at his Ordination, when he had this
power conferred on him (Be thou a faithfull Dispen∣ser
of the Word of God, and OF HIS HOLY SACRA∣MENTS.
Take thou Authority to preach the Word of
God, AND TO MINISTER THE HOLY SA∣CRAMENTS,
IN THIS CONGREGATION where
thou shalt be so appointed) And that solemn promise he
then openly made,See the Book of Ordina∣tion; confirmed by the Statutes of 5 & 6 F. 6. . 1. 3▪ . 6. c. 2. 8. Elz. c. 1. I will by the help of the Lord,
GIVE MY FAITHFVL DILIGENCE ALWAYS
SO TO ADMINISTER THE DOCTRINE AND
SACRAMENTS OF CHRIST AS THE LORD
HATH COMMANDED, AND THIS REALM
HATH RECEIVED THE SAME, according to the
commandements of God: will (I hope) through Gods
blessing on them, resolve and determine all those di∣stracting
needlesse Controversies, touching Suspension
of particular Persons, or whole Parishes from the Lords

Supper, and remove all New-erected Bars and Rayles
to keep the people from Free-admission and accesse to the
Lords Table, in all plaees where of late years they have
been injuriously sequestred from it; and restore the fre∣quent
Celebration thereof in remembrance of our Savi∣ours
Passion. And so much the rather, because the very
Directory it self (as well as our old Common Prayer
Book) in the Section Of the Celebration of the Commu∣nion
or Sacrament of the Lords Supper, resolves thus in
the very first lines. The Communion, or Supper of the
Lord isSee Peter ombard, Sent. l. 4. distinct. 35. Henricus de Vuruma & o∣ther Schoolmen thereon: Grati∣an de Consec. Dst. 2. frequently to be celebrated. But how often,
may be considered and determined by the Ministers and
other Church-Governours of each Congregation as they
shall find most convenient for the comfort and edification
of the people committed to their charge. After which it
directs, When the day is come for administration, the Mi∣nister
shall make a short Exhortation, expressing the ine∣stimable
benefits we have by the Sacrament, together
with the ends and use thereof setting forth the great ne∣cessity
of having our Comfort and Strength renewed
thereby in this our Pilgrimage and Warfare; which
being the things I plead for, I cannot but hope, all
Ministers of the Church of England will henceforth cor∣dially
pursue, notwithstanding all former Books, Cavils,
Scruples to disswade them from their duties herein.
Phil. 2. 1. 2. If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any
comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any
bowels and mercies, fulfil ye my joy, that ye be like min∣ded,
having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind
herein.Phil. 4. 8, 9, 23. Finally brethren, whatsoever things are true,
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just,
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely,
whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any vir∣tue,
if there be any praise, think on these things. Those
things which ye have both learned, & received, and heard
& seen in me, do, & the God of Peace shall be with you. The
Grace of our Lord Iesus Christ be with you all Amen.

Swainswick, Sept. 1. 1656.
