



Right Honourable,
THough true Nobility (alwayes foun∣ded
inOmnes pari for∣te nascimur, solâ virtute distingui∣mur. Minucius Feli Octo. p. 123. Nobilitas sola est ac unica virtus. Iuvenal. Satyr. 8. vertue and reall piety)
needs no other tutelar Deity or A∣pologie,
but it selfe, amongst those
Omnes boni semper Nobilita∣ti favemus: & qia utile est rei∣pub. Nobiles Ho∣mines esse dignos Majoribus suis, & quia valet apud nos clarorum Hominum & be∣ne derepub. meri∣torum memoria, otiam mortuo∣rum. Ciero Orat. pro P. Sex. ingenious Spirits, who are able
to discerne or estimate its worth;
yet the iniquity of our degenerated
Age, and the frenzie of the intoxi∣cated
ignorant vulgar is such, that it now requires the
assistance of the ablest Advocates to plead its cause, and
vindicate the just Rights and Priviledges of the House of
Peeres, against theLiburne, Over∣ton, and others. licentious Quills and Tongues of
lawlesse sordid Sectaries, and Mechanick Levellers; who
having got the Sword and reines into their hands, plant
all their batteries and force against them, crying out like
those Babylonian Levellers of oldPsal. 137. 7. against the House
of Peeres, Rase it, Rase it, even to the foundation thereof,
and lay it for ever levell with the very dust; beholding
all true Honor, worth and Noblenesse shining forth in your
Honors heroick Spirits, with a malignant aspect, because

they despaire of ever enjoying the least spark thereof in
themselves, and prosecuting you with a deadly hatred,
because better and greater then ever they have hopes to
be, unlesse they can through trechery and violence make
themselves the onely Grandees, by debasing your high∣est
Dignity, to the lowest Peasantry, and making the
meanest Commoners your Compeers.
This dangerous seditious Designe hath ingaged me
(the unablest of many) out of my great affection to reall
Nobility, and to the present totering condition of our
Kingdome and Parliament (the very pillars and foundati∣ons
whereof are now not onely shaken, but almost quite
subverted) without any Fee at all, to become your Ho∣nors
Advocate, and voluntarily to plead your Cause, and
vindicate your undoubted right of sitting, voting and
judging in our Parliaments, of which they strenuously
endeavour to plunder both you and your posterities;
and to publish these subitane indigested Collections to
the world, to still thePsal. 65. 7. madnesse of the seduced vulgar,
whom Ignoramus Lilburne, Overton, Walwin, and their
Confederates have laboured to mutinie against your
Parliamentary Iurisdiction,Isa. 4 1. 25. treading upon Princes as up∣on
mortar, and as the Potter treadeth the clay, in their illi∣terate
seditious Pamphlets, which I have here refuted
by Scripture, Histories, Antiquities and Parliament-Rolls;
the ignorance whereof, joyned with their malice, is the
principall occasion of their error in this kinde.
And truly were all our Parliament-Rolls, Pleas & Iour∣nals,
faithfully transcribed, and published in print to the
eye of the world, as most of our Statutes are, by authority
of both Houses of Parliament (a work as worthy their un∣dertaking,
& as beneficiall for the Publike, as any I can
recommend unto their care) it would not only preserve
them from imbezelling, and the hazards of fire and war,

to which they are now subject, but likewise eternally
silence, refute the Sectaries and Levellers ignorant false
Allegations against your Honors Parliamentary Iurisdi∣cton
and Iudicature, resolve and cleare all or most doubts
that can arise concerning the power, jurisdiction and pri∣viledges
of both, or either House, keepe both of them
within due bounds (the exceeding whereof is dangerous,
and grievous to the People, except in cases of absolute
necessity, for the saving of a Kingdome, whiles that ne∣cessity
continues, and no longer) chalke out the ancient
regular way of proceedings in all Parliamentary affaires
whatsoever, whether of warre, or peace, civill or cri∣minall,
concerning King or Subject, Natives or Forrai∣gners,
over-rule and reconcile most of the present diffe∣rences
between the King and Parliament, House and
House, Members and Members; cleare many doubts, and
rectifie some grosse mistakes in printed Statutes, Law-Books,
and our ordinary Historians; add much light, lu∣stre
and ornament to our English Annals, and the Com∣mon
Law; and make all Lawyers, and the Members of
both Houses farre more able then now they are, to man∣nage
and carry on all businesses in Parliament, when they
shall upon every occasion almost have former presidents
ready at hand to direct them; there being now very
few Members in either House well read or versed in anci∣ent
Parliament Rolls, Pleas, or Journalls, the igno∣rance
whereof is a great Remora to their proceedings,
and oft times a cause of dangerous incroachments of
new Iurisdiction over the Subjects persons and estates, not
usuall in former Parliaments, and of some great mi∣stakes
and deviations from the ancient methodicall
Rules and Tracts of Parliament (now almost quite for∣gotten
and laid aside by raw unexperienced Parliament∣men)
to the publike prejudice, and injury of posterity.

Your Lordships helping hand to the speedy further∣ing
of such a necessary publike worke, will be a great ac∣cession
to your Honor, the best vindication of your
Parliamentary Jurisdiction, Right, Power and Judicature,
against all Opposites, till the accomplishment whereof, I
shall humbly recommend this short Plea in your Honors
defence, to your Noble Patronage, who can pitch upon
no better or readier meanes to support your Honor and
Authority, and to indeare your selves in the Peoples affe∣ctions,
then in these distracted, dangerous, stormy times, to
ingage all your interest, power and activity, speedily to
settle and secure Gods Glory, Truth, Worship, and the pub∣like
Safety of the Kingdome, against all open Opposers,
and secret Underminers of them; to unburthen the
People of their heavy Taxes, the Souldiers insolencies and
free quarter; to redresse all pressing grievances, all
oppressing arbitrary Committees, and proceedings con∣trary
to the rules of Law and Iustice; to right all grieved
Petitioners (especially such who have waited at least se∣ven
yeares space at your doores for reparations) relieve
poore starved Ireland, and raise up the almost lost honor,
power, freedome and reputation of Parliaments, by act∣ing
Honorably and heroically like your selves, without
any feare, favour, hatred or selfe-ends, and confining
your selves & the Commons House to the ancient bounds
and rules of Parliamentary Iurisdiction and proceedings,
and to excell all others as farre in Iustice, Goodnesse and
publike resolutions, as you do in Greatnesse and Authori∣ty.
Which that you may effectually performe, shall be
the the prayer of

