



Most gracious Soveraign,
THe1 Tim. 6. 15. Rev. 19. 16. only potentate, and KING OF KINGS, who
Dan. 2, 21. c. 4. 25. Job 12. 19, 20, 21. 1 Sam. 2. 8. Psa. 113. 7, 8. removeth Kings, and SETTETH UP KINGS,
and ruleth in the KINGDOM OF MEN TO
GIVE IT TO WHOMSOEVER HE PLEASETH; ha∣ving
by his own OmnipotentPsal. 98. 1. Exod. 15. 16. Deut. 4. 34. out-stretched arm, and
successive Miraculous Providences, unexpectedly cut
off, cast down, subverted, dissipated,Dan. 2. 34. 43. without hands or

bloodshed, the most Execrable, Persidious, Trayterous
Murderers of your Royal Father KING CHARLS the
first, of Glorious Memory, and Unjust disinheri∣ters
and proscribers of your Sacred Majestie out of
all your own Hereditary Kingdoms, and some forein
States by Violence, War, and inhumane Tyranny, (en∣forcing
your Majesty oft to cry out with the Exiled
Kingly Prophet;Psal. 120. 4, 5, 6. Wo is me that I am constrained to
dwell in Mesech, and to have my habitation among the
tents of Kedar &c.) who by rigorous Edicts debarred
your Majestie not only of the Charitable Relief of
your own Protestant Subjects, but likewise of the
Christian Aid, and1 Tim. 2. 1, 2, 3. Evangelical Tribute, (due to all
Pagan as well as Christian KINGS, by divine and
common natural Right) of their daily Supplications,
Prayers, and Intercessions to God, for your Personal
Preservation, and Restitution, under severest Penalties;
imposed many insupportable new Yoaks of Bondage
on all your Subjects necks, and worse than Aegyptian
Burdens upon their galled backs, for sundry yeares,
almost to their Irrecoverable ruine, it pleased this
Ps. 46. 7. Soveraign King over all the earth,Num. 16. 22. . 27. 16. and God of the
Spirits of all flesh, by strange Miracles of mercy,
through the preparatory loyal Endeavours of some
of your Majesties most inconsiderable faithfull Sub∣jects,
upon the very first Reception and reading
of your Majesties most gracious Letters and Declara∣tions
to the Lords, Commons, City of London, Army,
and Navy, immediately to bow the hearts and
spirits of both your Houses of Parliament, and all your
Subjects, (yea of the very Military Officers, Forces
by Land and Sea, formerly raised & engaged against
your Majesties Cause and Kingship,) as the heart of

one man, as he2 Sam. 16. 9. to 10. bowed the hearts of the men of Judah
after rebellious usurping Absoloms death, in the case
of exterminated King David) so that they immediate∣ly
and unanimously voted your Majesties speedy re∣turn,
dispatched their several Letters, Votes, Messen∣gers,
Fleet and Monies to your Majesty, without one
dissenting voice; to hasten your Majesties return, and
transport you with honour and safety, to enjoy your
KINGLY AUTHORITY and PATRIMONY, contending
with a most cordial aemulation, who should be first
and forwardest, to bring back and conduct your Majesty
(together with your Princely Brothers and Fol∣lowers)
from your long most deplorable exile, to
your Royal City and Palace, with all possible de∣monstrations
of their publike joy, and dutifull Al∣legeance
to your Majesty, and farr greater Magnifi∣cence,
Solemnity, Triumph, and multitudes of Con∣ductors,
than any of your most Victorious Royal Pro∣genitors
enjoyed when they returned into England
from their greatest Forein Conquests. And that which
crowned this Miracle of Mercies, was its celerity and
season, it having both its inception and perfection with∣in
the limits of one Month, and its completion on Your
Majesties Birth-day (May 29.) whereon, as You
were first born a Prince, You were now reborn A
MOST GLORIOUS KING, and most magnificently
invested in the possession of Your Royal Throne at
Whitehall, in the presence of all your Majesties Lords,
Commons, and thousands of your People there assem∣bled,
who with their united Shouts, Prayers, Praises,
Acclamations, Benedictions, and Panegyricks con∣gratulated
your Maties Natural and Political Nativity
thereon, both as a Man and Monarch; together
with the new Birth and Resurrection of Your three

United Kingdoms and Churches of ENGLAND,
SCOTLAND and IRELAND, and their respec∣tive
Dominions, being all raised from their Graves
of Death and Misery (wherein they had for some
years space before been interred) and were new born
AS KINGDOMS and Churches too on that joyful
day; worthy to be celebrated by them in all succee∣ding
Generations; and to have this Divine motto
engraven thereon:Psal.  18. 22, 23, 24. The stone which the builders refu∣sed
is (this day) become the Head of the corner; This is the
Lords doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes, THIS IS
THE DAY WHICH THE LORD HATH
MADE, WEE WILL REJOYCE AND BE
GLAD THEREIN.
What the elegant ProphetIsa 66. 7, 8, 9. Isaiah records of
Gods miraculous Mercies towards his Church and
people: Before she travelled, she brought forth; before
her pain came, she was delivered of a man-child. Who
hath heard such a thing? WHO HATH SEEN SUCH
THINGS? Shall the Earth be made to bring forth in
ONE DAY? OR SHALL A NATION BE BORN AT
ONCE? For as soon as ZION travelled, she brought
forth her children; Was now verified both of your
Majesty, and your three whole Kingdoms & Chur∣ches.
all brought forth and born together in this one
DAY. Wherefore, Rejoyce ye with Jerusalem, (with
England) and be glad with her all ye that love her; re∣joyce
for joy with her, all ye that mourned for her.
It hath been the antient cavill of ourBellarmin. de Notis Ec∣cles. c. 14. Bshop Jewels Def. of the A∣pology of the Ch. of Engl. ch 16. Divis. 1 D. John White his Way to the true Church, Sect 42 Di∣gress 44. Romish Ad∣versaries,
against our Reformed Protestant Churches &
Religion, that they are false and spurious, because they
have no miracles wrought in them: And they have daily
upbraided your sacred Majesty & your followers, yea
pierced your souls during your Exile among them,

with this soul-piercing Quaere,Psal. 43. 10. Where is now the
God of the Protestants? He can neither preserve nor re∣store
You to your Crowns and Kingdoms; Unless you re∣nounce
your Protestant God, Church, Heresie, & embrace
our Roman Catholike God, Church, Religion, there is no
hope nor possibility of your restitution, and that only by the
Arms of your Catholike Allyes and Subjects. But
blessed and for ever magnified be the glorious Name
of our great God, who hath now vindicated his own
Glorie and Omnipotencie against their reproaches,
& wrought so many Miracles in your Maties restituti∣on,
to justifie both the Truth of the Protestant Religi∣on,
Churches, & your Subjects, that all theirSee Surius, Lippomanes, Ribadenira, in their lives of the Saints. spurious
Miracles and Impostures wherewith they abuse their
over-credulous Proselytes, and fraught their Legends
even to nauseousnesse, are no more to be compared
with them, than a Glo-worm to the Noon-day Sun:
And their God andDeut. 32, 31. rock, is not as our God and rock, our
Enemies themselves being (now) Judges.
Verily, your Majesty with all your Protestant Sub∣jects,
after such a stupendious, glorious deliverance
from their late usurping Pharaohs, worse than Aegyp∣tian
Tax-masters, Burdens and servitude, have just
cause to sing aloud to the God of their Salvation,
this triumphant song of Moses, and the Children of
Israel, and King David after them;Exod. 15. 11, 12, 13, 21. Who is like unto
thee, O Lord, amongst the Gods? who is like unto thee,
glorious in holynesse, fearfull in prayses, doing wonders?
Thou stretchest out thy right hand, the earth swallowed
them; Thou in thy mercy hast led forth thy people, which
thou hast redeemed. Sing ye unto the Lord, for he hath
triumphed gloriously.Psal. 21. 1, 2, 3 &c. The King shall joy in thy strength
O Lord, and in thy salvation how greatly shall he rejoyce?
for thou hast (now) given him his hearts desire, thou

hast not with-holden the request of his lips: For thou pre∣ventest
him with the blessings of goodnesse, thou settest a
Crown of pure gold on his head: His glory is great in thy
salvation, Honor and Majesty hast thou laid upon him.
Thou hast made him most Blessed for ever, thou hast made
him exceeding glad with thy Countenance, For the King
trusteth in the Lord, and through the mercy of the most
High he shall not miscarry.Psal 106. 48. Blessed be the Lord God of
England from everlasting to everlasting (for this un∣expressible
mercy) and let all the people say, Amen;
Praise ye the Lord. Yea they all now joyntly
and severally apply to your Majestie, the blessing
and words of the Queen of Sheba to King Solomon,
after she beheld his transcendent Wisdom, Virtues, and
Magnificence: (which far exceeded the report there∣of,
as your Majesties royal wisdom and graces of all
kinds much transcend their fame)2 Chron 9. 5, 6, 7. Blessed be the Lord
thy God, who delighted in thee, to set thee upon his, Throne,
to be King for the Lord thy God. Because the Lord thy
God loved Israel (England, Scotland and Ireland)
TO ESTABLISH THEM FOR EVER, THEREFORE
MADE HE THEE KING OVER THEM TO DO JUS∣TICE
AND JUDGEMENT, yea, to restore them to
their pristine Liberty, Peace, Plenty, Traffick, Renown,
Prosperity, and make them the happiest of all Sub∣jects
in the world.
In the contemplation of which inchoated com∣mon
Felicity, I humbly presume to dedicate to your
Majesty, this now compleated Treatise of, The Signal
Loyalty and Devotion of Gods true Saints and pious
Christians in all ages (and likewise of Pagans) to
their KINGS, both before and under the Law and Gospel,
more especially within this your first Christian Realm
of Britain, (wherein I have most expatiated) ex∣pressed

both by their publike and private Prayers,
Supplications, and Intercessions unto God for their long
life, health, safety, victory, prosperity, temporal, spiri∣tual
and eternal felicity; and all sorts of blessings both on
their Royal Persons, Queens, Progenies, Families, Go∣vernment,
Kingdoms, Armies, Counsls; by their
Thanksgivings to God for their advancement to their
Royal Thrones, Victories, Successes, Deliverances, Piety,
Justice and Gratious reigns over them; by their loyal Ac∣clamations,
Salutations, Addresses, Panegyricks, E∣pistles
to them, and their dutiful Subjection and Obedi∣ence
under them, which I have evidenc'd by presidents
and Testimonies in all ages, (never formerly collected
into one Manual) To which I have super-added the
antient and modern Forms of the Coronations of
Christian Emperors, Kings and Queens, (and of some
Pagans) with the Ceremonies, Solemnities, Prayers, Col∣lects
and Benedictions used at them, especially those
relating to England and Scotland, (not hitherto pub∣lished)
as a President in, and Prologue to your Majes∣ties
much desired and expected Coronation.
The first Part of this Treatise, I lately Printed, for
Your Majesties service, in January last to inthrone
You in the Hearts, cordial Prayers and Supplicati∣ons
of all Your loyal Subjects, and to prepare the way
for Your Majestyes speedy Restauration to Your
Hereditary Crowns and Kingdoms, which (blessed be
God) you now actually enjoy, to their unspeakable
comfort: of the accomplishment whereof with∣out
Armes or Blood, I had such full assurance then
and since in my own apprehensions, from the Obser∣vation
of Gods admirable Providences, of Your
Majesties Opposites intollerable Extravagances and
Infatuations, & of late Your Subjects dutiful Inclina∣tions

tending thereunto, through the loyal Endea∣vour
of some Faithfull Friends to your Majestie and
your People, that I committed the Second Part of
this Treatise, and all that concerns Your Coronation to
the Presse, in the beginning of April last; before
any visible appearances thereof to the eyes or thoughts
of others: And I repute it an extraordinary Blessing
and Honour from God and your Majesty, that any of
my Paper Arms and Publications (in your Majesties
and others apprehensions) have been instrumental to
promote this your happy, Unbloody, most joyfull
Restitution to your Throne and Kingship, maugre all
Ire Ingagements, Oaths of Abjurations, to debar your
Majestie and all your Royal line for ever from them.
I humbly beseech your Royal Majestie graciously
to accept this Unpolish'd work (compiled in the
midst of many publike distracting Imployments,
bring your Highnesses peculiar by all Rights and Cir∣cumstances)
as a Publick Testimony of my Loyalty to
your Majestie, and a lasting Monument of my Thank∣fullnesse
to Almighty God, for hearing my many
years constant Prayers, and blessing my impotent Pa∣per
Artillery and endeavors for your Majesties long-desired,
and now happily accomplished Inves∣titute,
not only in your Royal Throne, but like a  in
the Hearts, Consciences, publike, private Devotions
and Supplications of all your People. Whom this Trea∣tise,
seconded with my Healths Sicknesse, (dedicated
to your Royal Father many years past) and your Ma∣jesties
most Pious fresh Proclamation, will instruct and
excite most devoutly to pray for your Majesties
Health and Happiness in their Churches, Chapels, Fami∣lies,
Closets, rather than heathenishly to prophane,
abuse your Sacred Name, in drinking your Majes∣ties

Health to the Hazard of their own and their fools
to boot, through Drunkennesse and Intemperance) in
Taverns, Alchses, or at their own or others Tables,
as well to God dishonor as your Majesties.
In fine, I shall be a daily Orator to the God of
your Majesties and your Kingdoms Salvation, that
all the temporal, spiritual, and eternal blessings,
comprised in the several Prayers, Collects, Benedicti∣ons,
Salutations, Acclamations, and Passages, collected
in this Treatise, for any Christian Emperors, Kings,
and Princes, may concenter in, and be abundantly
powred forth on your Majesties Royal Person, Family,
Kingdoms, Councils, Court, Armies, Government, Peo∣ple;
that so your Majestie may be Chronicled to all
Posterity (as in truth you really demerit) for the best,
devoutest, holiest, justest, and most gratious of all
Christian Kings that ever reigned, and your for∣merly
disloyal, degenerated Subjects, by your most
righteous Reign, and piousRegis ad ex∣emplum totus componitur orbit. Claudian. Royal Example, hence∣forth
become the most Loyal, Religious, Free, and
Happiest of all Subjects in the Universe: Which is
and shall be the daily Prayer of

From my Study
in Lincolns Inne
June 5. 1660.
