



Worthy Gentlemen:
IF in this brief Argument (which here treats of your Charters,
and maintains your priviledges) there be any thing beseem∣ing
an Advocate of yours: I desire the intire advantage
thereof may redound solely to your selves. For indeed the
Merit of your Cause is such, as would require an able Orator:
and when I first applyed my self to serve you herein, I perceived your inter∣est
was the same as the Common interest of all Merchants, and that could
have no termination, but in the common interest of our Nation: But if
there appear any Error, or Fayler in these papers: if the workmanship be
found too unworthy of the stuffe: I shall then desire of all my Readers, that
the blame may be onely mine: and that none but my self may suffer the least
disadvantage by my defects, and disabilities. I am certain all wise, impar∣tial
Judges will distinguish betwixt that which is mine in this weak peece,
and that which is yours: and if they cast some disdain upon me for not

pleading your cause, as I might: they will not proceed to a condemnation
of your cause, for being no better pleaded here then it is.
In Queen Elizabeths dayes a Tract to this very purpose was Printed by
Mr. Wheeler (a learned Gent: that preceded me in this place) were that
Tract now re-printed, perhaps our Times would be better satisfied in this
Case. It came not to my fight, till after I had formed the lump of this, and
given it all those rude lineaments almost, which it now bears: and I was
induced then to persist in my resolution of finishing this, and not of retroce∣ding;
the rather; because I saw my stile and method varied much from his:
because, the face of the times (which has great influence upon the State
and fate of Merchandize) was not the same when He wrote, as it is now:,
because, his Tract was in bulk more then twice, as great as mine; because,
He might give some light to me in some things, and I adde some to Him in
other things; and so both might be more effectuall for the ends proposed by
both, then either: because, if He was more satisfactory in matters of this
particular Company, I had some thoughts in my self, that I was more proper
for the affairs of Merchants in generall. These reasons kept from abortion
this Essay of mine at that time: but for how long a space it was repreived, I
cannot prognosticate: nor do I much regard how soon its fatall houre ap∣proaches,
so the businesse which it aymed at may survive, and prosper. Gen∣tlemen,
my reputation in this case must run some hazard, and stand or fall,
as the vogue of this age pleases: yet my intention is to be judged of onely by
you; wherefore let that onely finde your fair acceptation, and favourable
construction, and that shall be a sufficient encouragement to
Hamb: Decemb. 30. 1647.
Your Worships obliged,
faithfull Servant,

