



SIR,
THis Sermon was preached at your request; and having performed it, as I was a∣ble, and as suitable to the occasion as I could think on: afterward you thought it not unfit to be made a little more publick by Prin∣ting; and your demands, with others that
heard it, have at last prevailed with me thus to send it abroad, though very much besides my inclination and resolu∣tion.
The Subject of this Discourse, for the main, appertains to an Assize-business, fitted for, and applied to those Persons concerned in and about that Court of Ju∣dicature: and in truth, observing the great neglect of most Men, as to the faithfulness of performance, though un∣der an Oath to do all things justly and honestly, I laboured to convince Men of, and perswade Men to their Duty as they fear God, and must give an account one day, how they have acted in their se∣veral Places; and lest Men (other∣wise of honest Principles) might erre for want of Direction in many Points, I made it much of my Task to inform them from God's Word: and if this Sermon fall
into their hands, and they will read it with as sincere intention as I preached it, it may serve them to some purpose.
Besides, there are some Passages in it by way of Corollary, which are very seasonable for these Times, to be con∣sidered, while that Anti-Magistratical Spirit is up, which so much thwarts the Peace of a Nation and Scripture-Com∣mand.
And if any thing in this Sermon hath had, or hereafter may have any influence upon the Hearers or Readers, and it serve either for Caution or Direction, I have all I aim at.
Mean time, I hope I may not lie under the censure of any that fear God, for what I have done this way, seeing I am not guilty of Flattery, Temporizing or Curiosity: if any thing offend, it will be my plainness, (for my manner is to be
so) and if I am (as 'tis very often my lot) more bold then welcome, as long as 'tis for God and Reformation, I can bear it well enough: and this Sermon had the bap to be thought so.
Besides, I have no Temptation to be∣lieve I shall get any worldly advantage by this Sermons printing, nor any other that exposed it, because of the Subject treated on: and sure, it cannot be thought a de∣sirable Preferment, to go in the crowd with so many, too many Pamphlets that are printed to little purpose; and this must fare as they do, for ought I know. And I think the Stationers-stall is no such throne of Honour, that Men should be ambi∣tious to let their Names lie there: But fare it as it may with Many, yet if Any may get some good by it, I can bear the rest.
And now, Sir, you must own it: for
on your account it was preached, and on yours and others printed. And if it were Truth and Good when delivered, 'tis so still: and seeing you were one of them that took up your part of it to practice, as you did effectually, and were not at a shame and scorne, to follow the Exhorta∣tion, which had so much of Charity in it: And the Reverend Judges were pleased to own what was given them too, in their pra∣ctise, for that Session: and that it may be a Memento to all that fear God, and in com∣mission within any County, to act toward a reformation, as to those many abuses up and down among us, much to the dishonour of God; specified in the close of this Dis∣course, of which I would minde them a∣gain. Ʋpon those Considerations, I yield to let it pass abroad; and I think in respect of your place, your compliance with the
Truths delivered, and Obligation of Friendship, you are the Person fitted for this Dedication, from
SIR,  Camerwel, May 6. 1658.
