


Men, Brethren and Fathers,
LEast we should seem any way to detract from your worth; we freely confess these things following both concerning you that are here the Confes∣sors, and your faith which you have confessed.
That though you are not all the most learned men in this Nation, yet many of you are men of much Learning and abi∣lities: we confess likewise, That for life and conversation, many of you are grave, sober, Religious and devoute persons in your way; having a zeal of God, though in many things not accor∣ding to knowledge, as will appear.
That this Treatise of yours may, in some tolerable sense, be called a Confes∣sion of Faith, faith being sometimes used for our present perswasion, be it right or wrong, as the Apostle intimates, Rom. 14.23. And he that doubteth is damned if he eat, because he eateth not of faith; for what∣soever is not of faith is sin.
That the errors and mistakes, failings, and misperswasions found in this your Confession of Faith, by you presented to the Parliament, are not originally yours as if you first introduced them: but you learned them of your Teachers, and usu∣ally of your Authors, whom you read without serious pensitation, or due ani∣madversion, and to whom ye give too light and sudden credulity.
That yee err not alone, but have many men of note, and some whole nominal Churches who walk and wan∣der with you in the same aberrations.
And finally that ye will not (as we trust) prove pertinatious in your errors: but if the Lord shall vouchsafe to open your eyes, and discover your erring paths unto you; ye will turn from them and readily embrace the truth.
We hope you will not take this Ex∣amen
in evil part, when ye reflect upon these very words of yours, Cha. 31. Sect. 4.
All Synods and Councels since the Apo∣stles dayes, whether general or particular may err, and many have erred. Therefore they are not to be made the rule of faith or practice; but to be used as an help in both.
To the end therefore that yee and all men may the better perceive that there hath been a great Apostasie and depar∣ture from the faith, as the holy Apostles forewarned us, 2 Thess. 2.5. Except there come a falling away first, 1 Tim. 4.1. Now the spirit speaketh expresly, that in the latter dayes some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of De∣vils.
That the Lord Christ in his late spiritu∣al coming as himself foretold it should come to pass, Luk. 18.8. Did scarcely finde the true faith in the earth.
That many times that which is highly esteemed with men, is an abomination in the sight of God, Luk. 16.15.
And finally, that it may be seen not only what erratick lights the common people have followed: but also what weak, and unexpert Councellors the




Princes and States of the world have chosen to advise and assist them in their reforming enterprizes; yea how little truth or infallibility is found in your Authors whom you so Idolize; and how great a part of the modern Christians (as well as the present Church of Rome) is still captived with error and unbelief. We will here modestly, out of zeal of truth (and we hope the truth of zeal) re∣veal many sacred mysteries of Christ (which were long hidden from us, as wel as others, but are through his rich grace made known unto us, and many more unworthy ones) and detect the contrary mistakes, that God may be glorified, and the Nations healed with the leaves of the tree of life, Amen.
