



Right Honorable,
I Am more then confident you will not be offended, that I presume (though unwor∣thy) to present this Examen of the late Synods Confes∣sion of faith to your grave and discerning judgements.
The Auhors of the said confes∣sion did present the same to the
Parliament so we (that are not satis∣fied in it) do with all humility the like, ut vincat veritas, which is, magis amica, quam amicus Plato, quam amicus Lutherus, quam amicus Calvinus, therefore is to be sought out of all that love it, which can∣not be, but as Solomon saith Eccl. 7. (In another case) by setting one contrary to the other, to the end a man finde nothing after him: it is an old and true maxime, Opposita juxt se posita clariùs Elucescunt, as white and black illustrate one another; and I faile much in my intellectu∣als, if you finde not all the argu∣menta dissentanea here, as making a vast difference betwixt their con∣fession and this examen thereof: for you may observe in some passage the dissentane a diversa betwixt them▪ by which, though there might have
been a consent in many things, yet aliqua logica ratione dissentiunt, as by a , & .
Here you may finde opposita dis∣parata, quorum unum multis opponi∣tur.
Here you may finde opposita con∣traria, quorum unum uni tantum op∣ponitur, as contraria relata, that though we all confess the same Fa∣ther, yet rara est concordia fratrum in these two Treatises.
Here are opposita adversa, in such things, quae inter se velut è regione perpetuo adversantur, like as virtus and vitium.
Here are contraria negantia, like∣wise to be found, as contradicentia, quorum alterum aiit alterum negat ubique; they affirm (that which we deny) they say sin will and must re∣maine in the best regenerate men
as long as they live here, which we according to Scripture do confi∣dently deny.
And finally here are betwixt them contraria privantia, as habitus and privatio, which is the greatest opposition in Divinity, Truth and error, light and darkness: each seeking the destroying the possibi∣lity of the other; yet in all these that which Solomon faith, Prov. 18.17. is verified of us both respectiv∣ly: He that is first in his own cause seemeth just, but his neighbor cometh and searcheth him: The late Synod have been first in there own cause (as most desire to be) and seem just: now we (their well wishing neigh∣bour to truth) take the boldness to come and search them, presuming that you most impartiall and judi∣cious Senators, will vouchsafe un∣to
us the like  in this our humble tender as you did to them.
Surely the Parliament would ne∣ver (with such a publike lifting up of hands to the most high) have en∣tered into a Covenant to reform (as the ultimate end of it) the wor∣ship of God in Doctrine and dis∣cipline: Yea they would never have commanded us inferiours up∣on pain of their displeasure (wher∣by they have been looked on as ir∣religious that refused) to enter in∣to the said Covenant for reforma∣tion. Yea they would never (I be∣lieve) have convocated an Assembly of English, and Scotish Divines, to search out the truth which is ac∣cording to godliness, but that it was there real intention, that such a worship of God (which is made the chief motive to the Covenant)
might be found out and established in three Nations, whereby Gods people might become one, and the name of God in truth one among them.
Right worthy Heroes, when I considered of these particulars, I resolved (against all impediments) humbly to present this unto you, and to the publick view; because I am obliged unto it, by the said Co∣venant, to yeild my indeavors, in my place and calling, to the said re∣formation, which I cannot, I sup∣pose, perform in any way, like the publishing this examen, to unde∣ceive many, yea if it be the will of God, the deceived Authors of that Confession, who have so failed in a Confession of Faith, set out to re∣gulate the judgements and practi∣ses of three Nations in a good life,
(the sum of all) toward God and man.
Give me leave therefore (I be∣seech you) to use in some measure of sincerity the words of Job, cap. 36.2.3. Suffer me a little, and I will shew you what I have to say on Gods behalf, I will fetch my know∣ledge from afar, and will ascribe righteousness to my Maker.
My prayer is likewise that the Authors of the second Directory may recollect themselves to do the like; that their second thoughts may be better then their first, and I wish they may be so far from envy and displeasure, at what is here pre∣sented to publicke view, as they may say with David, Psal. 141.15. It shall be an excellent oyle, like that which Christ counselled the Church of Laodicea, Revela. 3.18.
to buy, and annoint their eyes that they may see the truth, which will appear to all that try all things by the touchstone of truth, the word of God; which the Assembly them∣selves acknowledge, Chap. 1. Sect. 9. of their confession, to be the on∣ly and infallible rule of inter preta∣tion, to which rule we all that have our head and heart, concurring to prepare this or the like examinatiō for the Press, referr our selves; who would have subscribed our names, but that the fear of envy, and some other evil consequences, press a concealment of some; but I have ad∣veured to offer this (most honor∣ed Patriots) to your serious consi∣deration, & to subscribe my name, because I doubted that a Smectmni∣us covert would not satisfie the Par∣liaments order, the transgression of
which in another case, though I was not sponte nocens, I suffered deeply for) which is, that some (as I am in∣formed) must subscribe their name to own (if they will avoid offence) what is printed; therfore I have put my hopes in my hand, and ad∣ventured the subscribing my name, that this may come forth according to order, and I fulfill the Proverb, The worst must hold the candle, that by the light thereof all that do not out of prejudice shut their eyes, may see truth from error, and mi∣stakes in the foresaid confession; the discovery of which I am induced to hold forth, because for many yeers I have, to some detriment, bin under the censure of many supposed great errors against many assertions laid down in the said Confession: therefore to vindicate my self; I
have great reason to promote what verily I am perswaded to be truth, for as Job said, Chap. 27.5. God forbid that I should justifie them, I will not leave my innocency till I dye.
But I humbly offer this and my self in all just obedience, and sub∣jection to you the Supream Au∣thority of the Nation, and

