



THE first occasion of these meditations upon these words of our Sa∣viour to his Disciples, (John 14.1.) is known only to my self and another person whose contentment I exceedingly desired. But the occasion of their publication is known to more
then your selves, (for whose use they were first transcribed a good while ago) which I will not trouble the world so much as to take an account of. For it will believe (its like) that it comes from my own proper motion and incli∣nation to send them abroad: and the ordinary reason from the importunity of friends can be understood by none but those who know that a friend can do more with us then we our selves.
But the reason why they address themselves to you, is known best to my self. For though you might know it if you pleased, yet your goodness teaches you to forget the many obliga∣tions you laid upon me, which I ought alwayes to remember. So many they are that when I think how to discharge them, it puts me in mind that there is one sort of trouble which I have made no provision against in this Treatise, which is for want of ability both to pay what we owe to those that love us, and also to express the sense which we have of their goodness. But I consi∣der that this is such a pleasing sort of trouble that one would not be willing that it should be cured. We have no
reason to find fault that our friends will do us more good then we deserve, nor to complain that their goodness is greater then we can speak of. And that ought not (I know) to be the occasion of my trouble, which is your singular pleasure aad contentment. And if this kind of acknowledgement will acquit me in any sort of ingra∣titude, I am but beginning to dis∣charge and exonerate my self: For I had designed, before the publishing of this was thought of, to put a Trea∣tise of another nature into your hands. But I am well secured that I shall not trouble you by beginning my ad∣dresses to you with a discourse of trou∣bles, as if I did bode some evil to you, because I believe that you desire rather to be prepared against any crosses, then to have none befall you. I confess I discern some defects in the first part of this Treatise, which if I had penned with an intention to have sent abroad, I think that I should have taken some care to have seen supplied. But it will not be the less aceptable to you who are able I know out of the general truths here propounded, to raise such
principles as will be able to give you satisfaction in particular cases not here named. Yet presuming that you will not be weary of reading any thing that comes from the hand of one whom you love so well, I shall here take the liberty to instance in some things which would have deserved some particular conside∣ration.
There is no greater trouble to some ingenuous souls then to be requited with injuries for the kindnesses they have done to others. But they may soon consider that this befell our Master Jesus Christ himself. And though it be in their power to do good to others, yet it belongs not to them to make them good. And if there be any way to be∣get love in them, it is by love: and there is no small contentment in loving those who have no love for us. For this is the very height of love, and love it self is a thing so sweet that it is its own reward.
But some perhaps have this addition of trouble that their own friends do not love them; and those whom God and nature do command to be kind, are ill affected towards them. The same re∣medy
will cure this disease. And let them turn their love into pitty, that any should be so unhappy as to be strang∣ers to the rarest pleasures in the world which arise from loving of others. And you may see from hence the ne∣cessity of one Rule which I have com∣mended, which is not to hope for any thing here below. And particularly remember this, that you may be disap∣pointed if you look for any more satis∣faction from your children, then the pleasure of doing good to them, and seeing them do good to themselves. For the old saying hath had but few hitherto to cross it, That love (like your inheritances) doth descend, but useth not to ascend.
But there are others that may say they could easily brook any sufferings from others, but that commonly it is the lot of those that suffer, to be thought guilty of those crimes for which they innocently suffer. Quae perferunt, meruisse creduntur. The world is so sottish that they commonly think men deserve that which they in∣dure; and we are deprived many times not only of our enjoyments, but like∣wise
of our fame; and we are denyed not only our security, but likewise all apology for our selves. But who can keep the world from thinking what they please? Who knows not that it sees but with half an eye, if it be not stark blind? And what shall we be the better if they think well of us, seeing what they think either one way or other, is with so little reason. If we deserve not well, their thoughts and speeches can do us no good; and if we do, God will take care that they shall do us no harm.
But there is a little number of good souls perhaps who are troubled for what others suffer, and are afflicted with the misery of their neighbours. There are so few that complain of this grief, and it is a malady that men are so seldom sick of, that I should scarce have thought it needfull to have pre∣scribed any Physick for such a rare disease. If the hurt do not touch us in our own bodies, relations or friends, we shall soon find comfort enough with∣out any direction to alleviate the grief which we sustain for others how hea∣vy soever it may happen to be. But
if any be oppressed with this sort of trouble, Let them consider what is said in the ensuing Treatise, that they do others no good, but themselves harm by being troubled. And there∣fore let-them be sensible of their mise∣ries so far only as to pray for them, and relieve them (if they can) and to make their hearts sensible of Gods mercies to them, that by that joy they may cure the other trouble.
But men are troubled perhaps that Religion is like to suffer. I am very glad of it if they be; for then I sup∣pose such persons are so much in love with Religion, that they will not let their trouble hinder any part of their duty. And if they do their duty, they may leave it to God to have a care of the interest of Religion; for he loves it far better then we can do.
But some are troubed that they are no more troubled. A sad thing that we should be discontented at that, for which we should be thankfull. For by this trouble they moan nothing else but a confusedness of spirit which ne∣ver did any body any good. The rub∣bing
of the eyes doth not fetch out the moat, but makes them more red and angry; no more doth this distraction and fretting of the mind, discharge it of any ill humours, but rather makes them more abound to vex us.
But some are yet troubled because they fall from the height of their re∣solution, and are more troubled now then once they were at what befalls them. Whereas they once observed these rules well and kept themselves in peace, they fall now into some dis∣content again; Whereas they did pray with some fervour, they now abate of the height of their Zeal. Truly we must not expect while we are here be∣low in this Cave or Dungeon, to be quite free from all such damps. And it may be some degree of pride, not to be able to endure some dulness and coldness of spirit. Be not troubled if at all times you cannot do as well as you would, but labour to do as well as you can. And especial∣ly take heed that the not doing of what you did, do not breed in you a fearfulness that you shall never do as you was wont again. This dispirits the
soul and so disheartens it, that it runs it self into that very thing which it is taking a course for to avoid.
Remember well that rule which is the first that you meet-withall in the the following book. Know your du∣ty thoroughly and then do it. If you think it to be less then it is, you will not do what you ought; and if you think it to be more then it is, you cannot do what you think you ought: and if you think that anxiety of mind for what is not in your present power, is any part of your duty, you do not think as you ought. There was a great Master among the Jews who bid his Schollars consider and tell him what was the best way where∣in a man should alwayes keep;
R. Jocho∣nan in Pirke Xi∣voth. L. 2. One came and said that there was nothing better then a good eye, which is in their language a liberal and contented disposition. Another said A good com∣panion is the best thing in the world. A third said A good neighbour was the best thing he could desire; and a fourth preferred a man that could foresee things to come, i. e. a wise person. But at last came in one Eleazar and
he said A good heart was better then them all. True said the Master, thou hast comprehended in two words all that the rest have said. For he that hath a good heart will, be both contented, and a good companion, and a good neighbour, and easily see what is fit to be done by him. Let every man then seriously labour to find in himself a sincerity and uprightness of heart at all times, and that will save him abundance of other labour.
But let me take upon me to be so far a Master as to tell you, that next to this man the second said right, that a good friend is the great∣est easement in the world in this sort of troubles.
If a man therefore cannot quiet himself, let him get a good friend to whom he may unbosome his heart; for two (saith Solomon) are better then one: because if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow.
Two small streams united in one channell, may be able to bear a vessel of some burden: and so may the counsels and comforts of two friends meeting to∣gether be able to support the weight of many troubles.

But if one will resolve to be troubled, I see there is no end of it; for a man may be disquieted in his thoughts about the choice of such a friend.
Let such consider this, that per∣haps God hath given them one alrea∣dy, and the person that lies in their arms may give the best advice unto them. Or their spiritual Guide may be the most excellent friend. Or how∣soever they may know who will make one, by their love to piety, by the simplicity of their manners, the inno∣cency and modesty of their converse, their wise discourse, their freedom from pride and captiousness and such like things. This likewise I may add that though there be an inequa∣lity between that person and you, which is a necessary thing to friend∣ship, yet if other things be not want∣ing, love and friendship will make you equal.
But how if this friend should die, will some say, how much then shall I be troubled? and what remedy shall I use to give me comfort when I have lost him that should comfort me! I told you there was no end of Questions,
But yet the resolution of this Que∣stion will satisfie all; for he that can bear this trouble, will be able to sup∣port himself under all other. And therefore since I resolved to let these meditations go further then your selves; I have composed a little Tract to wait upon them, which administers comforts against the loss of friends. It hath indeed contrary to my first design out∣grown that in bigness which was born above two years before it: But yet the reason may be because there is much of the other in it. For as it is in the Calculations of our Almanacks which are referred exactly to some certain place, but fit without sen∣sible error the whole Nation; So I ob∣serve it is in this discourse, which though it doth most properly belong to those who have lost their friends, yet hath many things in it which may in∣differently serve all other persons who are troubled about worldly matters. And let me intreat you and all others that read me, to remember alwayes, tha God rules the world; and that those things which are Accidents to us ar Providences with him; and it wil
give you much satisfaction in your hearts. He hath made all these things mutable, and therefore it is a madness to think that they alwayes stand as we would have them: and yet he is so good that he hath made something good for us in every mutation, so that it is a Folly to be discontented that they continue not as we would have them. Who would go and seek for Violets and Primroses in the Wood in the Win∣ter season? But then we may go and gather sticks to keep us warm. And in the Spring who looks for Grapes and Plums and such ripe fruit? But yet we may prune the Vines and lopp the Trees, and wait a while and have what we desire. Assure your selves it is forgetfulness of God that makes us troubled, yea forgetfulness of our selves also, who think we have lost our proper good, when we are well enough. And I think it will not un∣become me to speak to you in the words of a Heathen, and bid you Be confident,
Arrian Epict. l. 2. cap. 16. L. 4. cap. 7. and looking up to Heaven say, Here∣after I will use my self to what thou wilt; I conform my thoughts whol∣ly unto thee; I refuse nothing that
seems good in thine eyes. Lead me whether thou wilt; give me what garments thou pleasest; chuse my food and provision for me, &c. I had alwayes rather have that to be which already is then any thing else: For I think that is better which God wills, then that which I.
And yet upon a review of what I have writ concerning our friends death, I think that there is one sort of per∣sons that would have deserved a more particular consideration then I have given them in that discourse.
Widdows I mean, who esteem them∣selves so desolate that I ought to have pittied them so much as to have ad∣dressed a few lines on purpose unto their comfort. Though I do not know how to excuse my self if here I should enter upon that subject; Yet there is a great person who hath spoken words of consolation to them so excellently sweet, that it cannot displease you if I give you the sense of what He saith. I have lost (saith some sad soul) not only my companion,
S. Chrysost. upon 1 Thes. Hom. 6. but my guide, my stay, my shield, my second self. I doubt not of the resurrection which
Saint Paul discourses of; but what shall I do in the mean time? Much business I have to do: but I am a fit prey for every Cormorant who hath a mind to be unjust. The Servants who reverenced me before, will now de∣spise a silly woman. If my hus∣band have obliged any: alas! it will be soon forgotten now that he can do them no more kindness; but if he did them any wrong, they will be sure to take all the revenge upon me that they are able. This is the thing that breeds me all my anguish; and set this aside, his death would not so much trouble me.
What shall we answer? (saith Saint Chrysostome unto this.) Truly I could easily convince them that not what they pretend, but an unreasonable passion is the cause of words so sad and dolefull: If this were the cause of their lamentation, then they must never cease thus to bewail themselves. But if after a years time all these tears are dried up, then the want of their de∣fence and comfort which will be then most sensible, is not the only cause of them. But let it be supposed that
this is the fountain of all their sor∣row, and consider how much infi∣delity there is in it, that we should think it is They that take care of us and not God: It cannot chuse but pro∣voke him to anger to see that a creature of his is more beloved then himself; and therefore it is likely he took away thy husband because he was more to thee then thy God himself. The holy one of Israel is very jealous, and cannot en∣dure to be so slighted, that other things should have as much of our affections as his excellent goodness, which is there∣fore to be beloved by us above all others, because it expresses a love to us above all other creatures. What was the reason I beseech you that Widdow∣hood and Orphanage were so rare in the Ancient times among good people? Why did Abraham and his Sarah and Isaac live till a great old age? Truly I think it was because Abraham loved God more then either of them: and when God did but say unto him Kill thy Son, he was as willing to do it as to offer the Sacrifice of a Lamb. But we are heavy and dull; we are carried so head∣long into the embraces of creatures,
that God is fain even against our wills to draw our affections to himself by drawing them away from us. Do but love God more then thy husband, and I will undertake that thou shalt not fall into Widdowhood, or thou shalt not feel it when thou fallest into it. And I have a good ground for what I avouch: For thou hast him for thy Husband and thy defence, that never dies, and that loves thee infinitely more then any man can do. And if this reason be not suffi∣cient to convince thee, I have a compa∣rison that will win thy assent. Tell me, if thou hadst a husband who loved thee so much as if he had no soul but thine, one that was as much be∣loved of others as he loved thee; one so wise and discreet that he was as much admired as loved; one so gentle and complyant as if he was but wax to thy impressions; one by whom thou didst shine as the Moon doth with the rayes of the Sun: and suppose thou hadst a child by this dear person who dies be∣fore he comes to his full age; Wouldst thou be considerately grieved and touched with sorrow for its death while thou didst enjoy such a better love?
No, in no wise. He that is so fair and beautifull in thy eyes, would supply the want of it as the Sun doth the ab∣sence of the Stars. He that is more loved and esteemed, would obscure and quite hide all the excellencies of the other. If therefore thou lovest God more then that husband: if his glory put out the lustre of all other things in thine eyes, thou wilt be as little trou∣bled at his death, as before then wast for the death of thy child. Yea far less one would think, should thy trou∣ble be, in as much as God is infi∣nitely more above that Husband, then he above thy child.
And beside, what is that thou re∣ceivest from thy Husband that is com∣parable to what the love of God gives thee? Are they not pangs and labours, unkind words perhaps and angry chide∣ings? Or if thou canst tell me of any goods, what are they? What are fine cloaths and Jewels, and honours and such like things to the Son of God, to the Brotherhood and Adoption, to the Kingdom and eternal glory, to the life of God and Coheirship with the only begotten? wilt thou after all this
tell me thou canst not but be passio∣nate for the loss of thy Husband? If thou wantest him, thou hast God. If thou wantest thy menial servants and attendants, thou hast the guard of spiritual powers; the dominions and principalities of heaven are thy Mi∣nisters. If thou sayest thy children want a Father; that cannot be, seeing God is the Father of the Fatherless. If thou fearest they shall want, tell thy self who gave them to thee, and whether the life be not more then meat, and the body then rayment. Or if thou fearest they shall not be so well pro∣vided as otherwise they would have been; How many could I tell thee of that have been bred by Widdows and proved famous? How many that have had Fathers and been good for nothing? Put the fear of God in their hearts, and this will preserve them more then a Father. When the Guard is within, they will less need one without. This will be better then riches and glory and promotion to them: this will make them famous both in earth and hea∣ven. Do not set thine eyes then on the Youth, who by reason of his Fathers
greanness is girded with a golden Belt, and rides on a pransing Horse, and is taken into Kings Courts, and hath ma∣ny Masters and Tutors following him at his heels: But cast thine eye above, open the gate of heaven in thy thoughts; look into that stately Pallace; behold the King there sitting on his Throne; and if He whom thou seest on earth can be sooner admitted thither then thy child; then fetch a great sigh and fill the heavens with noise and clamor. But seeing neither riches nor birth nor any thing else is there preferred but only vertue and goodness, think what rea∣son thou hast to be content: and think how certain it is that nothing is sad,  if we will not be fools, but Philosophers. And for thy self if thou complainest of being de∣solate and solitary: think what the Apostle saith, 1 Tim. 5.5. that such an one trusteth in God. This is only an opportunity of enjoying more of God. Thou hast more time and liberty to please God now that thou hast none else to please. Thou art freed from all other bonds, to be tied faster to him. There are no chains, no restraints upon
thee to keep thee from doing what thou wouldst. Thou art separated from one husband, to be united to a better. Thou hast not the fellow-servant, but thou hast the Master. Thou hast not thy husband to talk with thee, but God is thy husband. When thou prayest, dost thou not talk with God? When thou readest, tell me, doth not God speak to thee? And what doth he say to thee? Words more desirable, more sweet then can drop from an husbands lips. If he speak never so kindly, it is no great matter, for he is but a fellow-servant. But if the Master will be pleased to embrace and speak sweetly to his hand∣maid, , This is a strange peice of service. And observe I beseech you how he serves us and waits upon us: Hear in what words he bespeaks us. Come unto me all you that are weary and heavy laden, and you shall find rest to your souls. And again by the Prophet he cryes, Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have com∣passion on the Son of her Womb? yea they may forget, yet I will not forget thee. What charms and Phil∣trums
are there in these words? And what can have more of honey in them then these expressions in the Song of Songs, My Love, my Dove, my fair one, my Paradise, &c.? and yet this is the language of God to men. To this purpose speaks that Divine Person with an elegancy, that though I cannot imi∣tate, yet I could not but follow till I have run beyond the just length of an Epistle.
And yet I cannot but tell you some more of my thoughts concerning the fol∣lowing discourse, though I have ac∣knowledged so many omissions already. There are some general rules laid down at the latter end of the first Treatise, which it would have pleased you per∣haps if they had been more inlarged. I shall take leave therefore to extend this address a little further; that if it be possible, I my not let you want any thing which you may chance to desire.
And for direction of your prayers to God in these cases. Be sure first to ob∣serve the cause of all your trouble, the fountain which casts forth the mire and dirt into your fouls. When we know the cause of a malady, it is half cured.
And seeing this cause you will find to be within your selves, therefore Second∣ly, Pray not so much against trouble, as the cause of the trouble. Pray for a contented mind, a low esteem of the world, a new opinion of things, an humble frame of heart and such like graces. If we meerly pray not to be troubled, and rest in General expressions, we shall find little ease to our hearts. Thirdly, Pray not so much for removal of the thing that troubles you, as for strength to bear it, and divine power to support you under it, and heavenly wisdom to make an advantage of it. Fourthly, If you do pray for the re∣moval of any outward burden, and the prevention of any loss, yet let it be with an indifferent mind, least you be more troubled when you find that God doth not hear those prayers. Fifthly, when you are troubled for one fault, be trou∣bled for all, and pray for a new heart. When you have done any evil, then be humbled for the neglect of so much good, which may be the reason of that evil. For when a malady doth affect a parti∣cular part, the whole body must be purged; or else if we apply the remedy
only to that part, we shall but drive the humor to some other place. And sixthly I would wish you to apply the remedy presently before the trouble eat into the flesh. As soon as you see it it come, fly to God, and take your An∣tidotes and beseech him to bless them to you. I cannot but here again transcribe another excellent speech of an Heathen. Either God can do something,
M. Anto∣nin. L. 9. §. 40. or he cannot: If he can do nothing, why dost thou pray to him? If he can do something, why dost thou not pray that thou maist not fear, nor desire, nor be sad for any of these things, rather then that this or that thing should be or not be to thee? If he can help us, then he can help us to be without a thing as well as to have it: and not to fear a thing, as well as not to have it. Begin therefore to beg these things of God by prayer, and thou shalt see what will be the issue of it. One prayes that he may have such an one to wife; Do thou pray that thou maist not desire her. Another prayes to be eased of a ty∣ranny; Do thou pray that thou maist be able to bear it. O let not my
child die, saith another; but do thou say, O let me not fear the loss of it. Turn thy prayers I say all this way, and see what will come of it. Thus that Royal Philosopher.
And as for Faith which is another thing there mentioned, I intreat you to believe, First, That God is not hard to please. Perswade your selves that he is good and gratious, and accepts of the sincere, hearty and constant en∣deavours of his Servants to do his will. Secondly, Believe that he would have us pleased too, and delights in our con∣tentment. It is not pleasing to him to see us troubled, nor doth he wish to see us full of perplexed thoughts N: ei∣ther doth he willingly grieve us, or send such things upon us that should molest us, but he loves to have all his children in peace. And Thirdly, Believe ful∣ly that he hath the greatest mind to give that which will remedy the great∣est cause of troubles, and that is his Divine Grace and Holy Spirit. Sin is that which makes all our sores so angry; The Spirit of the most High is that which will enable us to mortifie it; and this Spirit we may have as readily from
him, as a peice of bread from the hands of our dearest parent. Go on couragi∣ously therefore, and be confident; seeing there is nothing that God is more de∣sirous to bestow then that which will cure us of all our griefs.
Of these I shall say no more, and of the rest nothing at all, least I should weary my other Readers, though not You, who have given me abundant testimony that I can do nothing to dis∣please you, and thereby laid a perpetual engagement upon me to be

From your house at Batersea, October 4. 1659.
