



IT was the passage of an able Pen, That to describe a Holy State, without a virtuous Lady,
Full. Ho. State. pag. 300. were to paint out a year without a Spring. And how might I seem guilty of the like neglect, should I tret of Love, and not reflect on you (Ladies) who ac∣count your selves (and indeed should be) the chiefe Ornaments thereof.
Some there are (I confess) who have an Itch to set down your Crimes, rather then your Vir∣tues. They say you are the Syrens of the Earth, which cause shipwrack without water; and if you but step awry, they look on you [presently] as a Star in Eclipse; they cry out, Omne malum fere ex Gynesio, Women are usually the ori∣ginall of all mischief.
But the fairest Beauty is not without some Cloud. And I shall no way desire to strike at your Vices, by slandering your Sex; it savouring ra∣ther
of Passion then Charity, to blame the Gene∣ral, for the defects of Particulars. Though too many there are (indeed) who follow the steps of the first VVoman, and abandon themselves to Luxury, vanity, and dissolute Pleasures.
But what? though Dinah will be gadding abroad, and say it is to visit the Daughters, though it be to entangle and to be taken by the men of the Land? Do we not find three Ma∣ries at the foot of the Cross humble and mortified? What though Pride, the eldest Daughter of this fair Mother [Beauty] seldome begets the best House-wives, yet how many Women are there, truly Divine, who shine in their Houses like ri∣sing Stars, or the Sun in his Orb. And he that would equal their worth, shall rather find insuf∣ficiency in his purpose, then want of merit in the Object.
Solomon also gives us a large description of a virtuous Woman, Eccles. 6. perpetually exerci∣sed on good works, travelling incessantly [like Bees] from their Birth, and losing no time, but to give it unto God; Devotion being the first Portion which he hath granted them; whereas, were they never so well composed, had they all the Beau∣ties which a heart could desire, or the imagination feign, it would be but like some cruel Creature, whom nature had lodged in a painted house, or
like a Case covered with precious Stones, to pre∣serve a Dunghil.
And for your incouragement in the wayes of Holiness, how many eminent Patterns could I lay before you, whom Histories have hardly scope e∣nough to commend, and who appear to the world like a blushing Morning, which riseth the more fair after a shower.
Oh what a wealthy Exchequer of true Beauties, what a spacious Store-house of heavenly minded Lovers, do we find in the sacred Scriptures? what a rich Mine of costly Jewels may we there behold? Shall I shew you the Humility of the Maries, the Faith of Sara, the upright and blameless walking in the commandments of God of Elizabeth? Shall I present you with a Dorcas, fruitful in good works; a Priscilla, heavenly in discourse; a Li∣dea, whose heart was opened; a Bersheba, Lois, Eunice, careful to teach their Children in the fear of the Lord.
What shall I tell you of the great Woman of Shu∣nem,
2 King. 4.9.10. vers. 23. Act. 16.13. Phil. 4.3. who made preparation for the Pro∣phet, and attended his Ministry? of such as hearkned to Pauls Sermon, and were helpers to him? also of a Hanna, an Abigail, a Ju∣dah, a Hester, and many others, which are there registred for our imitation, and lie hid like Trea∣sures of great value, in the veins of the Earth.
And (as if Innocency were never better lodged then at the sign of Labour, Idleness being the source of embroiling the Spirits; do we not find the wisest of men further describing a virtuous wo∣man, by the Oeconomy she holds forth in the Go∣vernment of her Family. And if we look upon o∣ther Histories, we shall find Augustus Caesar [the Founder of Empires] not reputing the work∣ing with the Needle, & such kind of employments, unworthy of his Daughters. And the Romans much more preferring (as a Relick) the Distaff of Queen Tanaquilla, then the Lance or Sword of Romulus.
You (Ladies) then that consume your preci∣ous Time, in Painting, Powdering, Perfuming, and adorning your selves with such other Actings, as if Death and Love had conspired to make their feast in one and the same place; you who complain if the least beam pierce through a little hole of your Fan, or if a Fly chance to light upon it. You (who if a Hair be but amiss) presently call a Council for the reforming thereof. Oh consider! that such vanities conclude not your happiness; But the perfections of your Sex end in wisdom, and the fear of God, which is the first and last Ornament.
Remember also, how suddenly the Scene in the Masque will be altered; what then will become of your Shops of vanity, those superfluous Orna∣ments,
and that long Inventory of Ladies Gal∣lantry, which made the Gates of the City to la∣ment and mourn, Isai. 3.11. Isai. 3.18.21. and which (since that day) have been increased amongst you by modern Fashion-mongers.
Time, and Age, will one day wither the Blos∣soms of your youth, as the Sun davers the fresh∣est Roses and Lillies. Spend some time then, more then for the Body, Pride, and Earth. Let not your thoughts strike sail to Affection, nor your hearts do homage to that which will ensnare and imprison you in the Fetters of sinne.
Do you know how speedily the Storms of an evil Conscience may trouble the serenity of your delights, and the seeming tranquillity of your Affections? the best of our Joyes here, being but fires of straw, or flattering Sun-shines, which are either suddenly washed away with a shower, or E∣clipsed by a Tempest.
Labour then to supply your natural defects, with the virtues of your mind. Read constant Lectures of your own mortality. Those Flowers are best, and sweetest, which grow in the Garden, and not in the Wilderness. Adam, was never more beautiful then when he was in his Innocency, and free from gaudiness: and we find Solomons Spouse, all glorious within, and needs no outward Ornaments to make her amiable.
Oh think not then on Religion, as upon some fearful Apparition, whose visage is so fair and lovely. You say, nothing delights you more, then to love, and to be beloved; and is not a true Chri∣stian the best Lover, and beloved of the best? You say nothing is more ravishing then Beauty, and can you he better delighted then in the highest Beauty of your Saviour.
Briefly, that you may the better behold that pre∣cious Oyntment which drops down from the head of Jesus, into the Souls of his Saints, you shall there find that there is a Chamber within us, and a bed of Love in that Chamber, wherein Christ meets, and rests with the Soul. O sweet communi∣on! whereby we are also made the Temples of the Comforter himself; and in which communion stands the fulness of joy and beauty. Here the more you love, the more you may. If you love a∣bate, here will it be renewed; If it grow cold, at this Fire may you re-kindle it; if it be lost, here may you find it.
Here may you confer with the infinite perfecti∣ons, and (with joy) often repeat the unspeakable Bounties of your Saviour, far beyond all those fa∣bulous Imaginations which Poets feign, and idle wits have fram'd Errant Ladies to have engag'd their Servants in. Here may you retire from the noise, and distraction of the world, and entertain
thoughts with the sweet still musick of Contempla∣tion. Here may you sit alone, and [excluding e∣ven your self] be chastly ravished with the dear embraces of the divine Spouse of your Soul.
Ah the pleasantness of such a life of Love! Then onely indeed [and not till then] do we live when we injoy divine Love; Nor can our bosoms breathe out the breath of life, before Christ breathes in us the breath of Love! Alas! what Drans are our highest strain'd Lovers! what dull bussing of Beetles, are their kindest expres∣sions, to the sweet melting Notes of this Hea∣venly Harmony!
Away then with your false Boxes, fill'd with loathsome trash of sundry kinds of Colours, and compositions for the hiding of your Deformities. Look but in this Glass of perfect Beauty, and you shall have no need to provide Looking-Glasses [embossed with precious Stones] in length and breadth answerable to your Bodies, some whereof stand you dearer then the Dowry of your Ances∣tors. You will find little time to bestow in Patch∣ing and trimming your selves, whereby to invite all kind of Luxury, and infamous Pleasures.
And if you but once draw near this perfect ob∣ject of heavenly Love; if you but fix your eyes upon him, [who is the fairest of men, the per∣fection of spiritual Beauty, and the treasure of
heavenly joy] if your Affections be but once in∣flamed, and fixed on him, who is the chiefest of Beauties. Oh how will you be sick of Love; how importunate will be your wishes; how unsatisfied your desires; yea, how will ye pant and breathe after him, and never leave until he be brought to rest within the Chambers of your Soul.
