





Right Honourable,
BEing desired by the Order of
your Court to print this
Sermon preached on the last
day of the then Lord Mayor,
and the first of the present, I shall hum∣bly
crave leave to mind both those ho∣nourable
Persons, and all others, of the
signal providence of God to them and
us this last year. How graciously the
Lord hath carried the last Lord Mayor
through the storms and difficulties of a

most troublesome government, bearing
him up by a spirit of prudence and calm∣nesse,
above potent frowns, and popu∣lar
passions, till at last his year was ho∣noured
with the most glorious spectacle
that this City hath seen for many and
many ages, in the happy return of our
dread Soveraign unto his royal Throne,
our eyes have been abundantly witnesses
of. From how many afflictions and dan∣gers
your present Lordship hath been
wonderfully delivered, the Lord pro∣viding
shelters and chambers to hide
you in, from the jealous eyes, and iron
arms of those who were then in power,
reserving you unto, and recompencing
you with this present honour, you can∣not
but with thankful adoration of di∣vine
providence be most sensible of, and
affected with. What terrible things the
Lord hath done for these three King∣domes,
things which we looked not
for, in breaking Governments, infatua∣ting
Counsels, melting Armies, level∣ling

Mountains, and preparing a way
for his sacred Majesty through the
hearts of his people to the possession of
of his Throne, is so eminently known
to all Nations, as if it were registred
with a beam of the Sun, and proclaimed
by an Angelical Herald. What use both
you, and all of us should make of these
wonderful workings of divine provi∣dence,
I cannot give you in better words
then in those of Samuel unto Israel,
1 Sam. 12. 24. Onely fear the Lord
and serve him in truth with all your
heart, for consider how great
things he hath done for you. If
unto such a wise and holy improve∣ment
of mercies this present Sermon
may be of use unto you (wherein is
set forth how Ransomed persons are
not their own, and therefore not to
seek or serve themselves, and how
much they are engaged to live to the
Glory and service of him that deli∣vered
them) I shall have abundantly

the fruit of my labours, and I hope
therewith the benefit of your prayers,
who am
From my Study
Nov. 20. 1660.

