



Right Honourable, and worthy Sirs:
HOnest and faithfull Fairfax, and Cromwell, &c. That
Counsell cannot but be excellent,Iudg. 6. 12, 13 that is righteous,
for;Pro. 12. 26 the righteous is more excellent then his Neigh∣bour:
Let it therefore please your Excellencies to
consider, that not any thing will become you, but
that which is excellent, singular, extraordinary; Wisedome,
Justice,Micha 6 8 Love, Mercy, Noblenesse, Self-deniall; Doe good to them
that hate you,Pro 16. 9 love your enemies. He hath shewed thee O man, what is
good,Eccl. 4. 1 what doth the Lord require of thee to doe,Numb. 23. 22, 23 justly, and to love mercy,
and to walke humbly with thy God. It shall be said, what hath God
wrought,Esay 26. 18. we have not wrought any deliverance in the earth. You are
a terrible Army,Psal. 46. 11 for the Lord is come downe among you, the Lord of
Host is with you,Esay 42. 8. to 17 the God of Jacob is your refuge. All that were in∣censed
against thee shall perish,See Ier. 1. 9 they that warre against thee shall be as
nothing,Psa. 98. 1, 2, 3 and as a thing of nought. You have undertaken to lay a
foundation of Peace,Exo. 34. 14 if you doe it not, you deceive your selves
and us,Esay 40. 17 the worke you are a doing is of the Lord; you have a good
Cause (you are against Tyranny and injustice, they are for both)
stand to it, feare not, stand not still, goe forward, make haste, be
faithfull in a little,Heb. 13. 5. 8 keepe that which is committed to thee; put no
power into their hands who know not the righteous, or looke up∣on
them to be wicked. We cannot help our selves if you should

leave us, it had been better for us to have wandred in the Wilder∣nesses,
if you should (as we trust you will not) betray the Worke
of God in your hands, by leaving it to them that will spoyle it;
What will become of the people of God? the Generations to
come will say; Yee began well, and lost much blood, but your
hearts fainted, proved back-sliders, suffered all to come to nothing,
lost your end, and the glory of your former faithfulnesse; Verily,
every man at his best estate is altogether vanity. Selah, We acknow∣ledge
you to be a Mercy of God to us,Psa 39. . 11 and this Kingdome; your
intire love and fidelity is a small thing to many,Psa. 144. 4. but not so to us;
that which you have done for to prevent persecution in mat∣ters
of Religion, is a singular thing, extraordinary: The loves and
kindnesses you have shewed to us herein, the God of Hea∣ven
takes it as done to himselfe. I heartily thanke you in the be∣halfe
of my selfe, and a hundred thousand, for your intire and sin∣cere
love to us; you have indeared our hearts to you, we thinke
not our Lives too much for you, because you have saved our Lives,
and more, and have not esteemed your Lives too much for us, but
often have offered them up for us; we resolve to live and dye
with you.Esay 65. 8. Sweet friends, I present you with the best I have, its a
little one,Zac. 4. 10 yet who knowes but you may see something of God in
it. Have you never read, Out of the mouth of Babes and sucklings thou
hast perfected praise. The Lord will blesse and preserve you, there
shall not a haire of your head perish,Mat. 6. 16 much lesse your Lives, without
your Father.psal. 48 14 When you have served your time, and done the work
God hath appointed you to doe,1 Thes. 4. 17 18 then, and not till then he will
send for you home, then shall we be for ever with the Lord, where∣fore
comfort one another with these words.
I am your Friend and Brother:
Jan. 23. 1648,

