



Right Honorable,
IN Conformity to your desires sig∣nified
by your Order unto me, I
here humbly present you a second
time with that plain, but wholsome Do∣ctrine,
which you were lately pleased to
receive with all ready attention. And in∣deed
the argument is such, as the Apostle

thought need ful to inculcate once and a∣gain.
And therefore if the Tongue and the
Pen, the Pulpit and the Press, do a first
and a second time invite you unto the
same duty, the Apostles example will
both commend your zeal in desiring it,
and excuse my obedience in conforming to
so just a desire.
Self-sufficiency is Gods peculiar honor,
one of those Regalia which belong unto
him alone. All creatures must go out of
themselves, both for the continuance of that
Being, which they have, and for the Acqui∣sition
of such further good as they stand in
need of. And since they are all thus de∣fective
in them selves, they must needs be
unable to complete the perfections of one
another, much less of man, who is one of
the principal and most excellent of them.
That good therefore, the want whereof
doth kindle desire, & the fruition where∣of
doth produce delight, must be sought
above the world, in him, who as he is suf∣ficient
to himself, so is he alone All-suffi∣cient
unto his Creatures.

And because there is no approach for
sinful men unto God without a Mediator,
the Father hath set up his eternal son, as
that middle person, in whom we may have
communion with him, and access unto
him. Justly therefore was the Lord Christ
before his coming, stiled The Desire of all
Nations; & as justly is he, after his coming,
their everlasting Delight, since in and by
him alone, the Lord is pleased to be at
peace with us, and out of his fulness to
communicate all good unto us. To set
forth this Preciousness of Christ unto his
people, and to quicken their joy in him,
was the end of this Sermon, and is indeed
the end of all other.
We live in changeable and uncomposed
times; we see distempers at home, we hear
of distresses abroad; the Lord is shaking
heaven and earth, Churches and States;
our eyes and our experience tell us, how
mutable are the wills, how inconstant the
Judgements, how fickle the favors, how
sudden the frowns of men, how vain the
hopes, how unstable the delights which

are drawn out of broken Cisterns; how
full of dross and dregs the most refined
contents of the world are. God alone is true
and every man a lyar, either by falseness
deluding, or by weakness disappointing
those that depended on them.
Since therefore the life of man doth
hardly deserve the name of life, without
some solid comfort to support it; and nei∣ther
men nor Angels, much less honors or
pleasures, plenty or abundance, can sup∣ply
us with that Comfort; what remains,
but that we betake our selves unto that
Fountain of living water, whence alone it
is to be had? that we secure our interest
in the Lord Christ, who is faithful, and
cannot fail; powerful, and will not forsake,
nor expose those that come unto God by
him? that so being upon the Rock which
is higher then our selves, we may be able
amidst all the tempests and shakings, the
delusions and disappointments below, to
Rejoyce in him with a fixed and inconcus∣sible
delight, who can bring joy out of
sorrow, light out of darkness, and turn

all confusions into order and beauty.
This that you, and all Gods people in
City and Countrey may every where do,
is the prayer of

From my study,
Iune 2. 1655.
