


NOBLE PATRIOTS,
THis Supplication which now presents it self unto your Honours view, was drawn up in much grief and anguish of spirit, lamenting to see the sad condition of the people of this Nation, in order to their souls, and everlasting state; whilst after a long expectation of some happy Reformation, they are found partly sinking by de∣grees into the gulf of Prophaneness and Atheisme, partly hurried on by the wind of strange doctrines upon the rocks of Heretical opinions, destructive to the very foun∣dations of our holy Religion: Not much unlike the case of that ship wherein St. Paul was driven to Malta, whereofAct 27. 7 one part stuck fast in the earth, the other part was broken and driven away by violent waves. The sad apprehensions hereof caused me with a weak and trembling hand to draw up this Petition, imploring the aid of God and men, in this our sinking condition. It was indeed in∣tended to be sent abroad in the world as a desolate or∣phan, without any discovery whence it came, or to whom in particular to apply it self. But after that divine pro∣vidence had ordered the convention of this great Assem∣bly, and assigned your Honours to bear a part in that trust, I was easily perswaded to presume so far upon your Christian charity, as to direct it first unto your doors, humbly casting both it, and my self down at your Honours feet, beseeching you in behalf of the people of this Nation, as the passionate Father mentioned in the Gospel, did our Saviour in behalf of his son; If you canMark. 9 do any thing, have compassion on us, and help us. A case of higher concernment cannot be presented unto you,

than this, wherein the honour of Christ, and salvation of so many thousand souls is ingaged. And my hope is, that nothing will be more in your thoughts, than restoring beauty to Sion, and repairing the walls of Jerusalem so ruined every where. They seem to me too unreasonably to debase your honourable station, who would exempt the case of Christ, and the eternal salvation of souls from your care, leaving onely the petty businesses of this world unto your cognizance; yea to deal most injuriously with you, perswading you to neglect that, the care whereof is your greatest honour, and security, and the neglect where∣of, would certainly blast all your other proceedings.
Now the Lord vouchsafe to your selves, and the rest of that Honourable Assembly, a large portion of that Spirit which he put upon Christ, the head of all powers, A Spirit of wisdome and understanding, of counsel and might,Isa. 11. 2. of knowledge, and the fear of the Lord, and make you quick of sent, in what concerns the honour of Christ, the free course of his Gospel, and everlasting good of the people, and cause that all the mountains of difficulties that now lye in your way, may be turned into plains beforeZach. 4. 7. you, that in the end, the languishing hopes of the faithful in the land may be revived, the vowed Reformation of Religion accomplished, that we, and the following Gene∣rations may call you blessed, as being under God the happy instruments of repairing our breaches, and restoring our paths. Which is, and shall be the daily prayer of

Wast. Sept. 16, 6.
