



Right Honorable, and worthy Sirs;
AS your conditions are above
others, so are your temp∣tations
and tryalls; doe
what good you can: you
are men; Be pitifull; be mercifull; doe
good to them that hate you; see Luk. 6. 27.
32. to 39. Ease and relieve the oppres∣sed;
consider Eccle. 4. 1. Pro. 31. 9. Job 29.
God hath made you speciall Instru∣ments,
in saving this nation from ruine
& destruction; he hath honoured you
with his protection, presence, and bles∣sing,
even to admiration: you are the

Advocates of Christians, in that you
have often pleaded their cause, & done
(as much) good to the truth and peo∣ple
of God as any; and in that you are
of the number of them, this is your
greatest honour, happinesse, and glory.
Its the portion of the people of God
to meet with reproaches and hard
words, Mat. 11. 12. & 19. 29. & 27. 39.
41. &c. Christ did no sin, 1 Pet. 2. 23. Yet
he indured such contradiction of sinners a∣gainst
himselfe, Heb. 12. 2, 3. Hard spee∣ches
ungodly sinners have spoken against
him, Jude v. 14, 15. Christ was called a
deceiver, Mat. 27. 63. You must not
think much if you be called so; the ser∣vant
is not above his Lord; if they have
called the Master of the house Belzebub,
how much more them of his houshold? If it
be sufficient to prove one guilty, be∣cause
accused; then Christ was not in∣nocent.
Many things of which you are
accused, I know are false; of what truth
the rest are, I judge by these. I have ob∣served,
although good men have faults

enough, yet our accusers misse them,
and charge us of that whereof we are
innocent. Its a certain truth, some re∣port
ill of men, because they are no
worse.
You are none of them, of whom all
men speak well of; its well you are freed
from that woe, Luk. 6. 26. To speake
modestly, we have not observed any in
authority that have given greater te∣stimony
of their faithfulnesse, readi∣nesse,
& willingnesse, in improving op∣portunities
for the safety and welfare
of this Nation, and that have shewed
more love to the truth and people of
God, then these have done: neither
can I see how such do well, who would
have those whom God hath made the
Bulworks of this Nation, the butts for
them to shoote their sharpe arrowes, most
bitter words. Discontented Spirits, ease
themsves in abusing others; but I
trust, you freely forgive them, and en∣deavour
to get good by them: This I
thought fit to expresse, to correct their

unreasonablenesse, and to leave this te∣stimony
(to after ages) to answer theirs
in print.
Expect not freedome from reproa∣ches,
but to get good by them: doe
well, and expect ill; they hurt them∣selves,
not you; Riches, prosperity and
honour, causeth coldnes & lukewarm∣nesse
in Religion. Hezekiah was a good
man, yet his heart was lifted up at a
small matter; in many things we sinne
all; humane railties, every good man is
subject unto; great places have not so
great an influence into good men, as to
free them from those infirmities which
before they were subject unto; they ra∣ther
increase thē. Such need some sharp
crosse to quicken and revive and weane
them from this world, to cause them
more to minde & prize things spiritu∣all
& eternall: no worldly thing seems
great to him that minds eternity.
You have had great successe in war,
and a great blast of the applause and
praise of men, therefore you need

something to balance it. Fraile man is
like a little Vessell, lightly laden, not
able to bear very great sailes & winds;
crosses are sent to let out selfe, to try
us, and to weane us from the world,
to examine our hearts and wayes, and
to be more watchfull and circumspect
for the future, they cause us to deny
our selves, and to live by faith, they
shew us what hearts we have, and how
like we are to Christ, when reviled,
1 Pet. 2. 23. They exercise the fruits of
the Spirit in us, how could we forgive
our enemies, if we had none? or deny
our selves in suffering wrong patient∣ly,
if none were offered unto us? how
could we rejoyce in trials, temptations,
or know our strength, or weaknesse, or
learne patience & experience by them,
and reap the sweet fruit of them with∣out
them? What you loose in one
kinde, I trust you gaine in a better:
great crosses prove none of the least
mercies, when we see God in them, and
that all comes from his free & infinite

love; that not any thing shall hurt, but
all worke together for our good (thugh
we see not how) Rom. 8. we injoy the
sweetnesse of them, are humble, and
thankfull, and rejoyce in every condi∣tion,
because we know that ere long
our joy and rest shall be eternall; then
shall we be for ever with the Lord, out of
the reach of all reproaches, paine,
griefe, or trouble.
Most noble Worthies, Luk. 1. 3. the
great respect you have shewed to the
truh & people of God, hath imbold∣ned
me to present this to you in love,
out of a deep respect unto you; the Lord
is with you, Judg. 6. 12. Dut. 33. 27.
1 Sam. 16. 18 The Saints love you, they
pray and praise God for you; England
fareth the better for you; the children
unborne shall praise you, & blesse God
for you; and though there be that re∣vile
you, yet the memoriall of your
names shall be for ever precious;

