


Right Honourable,
THis Sermon, for the substance of it, was preached by your appointment, and is drawn forth to publick view by your importunity. I have been oft assayled by friends to publish some pieces, which cost me more pains, but could never be overcome till now. I am sensible of the curiosity and critical∣nesse of the Times, and of my own tenuity and insuffi∣ciency. I am able to bring nothing out of my poor Treasury which may seem new. Those small abili∣ties God hath given me to profit others, lye another way, rather through the Pulpit then the Presse; there∣fore durst I never yet appear in the one, though often in the other.

Concerning this Copy I may say, here is not all, and yet more then was there delivered.
Not all, because my time for preparation was very small, and my Notes so short, that they cannot possi∣bly give an account of my Sermon; and my memo∣ry not so good as to recollect all that God was graci∣ously pleased then to suggest.
Yet is here more, because I have now added some things for amplification of particulars, which God brought to my hand while I was writing, as he did many things before to my minde, while I was speaking.
Such were my straits of time for preparation to that exercise, as one part of this Sermon was, subitane thoughts in the morning of that day they were prea∣ched: which I did not intend should have seen more light, then came in at the chamber window, where I quartered that night.
The Notes are not so warm to me now in writing, as they were then in speaking; nor will they, I fear, be to any in reading, as they were, I hope, to some in hearing. Speaking and Writing have their severall graces and glosses; and take, as God is pleased to set them on by his presence and influence, which he usu∣ally sheds abroad more abundantly in the publick Or∣dinance. The same things (experience shews) which while spoken, seemed stirring passages, afterwards when read, move little.
Besides, the subject of this discourse is now become very trite, and worn I suppose almost out of request; of which so much hath been already said, as nothing can be added.
But your Honours acceptance of my poor pains then,
and earnest desire since, to have a Copy thereof, have forced me to put this into your hands; do with it whatsoever God shall put into your hearts: either to bury it in silence (which would please me best) or to give breath and life to it by the birth of the Presse, if your wisdome judge it worthy, and that it may be for publike use.
The Lord guide you with his councell, that the publike affairs may still prosper in your hands, and bring you to his glory when you have served your ge∣neration, according to the will of God. So prayes

