



Right Honourable,
IT may justly seem strange
unto you,Non se capit ex∣undantis Laeti∣tiae magnitudo, sed dedignata pectorum late∣bras, ita multa & candida foris prominet, ut in∣telligatur, non ingentior esse quám verior. Nazar. Paneg. That, when
Joy is one of the swiftest
affections of the soule,
and of all other most
impatient of suppression. This Ser∣mon,

preached before you on one the
greatest solemnities of Joy that this Na∣tion
hath seen,In eundem ho∣minem non puto  Gau∣dm & Sln∣tiam. Pacat. should have yielded
such slow and lingring obedience unto
your commands, and like Cushi should
come last with the tyings of a Restored
King, for which I have no other A∣pology
to make but this, That the joy
of one Service did retard the hast of an∣other.
For having, together with some
other of my Reverend Brethren, recei∣ved
a command from his Sacred Ma∣jesty,
(whose heart is zealously set up∣on
healing the breaches and divisions
which are in the Church of God amongst
us) to draw up some materials towards
so happy a work; and finding, That in
papers of such a nature, brought under
the view of different judgments, (where∣in
every clause, yea, many times single
words and particular expressions, prove
the subject of long debates) it is impos∣sible
to make such dispatch, as other∣wise

the urgency of the design doth pas∣sionately
call for: the necessary and
constant attendance upon that service,
did put for a time a suspension upon
the obedience, which I was ready
much sooner to have yielded unto your
Commands, for publishing this Ser∣mon.
It is now at last, by Gods assistance,
come forth, and sheweth how easily
the Spirit and providence of God;
can erect his Temple, and provide
for the Interests of his Truth and Wor∣ship,
though the instruments of it be ut∣terly
destitute of humane power. It is
indeed an happy thing, when they who
have power will exert it for God,
and lay it out upon the service of his
House. But though they should want
hands or hearts to build the Church,
God hath ever a residue of Spirit to
advance his own work by,Mal. 2. 15. and knows
how to infatuate all Counsels,2 Sam. 15. 31. Isa. 19. 3. 11. and to

dissipate all enterprizes and machinati∣ons
which are framed against it.Job 5. 12, 13, 14. 12. 17.
Our eyes have seen how easie it is
with God to dissolve and demolish the
most cunningly erected structure,Isa. 54 17. which either policy could contrive, or power
support,1 Reg. 19. 12. and that with a still voice,
and in a silent way, without so much
as drawing a Sword, or striking a blow
to effect it. How he can do things
which we looked not for,Isa. 64. 3. by rebu∣king
seas,Mat. 8. 26. and levelling mountaines,Zach. 4. 7.
and melting Armes,Psal. 46. 9. and scattering
the beasts of the reeds,Psal. 68. 30. and making
a plain and sudden way through insu∣perable
difficulties to bring home our
DREAD SOVERAIGN to his
Throne and Native Dominions again.Isa. 49. 11.
And he who hath wrought wonders
for us in these our Civil concernments,
can do the like for his Church,Isa. 43. 4. (the
Interests whereof, are, of all things on
the Earth, dearest unto him; and the

welfare and happinesse whereof, all the
Earthquakes and Concussions, which
have beene amongst us, do call a∣loud
unto you, to looke after, aad to
be tender of.Hag. 2. 6, 7. When the Lord shakes
heaven and Earth, Churches and
States, it is to make way for him who
is the Desire of all Nations. If
Christ, and the Glory of his holy Or∣dinances,
and spiritual worship be not
more exalted; If the sonnes of Levi
be not purified, that they may offer
unto the Lord an offering in righte∣ousnesse;
Mal. 3. 3. if the House of God be not
purged of corruptions; if pompe and
splendor, and terrene interests be the
things most passionately prosecuted,
and the vitals and essentials of Religi∣on,
the great things of the Law, pu∣rity
of Doctrine, spiritualnesse of Wor∣ship,
power of Godliness but in the se∣cond
place regarded: If we be zealous
for mint and cummin,Luke 11. 42. and philacte∣ries

and precepts of men,Mat. 23. 5. and have
not a proportionable fervour of zeale
for the Magnalia Dei:Mat. 15. 9. Certainly
God will yet reckon with us,Acts 2. 11. and call
us to an account for all the blood
which hath been shed, for all the Trea∣sure
which hath been exhausted, for
all the Judgements and mercies, for
all the providences and wonders
which have been expended upon us. I
speak not this to accuse, but onely to a∣waken;
not to charge, but onely to
beseech you to consider, whether the
Lord do not expect, That after such
vicissitudes of wonders as we have seen,
(especially having inclined the heart of
our GRACIOUS SOVERAIGN
unto moderate, healing, and Reforming
Resolutions,) you should together with
him take up the same purposes, to make
the Church of Christ amongst us more
holy and happy then ever it was before.
For certainly never any Parliament

had greater advantages to promote Re∣ligion,
than you have. I shall conclude
this Dedication and addresse unto you
with the words of Azariah the Prophet
unto Asa,2 Chron. . 1. The Lord is with you
while you be with him, and if you
seek him, he will be found of you,
but if ye forsake him, he will for∣sake
you. The Lord shine upon all
your Counsels.
From my Study,
July 24. 1660.

