


Noble Sir,
THe next interest to that, the Committee of Lords and Commons now with us, may challenge in this Sermon, is deservedly yours, because preached in your Quarters, to you and your Souldiers, and for your sakes especially; to bring God and you near together, even God into your Camp, and your Camp unto God; to direct and excite your duty to God, to draw down and ingage Gods presence with you, and that the Countries Cause and Cure (in the great work you are now about) may prosper in your hands. For if you can say to our enemies as Abijah did to his:
2 Chro. 13 12. Behold God himself is with us, for our Captain, and his Priests with sounding Trumpets to cry Alarm against you, you may say on (as he did) O enemy fight not against the Lord, for you shall not prosper. If your Camp be reformed, and you cannot bear them that are evill in it, surely the Lord will pitch his Tents in the midst of yours, and make you glorious by successes.
When poor Lincolnshire was in a low and sad condition, making approaches daily nearer desolation, God raised you up as Gideon a mighty man of valour to save us; giving
you not only Decertandi fortitudinem, but Decernendi rationem, Valour to fight, and prudence to advise. For courage without counsell, is like a Hand drawing a Bow, without an eye to set the Arrow right.
Sir, the mixture of amiable clemency, and insuperable valour, of modesty and magnanimity, of piety and souldiery, of courteous condescentions and sublime resolutions, which God hath made and tempered in you, is very remarkable. Me thinks I see those vertues which the Orator prescribes in an Emperour, worn as Gold-rings on all your fingers, Scil.
Haesunt vit∣tute Impe∣ratoria, la∣bor in neg∣tin, forticuo in pericul, industria in agendo, ce∣leritas in conficiende, consiltum in previdende. Cicero pro lege Manil. Diligence in businesse, courage in perils, industry in acting, celerity in effecting, counsell in foreseeing.
This I speak, not to flatter you in print (for I remember Elihu's speech, Job 32.21, 22.) but to give you (as I ap∣prehend) your due; and to provoke you to give God the glo∣ry of all you are, have, or do; and to adde to all your excel∣lencies habituall and practicall, Humility and Self-deniall, as the grace and ornament of them all.
Be often thinking that the Holy Ghost is putting these Queries to you, which Paul did to the Corinthians,
1 Cor. 4.7. Who makes thee to differ from another? what hast thou that thou didst not receive? God is the author of all dis∣criminating gifts, Graces, States, Successes. Let the high praises of God be in your mouth, because the high acts of God have been in your hand.
Go on, worthy Leader; in this your might; Scil. in ha∣ving God for your wisdome, courage, and strength. Ride on prosperously because of the greatnesse of your trust, and the goodnesse of your cause. Perfect what you have begun. Your business which before lay scattered all this Countrey over, & over divers other Countries also, you have now brought into a small compasse. (having driven your Antagonists as it were into a fold) The good Lord perfect the work for you and us,
and stablish peace againe upon our borders.
Blessed be God for the marvellous things done for this sinking (well-nigh ruined) Kingdome, and for our poor spoi∣led Countries by the Heads of our Worthies, the sonnes of Honour that have sate in counsell: and by the hands of you and others, the sonsof Valour, that have been imployed in action; by whom (as choice instruments in Gods hand) mighty things are brought to passe, even as it were a new Resurrection of our Kingdome (and poor countrey in speciall) out of the dust of ruine and trampling upon, and a reduction of enemies into our room. My feeble prayers are Militant for you and all yours, daily that you may triumph; and want no counsell, nor strength, nor successe which Heaven can af∣ford you. The Lord recompence into your bosome sevenfold, all your diligence and faithfulnesse; your indefatigable pains night and day; extream hazards, looking death oft in the face; and your sore hardship, serving the necessities of war: He continue to blesse you and all under your com∣mand, and make you still a blessing to your native Countrey, and give you for your reward what he hath promised, to him that overcommeth.
Rev. 2 17. Even the White stone, and new name written, which no man knowes save he that re∣ceiveth it, and hidden Manna to eat.

