


Madam;
IEsteem it an honour to be related to any stem of that Body, whereof your Lady∣ship is the Root; God having made you the happy Stock of a nume∣rous & verdant Off-spring in your country, and at the present, of as many eminent Families there, as the golden Candlestick in the Ta∣bernacleEx. 37. 18.

had Branches proceedingSic de sorore Nazian∣zenus; . Orat. 11. from it; who are all look'd upon as singular ornaments and examples of Vertue in it.
And I hope it will be (if an er∣rour) easily pardonable, to ingra∣tiate my service here by this Rela∣tion, and humbly to beg your Ladyships patronage for these two small Treatises: which may serve as a little vantage ground to stand upon, from whence you may see the Unity of Truth encompassed with Errours, as the Sun with Clouds, on every side, and puffed at by enemies of all sorts, endea∣vouring (if it were possible) to blow it out; the strangely-destru∣ctive wayes some take, whilst they walk in the light of their own fires, and will not have the great Lumi∣nary of Gods Word to guide them;

together with the sad divisions in this our Sion; & upon sight there∣of, take occasion to mourn over her.
Now whether (Honour'd Lady) can I better addresse these Lines for Sanctuary, then to your self, whom God hath given (what few of your Sex arrive at) Virilem intel∣lectum,In under∣standing be ye men. S we tran∣slate it, 1 Cor. 14. 20. to be as a man in under∣standing; able, not only to discern Truth from Falshood, and Vnity of Religion from Combination in Faction; but also, with the Elect Lady and her children, (Oh let not envy grudge when the Grace of God is magnified) to walk in the2 Epistle of S. Iohn verse 4. Truth with an upright and steddy heart?
Continue then your stand (most Christian Matron) in the Reformed Religion you have received, as

most consonant to the word of Truth in the sacred page; and your affectionate love to our Jerusalem,Gal. 4. 26. which is from above, and the mo∣ther of us all, though now forced by the unkinde struglings of her own children within her, to cryGen. 25. 22. out with Rebekah, vvhy am I thus?
Let your Constancy be made ma∣nifest to all men, for the Lord is nigh at hand: and persevere (as you have begun,) that none takeRev. , 11. 7, 9. Sine perse∣verantia nec milita∣rem qui pu∣gnat coro∣nam, nec palmam victor con∣sequilur. Bern. Epist. 1 29. either the Crown or Palm from you; either the Crown from off your Head, or else the Palm out of your Hands.
Your Zeal hitherto hath pro∣voked many; do but add to it the exercise of your Faith and Pati∣ence, and see the Salvation of God: For the poor shall not alvvayes be for∣got,Psal. 9. 18. the patient abiding of the meek

shall not perish for ever: but Truth and Vnity, which are yet so much clouded with us, shall e're long (when God hath sufficiently hum∣bled us under the want of them)Clarius elu∣xit lumen Phoebi re∣deuntis à tenebris. Ovid. break forth again, and shine more gloriously then ever; the one triumphing over falshood, and the other over division. Which choise blessings that your Ladyship may live to see Gods Church here re∣invested with, and have a high en∣joyment of, even till Shiloh come again, is the sincere prayer of him, who is
MADAM,

