


Worthy Sir:
THis ensuing Sermon was by your desire preached at the Funeral of your dear Yoke-fellow, and it is now by your command come to publick view. I thought my self very unfit to be imployed at such a So∣lemn Meeting, and cannot but judge what was then delivered unworthy to come forth to open light. But my engagements to your

Self, and the memory of your deceased Wife, are such, as that I cannot but gratifie this desire. I had rather adventure the Censures of others, than have my own heart censure me for unthankfulness.
Sir, God hath by his wise Providence taken away the one half of your self; that which his Majesty doth now expect from you is, To study a quiet submission unto, and a holy improvement of this his afflict∣ing hand.
If you do but commune seriously with your heart, you will see cause enough for this holy silence. How precious soever this Jewel was in your eyes, it was of a brittle nature. All the Sons and Daughters of Adam are Mortal Creatures, and why should it be strange to see a Mortal creature dye? Reason will teach men not to quarrel when they see that come to pass which they knew could not but come to pass. Quisquis aliquem queriturSenec. Epist. Lib. 1. Ep. 99. mortuum esse, queritur hominem fuisse, saith Seneca, To make complaint that our relati∣ons are dead, is to complain that they were mortal, and then it is the Hand of God that

hath done what is done. Calvin writing to his friend who had lately lost a hopeful Son, useth this as an Argument to quiet his Spi∣rit, because the stroke was given by God himself. Dominus qui in hac vitae statione ad tempus lv. Epist. ad chebug. eum locaverat, evocavit. The sight of Gods hand is sufficient to command deep silence to Creatures, for whatsoever God doth, he carries it on, not only in Righte∣ousness, but in Wisdom, yea and in infi∣nite Mercy to them that fear him. All his Psal. 25. 10. paths are Mercy and Truth, unto them that keep his Covenant, and think upon his Testimonies to do them. Bereaving Providences have Mercy and Truth in them towards the godly, as wel as enriching Providences. When God gave you so prudent and loving a Yoke-fellow, hee did not devest himself of his Propriety in her; Shee was Gods more than yours, even when she was yours. The Borrower hath no cause to be displeased, when the Lender calls for that which is his own. Shee whom you now mourn for, suffers no loss by this removal. A Wife is farre better in the Bo∣some of Christ, than in the bosome of any

earthly Husband. Though you want her Senec. Epist. lb. 1. Ep. 69. company, she wants not yours. Citius mori, vel tardius, ad rem non pertinet; benè mori, aut malè ad rem pertinet. Hee that lives well lives much, though he live not long. When you hear that your Ships are safe at their Port, you are not troubled, though they bee in Harbour sooner than you expected. Non sic Calvin, Ʋt su∣pra. Dei beneficium est longa vita, ut aliquid nobis depereat, si paucorum annorum spacio disjuncti ad meliorem vitam traducimur. God doth not break his Promise with his people about long life, when he cuts off a few years in this World, and translates them to life e∣ternal. God gives leave, yea he expects his people should be sensible of afflicting Provi∣dences, but he will not allow them to mur∣mur under such Providences. He that sees not Gods hand, disowns his Soveraignty; he that repines, denies his Righteous∣ness.
As God requires submission, so he expects some good improvement should be made of this his hand. There are Three things which God points out by this Dispensation.

Sir, I know you desire counsel as well as comfort, therefore I use this freedom. Gods minde is,
First, That you should meditate much on your own end. Death comes near the Husband, when it lays hold on the Wise of the bosom. Our dying friends upon their de∣parture leave us this Message, that vve must follow.
Secondly, That you should see how uncer∣tain all worldly things are. A vertuous Wife, the best of worldly comforts, is but a dying comfort; the fashion of this World passeth away. The loss of worldly contentments should make us love the world less.
Thirdly, That you should study more and more to make out your Spiritual relati∣on to Jesus Christ, and to rejoyce in it. The relation between Christ and a Beleever can never be dissolved. He marrieth the Soul to himself for ever; though he hath taken a∣way a loving Wife, he will not take away himself. A Soul is never solitary while it en∣joys communion with Jesus Christ.
Sir, you have now another Load-stone to

dravv your heart Heaven-ward. The great and mighty God enable you to submit to his holy Hand, give you more fellovvship vvith himself, and increase all his Graces in you. This is, and shall be the prayer of
Sir,

Lumbard-street, Jan. 12. 1654.
