



SIR,
IN the wheeling motions of our late changes I have still observ'd you to be Ho∣mo quadratus, one whose Basis hath been firmly grounded up∣on Religious principles; and amidst the manifold Alterations of the World's Scene (on which you have a∣cted the suffering part) most con∣stant unto the Truth; your Heaven∣born Soul over-looking these subluna∣ry

mutations with an eye of Faith fixt upon Eternity.
Having therefore compos'd this Treatise, [The birth of a Day] brought forth by the midwifery of some weeks studies, I no sooner thought of seeking a Patron for it, then of choosing Your self; whose Experi∣ence (I knew well) could fully at∣test the Vicissitudes of all Humane things, and whose Judgement did clearly discern their severall Cau∣ses, as having already apply'd them home in their sacred Uses.
And the rather, S, do I make bold here to inscribe Your name, that I may erect, if but a small Monu∣ment

of Thankfulnesse unto you for sundry Favours; and let you see that I eye not Greatnesse so much as Goodnesse for the fittest Patron. The former of these having much of Vicissitude in it, being Aurâ fu∣gacior, more fleeting then the Air; but the later of duration, being Aere perennior, more durable then Brass. And a greater testimony of this Goodnesse cannot be given, then your eminent and cheerfull suffer∣ing, even the losse of All, your Constancy excepted in the Ortho∣dox Faith, which hath taught you to look beyond the Instruments, unto God the principall Agent, in his so

various and changeable dealings with you, as to earthly things.
May these Lines then stand you in any stead, though to be only (as Aaron and Hur were to Mo∣ses) some stay and support to Exod. 17. 12. your weak hands and feeble knees, it is enough.
For God who is rich in mercy to those that call upon him, hath a Suf∣ficit for You and Yours, and will at length make up all your losses (if you faint not under them) out of his own choicest treasure of happinesse, which no son of violence shall be a∣ble to force from You; since you have suffer'd as a Christian with undaun∣ted

Fortitude and Patience, know∣ing in your self that you have in hea∣ven a better and an enduring Sub∣stance.
And now, Sir, I commend your VVorthy self with your Ver∣tuous Act. 20. 32. Lady, and your hopefull (as well as numerous) branch∣es, unto God and the word of his Grace: nothing doubting but that He, who by the hand of his provi∣dence hath the turning about of this great Globe of the World, will al∣so , in his good time, turn all to his Churches good: and as he is able every day to build you up more and more in your Holy Faith; so

likewise he will do it, and give You an abiding inheritance among them that are sanctified. Which is the prayer of him who esteems it an Honour to be,
Sir,

