


SIR,
I May safely appeale to Whatsoever is of esteeme and deare unto you, how I could much rather have bemoan'd in private that perverse and implacable spirit of yours, had not you of late so inconsiderately bespatter'd so many Pam∣phlets, which have infected the very aire, far worse than any most malignant e∣pidemicall contagion, by having inherited the priviledge to be cryed up and downe the streets and publicke places, instead of Royall Proclamations, to the great scandall of your most conscientious Brethren, and suppressing truth both Spirituall and Civill, which had more than begun to shine out so gloriously, since the first assembling of this present Parliament.
You have done as much as in you lyes to divide the Independents from the Parliament, by grudging them a peaceable abiding place in the land of their in∣heritance; and provok'd our Brethren of Scotland by fixing or fastning upon Christian Emperours, Kings, Magistrates, Parliaments, the undoubted legislative coercive power in all matters of Religion, Title page; and that even without the assistance or advice of Synods; page 88. I doe but advertise you thereof, though it be knowne so publickly, that Aulicus tooke notice of it so long since: consider the high consequences thereof, and the mischiefe it may grow unto, unlesse prevented opportunely.
Both King and Parliament pretend to have taken up Armes to defend the Protestant Religion, &c. and yet fight one against another, no lesse, than both of them opposed it: The King wonders the Parliament should entertain Brow∣nists and Anabaptists to fight for the Protestant Religion; and the Parliament marvels no lesse that the King should entertaine Papists to doe the same: But may they not both alike wonder at each other in this particular? or rather, why should either of them at all wonder at such proceedings, since the Papists in mat∣ter of doctrine beleeve all which Protestants beleeve; and both Brownists and Anabaptists hate Popery and superstition as much as Protestants? But if the Protestant Religion can be truly propagated by fighting; surely both Papists, Brownists and Anabaptists, even Turkes and very Dogs may be brought and taught to fight for it, all alike; but when you have spent your spirits, and distill'd away your braines, you will perceive at last if ever your eyes be open as I desire unfainedly) that it is the most irrationall and Ʋn-Gospel-like course under heaven, to imploy the arm of flesh to work upon the spirit.
Take heed then what you say; or explaine to us what you and your party meane, when you make the supreme Civill Magistrate to be custodem utri∣us{que} tabulae: Tell us whether the Great Turke, Emperour, Kings of Spain,
 France, Poland, &c. be not lawfull Civill Magistrates; how you can abridge them this Prerogative of both Tables, or quit their duty in taking charge of them, more than any Prince or Magistrate of Christendome.
Did not Paul tell Timothy, and Mr. Pryn in him, that the time would come when men would not indure sound doctrine, but turne away their eares from the truth, heaping to themselves teachers after their owne lusts, 2 Tim. 12 3, 4, 5. What if Mr. Pryn were another Timothy, or had the very spirit of the selfe same Timothy, and could infallibly assure us that these were the times which Paul then spake of, and the Independents those who were then foretold to have itching eares, and to be turned unto fables? may Mr. Pryn be more officious, or exceed the commission which was given unto Timothy, himselfe? Paul, and Christ, whose Apostle and Minister Paul was, gave Timothy no other, than that in such a case he should be watchfull in all things, indure afflictions, doe the worke of an Evangelist, make full proofe of his Ministery, reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long-suffering and doctrine, v. 2.
Consider, I beseech you, for the love of God and men, or your owne sake, if you have any symtomes of respect to either; Does the Apostle, thinke you, there understand by reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long-suffering and doctrine, that Timothy should upbraid, reproach, defame such as but differed from him in some opinion only, as you have done to Mr. John Goodwin, and that not for turning away from, but for holding out such truths, as none in Scripture are more evident, or may more warrantably, and that more easily too, be made good, next to the very Scriptures themselves to any equall judge, and even to every man himselfe, who will not put out the eyes of his owne reason and under∣standing, to be led blindefold and superstitiously by other mens, whereof we can have no other assurance than what is full Popishly implicit? To doe the worke of an Evangelist, to make full proofe of his Ministery, is it, thinke you, to be∣come an informer of the Civill Magistrate? to provoke them unto wrath and rage against your Brethren of the Independent way? to become an accuser of them, a persecuter, a very executioner, (properties most eminently peculiar to the Arch-enemy both of God, and any thing like godlinesse in any of his Saints) as you have done most tragically to your eternall infamy, unlesse God in mercy worke your bitternesse of spirit into a more Christian temper of mildnesse and humility? which till attain'd to, shall continually be the prayer of One, who, till you be such, or at least, lesse Basilisk-like, must only rest,

