



Good Mrs. Herrys,
IF it be a fault to joyn you both in this one Dedica∣tion, excuse it; seeing God hath joyned you together by his own Ordinance, and knit your hearts together with the Bands of Love: And both, as one have manifested your good Affections unto me, in conferring that Rectory upon me where I now (at present) am, and whereof you both are the true and undoubted Patrons.
The same cause (than) I have, of respective thank∣fulness to the one, as well as to the other; and no other
way have I really to express this thankefulness (be side my Prayers) than by sending forth these Papers, under your Names, the poor Present of an ever remaining Debtor, wishing they were as worthy of respect from you, as in many respects they do belong unto you.
I send them not cloathed, (as the Mother of Cyrus willed, that the words of those who spake unto her Son should be) in Silk; but in a homely Countrey dress, such as they were clad withall, in the first delivery; I may truly say with Moses, I am not elo∣quent,Exod. 1.10. neither at any time have been. And yet I should be loath to deliver my Ma∣sters Message, with irreve∣rent, and uncircumcised lips; but in such a Lan∣guage, as may beseem his ser∣vice regarding more that my words be full of sense, then of sound,1 Cor. 2.4. and such was the Apo∣stles speech; might my preach∣ing be like his, then I should think I were rightly elo∣quent.
The Eye, indeed, is a strict∣er and more curious Exami∣ner, then the Ear▪ and a seve∣rer Judge: Life puts a wor∣king lustre upon the meanest
Language being spoken, (and that generally the Hearer is much affected with); but that lustre is lost in writing which our words had in the delivery. And being but as dead in the letter, the Reader expects that the phrase and style should be pleasing and adorned (as a dead Corpse used to be) with Flowers of Eloquence and Oratory; which yet (unlesse the matter be sound and sa∣cred) cannot keep mens Wri∣tings from rottenness and pu∣trefaction. However, this my labour, in respect of the style and phrase, may be judged by a curious Eye to be simple, plain, and popular, and in that respect contemptible; yet I assure you, that the Subject-matter of the Book is Divine and sacred, and in that re∣spect not despicable; but such as may exercise the Devotion of the best Lady in the Land. Good Mrs. Herrys, that God,Iob 7.1. who doth visit man every morning, and try him every night, hath visited you with infirmity of Body, whereby you are often disabled from atten∣dance on his Publique Ordi∣nances, to your great grief (I doubt not): Be pleased under this your restraint, to have some serious and private con∣ference
with this Friend, which I here present unto you, (as a thankeful testimonial of that duty which I owe you) and I am assured it will speak a word in season to your heart, and fur∣nish you with some comfortable Cor∣dial, to revive your fainting spirits, in the saddest condition that you can be under. For it is onely the assurance of God's friendly love and favour, that gives the Godly satisfaction in their soarest Afflictions. Nor shall I be wanting, whilest I am in this Earthly Tabernacle, to assist you with my poor Prayers: Beseeching
The Father of all Blessings, that He would bless you, both with the Blessings of the Throne, and of the Foot-stool, and enable you so to glorifie him in this life, that you may be glorified of him in the next. Desiring still to be esteemed one that is

