



WORTHY SIR,
WEre it not that in Common Civility. I am Bound upon this Occasion, as to acknowledge my Infinite Obligations to you (that being the best Quality of a Bad Debtor, and even All a Chrsti∣an Creditor should expect, where the Meanes of a juster Requitall is wanting,) so to give you an Account of the present Worke, unto which you First incited Me:
Yet (Sir) the Rarity of the Subject, and the Gypsy∣like Esteeme it hath amongst the vulgar: would have necessarily enforced Me, to shelter in under the Wings of none but an Absolute Mercurialist.
That you are no lesse, The Ingenious Workes you 

have already Publish'd; The Succinct and Learned An∣notations you have made upon some Part of those, (to omit what I know you have in Designe;) your Exqui∣site knowledge in Arithmetique, Geometry, Astrolo∣gy, Naturall Magique, and Physick: and in those other Inferiour Objects of your Delight, viz. Limming, En∣graving, Painting, and Musique, may and doe abun∣dantly manifest: I shall not, I need not Expatiate: (To instance the particular knowledge you have in Chiro∣mancy, were but Actum agere, in that Astrology (be∣fore Mentioned) comprehends the same, as here it is Ap∣ply'd:
and your selfe Them both.)
Nor could I glory at All in the Name of a Greater Personage, to Patronize this Piece: it is not the Blustring Noise of an Empty Title, or the Fraile Sup∣port of a Signall Birth, Only, that can be a Fit Cham∣pion, for this or the like Mysterious Sciences: Learn∣ing is best Fortress'd of those, by whom she is most un∣derstood: I confesse her Admirers may wish her Happinesse; yet they commonly faile her in Extre∣mity.
And herein I follow the Example of mine Authour, who made choise of the best Deserving in his Countrey, unto whom he Ddicated this Worke in the Originall: that is, unto such as were sober and skilfull: Not to Men that were Mighty and Ignorant, or Learned and Malitious.
Nor yet have these any just cause to complaine, un∣lesse for the want of Ingenuity: whereby they are Doom'd to an Absolute Depravation of that, whereby Wise Men daily Ascend, even to the Presence of God and his Angells; I meane the Knowledge of his Works:

For it is not sufficient we heare a story of God in the Scriptures, unlesse also we read or see him in the large Volume of his Creatures: neither doe we Read Him by a Bare Gazing upon the outward Forme thereof, but by a narrow Enquiry and search made into their hidden Nature, and Disposition: For, In the Beginning (saith my Author) God adorned All things Created, with Signatures, that so the Minde of an Ingenious Man might delight it selfe by a Diligent searching into the Nature and Disposition thereof, and thence bold∣ly acknowledging the wonderfull Workes of God, and converting them to a Right use, be cheerfully constrained to the Love of God himselfe, and to worship him with all his heart, for his Infinite Wis∣dome and Goodnesse.
Let us therefore Behold the Heaven, the Starres, and Celestiall Signes, the Animalls, Plants, Roots, Stones, Metalls, &c. in and upon the Earth; and con∣sider how wonderfully their various Signatures every where present themselves unto us, and by a Tacite Lan∣guage proffer us their Nature and Disposition! How exceedingly the Seven wandering-Starres (vulgarly called Planets) doe Differ, not onely in Magnitude and Motion, but also in the Brightnesse, and Beauty of their Light! How variable an Influence is in each; what a Lively, Lasting Spirit, diversly disposing, Moving, Animating, Producing, Signing, and Sustaining these Inferiours, according to their different Position in the Heavens, and the sundry Complications and Mixtures of Beames accurring from other Starres!
The Philosophers of old have acknowledg'd, (and we shall willingly the same) Et infmis Suprema, & in 

Supremis infima: There are in Heaven Earthly things, in respect of the Causes, and by a Celestiall man∣ner, and Celestiall things in Earthly, but by a Ter∣restiall manner: whence indeed it is, That the Sun, the Moone and other Starres are considered in the Earth, but that in regard of a Terrene Quality; so also Plants, Stones, Metalls, &c. in the Heavens, but this in respect of a Heavenly Nature, indued with Life-In∣tellectuall. And this was the Reason why Heaven it selfe was Depainted with sundry Images by the An∣cient and Holy Fathers: and that he who had through his Ingenuity▪ attained these Holy Mysteries of the World, was by the Hebrewes truly named Rabbi, by the Latines, Magister; and by almost all other Nati∣ons, Magus: Neverthelesse this Name is now so much suspected and hated, that some had rather for-goe the Gospell it selfe, then receive it againe into Favour: so willfully Obstinate, Blind, and Stupid are the Masters this Age hath produced.
But let us Instance a few Examples, and First of the Celestiall Bodies: you know that the Image of the Ser∣pent, hath the Nature of a Serpent; that is, it cau∣seth Death by Poyson, so oft as the Lord of the Ge∣niture, or the Moone is therewith unhappily Posited at the Birth: The like of the Scorpion; For even the same Images drive away and kill Serpents and Scor∣pions, Spiders and Flyes, they expell Poyson and the Plague, being deduced from Heaven upon the Ter∣restriall Chaos, at an observed time: Leo makes Men Bold; Virgo, Docile; Taurus, Robust; Aquila pro∣cures Honours; Lyra instills the love of Musique, and the study of Poesy: Sagittary addicteth to Hunting;

and much more of that Nature, marked with their proper Signatures.
Next, let us contemplate the Animalls of the Earth, how every one Beareth its owne Nature: and how wee know the same in most of them by their Effigies, [viz. by their Countenance] Voyce, Gesture, Habit. often by their Colour. The Horse by his Gesture be∣wrayes his Pride: The Asse his Slownesse: The Lyon (by the Face and Gesture) his Courage: The Beare his Fircenesse; The Cock his Cheerfulnesse: The like are every where obvious in other Creatures, unto any but such as regard the knowledge of nothing. Now by observing the outward Formes of Beasts, ariseth Phisiognomy in Man: For looke what Beasts a Man resembles most, either in Face, or Proportion, hee is truly said to possesse the Disposition and Nature thereof.
If now we descend to Plants, and Roots, wee shall there enter a Theatre of Signatures worthy our Con∣templation: For Example: Solatrum vesicatorium (barbarously termed Alkakenge) shutts up its Huskes so soone as the vessells thereof are Filled with Juice, and replenished with little Stony-Graines, as if Intima∣ting unto us by a Tacite Language, That therein resides a vertue of Purging the Bladder, and of Diminishing the Gravell and Stone therein.
Chelidonia, not onely Blushes with a certaine Bloody Moisture, and therewith Staines the Hands of him that Touches it, but in the Roote it also shewes a Cavity much like the Ventricles in the Heart of Man: whereby is intimated that its vertue is to Purge the Blood to quicken the vitall Spirit, and to free 

the Heart from the injuries of Poyson.
Cynosbatus, as also Mespylus, fill the Belly with Little Stones, that breake in Pieces the Stone in the Bladder.
Carduus offends the Fingers of those that touch it by Prickles, yet such is the secret vertue thereof, that it consumes and Expells all Pricklings and Stingings in the Body of Man.
The Numulariae resembles in the Leaves thereof the Epiglossis, and heales the Inflamation of the Throat.
Nux Juglans and Moscata represent in the Faces thereof, the Composure of the Braine and Head, and are therefore comfortable to both.
Orchis in the Roote thereof, resembles the Testicles, and therefore is Venus excited by it.
The Hypericon, and Persicaria are notoriously knowne to operate according to their proper Signa∣tures.
Many Hundreds more might be Instanc'd of Flow∣ers, Seeds, Leaves, and Roots. The Signatures are most apparent in such Herbes as are least indued with Odour: Those that are Sweeter, Evidence their Ver∣tues unto us (notwithstanding we were Blind) by their Smell. So also in the Leaves of Trees, in Rinds and Barkes, in Wood and Roots, we finde such Signatures, as doe manifest the hidden vertues thereof, and thereby learne to apply them to Humane use, or the Healing of Diseases. The like we see in Stones and Me∣talls.
If this then be so cleare in the Starres and Signes of Heaven, if so in Animalls, Plants, Roots, Stones, and 

Metalls: who but a Mad-Man, or Foole dare say, That the like Signes in the Hand of Man▪ are Idle and Vaine? Man is he for whom all things were made, and wherein all things of the Greater world are comprehen∣ded, although with a Face more Occult. Man onely Rejoyceth in this Honour [that he hath a Resemblance, Operation and Conservation with all things in the World:] He symbolizeth (as I may say) with the Matter in the Proper Subject, with the Elements in their Foure-fold Composure of Body: with the Plants in the Vegetative vertue: with the other Ani∣malls in the sensitive: with the Heavens in the Syde∣reall Spirit, that is, in the Motion and Influence of the Superiour Bodies upon these Inferiour: with the Angells in the Intellect, Wisdome, and Speech: with God himselfe in the Containing Power of all things. And therefore we cannot imagine the Signes so vari∣ously Pourtray'd in the Hand of Man are in Vaine: but that they are there placed by Nature, with intent to make knowne unto us the Inscrutable Workes of GOD, if Job (Chapter 37.) may be Cre∣dited.
That the Explanation of these Signes is named Chi∣romancy, I need not acquaint you: Nor what Ca∣nons the Ancient and Moderne Philosophers have written concerning the same: Onely this I shall tell you, My Author hath not onely (in this small Tract)
Reduced All to a Concise and Methodicall Discourse, and Added divers others of his owne Observations:
But also Illustrated the Practique Part thereof with sundry Notable Examples, whereby he hath Mani∣fested an Astrologicall Consent and Harmony be∣twixt 

the Hands and Genitures of all Men. A worke
not attempted by any before him. And whereas the Masters in this Science have not Assigned  Tuber∣cula, or Mounts of the Hand to the Planets, without some Successive Discrepancy: Nor although all of them deliver it for a Generall Rule [That by how much every one hath a Planet more Dignifyed at the Houre of his Birth, by so much more Evident the Characters and Signes will appeare upon the Regi∣on appropriated to the same Planet,] yet hath not this been approved untill by this Author, who hath hereby abolished all former Doubts, and clearly demon∣strated the Truth of that Doctrine.
Nor hath He thereby (in my Judgement) restor'd the Art of Chiromancy to more certainty, then he hath confirmed the Grounds and Credit of Astrology, and Das'd in Pieces the Bug-beare Arguments of all the Enemies of either: For what more Convincing to the Juditious, then if (by Inspection made into the Hand of any Man) I truly pronounce this or that Planet Essentially Dignified or Angular in his Geniture, or in such or such a Position with other Planets or Starres: another Infortunate Afflicted, or Dejected? Or if (on the Contrary) by looking first into the Geniture, and considering therein the severall Positures of the Planets, and their Configurations one to another, and with other Starres; I tell him (and that Distinctly and Truly) the Lines and Signatures Engraven in his Hand: what (I say) is or can be more satisfaction then this to Rationall Men, as touching the Power and In∣fluence of the Planets and Starres upon these Inferi∣ours, and consequently of the Lawfull use, and verity

of the Sciences of Astrology, and Chyromancy, be∣twixt whom there is such a secret Coherence and Har∣mony? And this I dare undertake to performe for the Honour of these Sciences, to the shame of all Malitious and Pestilent Detractors.
Indeed (I confesse) we cannot by Chyromancy so ex∣actly determine the time of any Accident, as by Astro∣logic, where the Arch of Direction may be Resolv'd into the most Scrupulous Parts of Daies: I suppose Chiromancy was not so much Ordained by Providence for the use of such whose Purer sights can penetrate the Celestiall Spheres, and there Exactly reade their owne, or others Fate, in those Golden Letters of the Starres: But rather for the Benefit of such that be of a Grosser Genius, and whose Dimmer Eyes cannot Discerne the Decrees of Nature at so Great a Distance. Yet are not these Signatures wanting in any Man (more, or lesse)
lest he should prove wanting to himselfe in th' Accom∣plishing of a Higher Scrutiny.
As touching the Version it selfe, I have done it with all Integrity: and if in some places I may seeme to Differ from the Originall, it is but where I find the Au∣thor abounding more with Elegance, then Variety of Matter, and even forsaking the Tearmes of Art, rather then he will Misse of an Eloquent Expression: for per∣haps I have herein sometimes Contracted him, yet still retained His Genuine Sense. In other Places I have onely Corrected the Errours of the Presse, the which indeed were many more, then the Author's Errata spe∣cified, and very Grosse ones besides: and therein have done no more, then I desire others may doe for Me. For any thing else I know not that I have Exceeded the 

Lawes of Translation, unlesse it be in retaining the Tearmes of Art, and that I did purposely, lest in Abo∣lishing them, I should therewith abolish the Art also: Neverthelesse in the First Seven Pages I have given the English thereof, and that (I hope) is suffici∣ent.
The End proposed, is, That hereby all Persons, who are not acquainted with the Latine, might in Plaine English Reade and understand their owne Destiny: and (if Possible) Avert (at least wise Mitigate) the Mischiefs Threatned them: Or with comfort attend, and (by Humane Prudence) Cherish and Augment the Good portended: whereby they may Greatly be Enabled to Give God thankes for his Infinite Mercy, and Goodnesse: At least wise Glorifie him in the Midst of their greatest Afflictions.
And this is the first Tract (of this Nature) that ever appeared in the English Tongue: and I may confident∣ly say in any Language whatsoever, (the Latine excep∣ted;)
wherein the Author writ no lesse Learnedly, then Elegantly: And I heartily wish (and desire, Sir, you will joyne with me in it) That some one or other of our ablest Astrologers, (who have better Encouragements then my selfe,) would pursue this Designe of the Au∣thors, it being (in my Opinion) the best and onely way of bringing this Science the nearest to Perfecti∣on.
Sir, I have now but a little to say, and that is, First, to give you Thankes for all the variety of Favours you have conferred upon Mee ever since the First Houre of our (to Me) Happy Acquaintance: Next to as∣sure you (in a short time) Ptolomy himselfe, in the Eng∣lish 

Tongue, which so long hath beene expected from Me, yet still Retarded by Reason of the many Discou∣ragements and Crosse-Grain'd Events I have Labou∣red under for some yeares past, begging your kind Acceptance of this in the Interim: Then to crave your Pardon for this Prolixity: And Finally, the Conti∣nuance of your wonted Affection, and Opinion of Him, who unfeignedly am
Feb. 18. 1651/2.
Sir,

