


THe BOOKS mentioned by the Author of those publique Prophecies out of Daniel, Revelation, Prophets and Apo∣stles of old, and New Test. the fifth Kingdom, prepared in Pathmos (or in Prison and Exile Teavels) among is sweetest vi∣sits and visions of God (and in the still voice,) are very strangely (it seems) miscarried, without Time and Providence do recover them, and so discover him or them that had a hand in hindring or stifling of them. Only the Introductory part to the first Treatise (or Prison-born Morning-beams) are preserved, and gotten together, as the occasion of his falling upon so large a Systeme (so some part of his suffrings at Lambeth untill Winsor, which therefore we have added unto his Heart-appeale (having been hardly kept and col∣lected) that the view of present persecution my be the more clear, and this History the more complent, though (to my knowledge) many things are omitted, passages left out, fleeced and sheered round, as they lifted that had them to do, before we could bring it to this passe (in publique;) besides much more which in time may be added (if need be) as some of us hear) of severall reasonings between him and O. P. him and Souldiers, him and Ministers, him and many Adver∣saries, upon the matters of our faith in the things of Christ, this his betrayed cause, and Kingdom-work; besides what sufferings have been added since these Papers came from him) to this CHAINE. But in the mean time it may appear by this, what the servants of the Lord do pass through at this Day by these powers of the Beast, such fore trials, remarkable passages and experiences of Persecution as may make them (that have said it is no Persecution) now very Mutes for very shame; and their eares tingle to hear of such a height of tyranny, profaneness, and impiety among them, as may awaken our Friends and favourers of Sion to their Work and Watch, and as may revive once more amongst us the blessed memory of the (yet) bleeding MARTYRS, and the Cloud of Witnesses whose examples are before as in this Cause; that we also may be made FAITHFUL unto death therein. His cup of Affliction hath been deep (for this Day and Nation) but yet sweet; and if so be the report of ONES suffering do sound so, what would the WHOLE do, of all the suffe∣ring ones this day in England? (for the good Cause, a good Christ,
a good Conscience?) but another a new Book of Martyrs? a fair Garden full of purple Roses and pure Lillies, which the Beloved is gone down to gather, Cant. 6.2. But the Cain-like cruelty keeps off the report at present, till the blood of Abel be heard out of the earth; I mean them of whom the World is not worthy, that have wit∣nessed with such boldness to the Kingdom, Work, Cause, and Prin∣ciples of Righteousness.
Now upon these Papers (at last) produced (and extraordinarily preserved out of the Catch-pole Clutches) can we now be thankeful to our heavenly Lord and Father for them? and for that some are yet kept constant and faithful (through Christ) in sufferings? for to you it is given, saies the Apostle: every one in his place, as he is called to contest against this (the last) Beast, Rev. 13. Some tried, some tempted, some plundered, some prisoned, some barbarously used and set upon by the enemy, some hurt, and some maimed, and many immur'd and injur'd; yet others ready to succeed them, and to bring up what is behind, the Lord assisting, supporting and sweetning all unto them. Yea, methinks the most High saies to each one of those Sufferers, Well done! thou good and faithful Servant! and as Mat. 24.46. Blessed is the Servant, who when his Lord cometh he shall find so doing! for now I have proved thee! I have tried thee! I have fifted and shifted thee! now I know that thou lovest me! and fearest God! Wherefore I have sworn, by my self, that in blessing, I will blesse thee; and in multiplying, I will multiply thee, &c. And mine oaths are not like Mens.
It may be these sufferings may work upon some that hear them, they have on some that saw them, yea, even amongst the Souldiers; for we hear that one of them (formerly busie) is now wounded and touched in Conscience for it; and others have already left them for their cruelty to these: Whiles the Cavileers can have liberty to drink, swear, whore, or any thing (it seems) and live as they list, and thus (say the Souldiers) may our Friends too, so they he for their Lord Protector, and his G—Whom the Lord protect us from, and from their wickedness in high places: And whiles they pro∣ceed from evil to evil, teach thou us, O Lord, to grow up in thy strength! from faith to faith, in the Grace, Power, Knowledge, Purity, and Holiness of our Head (the Lord Jesu) and f his King∣dome and coming, which we all wait for! even so, Amen.
