




YOu were pleased (Gentle∣men) the last year, when you revived this friend∣ly Meeting of your Countrey men in Lon∣don, to desire Mr. Ralph Robinson to Preach before you, which accor∣dingly hee did, and his Service herein
 was accepted with such Approbation by those whom the Lord had put into a Capacity to judge of the Spiritualnesse and usefulnesse of his Sermon, that the Copy thereof was desired to be published. It was the Authors purpose to have Printed his Sermon, and to have De∣dicated it to you his Country-men, and accordingly hee had made most of it rea∣dy for the Presse; But the all-wise God prevented his Intention by Death. The Subject of this Sermon, is, The Saints Longings after Heaven. Sirs, you are here Minded what Country-men you are, viz.
Fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the Houshold of God;Ephe.
2. 19. Mehor est Chri∣stianus Rusticus qam Alexander  Lu
. Nemo me ma∣jor nisi qui justion. Prov.
12. 26. Psa. 4. 3. Psa. 16. 2. This is the best Countrey, true Christi∣ans may Challenge that Title to be Choice of Men, for such are more Excellent than their Neighbours, they are Gods Chosen ones, and the most
 most Excellent of the whole World. That which was prounded to you, when this Sermon was preached, as the matter of your hope and desire, is now the joy and enjoyment of faithfull Mr. Robinson, your Countrey-man, safely landed on the shore of Eternity, and now possessed of his heavenly Country. Had God spared him, hee had lived to bee a speciall Ornament both to the Country of his birth, and this City of his Abode and Imploiment. But God hath made a great breach both amongst you and us. The Lord sanctifie such a sad Providence unto us all, that wee may faithfully serve out our Generation, and seriously minde our way, and diligently mend our pace towards our heavenly Countrey.
If any of you shall bee at the trouble to ask why my name (possibly unknown
 to some of you) is subscribed to this Dedication? You may bee pleased to know, that it was the request of Mr. Robinsons sorrowfull Widow, that I would take the care of committing this Sermon to the Presse, which now in her Name, with all due Respects is presen∣ted and put into your hands, and the Lord write the serious and holy Truths herein Contained upon your hearts, and blesse your Meeting: For the Glory of God, the Honour and Happinesse of your Country, and the increase of Piety and Charity amongst your selves, which is the Prayer of
Sirs,

From my Study in Colemanstreet London,
July 7. 1655.
