



Worthy Sirs, and my much respected Friends,
THis Sermon first preached amongst you, and now dedicated to you, hath had occasionally it's first birth from him, from whom the Author naturally hath had his being, whose pains in this kind, and upon this occasion, had it been afforded, as of right expected, this worthlesse work of mine might have been well spared, but it was his pleasure to put me upon the worke, and therefore my— mihi jussa capessere fas est. duty to obey him, to whom I owe my selfe; this and the same that was at first directed to your eares is now made visible to your eyes; after it had been preached, for above halfe a yeares space it came not once into my thoughts it should be printed, I accounted it no other then as an untimely birth that never should see the sunne; and the reason why now I brought it forth to light, was not because of any high conceit, that either I have, or expect you should have of its worth, (I am conscious to my selfe of my owne imbecillity which even herein may be seen to others) but in this printing age (wherein are vented all things both new and old, both good and had) for any one that is a Penman, it is expected that he should not onely set his tongue a work to speake but also his Pen to write; to be altogetho silent in this kind, and in these dayes may seeme a solaecisme; but that was not it which drew this from me. I could well enough have still shrouded my selfe under the shadow of obscuritie, and would willingly have kept any thing of mine in this kind from publike view, but more forceable arguments did over-power me, viz.
First drawne from the pressing miseries of multitudes of people in many places; the objects of pitty which should set a worke charity we every where to be seen, how many shiftlesse and helplesse creatures (whose loud cries may he heard even afarre off) doe importune us to put to our helping hands, to
doe for them, that are able to doe little or nothing for themselves, this then may serve, as their Eccho, to give you (as it were) the rebounding of their voices.
Secondly, I considered the hard-heartednesse of most in most places, these are the times wherein (I thinke) never greater necessity, and yet (I feare) never lesse charitie, and no wonder that in this iron age men have such hard hearts, for it was foretold by our Saviour that in these last dayesMatt. 24.1. iniqui∣tie should abound, and the love of many should waxe cold,1 Joh. 2.18. whereby we know it is the last time, for never more vanity, and never lesse charity,Jam. 5.4. the cries of the distressed and oppressed that doe pierce the eares of God even in the highest Heaven, cannot enter into the eares, or at least the hearts of men on earth. Who is not more or lesse wanting in making a supply to the wants of others? in whose hearts doe the kindled coales of love appeare so violent at to breake forth into a vehement flame? are not most men herein starke cold, and doe not the best seeme to be but lukewarme? needs there not then some∣thing to quicken us, a spurre to provoke us? make use then of this for that purpose, at least let it be as a remembrancer to minde us of our duty, which sometimes we shall be ready peradventure willingly to forget.
Thirdly, concerning this particular occasion which first put these words into my mouth, the same was the cause why I let them fall from my pen, for I understood that notwithstanding you have had many Sermons, two yeare∣ly upon this occasion, yet not one appeares extant, they were (it seemes, no longer lived then the breath wherein they were delivered; whereupon I thought with my selfe that something in this kind were better then nothing to be kept upon record in honour and for memoriall of that great good worke of charity, which the Apostle saies is a never failing grace, 1 Cor. 13.8. of that kind (it seemes) was this, for the last will of the deceased is as a lasting deed, to insure your poore of their yearely reliefe for ever: that this therefore was a good worke, none that is good can deny, for it is of good use tending to the good of many, and that it was also a great good work, I think it may well be so said to be, in that I feare me it will not be greatly followed, when and by whom amongst you will it be seconded? Now good workes especi∣ally of this nature are so rare, that they may well be welcommed when they doe appeare, and certainly the perpetuity of that work (were there no other cause) deserves the continuance of this, your poore's yearely Pension may well be honoured with an annuall celebration; see then how one good work is seconded with another, a bodily almes for the poore is recompenced with a spirituall benefit for all; you have (it seemes) usually on this day, upon
this occasion a double Sermon, and why may not each be of double use? viz.
First, for Commemoration of what is done for the time past; for the Lord will so grace good workes, that they shall be (as it were) a surviving issue; Saint John tels us what he heard God from heaven say, Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, both in that they rest from their labours, as also in that their works doe follow them, nay let me adde, they are blessed in that their works doe still survive them to, for they follow after them to Heaven to be rewarded, and yet they remaine still behind them on earth to be renowned. Prov. 10.7. The memory of the just is blessed.
Secondly, for Exhortation to what should be done for time to come: For so (as it seemes) was it the mind of this Donour that each Minister of your two Parishes should be requested yearely on this day to make an Exhortation to the people, and if they doe it not themselves, to cause it to be done by some others, and hath allowed them a recompence: Now whereto serves an Exhortation but to move us unto, or put us upon the practice or performance of a good work or duty? and then is it of so much the greater force, when as it is grounded upon the Examples of others set before us, who though they are dead, yet speake unto us, and though not vocally, yet really call upon us, to doe the same good workes, that so we may be repaid with the same rich recompence of reward? For the Examples of good works are as patternes set before us to teach us that the same or such like should proceed from us; this worke of almes to the poore, you are not so much to consider as done by another, but so to reflect upon your selves, as hence to learne what herein should be done by you; hence are you exhorted from this example of our brother deceased to be of the same minde and pra∣ctice; considering it is a high point of wisdome, whilst we have the things of this life to make the best and the most of them, which is not when we engrosse them to our selves, but when in conscience and obedience to God we distri∣bute them to others; the Apostle mindes us of what our Saviour saies (oh let it appeare that we beleeve it to be a truth) That it is more blessed to give then to receive, Act. 20.35.
If any thing spoken this way be here to be found that may stirre up com∣passion and acuate affection, that may so work upon our hearts as to set a worke our hands so to extend charityDan. 4.27. that we our selves may find mercy, it is enough I have my desired and: Two things more only by way of Preface I desire you would be pleased to take notice of, viz.
First, concerning the matter which you shall here find; Expect no newes, of which every dales plenty and variety doth alwayes fill us, if not some∣times
times surfet us, and were our newes as true and good, as rise and common, there would seeme to be no want; newes is now growne so stale, that for any thing not new to come forth may seeme to be newes indeed,Nihil dictum quod non di∣ctum prius. no other newes have you here, for the wise man saies,Ecc. 1.9, 10. there is no new thing under the sun, is there any thing whereof it may be said, See this is new? it hath been alrea∣dy of old time which was before us: I should be loth to be censured by you de∣servedly, as the Apostle was by the Athenians most unjustly to be a Act. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. babler for bringing new and strange doctrine to your eares; or that you should be accounted (as they were, and did appeare so to be) so addicted to novelty, that the truths of God should seeme strange to you; Here you shall find com∣mon things, which are therefore never theOmnia bona communicati∣va, quo commu∣niora eo melio∣ra. worse, or of never the lesse use, common they are indeed, because they concerne all; such things that you have formerly (and it may be often heard) and yet are now againe hereby put in mind of, that so you let them notHeb. 2.1. stip; It is not amisse2 Pet. 1.12. to put you alwaies in remembrance of these things, though ye know them, that you may be established in the truth:Nunquam ni∣mis dicitur, quod nunquam satis discitur, Sen. epist. 27. that is never enough spoken, that is never too well learned, nor can be too much practised.
Secondly, concerning the manner of delivery both at first and now, it is without excellency of speech; affected eloquence in preaching is notVenerabiles & verè Deo digni Apostoli. Christ cum es∣sent in omnibus puritate vita, & animi vir∣tuibus clarij non magni pen∣debont sermonis ornatum. Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 24. Apo∣stolique, for the Apostle Paul the1 Cor. 14.18. most learned (as may be thought) of all the rest tels us expresly that when he was sent of Christ to preach, his com∣mission ranne thus in these words,1 Cor. 1.17.&c. and I confesse, my opinion is that plaine speaking is as commendable in preach∣ing, as plaine dealing is necessary in trading, as Ministers therefore presse this upon people, so are they to practise that themselves, choosing rather to profit people with wholesome doctrine, then to please them with delightsome Phrases; this that you have here at first, shewed it selfe in a plaine dresse, and since, had I neither list nor leisure to put it into another habit, had I skill to doe it, who can now in these sad times apply himselfe to the studie of witty inventions; or delight others with the curiosity of nice ex∣pressions? Cicero saith thus of Rhetoricke, Pacis est comes, ottique socia, & jam bene constitutae reipublicae velut alumna quaedam eloquentia; which if so, how unseasonable is it at this time for us, and what little use have we now to make thereof: except to worke the more upon our affections, the more pathetically to expresse our bitter lamentations? our wits may well be dull'd, when as our hearts cannot but beLam. 1.20. bemudded with our trouble.
Again, had I had will, yet could I not have time to doe herein as I would, for these impolished meditations I let passe out of my hands with as much
haste as they came into my minde; all I could doe was but to review them, I could not refine them; for all the time I had to make them legible and fit for the Presse, was surreptitiously taken away from my other imployments, now and then a little, which little being soone missed, I could not then spare much, or more; I must needs therefore implore your kind acceptance of this my weake conception, which wanting its due perfection through the want of the midwifery of time hath come to an immature and untimely birth; such as it was, it is, and such as it is, it is freely yours, if you please but to take it as your owne; if any thing herein be amisse, I cannot but take it to my selfe; Humanum est errare, it is incident to mans nature to erre, and whatsoever is good I dare not but ascribe it to God, Omne be∣num supernè, Every thing that good is, is from above: Now the God of all glory enrich our hearts so with his grace, that we may be fruitfull in repentance and obedience to him, and abounding in love and mercy to∣wards others, and endue us with a greater measure of wisdome, not of this world, which isJam. 3.15, 27. earthly, sensuall, and divellish, but of that from above, which is pure, peaceable, gentle, easie to be entreated, full of mercy, and good fruits, without partiality and without hypocrisie, that we may enjoy the fruit of righteousnesse which is peace, to all them that worke righteousnesse, and that make peace, which is the Prayer of him who is

