


Worthy Brethren,
THat which woved me to undertake this worke, was not out of the least thought of any abilitie in my selfe above others, (I speake not by way of humble pride) but I had a challenge given me, with many a jeere and mocke behind my backe, when my extreame sorrowes called for better usage: The Apostles counsell is, that we should endea∣vour to keepe the unitie of the spirit in the bond of peace; but this Diotrephes loving the preeminence hath beene alwayes under∣valuing his neighbour Ministers, to set up himselfe: and at
In the County of Bedford. Shefford Lecture his course hath beene after the Sermon to goe whispering up and downe against something delivered; still finding fault with every man: yet not daring to
Non enmi dispatare a∣mant haeretici, sed quoquo modo superare impudentissima pervicacia, ut congregent quae non pepe rerunt. August. Tom. 6. Contra Faustum Manichdib. 13. cap. 12. col 237. dispute the point before the Ministers with any of them: He hath to my know∣ledge accused all the Lecturers in that combination for preaching Poperie, because they did presse the people to Sanctitie. I speake unfainedly, it hath much grieved me to heare them so falsely accu∣sed, from whom I have heard so many excellent Sermons delivered with tender compassion and sweet expressions to the comforting of
my distressed soule, of whom I may say in the Apostles words, God be mercifull to them, for they have often refreshed me. Deare brethren let not this Momus discourage you: God will blast his stinking breath: and (maugre his malice) blesse you with the sweet breathings of his holy Spirit. Doe but consider how the De∣vill doth unmaske himselfe in moving this man in these times, when Gods sore judgements are upon the Land to preach downe teares of repentance and Humiliation; without which you cannot read in all the Booke of God, that the Lord ever removed any one judgement from a Land, unlesse it were to bring a greater in the roome: Let the Scripture judge, whether it bee not our duty to preach to our people to weepe; And our selves, in the Prophet Ioels expression, to weepe between the Porch and the Altar: And to say, Spare thy people O Lord. Goe on couragiously, and the Lord give you his gracious assistance in the worke of your mi∣nistery; So prayes

London, from my Study Septemb. 25. 1643.
