



HIGHLY HONOURABLE,
A Poor DUST (as I am) needs no great at∣tendance;
and A servant of Jesus Christ
needs no other CREDENTIALS to de∣mand
an Audience then his Message: besides, the
Matter herein doth more concern your selves then
me, and the best PRUDENTIALS that you have.
If this Quadruple Discourse, do but come to your
Ears, the Commonwealth is an object presented to
your Eyes, 1. As an ANATOMY (but most mi∣serably

mangled, yea) cut up Quick by Mr. P. 2. As
a PATIENT, but as pitifully Physick'd by Mr. B. in
the Preface of his Holy Commonwealth. 3. As a Spar∣tan,
Athenian or Venettan State; upon orders EKDE∣MICK,
and differing with the nature of our Cause,
Climate, Manners, &c. by Mr. H. 4. As a Christi¦an
Commonwealth, in a Theocratick constitution and
Cause of Christ upon orders ENDEMICK (both to
MEN and to CHRISTIANS) as was contended
for, by the well-affected; and is by J. R. In every
corner of which Quadrangular, is somewhat observa∣ble,
either from Mr. P's opening of his Stomach; Mr.
B's opening of his Spleen; Mr. H. his Brain; or my
plain denudation of heart to your mature and wise
judgements, in the Promptuary and Larder of this
Discourse. So that these Papers, as you accept them,
are your's; if you reject them, are mine; though they
more concern you then any men alive, upon a two∣fold
consideration, Chilification or concoction of the
whole Matter.
1. Upon the account of that PUBLICK TRUST
and confidence which the Commonwealth hath in you: if
Immanuel (your Motto, or) GOD WITH US, be
GOD WITH YOU, then Butter and hony shall be your
food, and you shall CHOOSE the GOCD, and REFUSE the
EVIL; yea, BUTTER AND HONY shall every one Eate
that is left in the Land, Isa. 7. 15, 22. under such a
Government. What is eligible (I hope) will be ac∣ceptable,
and (upon your digestion) profitable and
nutrimental to the WHOLE BOBY; it may be (by
this) you may find out, who are (indeed) the Gun∣powder-plotters,
and which are the Grand Designs
that would blow you up into the open Air. Some

are so confident of carrying it yet, that already they
conclude the Commonwealth is but a firme Nihil, or a
meer Nothing without a foundation; and it is hard to
say, whether they would propagate their work more
by a Faux under, or by a Fax in the Parliament House.
All I can do in that, is but to tell you where and how
their Barrels are laid, and Instruments are at work.
In the next place, I could not do less (if not somewhat
more) then to present your Honours with the SPOIL
of those GOODS that I have taken from your Ene∣mies,
by way of reprisal or Letters of Mart, in this Pole∣mick
susception for the service of the Commonwealth;
and therein, the recovery made of the Honour and Re∣putation
of your most worthy Members, Sir Arthur
Haslerige, Sir Hen. Vane, &c. and others (not lost,
but) invaded by most Name-murthering and unchari∣table
Pickroons, who have infested and ranged the
Coasts of our Commonwealth (now) many months (if
not years) together; to rob you and us, them and the
Commonwealth, as they have done. And this I obser∣ved,
that as I hoised Sail, and was in pursuit of the
SPIT-FIRE (Mr. P.) I was set upon (and so fell in)
with the HUNTER (Mr. B) who came in to assist
the first: and afterward I met with the FOX in the
way (Mr. H.) though I cannot say, of the same com∣pany,
yet at the same imployment; All which I have
(with God's blessing) BOARDED (and without
much Fiering on my part) have brought them into this
BAY before you, as Prize (in the RESOLUTION)
where I now am bent to live and die (through Gods
grace) for the Good old Cause and a Christian Commonw.)
2. Upon the account of that late DEBATE had of
me, (unknown to me) in the COUNCIL; wherein

some would render me what (I hope) they shall ne∣ver
find me; herein some shall find me what (I fear)
they would never render me to be, both for Principles
and Practice as to Government; which I presume are
such as (infirmities excepted) you would be loath to
eject or not affect. And therefore (Curvis Poplitibus)
with bended knees, and a will broken and bowed to
the foot of the Lord) do I present my Requests to him
for you; and to you for him; and from him, that you
may give us but a due incouragement (that are ready
to engage our utmost in your service for Christ and
the Cause) by a true judgement upon this Subject set
before you, viz. the HEAD (i. e. Christ) and BODY
of the Commonwealth i.e. the adherents to the CAUSE,
as they are (indeed) the most sound, sanable, and soci∣able
parts of it's Constitution; and this
1. In the PHYSIO-LOGY of it; wherein all
things must be pondered that appertain to the essence
or nature of our Cause and constitution, (viz. Parts,
Temperaments, faculties, functions, most innate spi∣rits,
qualities, and the like) for then I dare aver, you
will give us freedom to pay the TENTHS of all the
SPOIL to our Melchsedec, as well as to feed upon his
Bread and Wine, and take the blessings; yea, to consecrate
the gain unto JEHOVAH, and the substance to the ADON
of the whole earth. (Hacharamti, the word is; I will set
it apart, with an Anathema to any that shall alter that
property of it, Micah 4. 13.) to retrieve and drive on
this interest of Christ, (our ADON) in all, and of
JEHOVAH above All; as suits best with the very
being and nature of our CAUSE. It is your Honour
to maintain HIS, and your interest to espouse HIS;
and not to think worse then you need, or (too severe∣ly)

to censure such as peaceably, piously, humbly, ho∣nestly,
in a holy manner, with a gracious spirit, and
without any contempt to your Persons or Authority, or
to the Peoples just Rights and Liberty, plead this
CAUSE, and justifie it as YOUR'S, as THEIR'S,
as OUR'S, and as HIS; who shall be, who must be,
the desire of all nations. But because Mr. Baxter may
be heard with many when I may not, I shall usher
in ALL, in his own words, that I have to offer for
this Christian Commonwealth or Theocratick Govern∣ment,
as the CONCAMERATION and upshot of
the whole Discourse.
2. In the PATHOLOGY of it; and therein to con∣sider
how the Principal parts might be affected (if not
infected) with the late Morbous estate of the Common∣wealth:
And acted (for that time) so preternaturally,
that might render it as unsafe then to follow them,
as now to fall on them for no MEMBERS, (humanum
est errare, sed inhumanum perseverare, Cic. Phil. 2.) Un∣less
we be of opinion that the only way to cure a dis∣ease,
is to cut off the member; or to evacuate an hu∣mor,
is to kill the man. So to measure the affections
of your old friends (who are sound at heart) ADHE∣RENTS
to the Good old Cause and Commonwealth, by
any humorous or incomposed resentment of your
interruption (which was sudden and amazing!)
however they took it, may be dangerous and unjust.
Seeing some that were more troubled fell in with the
Apostacy; and some that were less, fell out with it! yea,
seeing such as were Active in it, and made their Ad∣vantages
by it, are indemnified; shall such as were
Passive in it, and pursued nothing by it, but the Pu∣blique
Good, be indamaged? Can any think that after

so many years hard Bonds and Banishment, those that
were forwardest, proclaim'd the Single Person, serv'd
him (or rather themselves) therein, should be the
Men of your Right Hand, and not those that have wit∣nessed,
prayed, appeared and Protested against it
(from the first to the last of it) be worthy of your
LEFT? Or that those who were but FOOLED
into an expectation of better things (and in that did
rejoyce through hope) be the onely marks for your ene∣mies
to shoot at; and such as were KNAVED into
into a Perpetration of worser things (and in that
they did Triumph and boast) be the very Quivers of
those Arrows that are shot at them? As soon as the
first sort saw the snare, they escaped it, with the loss of
Liberty, Estate and Livelihood, a many of them; but
the last sort saw it, kept it, and became their enemies
that did it not. The first sort were more in simplici∣ty,
and (as they intended) upon the account of the
Cause (the Reasons and Grounds in the Declaration An.
1653. pretended, were for the better carrying on of the
Cause, and a more absolute weaning the people from Monar∣chy,
and for successive Parliaments, &c.) but the last sort
in Subtlety and Design (a many of them) upon the
account of themselves, Places & Profits. The first sort
did sink but like Peter, and as their feet slipp'd, their
hands held fast upon Christ; but the last sort sunk
rather like Pharaoh, having no principle to bear them
up, and nothing to hold fast by: (only this we see by
it) that a man may sink and rise! and sink and rise
again! and yet be recovered at the last.) The first
were WITHOUT, blinded with Words, and knew
nothing but what was openly pretended; the LAST
were WITHIN, even in their Cabals, and might ea∣sily

guess at what they secretly intended. The first
did but stumble; but the last did fall, and lie in their
filth. It is a Good horse that never stumbles, but it is
a Bad one that ever does; and that will wallow in it
too! To stumble once, is a common fault; but twice,
(at one Stone too) is a special one! and therefore (we
humbly think) that the first ought not so to be explo∣ded,
if the last ought so to be applauded and prefer∣red.
The Orator said (Natura me Clementem fecit,
Respub. severum; sed neque Natura neque Respubl. me
Crudelem efficiet) Nature hath made me MILDE, the
Commonwealth hath made me SEVERE; but nei∣ther
one nor the other shall make me CRUEL to
any man: and the Preacher says, Eccles. 5. 8. If
thou seest violent perverting of justice in a Province, mar∣vel
not at the matter: For he that is HIGHER then the
HIGHEST regardeth, and is HIGHER then THEY.
For my own part, I need no Apology in the matter,
who was possest with amazement at the rashness of
the Action. I was so far from irritating or abetting
it (as some would suggest) that I never mention'd
or imagin'd it; or (to my knowledge) heard it of
any other, till it was performed: And then was so
unsatisfied with it (of which eminent Persons are
my Witnesses) as might free me both from the suspi∣tion
and the sin of it. Besides, it is in print to the
World (and was then in Press!) for Posterity to see,
my opinion of them that were reputed Active in it
Vide my Irenic. E∣vang. Epist to Church, p. 7.. Yet when that interruption had so candid an
Interpretation, by Good People (who were over-credu∣lous
and ignorant of the Design) I did write to the
(then) GENERAL, and my fourth Propos. was,
hisce Verbis, word for word, That those who were righ∣teous,

and spirited for this Government of the WORTHIES
of the late (i.e. this) Parliament, that are without just
exception, may be Owned with Honour, i.e. Return'd a∣gain
to their Trust. And these Proposials are the
worst that can be said of me by any man, wherein I
meant, as much as I mentioned, very honourably of
them, as of our WORTHIES. But if that satisfie
not, I shall presume with the words of a Scottish
EARL Leviston (in his Oration to the then Lord
Chancellor, ex Georg. Buchan. Rer. Scotic. lib. 11. &
Junii 27. adhort. p. 151.) Non me HONORE Spoliatum,
sed ONERE levatum existimo; Privatim si quam accepi
injuriam, eam Publicae Salutis Causa libenter Condono:
Si quam feci, Bonorum Virorum Arbitratu satisfaciam,
&c. I account not my self rob'd of Honour in your
late DEBATE, nor exempt of Reason in any former
REBATE (being arm'd with so much innocency
that I can heartily say,) If I have privately received any
Wrong, I can freely remit it for the Publick's sake; but if
I have done Any either to the PUBLICK or to PRIVATE,
I (as heartily) refer it to the Arbitrement of Good men,
and I will make satisfaction, if I can, for it.
Neither expect I any thanks, to be an Advocate for
others; but to prevent the injustice of squaring your
Affairs and their Affections by so fallible a RULE
as that is. The Angel's Golden Reed is the Golden Rule
to measure the Inward by; but the outward (Rev. 11.
1, 2.) may be measured by the best Reason of man
(rightly fix't for judgement) and then I need not
shew the danger of Breaking Bones too often in one
place, lest they fester, and Rot, and come to Ruine,
as well as put to pain the Whole Body. But to con∣clude,

I see you like Men in the Dark, up at MID∣NIGHT,
in a confused State; ready to Knock
your Heads at every Post, and to break your Legs at
every Block! and therefore hope by this Collision
of flints to strike a spark of fire; and if I find my match,
I shall light a Candle at the least. Which will be
some comfort to me in my WAY, if it be no help to
you in your WORK: and seeing I am not Worthy
to live in my own Nation, I am glad that you are so
worthy as to send me into Another. I would say, with
Chrysostome, Well, the Earth is the Lords! and the fulness
thereof! ET NIL NISI PECCATUM TIMEO! yea, I
would answer too with Aristotle, when asked why he
left Athens, ,
because I would not have the Athenians to sin
TWICE against Philo-sophy; nor would I that our
Honourable Worthies should run the SECOND
TIME upon the (same) ROCK, or Danger of
Ruine.
My poor Prayers and Tears to my God for you
have been, are, and will be, That with Wisdom and
Grace (like a Burning-Glass, which gathers All Beams
into ONE) you may be both HEAT and LIGHT
to your selves and us; Discovering the dark De∣signs
and Retrenchments of all your Enemies, Reco∣vering
the Light and florid intendments of all your
friends to serve the PUBLICK with. And, O that
JEHOVAH! would honour you, as Instru∣ments!
and Columns of his immortal Praise! in
raising up the Plant of Renown in this Nation! and
making it to flourish in your Days! by the Pouring
out a fresh Horn of Oyl upon the Heads of his Magi∣strates

and Ministers of the Gospel, so as may make us
his HEPHZIBAH and his BEULAH in this I∣sland;
and GREAT be the Day of his JEZREEL!
Amen, Amen.
From my House in Alders∣gate-street 14. of the 5. Month
(called July) 1659. in the 1.
Year of our second Delive∣rance
or Return to the Liberty
of a Free-State.

