


Deare Friends,
I Know this Booke in Answer to Master Denne, was expected a yeare agoe, and it hath beene almost so long finished: But I have beene hindred, by the great di∣stractions of the times: And my sickly and crazy body, besides other deepe sorrowes which since have befalne me; As the parting with a Sonne of no small hopes; And the death of my truely religious and tender-hear∣ted Mother: of whom I may say, as Saint Augustin of his Mother, Confess. lib. 1. cap. 11. Et conturbata mater carnis meae, quoni∣am & sempiternam salutem meam charius parturiebat: She suffe∣red sorer pangs that I might be borne againe, then She did at my first Birth; when in sorrow she brought me forth into the world: Witnesse her last dying words; which at her last farewell, at the point of her death, she did with deare affection expresse, looking upon me stedfastly, and say∣ing: O Sonne, take heed how thou sinnest against God at any time: And I may truly say of her as the same Father speaketh in the first of his Confessions: An dicam vitam mortalem, an mor∣tem vitalem, nescio? Whether her whole life, was a dying life, or a living death, I cannot tell: but this I can tell (to my hearts griefe) her gray haires were brought downe with sorrow to the grave. Thus you see my hinderances, yet at last, (Post varios casus, post tot discri∣mina rerum) I have here presented my answer to the Printed Sermon: And that I undertake this worke, is not out of hatred to the man, but love to the truth, and to your soules: let me advise you in our Saviours
words, to take heed what you heare: and be not tossed to and fro with every winde of Doctrine. He gives his booke this Title: The Do∣ctrine of John Baptist. And yet every one may see, he doth through∣out his Sermon Preach downe Johns Doctrine; as if of purpose he did intend to confute it: Take heed of woolves in Sheepes clothing. Aul. Gellius, lib. 2. Noct. Attic. reports, that the habit of Philosophers was once had in great esteeme: and it hapned that a man infamous, cloa∣thed himselfe in the habit of a Philosopher, and this man asking a gift at the hands of Herodes Atticus one of the Consuls for the Common∣wealth of Athens; he questioned him who he was: but he with indig∣nation answered him he was a Philosopher, he might know him by his habit: to whom the Consul replyed, I see (sayes he) the face and cloath∣ing of a Philosopher, but no Philosopher: I apply this to this Sermon. Here is Christ pretended, and Christianity, but Faith, and Repentance, and Charity cryed downe, which are the inside of a Christian: And men may pretend the Preaching of Free Grace, and Christ, and this may make a faire shew: but unlesse you see Faith working by love and repentance, you cannot see a Christian, but an Antichristian. I am glad I have this love-token to leave with you, whom I alwayes did, and ever shall wish well: I had, while I lived with you a trembling care for your Soules good: And I can speake it with a safe conscience: I never wil∣lingly grieved any in the Towne. If from some I had hatred for my good will: I leave all to God, who in time will lay every mans sinne at his owne doore: I desire it may be in mercy to their Soules. At my remove from you some imbittered Spirits did invenom their tongues against me; (and yet would appeare to the world as Angels of light) at whose hands I have deserved better: I may take up the Prophets com∣plaint; They said, Let us smite him with the tongue, and then we will regard none of his words: And it is the Devils policy to raise an evill report against our persons: that so he might take away the power of our Ministery from the hearts of men that are our hearers; but I thank God, who hath wrought otherwise in the hearts of most of my peo∣ple with whom now I live, whom I desire to be followers of me, so far forth as I am a follower of Christ: I speake not out of pride, or singula∣rity, in regard of my selfe: I thanke God I have learned quietly to passe by evill report: but in respect of my Minstery, Let my accusers be brought to my face: if I cannot make a Christian answer, to what any man can lay to my charge, then let me be blamed: I can truely say I have cove∣ted
no mans Silver, Gold, or Apparell. And God knowes my heart, my care hath beene more to inrich my selfe with inward abilities for my place, than to get outward ability by my place: I ever tooke more care for the state of my peoples soules, than for my outward estate: And now Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the Word of his Grace, which is able to build you up; and to give you an inheritance among all them which are sanctifyed: And thus I rest

St. John Zacharies, London, from my Study August. 24. 1643.
