



MY LORD;
IT is not for any worth, performed on my part, that I have taken the  or boldness here to prefix your name; but rather from the subject mat∣ter of this ensuing Discourse, it being an Exposition of the mystery of the two Witnesses: wherein we have a description of their persons and prophesie, their time and actions, their death and resurrection, toge∣ther with the consequences

that follow thereupon: all which I humbly conceive, may be very suitable for you, As well for the greatnesse of your place and imployment, as it's necessary to be retained in your knowledge and judg∣ment. Therefore in the first place, I present this to your Excellency, as unto a choise & faithfull witness of the Lord; and after, to all those that give forth their testimony for the truth and authority of Christ; against the falshood and usur∣pation of Antichrist.
It's most certain, as the A∣postle doth affirme, that Anti∣christ shall be destroyed by the brightnesse of Christ's coming:

which is no other, then his coming forth in the bright beames, and glorious rayes of divine light, shining forth in his people. The Saints of the most High, by the testimony they give forth, are the rod of his mouth, and the breath of his lips; Whereby he will bruise his enemies, and breake them in pieces. Thus the true Spirit of Christ in the Saints, shall darken and dry up that coun∣terseit and corrupt Spirit of Antichrist, that is abroad in the world. But not withstand∣ing, the power and authority of the Beast shall be dissipated and broken, (as it were) vi & armis. And hence it is, that

in these times, the Lord hath appeared among us, as a migh∣ty man of warre, clothed with his zeale, as with a garment: and hath indued his people, with such masculine vertue & strength, that their hornes have been as iron, and their hoofs as brasse, whereby they have threshed the Mountaines, and the hills as Chaffe. And this they have not done by power or might, but by the Spirit of the Lord. It was the glorious appearance of GOD in the midst of his people, that hath subdued these three Nations. Now though Dutch, Dane, and French should combine against us, yet shall the arme

of the LORD awake for his people, and shall as in former dayes, cut Rachah, and wound the Dragon; he shall dry up the sea, and the waters of the great deep. It's not an arme of flesh can doe this, but a divine presence with an Army, with whom are the hearts, affecti∣ons, prayers, and spirits of the Saints, with a sweet comply∣ance gathered up into, and going along with them. This causes the shout of king to be in the midst of us: though the king in his person be taken a∣way, yet the everlasting King lives, and shall take to himself his great power, and raigne.
It's a most undeniable truth,

that the sword hath been the originall of all kinds & forms of government in the world: it's the mother of all power, protection, and preservation. When any disturbance doth a∣rise in a kingdome or Com∣mon-wealth, whither do they run? but unto a military pow∣er for succour and defence, as not being able to subsist, un∣till they do, as it were, resolve into their first principles, And though the sword in it's selfe be a dark and sad dispensati∣on, eating flesh, and drinking bloud, it's proper worke be∣ing to wast and destroy; yet when tis accompanied with wisdom, righteousness, good∣ness,

and justice; it becom good and desireable.
My Lord, I have but three words more to speake. The first is of you. The second to you. The third for you.
That of you is, That the Lord hath so far honor'd you, as to make you an instrument of glorious atchievements: and hath made you head of your brethren, and hath given you a name with the great ones of the earth: but above all, he hath bestowed on you the spi∣rit of his Son, which makes you most acceptable to him∣selfe, and precious in the eyes of his people. It's a true say∣ing, Honor est in potestate hono∣


heart, and make it suitable to your worke, & that your will may be drawn forth to the extent of the divine will, that your soule may have a true sympathy with God, that your heart may be fortified against all stormes without, & feares within; and that you may cast down your wisdome, valour, honour & succeste at the feet of Christ; so shall you take all up againe with unspeakeable advantage. What ever you ex∣pend sor Christ, in Christ you shall finde it againe. Now that you may enjoy all in Christ, & spend all for him, is the de∣sire of him, who shall indeavor to be in all faithfulnesse,

