


Good Sir,
THe Roman O∣rator tells us, Quod exemplo fit, jure fieri pu∣tamus; There are few Writers (humane or Di∣vine) but they entitle their Labours, intended for Publique, to some particular Person whom they make choyce of, ei∣ther to Pattonize their Persons and Works, (in which Case Wisdome di∣rects
them to some Lear∣ned Mecoenas, one of high Place, and eminent Parts and Power; who is able to shelter them from the malice of car∣ping Momus); Or to testifie thankfulnesse, for some special benefit re∣ceived: (and in that Case discretion guides them to pitch their thoughts on some singular Benefa∣ctor). The Community of the Act, may plead an Immunity for my Acti∣on, in going the com∣mon road of Writters. Yet I close not with those who crave Pro∣tection; there is no need of that: for if it be Truth that I Preach and Print, it is God's, and needs no other Protector: If it be Error, all the Powers under Heaven are unable to support it: That I aim principally at, in my Dedications, is, The Testification of a thank∣ful heart, to those, from whom I have received undeserved kindnesse; And in the number of those, should I forget you, I should forget my self.

To you Sir, I am many wayes obliged, for your a∣bundant favours, & fruits of love, really expressed, e∣ven then, when it pleased God most to darken my outward Estate. For three years space I most comfortably enjoyed my Ministery, (through Gods goodness and Yours,) in that Parish where you now Dwell; all which time, I found your house to be both to me and mine, as the house of Onesiphorus was to Paul, a house of great refresh∣ment;2 Tim. 1.16. The shadow of your Trees was to me, as Jonah his Gourd was to him,Jon. 4. very comfortable; but it pleased God to prepare a worme (what worme I will not say, but it went under the notion of an unknown Friend) which did smite my Gourd, and so gnaw the Stalk of my Shrowd, that it soon withered, to my grief.
I, wanting those means (whereby the World doth usually testifie their thankfullnesse to their Benefactors) desire by this outward evidence, to
give evidence to the World, of the inward disposition of my heart, in presenting to you, and sending forth under your name, this Fruitlesse Figg-Tree: The Title pro∣miseth little, yet, I hope under the Leaves thereof you will find some Fruit that will please your Religious palate.
I cannot doubt, but that, as you were a Reli∣gious Hearer of some∣thing of mine, that hath formerly past the Presse, (which, in transitu, as it was passing by, you cal∣led in, and gave it friend∣ly entertainment), so you will be a profitable Rea∣der of this, and give it House-room and Heart-room; and seeing it comes unto you, under your own name, it will be a welcome Guest unto you. And my poor Pray∣ers shall accompany it, and follow you:

The Lord so assist you with his Grace, that by this, and all other good means, you may grow from Grace to Grace; that so perfecting your Sanctifi∣cation in the fear of God, you may be made per∣fect in every good work, to do his will; working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. Thus prayes he, who is

Dodding-Hurst, Novemb. 1. 1659.
