


Dearly beleved Friends and Brethren in the Bord,
IT is now almost nine years compleat since it pleased. God by a speciall hand of Providence to cast me upon this place, where I found most of you, and where some of you (that came hither since) found me: Many changes there have been in this our British world, since my first coming hither, under all which (I bless God) I have been, am no Changling: My constant care hath been from time to time, to shew my self a faithfull Watchman over the Souls committed to my Charge, and a faith∣full Witness for Jesus Christ, against those cursed Errours, and other sinfull abominations, whereby his glorious Name was dishonoured, and the pretious souls of his people were indangered. My rejoycing hath been and is the testimony of my conscience, &c. 2 Cor. 1.12. and yet my Prayer with Nehemiah, Neh. 13.22. my complaint the same with the Evangelicall Pro∣phets, Isa. 6.3. and my present confession it is, 1 Cor. 2.3. I cannot confidently say, I know, &c. Act. 20.29. but
truly, truly, my dear Friends, I much fear it, and I have but too much cause for my fears: this I know by sad experience, that while I have been with you, grievous Wolves have come among you; yea, and a∣mongst your selves have rien up men speaking per∣verse things, to draw disciples after them: I cannot but fear that , The Antichrist, may succeed , Many Antichrists, (as in his first rise, so) in his resurrection amongst you; and what my fears are con∣cerning all the Churches of Christ, not only through this other world, but through the whole Protestant world, if the removing of the , That which lets, do not make way for the Resurrection, as well as the rise of Artichrist, my conjectures fail me; and if the loose Doctrine of unconscionable Liberty of Consci∣ence, prove not a back door to let in Antichrist, Reve∣rend Mr Cotton was deceived, and so am I also; yet (with that transcendent Magazine of Learning and Pi∣ety, Dr Usher) I am of opinion that the prevalency of Antichrist will not be so much in a way of fraudulent seduction, as in a way of violent and bloudy persecu∣tion: The measure of Babylons sins will be made up in bloud, before her finall ruine, and just with God it should be so, his Churches deserve it; but wo be to the man by whom they are betraied, and wo, wo, wo to Babylon, her fatall downfall is at hand; when the Antichristian Gentiles or Nations are angry, the time of the Lords wrath comes, Revel. 11.18. and after the Everlasting Gospel hath been again openly preached, and the downfall of Babylon clearly published, wo to all wretched Apostates that comply with Antichrist: You may reade their dreadfull doom, Revel. 14, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Arm your selves with the patience of Saints, that keep the Commandments of God, and the Faith of Jesus, as
it follows, ver. 12. minde and meditate on what is added, ver. 13. For my part, I have often by word of mouth, warned you, and now I am in a manner necessitated to write unto you concerning them that seduce you: It is not long since I did publiquely, face to face, appear against one of them, many of you being present, and hearing with your own ears what passed between us; little did I then think of appearing in Print against him, having brought the Mole above ground, and gotten him to appear naked in his own shape, I supposed the least of the Flock, the weakest Christian would be sufficiently Antidoted and armed against him able enough to deal with him; yet since he hath told such a tale for himself as he hath done in Print, wherein he impudently lies, both against me and the truth, I am perswaded to think it necessary (in some respect) though not to give a for∣mall Answer, to one that is Copiofissimè delirans (as St Au∣gustine speaks of a Maniche) yet to draw up some true Narrative concerning this Seducer, and what indeed passed between my self and him; that not only you, but others also may the better judge between him and me, and that my testimony for the Truth may be as pub∣lique, as his hath been against it; Accordingly I have drawn up the following Narrative, wherein my Con∣science doth witness with me, I have represented the truth, and nothing but the truth, whatsoever the ad∣versary, or any of his impure fraternity may grunt or bark against it: I can appeal to many of your con∣sciences also for whatsoever I have written concern∣ing matter of Fact, and for Judgement, let all that are Godly, Wise and Judicious, judge of it. I have yo∣ked a pair of Seducers together, that I might not white two wals with one brush (as the Proverb is) but, that with one coal I might set a true mark on two white
Devils, whose most specious Opinions and Doctrines are as black as hell it self. I shall therefore crave leave to present you with the ensuing Narrative, and with my Judgement of the parties concerned in it: and thus commend you to God, and to the Word of his Grace, I conclude what at present I have to say, with the advice and doxology which you shall finde, Jude v. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. and so take my leave, Resting,

