



Good Mrs. Roberts,
THere is no Mo∣nument so la∣sting,2 Tim. 1.5. to perpe∣tuate the memory of godly Parents, and make them to survive after Death, as is the godlinesse of the Child: Solomon brings in the Children of the Vertuous Woman, spreading of her praise; They arise up, and call her Blessed, Prov. 31.28. which is not to be restrai∣ned
to a Verbal praise, gi∣ven by Children to Parents whilst they live, (for that may proceed (as many times it doth) from self-love and flattery); but it is principally to be under∣stood, of an Actuall and Real praising of her, both Living and Dead): which is done; when those shining vertues of Modesty and Humility, and other Gra∣ces that were in the Parent, appear in the Child, and proclaimes the Piety and care of the Mother in their Education.
Your Mother,Mrs. Pert. (now with God) was a Godly and Re∣ligious Matron, (whom, for her more then ordinary en∣dowments, both of Nature and Grace, I honoured whilst she lived, and can∣not but gladly make men∣tion of, being Dead); She had alwayes a great care of her Childrens Religious bringing up;John, Epist. 3. and her joy was greater to hear, and see, that they walked in the Truth, then that they en∣joyed fair Estates, and large Possessions in this World. I need not em∣balme her, being Dead with my Report, who li∣ving,
was so well reported of by all that truly knew her, and the grace of God that was in her; and now being dead, yet liveth in the godly Conversation of her Children (both Sons and Daughters) who ma∣nifest the fruit of their re∣ligious Education, by such a Conversation as becom∣eth godlinesse.
Should I speak of those excellent Parts that God hath bin pleased to endow you withall, your Modesty would not like it, and those that are not well acquain∣ted with you, would think I flatter, (but that is be∣neath my Calling, and above my Skill). This I may truly say (without flattery), that God hath enriched you with that which is more precious then Gold, A true and lively Faith, accompanied with the grace of Know∣ledge, the Government of Temperance, the Orna∣ment of a meek and quiet Spirit, the support of Patience, the Splendor of Humility; so that whilst you live, your Mother is not dead: and albeit, God hath not given you a fruit∣full
Womb, yet he hath blest you with a fruitfull Heart; insomuch, as that which the Prophet speaks, may in a good sense be ap∣plyed unto you: The De∣solate shall have more Children then the marry∣ed.Isa. 54.1.
To my self in Particu∣lar,2 King. 4.10. you have bin like that godly Shunamite to Eli∣sha; you have joyned as a Partner with your Hus∣band, in his love and bounty, providing Light and Lodging, House-room and Frying, and other ne∣cessaries fitting for an Eli∣sha: and therefore I make bold to joyn you with him in this Dedication, cra∣ving the like acceptance from you as from him. And I shall put up this prayer to Heaven, both for you and for him:

The Lord so assist you with his Grace, that by this, and all other good means, you may grow from Grace to Grace; that so perfecting your Sanctifi∣cation in the fear of God, you may be made per∣fect in every good work, to do his will; working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. Thus prayes he, who is

Dodding-Hurst, Novemb. 1. 1659.
