




Worthy Sir,
FEw Writers but are ambitious of some high and honourable Patro∣nage for their Labours; their Inscriptions run thus To the Right Honoura∣ble, —and, My ever Ho∣noured Lord—.And who so reades their Epistles De¦dicatory, woud think, that St. Paul was out, when he said, Not many mighty, not many noble are called.1 Cor. 1.26. And that the most part of the great Ones of the Wor were such Religious and worthy Patriots, as that no∣thing more could be desi∣red,
when as an unbias'd man that well knows their persons cannot read (as one truly saith) their gross flatteries without blush∣ing:Robins. Essay, Obs. 42. This one style of Honoured and deserving Friend, countervails all the other (in my Judgment). I am sure that a Friend which sticketh closer then a Brother,Prov. 1.24. sounds better in my Ears, and hath yielded a sweeter refreshing to my bowels,Prov. 27.9 then Honoured Lord. And with that style at this time (and that without flattery) I make bold to salute you.
Your friendly favours I may not bury, in a kind of tacite acknowledgment; but I must needs acquaint the World with a part of them. Under God, you were the principal meanes of obtaining my liberty for the exercising of my Ministerial Function (and that in such a time when it was thought scarce feise∣able) you labour'd it, you engaged your friends in it and were at cost about it and (at length) effected it to my great comfort and content; who having ser∣ved my Lord and Master
six full Prentiships in the works of the Gospel, could not but be much troubled now in my old Age, to be turned out of my service, and have my Indentures torn before Death brought me my Freedom; which I daily expect, wanting but few of those years,Psal. 90.10. which David allows in common account to the age of Man.
This being done, yet you had not done; but were pleased (having the power in your hand) to remove me from that place where I was, from which (I must confess) I was drawn with much unwillingness) and present me to a Living then vacant, and in your power to dispose of, where (with the general desire, and good liking of the people) as yet I am: And shall desire (seeing God by his good Providence hath so dispo∣sed, and if He so see good) to keep my Stall, and there∣on to labour with the Bee, which,Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. 11. cap. 6. as the Natural Histo∣rian tells us, after Beans do blossome, works hard and loseth not a day, nor plays one whit, if the Weather hinder not. I have not been altogether idle in my youn∣ger
time, no nor in a tem∣pestuous season (to the glo∣ry of God, who hath enabled me, I speak it) albeit I see great cause, now that my Almond-tree doth bloom, and the Weather serves,Eccles. 12.5. to double my diligence, that my last works may be more then the first.Rev. 2.19.
As a Monument of my thankfulness to you, whose obligations are thus strong upon me for these great fa∣vours, I presume to Dedi∣cate this poor part of my Labours; and do further promise to be your Solici∣tour unto
