



SIR,
IT was the grave ad∣vice of St. Hierom to his friend Rusti∣cus;Hierom. ad Rustic. Ep. 39. Ne ad scriben∣dum citò prosilias, & levi ducaris insania. If I have seemingly transgressed the Rule of the Ancient, and this Citò be obje∣cted and laid to my charge, as an ar∣gument of over-much lightness; I suppose, they that know me in part, will readily become (though not my
Advocates, yet) my Compurgators. And that number of yeers with a surplusage, which exempted and dis∣charged the Levites under the Law from the burden of their Office; will be thought a sufficient warrant, so far forth as concerneth the Age of the Publisher, to license the Sermon to the Press. As for the Sermon it self, the Subject matter of it is spent in the Discovery of the Dis∣ease of the Latter Dayes: A disease so much the more dangerous, by how much it is the more common and Epi∣demical.
It is observed of our blessed Savi∣our, upon his first entrance into his publick Office, Matth. 4.23. And Jesus went about all Galilee, tea∣ching in their Synagogues, and preaching the Gospel of the King∣dome;
and healing all manner of sickness, and all manner of disease among the People. And I have herein followed, after a sort, Christs example, and in my first essay in this kind, attempted the Cure of that which is (causally and virtually) all manner of sickness, and all man∣ner of disease among the Peo∣ple; and that is, The not enduring Sound Doctrine. That the Remedy is accommodate to the Distemper of the present Times, I suppose will not be denyed. And I shall accompany and send it into the world, with this hearty and pithy prayer, Faxit Deus ut sit aeque commodum ac accom∣modum; God grant it may prove as profitable as it is truly seasonable. If the succinct handling, and cursory dispatch of the several parts be pre∣judged
and censured as a fault: Let such consider, That he who adven∣tures upon a long Journey, and is to call in at several places, must not pro∣tract the time, nor stay long in any. And as for my choyce in the Dedica∣tion, I shall make use of no other Apologie then that known Rule in the Civil Law;Regulae Juvis. Mancipato Patre, mancipantur & Liberi. I may add, Etiam & Libri, and the Truth is one and the same. The Father hath been long since bound unto you with the cords of a Man, with bands of Love, many real and liberal favours. And now this sorry Sermon. Clem. Alex. Lib. 1. Stron. as a Childe of the same Parent, becomes bound unto you. But I must not ex∣ceed the measure of an Epistle; and am therein cautioned by the Pen of a Heathen: The Letters of Friends
and Lovers must not be over-long, nor fill both Hands.
I have no more to say; But that next the glory of God, and the com∣mon Benefit of his Church, the pro∣priety and particular interest in this poor Piece, and Paper present, is wholly yours together with the Au∣thor,

