



Much Honoured Sirs,
HAving beene a sorrowfull observer of your Unworthy walking, both for∣merly and of late; And taking notice of Gods displeasure against you for it, so as not to be inhappied by a faithfull Admonisher, or Remembrancer of your sinner and dangers. I durst not, finding the Holy-Ghost bringing this to my remembrance, to become a Remembrancer to you, bee disobedient unto that Heavenly Vision, by consulting with flesh and blood.

Our blessed Saviour tells us, that in some cases, if men should prove stones and hold their peace, the stones should prove men and immediately cry out, Luke, 19.40. And truly did you but know me, as well as I doe my selfe, you would look upon mee as such a miraculous Monitor, One, the string of whose tongue is unloosed, that never spake in this kinde before. But not upon the sight of the murther of Craesus, but of the utmost crysis of dan∣ger, wherein you have involved your selves and the Kingdom.
Though the Sceane be altered, the Court turned into a Councell of Warre, and the Court Parasites vani∣shed away, yet am I jealous over you with a Godly jea∣lousie, that it is your great unhappinesse not to be so free from Flatterers and Flatteries as I could wish. But not knowing how to give flattering titles, least in so doing, my Maker should soone take me away. Iob. 32.22. I have declined in what I humbly present your Lordship, and your Councell of Warre in what follow∣eth (as your faithfull Remembrancer.) Not on∣ly those affirmative flatteries, which are too often soun∣ded in your eares by way of incouragement in this your pre∣sent undertaking; but also that Negative flattery, con∣sisting in the silencing, or extenuating the sinnes and miscarriages of those whom by the Law of Love we are bound to deale faithfully withall.

Your Lordship and Councell well know, that in For∣tifications that Engeneer is a Traytor that conceales or lessens a places weaknesse, and he is no lesse to be condem∣ned that shall with a negative flattery, conceale or exte∣nuate the sinnes and miscarriages of such persons, as may indanger the publique safety.
I have therefore, in the integrity and sincerity of my heart, for prevention of those miseries and calamities that are like to come upon your selves and the Kingdome, by your meanes, indeavoured by a sound conviction to make you sensible that there are in you, even in you, sinnes against the Lord your God, of which you are guilty, either actually, or accessarily, 2 Epist. John. 11. And because they are such as have beene committed in the sight of the Sunne, before all; therefore I have remembred and reproved you before all, that others may feare, 1 Timothie, 5.20. Wherein as I come not out against you, shod with indignation and scorn, being pleased to pour contempt vpon you, as you know who, (Sedg) nor yet with Lilburnian language, but with a spirit of meekenesse to restore you.
So doe I hope for, and earnestly desire your favou∣rable acceptance and candid interpretation, Beseeching your patience to read over, and ponder, what I have sincerely and seriously propounded for yours and the pub∣lique good, and your pardon for any un-intended fai∣lings
of mine in my expressions. And having by pray∣er put this blunt weapon into an Omnipotent hand, that can make it cut indeed: I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus, that bee would grant you according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with all might by the spirit in the inward man, that so you may conquer your present temptations, and be recovered out of Satans snare, into which he hath brought you by transform∣ing himselfe into an Angell of Light, even so prayeth, againe and againe.

