



RIGHT HONORABLE,
AS Jesus Christ the wonderful, theIsa. 9. 6. Counsellor, the mighty God driveth on his great State-design in the whole Earth, and now in these Kingdoms, to to save an afflicted people, to dye his Garments in the blood of his Enemies, and to

build the Tabernacle of God amongst men, and cause the wildernes blossome as a Rose, that theIsa. 35 1, 2. glory of Lebanon, and the excellency of Carmel and Sharon may in a spiritual manner be given to Zi∣on; So he still acteth in his own sphere of Righteousnes, and all inferior wheels in their revolutions move toward his most eminent end; for the Courtiers and Royal At∣tendantsPsal. 97. 1. of his Throne are Righteousnes and Judge∣ment. And he desireth that the motions and wayes of his people may be concentrick to his own heart, andVel luben∣tes, vel vi attracti de∣creta Dei se
quamur necesse est. move in the same Orb with himself; we must either walk, or be drawn to the end of Jesus Christ, his end cannot come down and comply with our policy. When men go with one head, and two faces, and two hearts, Providence can beguil them: we are then safe, and do sail at the Haven of the Sea when we walk with God, and our way draweth a straight line to the heart of Je∣sus Christ. These two Kingdoms have before them an end▪ the Covenant to be a people to God; this we did Swear with our Hands lifted up to the most High; the stones of the field shall witnes against us, and the Sword of the Lord avenge the quarrel of his Covenant, if we dally with the Lord, as if the Vow of God, that the Lord may be one, and his Name

one in both Kingdoms had been on us, when we were low only, and our Oath had a date only till the Year 1645. and then our Vow must exspire, as did the Law of shad∣dows, when the Body Jesus Christ came. As successe is a poor and waxy Kalender for Religion, so the low condition of our Kingdom, I hope, shall not move us to forsake the Lords cause, or to blame God, because good causes have sometimes sad events; for beside that Heathens said, that God cannot erre, because Ma∣rius ex culpâ gloriam reportavit, Marius was made glorious by ill-doing, and one hath a Crosse,Ille crucem sceleris pretium tulit, hic diadema. Iuven. Saty. 10. another a Kings Crown for a reward of wic∣kednesse, we know that God, however it be, is good to Israel. If that which was intended for Vnion, shall by mens wickednesse, turn to a sad Division between the Kingdoms, I shall believe, that the truly Godly of either Kingdoms, can scarce be capable of such bloody intentions, as shall leave a Legacy of perpetuated blood to the Posterity; and sure, though for the present guiltinesse, strength prevail, yet habent Deum ulto∣rem, men on Earth cannot long be strong against Ven∣geance from Heaven. As successe doth inebriate, so extremity of a low condition is a wicked Counsellor; and evil Iealousie, as Hell, thinketh alwayes evil. All whose

bowels are moved for the Desolation, Graves, multipli∣ed Widows and Orphans of both Kingdoms will not dare (Judgement from the Almighty being a terrour to them) to adde affliction to the people of God already afflicted. Blessed shall they be of the Lord, who medi∣ate for preventing of National ruptures, and for the continuance of the Brotherly Covenant. Christ Je∣sus is a uniting Saviour, one God, one Faith, one Lord Jesus, one Religion should be, and I beseech the God of Peace, they may be Chains of Gold to tie these tipo Nations and Churches together in uno tertio, that they may be concentered and united in one Lord Jesus. O that that precious Dew of Hermon, that showers of Love and Peace may lie all the night upon the Branches of the two Olive Trees, that the warm∣nesse, heat, and influence of one Sun of Righteousnesse with healing in his wings, may make the Lilly amongst the Thorns, the Rose of Sharon, that is planted by the Lord, the Spouse of Jesus Christ in both King∣doms to spred its Root, and cast its Smell, as green and flourishing to all the Nations round about. The Kingdom of God is Peace. The Lord is about a great work in Britain, why should Divisions that proceed from the lusts of men▪ and the enemies of the Lord re∣tard

the wheels of the Chariot of Christ? Let us not water the Lilly with blood again. The Sons of Babel have shed our blood in great abundance, for the which doth the Church of God in the three Kingdoms stand, and Pray and Prophecy in sackcloth. The violenceIer. 51. 35. done to me and to my flesh be upon Babylon, shall the Inhabitants of Zion say: And my blood upon the Woman arrayed in Purple and Scarlet, the Mother of Harlots and Abomina∣tionsRev 17. 3. 5. of the Earth, shall Ierusalem say. Happy we, if we could for the second Temple builded, and the Lord repairing the old waste places, and the GentilesIsa. 62. 1, 2▪ beholding the Righteousnesse of the Elder Sister the Church of the Jews, and both as a Crown of Glory in the hand of the Lord, and as a Royal Diadem in the hand of our God.
I shall not need, I hope, either of an Apology for In∣tituling this Piece, such as it is, (others can, and I hope will adde riper Animadversions to Erastus) to Your Ho∣nours Name, or of a word of incitement, that Your Lordship co-operate with Your serious Endeavours, for a right understanding between both Kingdoms, and for the carrying on the work of the right arm of the Lord,

the Lords creating of glory on every Assembly on Mount Zion, (for we are witnesses of Your Honours Travels for both) that glory may dwell in our Land.

