



Endeared Aunt,
I Have much desired an opportunity to express my thankful∣ness to you, for those real Kindnesses you have so long and often expressed to me; and though it lay not in my
Power to requite, yet I would not want Affection to acknowledge your love. It is an old obser∣vation, that they that do a good
 turn must instantly forget it, and they that receive it must constantly remember it; you have done the former; as for my self, I will not deny but my memory hath long been asleep, but I would now onely testifie (by this publique remembrance of my duty) that it is not dead. The Lord made you an instrument, though not of my natural, yet of my spiritual birth; you gave me not suck in∣deed from the Brest, but you fed me with the sincere milk of the Word, you first taught me the first rudiments of Christianity; not so much how to
spell the Name of God or Christ, as how to spel out the Name of
God in Christ. What cause have I to bless the Lord, that you instructed mee how to
beleeve, before I was temp∣ted to doubt? you knew that I came so full of
poison into the
 world, and therefore you could not too soon administer
physick, to expel it; you looked on Original sin (as like a common fire in a Town) in my soul, and you sear∣ched, not so much how it came, as how to
quench it; you did not prevent but prepare a way for the workings of the
Spirit. How hap∣py was I, that you did not (with some) judge it prejudicial to the
guidance of the Spirit to be indo∣ctrinated in a form of Divine Know∣ledge? I remember, I have read somewhere, that Luther, when he heard how that little children prayed against the Turk, said, In the name of the Lord let them go on; for as they want the knowledge of men, so they want the malice of men, and God may hear them. I must acknow∣ledge I lived long in the world be∣fore I knew what it was to
die to the world, and many years had
 the profession of Religion, before I was acquainted with the
expe∣rience; yet I bless God, even then when I had not Saving Grace for my own Salvation, that I had any Restraining Grace for the good of others. How did you pray for me, when I was not able to pray for my self? your heart was ten∣der, when mine was
hard; my prayers now are to the Lord, that though I yet carry a body of sin about me, and in my own sense have been often a sinking, that yet you would praise God with me, that a Nephew of so many prayers hath not perished indeed.
Your condition now calls for my counsel, but I will not under∣take to
teach my Teacher, onely humbly telling you, what once with delight you taught me out of that School of Wisdom, Pro. 3.11. Despise not the chastening of the Lord,
 neither be weary of his correcti∣on.
What though you have been cast down, will you conclude that you are cast away, when your God hath on purpose cast you down, that he might not cast you away? You know that Gods fish thrive best in salt waters; that the
Walnut-tree is most fruitful when it is most bea∣ten; that
David was never so tender as when he was hunted as a Partridge, and
Jonah never so watchful as when he was (alive in his Sepulchre) in the
Whales belly. It is true, you are Husband∣less, but yet not
Fatherless; my once dear Uncle is now singing out the praises of the Lamb in the new Jerusalem; the singleness and sin∣cerity of his Light, Love, and Life, did tell his acquaintance he was a Traveller thither; now you dare not
mourn because he rejoyceth;
 and can you mourn while he re∣joyceth? Oh! that you would rather consider what a comfort you once had, than what a com∣fort you now want; rather to meditate of your going to him, than grievingly to think of his going from you. My dear Aunt, let me use that phrase (that was spoken to a friend on such an occasion) You know well that you have need of his joy, but he hath no need of your tears. Your Husband was also your Brother, and if that maxim be true, that the union of Grace is stronger than the union of Nature, then I am per∣swaded, you mourn not so much for the loss of an Husband, as of a
Brother in Christ; yet though the stream be cut off, you have the Fountain. I would speak more of this, but I shall forbear, lest while I go about quite to
 extinguish, I should unawares re∣vive the grief; chew not this Pill, but swallow it whole; and it will not prove so bitter.
I beleeve you are more per∣plexed with the publick evils of Sion; But in this you may consi∣der, the Lord wounds that he may not kill, and overcasteth the face of his Church with a
cloud, that the Sun of Righteousness may at length shine out the more clearly; and that those storms and waves are happy that shall drive the Ark nigher to her Har∣bor. It is certain, All things shall work together for their good that love God. It is your happi∣ness, your comfort lies not in the lives of others, but in your own experience, that while others tack about after every wind of Doctrine, you still steer your course according to the compass
 of the Scriptures; that while some think it zeal to fall in
love with every fond opinion that pre∣sents it self on the Stage of the world, that you have chosen your Love, and love your choyce, in the Practice of Piety, mortification, and conformity unto God; That while others talk much of God, that your study is rather how to speak with God himself, than of God to others; That while they love to gaze on the Infir∣mities of others onely, that you love rather to weep over your own sins in your Closset, than to cry out against the sins of o∣thers in the Market place: but herein you know you are not ju∣stified, and I trust you would much rejoyce that you had something more you might account nothing for Christ.
Go on, dear Aunt; Put on
 the whole Armor of God, that when you have withstood you may
stand, and when you have stood it out on earth, you may sit down in a Throne in Glory. Perseve∣rance is the Crown of Grace, and Heaven is the Crown of Perseverance. You could not mourn (as the Martyr said) for the absence of the Bridegroom, if you did not belong to the Bride∣grooms Chamber. Ride on in Faith, though the way may be the dir∣tier the nigher you come to your journeys end; The Sun shines most amiably towards its
de∣scent; eye not the stream through which you wade, but the
firm Land to which you go; Look not on your Race so much as on your
Crown; your storms and Tempests, Doubts and Fears, as your Port and Harbor. Here is your Seed-time, hereafter is
 your Harvest; Here is your Hell of Difficulties and Deser∣tion, hereafter is your Heaven of Light and Peace.
You shall not alwaies climb with the Angel, but one day stand on the top of the
Ladder with the Lord; You shall not alwayes wrestle with Jacob, the
Day will ere long break, and then farewel hardness of Heart, and temptations to Despaire, and mourning for Sin, and doubt∣ing of Gods Love for ever. When you shall lodge in the Arms of your Physician, then no more complaint of your wounds; When you shall walk in white with a Crown on your head in Heaven, you shall not want the gracious company of an Husband, as a fellow Mem∣ber of Christ to comfort, or as a
Preacher to instruct you; There
 are no tears falling down the Spouses Cheeks in glory. Com∣fort your self with these things, that while you wait with Han∣nah for the
Consolation of Israel, you may at length (when death shall knock at your door, which cannot probably be long) by Faith, with old Simeon imbrace the King of Saints in your arms, singing his sweet and Swan-like Song, Now lettest thou thine Handmaid, O Lord, depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy Salva∣tion.
As for this Discourse of Jacobs wrestling (I here present you withall, as a Testimony of my Love and Obligation) I hope you wil see your face in it as in a Glass; not teaching you so much from mee, how you may be Israel prevailing with God, as to shew you how you have been
 as Jacob, a Wrestler with God. Accept of it my dear Aunt, and farewell in the Lord, in whom I subscribe

From my Study at Shoreditch,
Janu. 20. 1654:
