



IN obedience to your commands, I here publish the substance of what I presented before you at Mercers Chappel; otherwise I should have been willing to have lyen dormant, be∣ing exceeding consciencious of mine own weaknesse and insufficiency,. for though I cannot deny (but must confess to the praise of the Lords super abundant grace) that something of the light and glory of the Gospel in the face of Jesus Christ, hath dawned upon my darke heart; yet this I know, that the candle of the Lord cannot burn with a more dim light then in my self, for although truth (in some measure) liveth in me, yet clouds and darkenesse are round about it: So that I have but little of the spirit in abundance of infirmity of the flesh, yet truth is powerful though I be weake, and the glory of it doth out-shine all o∣ther glories, though in the meanest instrument: There∣fore if any of the glory of Christ breake forth in this dis∣course,1 Cor. 1.28. let him have the glory who hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the mighty.

Honourable Senatours, God hath made you instruments to make this City a quiet habitation for his people, and to lay a restraint on those that would molest and vex them: we take it kindly,Math. 25.40. yea Jesus Christ doth take it kindly at your hands, that you will allow his Saints, to have a place to rest their heads on under your Jurisdiction: we wish you well in the name of the Lord, and our God continue your hearts, in this love unto his Peculiar inheritance, for you must be comforted by the spirit of Christ in all your sorrows and counselled by it in all your streights,John 14.26. and assisted by it in all the difficult affaires of the Sate, therefore you do well to indulge love and tender that spirit though in those who are very contemptible in the eye of the world,1 Cor. 1.28. Rom. 13.1. and not to hearken to such who would have the powers that are of God engaged against God. Honourable Senatours: God hath called you unto places of eminencie, & committed a great people to your charge, and truly you need more then the wisedome of Man to manage such a trust.
But he who called Peter forth to walk upon the waters (saying come) gave him that power,Math. 14.29. 2 Cor. 12.10. whereby he was supported on the waters: therefore never fear to en∣gage for God,2 Cor. 1.5. Sicut abun∣dant passiones Christi, sic a∣. if ye have a call from God: for the more oppositions ye meet withall, the more encouragements, and divine assistances shall come from God, to carrie you through such difficulties and oppositions. You have had plen∣tifull experince hereof: for even to admiration God hath appeared for you, in the mount he hath been seen, and in the maidst of all these storms, you and your Relations have been under the protection of our Redeemer: yea the pre∣sence of God, hath stood round about your City, so that your enemies rock hath not been as your rock, themselves being witnesses. Oh how are ye engaged to the God of
your salvation, who hath not given you victories to make your selves great,Isaiah 58.6. Psal. 144 14 Isa iah 58.12. or to exalt your own interest by them: but to exalt his name, in removing every heavie burden and letting the oppressed goe free, that there might be no complaining in your streets. Then you shall be stiled the Repairers of our breaches, the Restorers of the paths to dwel in, and the blessings of many,difficilima quae pulchra. who are ready to perish would come upon you. I know (noble Sanatours) that in the prosecution of truth, justice, and righteousnesse,Si Deus no∣biscum quis longa nos. 1 Pet 4. ult you will meet with many adversaries: yet who can harme you while God stands by you to keep all your bones? Oh both in doing, and suffering commit your selves, your bodies and souls to him, as unto a faithfull preserver:Psal. 23. Exoe 33, 14. Oh Remember how the glorious presence of the Lord of hosts hath gone along with your Armies step by step: that through Europe you have been famous for the presence of God a∣mongst you; therefore fear nothing, but the withdraw ment of that blessed presence: for while it doth continue with you,Joshewa 2.9. you will be formidable to all the Nations round about you, and the Majestie of heaven with you, and for you, will attract and draw forth the envie, and indignation of the Nations against you: (who are very angry, and their wrath is come) but Sanctifie the Lord in your hearts,Revel. 11.18. Psal. 3.6. Rom. 8. and make him your fear: and then you may bid defiance to them, and the worst that they can do; for though ye had Nations, Kings, and Kingdomes, for your adver∣saries, yet God would establish you:Esay. 54. vers. 14. John. 10.29. for the Lion of the tribe of Juda, who doth defend, and save us, is stronger then the roaring Lion, who seeketh to devour us: In your povertie, and weaknesse,Exodus. 14.13. your eies have seen the sal∣vation of God: Oh therefore do not decline, and Bauke, the cause of Christ, and his people, if itshould be low,
and desperate (in humane probabilities) you would ut∣terly lose your glory, and become so weake, impotent, and contemptible, if you should desert the power of God, and seeke to fortifie your selves, with the arm of flesh: that all humane dependencies should not support you. Straglers are taken by the enemy, when those souldiers that follow their Captains, & stand to their Colers, are safe. Look up to Jesus, the Author & finisher of your faith,Heb: 17.1. Heb. 2. Ephes. 6.14. keep close to the Captain of your Salvation. Buckle on your harnesse, gird the sword of the spirit about your loines, and take unto you the Helmet of salvation, and the brestplate of righteousnesse, and follow him,Rvel. 19.13. who sitteth upon a white horse, cloathed in a vesture dipt in the blood of his sufferings, (whose name is the word of God) and ye will say that there is no glory, like unto this glory: for it will continue with you, when all other glorie shall be over-shadowed, and out-shined. Thus (desiring pardon for my boldnesse) I commit and commend ye all, your City, families, friends, and Re∣lations, to the grace, and goodnesse, of our Redeemer.

