



My Friends,
IF ever there were an hour of tentation, it is surely at this day, when so few follow Christ, when so many stand still, and most go
backward: When those that once would not have been hired to neglect a
duty, now think it their duty not to pray at all; When those that have tasted much sweetness in Gospel-Truths, should now cry out (as those in∣grateful Israelites of old) what, have we nothing but this Manna? that have suffered much reproach for Christ, should at present in their lives, be a
reproach to
 Christ; that formerly avoided the ap∣pearance of evil, and now condemn those as ignorant of their liberty, who are a∣fraid of prophaneness; that those that seemed to mortifie the flesh should now after all their
Profession and visible re∣pentance, even deny the resurrection of the flesh. Our Nazarites were purer than the Snow, whiter than
Milk in their Profession, for their heavenly zeal more
ruddy than Rubies; and as for their Conversations they were not on∣ly
Saphires, but polished Saphires, the very carved workmanship (to us) of the Spirit, shining and sparkling in every angle and corner of their lives, with
Wisdom, Patience, Holiness, and Sin∣cerity. But O Lord! How is their
vi∣sage blacker than a coal? How do those that of old were brought up in Scarlet, and did wear Christ (like the Courtiers of Heaven) in their
conver∣sations, imbrace the stinking Dung∣hills of the Pleasures and
Profits of this world? thy Professors that were even marked out for thy Glory among men, and concerning whom, not long since it was familiarly said, There goes a Saint,
 there walks an Heir of salvation, now are not known in the streets, that there is little difference between a Profes∣sor and an Apostate, between a
Pro∣fessor and a prophane man nay, between a Professor and a
persecutor. It is in this age too remarkable, that some Professors of the Gospel, are the great if not the greatest hindrances of the profession of the Gospel.
How plainly doth the Providence of God comment on that Text, The first shall be last, and the last shall be first? What loud alarms by the falls of those that once seemed to stand, doth God make in your ears that stand, to take heed lest you fall? In the seventh of Matthew, the foolish build as well as the wise, the difference lay not in their Buildings, but in their Foundations, the one built on the Sands, the other on the Rock: The house of the foolish builder might possibly glister as glori∣ously when the Sun shone, as the house of the wise builder, and have as many Stories, and as great Window-lights; but all that glisters is not gold, though all that is gold doth glister. It is not
 he that professeth, but he that possesseth Christ is
happy; not he that is a gi∣ded, but he that is a golden Christian, in this brazen and iron age. The lord is a coming, not so much with a pair of Scales to weigh, as with a Touch∣stone to trie the truth and sincerity of your Graces. Jerusalem is a lighting with candles; Providence will light up candles in France, in Holland, in Den∣mark, and though now it seem mid∣night with us, yet ere many glasses of Providence are run out, I am perswa∣ded it will be Candlemas day in Eng∣land. Now most care, not to be living Saints, so they may but be imbalmed with a name to live, and covered over (as a dead corps) with Roses, and Lil∣lies, and
Flowers of a Profession; care not to have Religion at their fingers ends (ad unguem) to be indeed Chri∣stians, or Christians indeed, so they may but have Religion at their tongues end, and talk of the Spirit, the
Gospel, the new Jerusalem. But how shortly will many that want the
Power and Life, wish they had not the Form and vizard of Grace; and cease to appear
 to be what they really are not; the paint of Pro∣fession will neither indure the water or the Sun. How monstrous is it, that our Tongues should be bigger than our hands?
For these twelve years our Lord Jesus hath been burying the Designs of his more publique Ad∣versaries under ground, now God is coming to Jerusalem to purge his gold, to prune his Vine. Professors, look within you, and look about you; Ah Lord! what blushing will there ere long be in
England? when thou wilt wash off the paint of our
profession, and that thy followers shall wear their hearts in their faces? How much better will a dram of grace be, than a
talent of gifts? when as the greater our lights and Links of Knowledge are, the more unawares we discover our dark∣ness. If we cannot endure the Spirit going up and down with a Candle and Lanthorn to search our hearts, how can we abide the day of
Christs com∣ing, and stand when that Sun of Righteousness shall appear,
for he is like Refiners fire, and like Fullers soape? Justice, Humility, Mortification, Re∣pentance, though now they be but poor and low things with man, yet when the
Judge shall take the Bench more visibly, how high will they be with God? Sincerity, though it be a silent Grace at this time, and dwels in obscurity, ere long I hope will carry the day, and bear away the bell.
 Though we sin at a greater rate, yet we cannot sin at so cheap a rate as our Fore-fathers; it were better that God did forthwith lay down his Basket, and take up his Ax, than that we should be further unfruitfull; better that God should remove his Candlestick (which he can do without breaking it) and say to us sinners, if you will play, play in the dark; if you will break Vows and Covenants, break them in the dark, &c. than suffer us to sin against
Gospel-light. For his silence increases our guilt. The Almighty is more displeased with sin than ever, his hand is as just to revenge, and his
eies are (q d.) wider to espie it.
There are some that having assurance that Christ reigns in their
Consciences, desire the in∣largement of his Kingdom, long to see
the Crown of Glory shine on his head, and his Subjects to multiply in the world: And notwithstanding the many false Pretenders to that Noble Interest, yet there are some Followers of the Lamb indeed, that follow him not for his Fleece but for his blood, who having past the work of Regeneration hum∣bly, and patiently deire to do the work of their
Generation, and probably the reckoning of Sion is wel nigh at an end, and the Glass of Antichrist almost run, and certainly the King of
Sion shall be as publique in his glory, as ever he was in his shame; his Deriders little considering, that while
 they willingly add to his shame, they really, though
unwilling, add to his glory, for as he was not crucified in a corner, but at Jerusalem, the eye and center of the world, so he shall de∣scend from Heaven in Majesty with shouts, riding on the Clouds, as in his
Charriot, atten∣ded by millions of Angels, and Saints, his roy∣al Favorites, all eies beholding of him, and every knee bowing to him, Jude 14, 15.
Woe be to the great ones of this world then, when Pilat that sat on the
Bench, shall stand at the Bar; and our Lord Jesus that once stood at the
Bar shall sit on the Bench (when we shall see not Persons but
Causes heard) the Judges being judged, and the judged being
Judges; when Emperors and Kings shall be brought not in
Chains of Gold about their necks, but in Fetters of Iron about their
heels; When the Peers, and Powers, and Potentates of the World shall hold down their heads, and hold up their hands, and cry guilty; When most of all the Mighty, and all the almost All mighty of the Earth that have disrobed Christ of his Title, and robbed him of his
honor, shall be led up and down this Court, (q.d.) as Tam∣berlain led
Bajaret in an iron Cage, (through Asia) to be gazed on, and
howted at by all the Saints, Psal. 149.6 7, 8 9. 1 Cor.
.2.)
 as the Prisoners of the Law, and Prizes of Ju∣stice; what then will become of all those Poli∣ticians that make Covenants in Conscience, and break Covenants out of necessity? That like children stand on the earth with their heads, and boldly shake their heels towards Hea∣ven? That set up the Kingdom of Christ no faster than they can rear their own King∣doms? of all those that had rather themselves should reign in a corner, than that our Lord and Master should rule in the whole World? Never thinking, how those Crowns that now sit light on their Heads, will ere long lye heavy on their Consciences. For God though he suspends the execution, yet he hath not al∣tered the method of his Justice on such of∣fenders. It is a maxim of the Law, Right sometimes sleeps, but it never dies. The re∣conciling Sion and Babylon, Pride, Oppression, the intollerable tolleration of all kinds of Re∣ligions, Bribery and Intemperancy, are now acted on another Stage, by other persons, but they are the same sins, (aliena scena eadem fabula) if that Headship that flattering Pre∣lates in former ages took from Jesus Christ, be yet taken from Christ, and given to men in the Nations, if Christs Crown be pulled off his head, no matter whose head it warm
 in the world, Mal. 3.15. Mal. 4.1. And as for this Nation in special, my prayers to the Lord are, that Holiness may not onely have a tolle∣ration but an Authority amongst us, against Licenciousness both of
Judgement and Con∣versation, that the Rulers of England may not say, The time is not come that the Lords house should be built, but rather hear God say, is it time for you, O ye, to dwell in your sciled houses, and this house lie waste? Hag. 1. That they would expeditiously do the work of this age. Because, to every purpose there is a time and judgement, therefore the misery of man is great upon him, Eccles. 8. That our Officers may not onely be Peace, but that our Exactors Righteousness, that we may be made an eternal excellency, and the joy of many Generations, Isa. 60. That saying in your hearts, the Inhabitants of Jerusalem shall be our strength in the Lord of Hosts; they may be like an Hearth of fire among the wood, and like a Torch of fire in a sheaf, devouring Sions enemies round about on the right hand, and on the left. Zech. 12.
For shame therefore let Virgins arise, and either get oyle, or cast away their Lamps. Security makes you uncapable both of
 seeing your reward, or doing your work.
First, Think not because you can properly be but once regenerated, that you need but once to repent. Converted David (q d.) must repent of his Adultery before he be saved; Repentance is not onely as life to the dead, but as
salve to the wounded sinner; Repentance is as the Vowels in the Alphabet, which we have not onely need of to spell with while we are Babes, but to read with all when we are men in Christ, Mortification and Humility are not
accidents or things by the by, but of the very substance, the very Materials and Pil∣lars of the New Jerusalem. The Gospell it self, I suspect will, ere long, be but an old Almanack to them, to whom Repentance and confessing of, and mourning over sin is now (upon what glorious pretences soever) out of date.
Secondly, Plead for Opinions as Opinions, and for Graces as for
Graces. I fear those that plead for disputable Opinions, as infallible Truths, will ere long hold vital and indispu∣table Truths, as conformity to the Gospel, sincere Faith in, and repentance towards Christ, but as failable and fallible Opinions; This is intollerable folly, to see men
slaves to
 Opinions and Masters over Graces, if the Lord extinguish not this fond zeal, the carnal world hence forward will take advantage to think that Religion lies onely in thinking and conceiving, and in the next age conclude they are not to seek Religion in their Bibles, but in the brains of men. O Lord! How many are true to false Principles, and false to true Principles; and will rather die
Martyrs for Error, than bow as Servants to Truth. These are some of them that have been over wise (in their own eyes) and yet as the
wiseman speaks have not known the way to the City, that call this or that way, Christ, and not Christ, the way; that set up an Image in their own
Opini∣ons, and censure all the world as Idolaters that will not do
homage to it, proclaiming sub∣jection with Lutes and Cymbals of peace, and though on the first entertainment of such Opi∣nions men have had a calmness in their Consci∣ences, yet afterwards have found themselves burning in a Furnace of discontents and doubts, as then remembring that neither this or that O∣pinion availed any thing to peace in Christ, but a new creature.
Thirdly, While you cry out against the old Superstition, beware of being tainted with the
 new disease of this age, not the plague of the guts, but of the
heart; not the Rickets in the head, but the pride of life, alias
Hypocrisie, ali∣as apparent Prophaneness. Fly as far from
Li∣centiousness as you do from the formality of Rome. Woe be to the
profession of Religion if your Profession should stand or fall to the ver∣dict of the world. Oh! let not those whom you must one day
judge, justly judge you now. Some possibly may say, The world are dogs, and their mouths must be stopped; Christ is a mystery, our
principles are above their cog∣nizance, they are not competent Judges of our conversations. I answer, We must then endeavor to silence them as much in our
lives, as they condemn us with their lips; otherwise pretence of assurance and participation of the Divine creature will make them abhor profession as a meer design, and say, Lo, there is so much difference between that Religion that is in our Bibles, and that which is in your Conversati∣ons, that we profess either you are not Evange∣lical, or this is not Gospel. Take heed of
putting out the eyes of Conscience, and then to make apology for your
blindness; Conscience is Gods Vice-gerent, but it is not our Law-giver; Con∣science is out guide, but the Word is our way,
 and there is no excuse in following our Guide out of our way,
Fourthly, Call not that poyson which is your Milk, and strike not those Breasts which once you stroaked; say not the preaching down of sin is the preaching up of the Law. Trample not those Ambassadors under your feet, who have rejoyced to carry your souls in their arms to Christ; have not low thoughts of them, that have low thoughts of themselves and high thoughts of Christ; that care not though they be account∣ed nothing (who yet are something in your eyes) that Christ, who is little esteemed in the world, may be All in All. But if the Bridemen be despised, oh that the Bridegroom might the more be honored: Oh that that love which is denied to the Servants, might abundantly be given to their Master. I confess it were better for some to have an hundred a year to be silent, they so instead of preaching Christ crucified, crucifie Christ in preaching, they so wound and kill Religion in the Pulpit where they should give it life. While you endeavor their down∣fall, forget not to pray for their conversion, Paul was a
Saul. Let not therefore your vertue be only in speaking against the Vices of others. It is an easie matter to trample on those that are on the ground already.
Fifthly, Take heed of the Corinthian disease, I am for Paul, no, I am for Apollo, no, I am for Christ, as if we might not love
Christ, and Paul, and Apollo too; In the primitive times, they (as in the Acts) kept together in single∣ness of heart, and there was no controversie at all amongst them, one copy adds; but oh that those now that have but one Head had but one heart. It is sad to consider, how that the nigher any come to an
agreement in matters of Religion, and yet differ in some things, that the greater should be their difference; as there is a greater difference between the Protestant, and Papist, than between the Protestant and the
Jew; was it not so in Germany, is it not so in England, between those that are called Inde∣pendents and Presbyterians? Oh that we did consider, that though Paul and Peter be in Heaven, yet that there are neither Paulians
nor Petrians in Heaven, that Christ is not a Calvenist in the Calvinists, or a Lutheran in the Lutherans, but in those that are Christians amongst both, All in All. God must scourge this folly from us; his children are a wrangling, and we may expect that either he should sepa∣rate, or correct us. O Lord! if mans Apostate were thy Apostate, and mans Heretick thy
 Heretick, and mans Reprobate, always thy Reprobate, Election to Eternal life would prove but a Fable, and all the world would be
damned. We are so censorious of others, of∣ten, and that but in things
disputable, possibly, in many things indifferent, as if Heaven and
Hell did hang at our Girdles, as if those were in a damnable estate whom our passions con∣demn, and those onely saved indeed, that have our (good) opinion or word. The yoke of Christ which he said was easie, may it justly be made heavier by the Governors of the Church, nay, by private partial Christians in after ages? The Apostles profess, They revealed to the Church the whole Counsel of God, keeping back nothing needful for our Salvation; what tyranny is it then to impose any new, certainly doubtful matters on the Faith of Christians, (especially as some Popelings daily do) under that Cananding form. He that beleeves not shall be damned. In the Apostles time, or a little after (as is judged)
There were twelve Articles of the Creed, but now we have more Creeds than they had Articles; so many men so many minds, nay, so many opinions (which yet are far from the life of Christ) so many Faiths, and though our Lord Jesus saith, he
 that beleeves in him shall be saved, we now cannot be saved but by beleeving more, and as the world continues, so we increase in our Beleef, and upon this giddy accompt poor ignorant, de∣stracted sinners know not when they shall be∣leeve enough to salvation. But when our Re∣deemer shall appear, he will not prefer one
Opi∣nion and reject another, so much as prefer all the upright, and reject all the Hypocrites, he be∣ing not the Lord of Opinions but of Souls, not one
sheep that hath his mark shall be left out of his Fold, nor one Child that bears his image shall either be kept or thrust out of his Family; now, they are Faith and Love, Singleness and sincerity of heart.
Sixthly, Remember that the Ordinances of Christ are not his Grave, wherein he lies, but the Throne whereon he sits as King of his Church. That you shall never be above Ordi∣nances untill you are above tentations; and that they lose not their Authority, because some∣times we miss their Influence; and that they are appointed not onely to bring men into, but also to bring men up in Christ.
The Bible is not the Word of God, because it is imprinted in the hearts of men, but because it was written by the inspiration and finger of God. These are
 Breasts though sometimes we cannot suck, or milk out consolation from them;
for otherwise, every time we have new affections, there should be a new Gospell, and in the end there should be as many distinct Bibles, as there are new Experiences in the world. It is true, they are the Conduit-Pipes, and we have no comfort from them unless Christ convey his blood through them: Yet shall they be nothing (in respect of Gods Authority) because they (quo∣ad hic & nunc) do nothing upon us? The Ordinances are dead creatures onely to those that are
dead in their Consciences, and are not alive in Christ. The
Ordinances cannot work without the Spirit, and the Spirit (ordinarily) will not work without the Ordinances. Where∣fore Christians prefer not the
Letter before the Spirit, neither oppose the Spirit to the
Letter (as the manner of some is) lest in the end you prove neither for the
Letter nor the Spirit, but the Flesh. As ever you would be comforted by, take heed of scoffing at the Spirit. Quench not the Spirit in your selves, grieve it not in others.
Seventhly, Let us take heed of Lukewarm∣ness; Let us not spend that time in examining the Lamps of others, while we neglect to get oyl into our own
Vessels. Christians, look about you! you live in an infectious Air, therefore
 take cordials; where ever he hath a poyson, have you an
Antidote; take down the antidote of Humility, against the poyson of Pride; of Sin∣cerity, against Hypocrisie; of Zeal, against
A∣postacy. It is easier to keep sin out of the consci∣ence, than to
cast it out when in. The Devil is a fiery Serpent, and if he can but get in his
head, he will get in his whole body, and if he do not, yet the sting is in his head. How many virgin Pro∣fessors have lost their spiritual chastity in an hour, that they have been procuring many years? and that dear peace of Conscience in a moment, that they have not imbraced again till eternity? But alas! while we should give
cordials to others, we faint our selves; we should awaken others, and we sleep our selves; we should uphold others, and we fall our selves; we should help to revive others, and we are dead. Many that have time to reprove and ad∣vise others, have not hearts, many that have hearts, have not time, their own hearts are so out of frame and tune. Like dying men we take hold of one another, and we love to perish in company. But Christians,
Arise, and prepare for the coming of your Master, for as it is certain, so it will be sudden. If it were the last hour in Pauls time, sure now it is the last minute of that last hour. Oh Lord!
 never was the Judge nigher to come▪ and never less preparation for his coming. Christians, have we not Closets to mourn in, or rather do not we want hearts to mourn with all? Hath Christ cast his Cloak of love over you▪ and said,
live, and will you not pitty those that yet lie as it were dead in their blood? if you have any Know∣ledge, advise; any Faith, pray; any Zeal, en∣deavor; any
Wisdom, soberly wait; for the co∣ming of the Lord draws nigh. How can Christ wipe tears from our eyes, if we never wept for his absence? or come to answer our prayers, if we never pray for his coming. Awake, awake, the night is far spent; arise, the Day star is risen in the world, we have slept too long already; Endeavor that when the
Father comes, he may not find you, like Prodigals, out of his house; that when the Captain of your Salvation comes, he may not find you in the
Trenches of the De∣vil, or of the World, a Lying, a Swearing, a bea∣ting your fellow Brethren, for even to these mon∣strous sins our natures are inclineable. Pray, Pray, That when the Judge comes, who is even at the door, that you may not have your
Ac∣counts to be cast up, when they are to be given up; Judge your selves that you may not be judged. The noise and news of the
Bridegrooms approach is at hand; Awake, arise, go ye out to
 meet him. If these following Discourses may any way advantage you in your spiritual Watch against the Devil, they are yours, read them in love, apply them to experience, let them not swim in your heads, but sink into your hearts; And in your prayers to the
Throne of Grace, let him have a room, who subscribes himself in our Lord Jesus,

