



Dread Soveraign, and Europ's highly qualified Prince,
YOu have set a whole Nation in an extasie, yea the whole earth in amazement;
Nescio qua praeter solitum dulcedine laeti.Virg. 1. Georg. Nay the very heavens do seem to rejoice, and to joyn in the trance.
Exhilarant ipsos gaudia nostra Deo.Martial. Oh! what evil Angel drove you out of the Land? Oh! What good Angel hath brought you again into the
 Land? It is said of Socrates, that he had a Phaenomenon attended him whithersoever he went; and doubtlesse some good Spirit waited upon you in all your Pilgrim∣age, or else we had never seen your face again. Had you not dwelt between the shoulders of God, how many were there that would have shouldered you to death? this was no ordinary preservation, no,
—Homer. Oh how many dangers have you escaped? how many plots have you prevented? it is an admiration to see Incoluniem Pallanta, Virg. 8. Aeneid. a Prince so way-laid safe, and se∣cure.
Struxerit insidias notus feritate Lycaon,Ovid. 1. Met. Your cruel, bloud-thirsty Lycaon (known farre and nigh for his savagenesse) wanted not his treacheries and stratagems for you in all Countries, and corners; that base, ignoble Merchant, would have bought your Roy∣al head at the price of Millions; one of his Factours you happily met with, and sent him out of the world with his due guerdon,
Hic laqueo fauces, elisaque guttura fregit.Luc. 1. Phars. A goodly spectacle, let all those which aspire to touch a Princes head, leave their heads upon such a gibbet. This was the deliverance, but how great was the dan∣ger? bitter it was to endure, joyful it is to remember. All these hazards considered, was it not as great an ad∣miration to see your Majesties exile changed into such a state of exaltation, as to see Agrippa's iron chain turn∣ed into a golden chain? Ioseph. Antiq. l. 19 c. 5. Oh that you which were ex∣pelled out of the Land, should have the happinesse to vi∣sit your Native Countrey, even expiring, and in a mo∣ment to restore it to life; Pausan. in Messen. as Conon dreamt, that he lay
 with his dead Mother, and she thereupon presently revi∣ved. Your stay was tedious, your return was transport∣ing. Was ever Prince entertained with more solemni∣ty? and welcomed home with more triumph? the shores shouted, the high wayes chaunted, the hills ec∣choed, the streets were Theaters of joy; and have we not the fruit of this melody, and bringing in a King with honour? yes, how peaceably do we live? how glo∣riously do you reign? there hath been a festival ever since.
Mollia securae peragebant otia gentes.Ovid. 1. Met. Oh that we could see Gods face shining upon us in your Royal presence! and with clear eyes look upon you as the man of Gods right hand. Doubtlesse this was one of the mysteries of Divine providence, and one of the chiefest of the wayes of God. There doth want no∣thing for the perfecting this blessing, but thankfulnesse to God, and obedience to his known Laws. Who would not praise God for such a mercy? who would not serve God for such a Prince? Oh that we could prize you, as our felicity in you is prizelesse! Oh that we could ho∣nour God, as he honoured us by you, making us in the sight of the world his special Favourites! But I am a∣fraid that all this will be but a blast, and end in a lip-strain. Ten may be cleansed, but where are the nine? Nothing is more short-lived, then the sense of a recovery. Our maladies are even healed, and we begin to forget our cure; we scarcely magnifie our God, or value our King. What is the price of a good God? what is a true King worth? cloth of silver, chains of gold, ringing of bells, blowing of Trumpets, roaring of Ordnance, kindling of bonefires, a panegyrical Oration, a thanksgiving-Ser∣mon.
 Is not here all out pomp? our chiefest devoti∣on? what mortifying of corruptions, cleansing of con∣sciences, vows of reformation, fruits of obedience are there to be seen amongst us, more then formerly? no, we were affected onely for a time, or holy for a season; some are again at their old frolicks, and some at their old Politicks. We are satiated both with our God, and our King. Never well without our King, and never the better when we have him. There are men, that will not forbear a cursed oath, a bowsing bowl, a cheat in the shop, a bribe in the Court, a seditious design, a factious meeting, to make the reign of such a King peaceable, or the life of such a King safe; they must either be Kings themselves, or else no King doth please them. So that this high favour from heaven, is like to be but an ominous trial, an imminent and impending judgement. For how can God be but angry, if we be offended at our peace, or kick at his blessing? we ha∣zard our welfare, and jeopard our King. Oh that we can forget our distractions before this settlement! and our despairing condition before God opened this door of hope in the land! with what sobbes, and tears, would we have bought this calm, and comfortable state, which we do now enjoy? Before your Majesty came amongst us we were a sick Nation, visited with Many Princes; and this Kings-evil nothing could have healed but the touch of your own Royal hand. By the blessing of God, and your Majesties happy appearance, the Many Princes are turned into One. And is not this a change, a cure to be magnified and admired? yes, if we had either sense of mercy, or conscience of duty left in us, we would never sinne again, but dread as much to be guilty, as mis∣erable.
 For we know, that it was the transgression of the Land, that brought in the Many Princes, and will not we cast away our transgressions to cast out, and keep out such Princes? were they once so odious, and are they now again become so precious? else why do we set open the right broad gates to give them entrance? is there any readier passage for them to break in amongst us, then by your old corruptions? If we would preserve the Man of understanding and knowledge, can there be a surer means of prevention of misery, then by taking the right Antidote against Transgression? For can Trans∣gression be prolonged, and the State prolonged? no, Con∣traries do expel each other. If the distemper be conti∣nued, the disease may renew. Our incorrigible sins may endanger your Majesties Royal person, and shed your Royal bloud. I do not fear so much the Malecontents at home, or the Machivilians abroad, as these Miscreants of impiety, and impenitency. Some call their selves your Majesties good Subjects, & some your best Subjects, I would they would try their degrees of comparison by a superiority of repentance. Repentance? what should we repent of? Some think onely of carnal sins, but carnal sins, are onely greater for turpitude, and infamy; Tho. Aq. 12 q. 72. art. but spi∣ritual sins are the most hainous for deordination, and ir∣regularity, and that in respect of subject, object, and mo∣tive. Well, both the black and the white Devil had need to be dispossessed. Your Majesty therefore did wisely to publish your pious Proclamation to call home all to a reli∣gious life; I call it a pious Proclamation, because if men had listened to it, they might have been made not onely happy, but holy under you. A divine sentence was in the lips of the King, when that was sent through the
 whole Nation; it is a rare thing to hear a King upon the Throne to teach all the Kingdome virtue, such a King may be sirnamed Ecclesiastes, such a motion is able to sanctifie a Land; especially, when it is not onely man∣datory, but exemplary, edged with as much piety as au∣thority; whereby all your people might ascribe to you your attributes of Gratious Soveraign, and Sacred Ma∣jesty. Your Majesty have done your part, freed your own soul, and endeavoured to cleanse ours. But I be∣seech you (my dear and dread Soveraign) what opera∣tion have you found by that Masterpiece of your go∣vernment? how many Royal Converts have you to re∣joyce in? If you have, I will say that Majesty doth car∣ry some Soveraignty with it, and that your Crown is not more glorious, then your Scepter awfull; you are then a potent King, and have true loyal Subjects; then all Nations will flock hither more to see your virtue, your efficacious virtue, then ever they did to hear the wisdome of Solomon, and say that here do dwell the people of ho∣linesse, and that you do reign in a Kindome of Saints; which is not onely your proper Territory, but your pro∣per Sanctuary, a Temple which you have consecrated by your own graces; yea then as Cyprus was once called , the happy Island, Knolles Turk. hist. so we shall be called , the religious Island. Doth your Majesty find by experience that your physick hath wrought? and that your Patient hath voided his ill humours? is your Court purged? is your Land cleansed? hath the Goddammee-Blade filed his blaspheming tongue? hath the riotous Carowser left drowning himself upon dry land? hath Felix given over his groping for bribes? hath Shebah laid down his trumpet? have the Monichangers pulled down their Tables? what
 are all rough places made plain? and crooked things made streight? Who hath heard such a thing? who hath seen such things? shall the earth be brought forth in one day? or a Nation be born at once? Es. 66.8. Oh rege∣nerating King then! Oh converting Proclamation! If men be thus really renewed, it is pity that they should be reproached with any of their former errours, for none but a sordid spirit will gather up that filth which repen∣tance hath washed away: When the bond is cancelled, the former debts are no more to be required, the re∣formed man is no more to be called a scandalous person, for then what comfort should any man have in his change? or in striking the mortifying nail into his brest? it is as great a sin to censure a Penitent, as to flatter a Li∣bertine. Repentance doth give the exequies to all for∣mer crimes; mortified crimes are to be buried, aswell as dead corpses. There are none but Necromancers, which will call up the spirits of the deceased to work their Ma∣gicall ends withall; there are none but ravenous dogs, which will satisfie their greedy appetites with such Car∣rion: for what can God, or man, require more of the greatest Sinner, then reformation. Were it unpriestly, unchristian, unmanly in me, to call any man Rebel who is become a Loyal Subject? or him an Heretick, or Schismatick, who is, turned Orthodox in doctrine, and discipline? then how ungodly and inhumane is it in any to call them profane, who have decla∣red themselves Converts? Mary Magdalen, Peter, and Paul, would never have been, called Saints by these spiritual Murtherers of reformation; but repentance hath so rinsed a Penitent, that he is never after to be cal∣led filthy; Pnitentia revocat omnes de∣fectus, resti∣tuendo ho∣minem in pristinam gratiam. Dignitas amissa per peccatum restauratur per poeni∣tentiam, Aquin. 3. q. 9. art. 3. for it is an expulsion of all former defects, and a
 restitution into a state of grace. The dignity that was lost by sin, is restored by repentance. If your Majesty therefore doth meet with such, esteem them, and embrace them, prize them, and prefer them, they are the lustres of your Nation, and the Supporters of your Throne. But I doubt, that your Majesty upon due search, can find few of these Proclamation-men; they may read and magni∣fie, but not loath and cleanse. That Witch of Religi∣on (I am afraid) did more good with his redhot iron, then you can do with your Imperial Edict. They which make a foul shew in the flesh, and they which make a fair shew in the flesh, they whose course is wholly sinne, and they whose cause is wholly sinne, antiquum obtinent. Now are these likely to fortifie your Title? or to esta∣blish your greatnesse? no, God send you better Cham∣pions, three righteous Saints were better then Myriads of such Heroes; they may have the brawny arms of Giants, but they have no good sinews; their sins will never suffer them to fight with a conquering hand. If they will not expresse their selves truely vertuous, how do they reverence your person? or cordially desire your preservation? no, they do but live under you to confirm their interests, and in effect care not whether you live or die, prosper or perish; if they did, they would shun those transgressions, which they know will cause the bloud-draught of Princes. If they will not wash, I will go to the Laver my self, and endeavour to cleanse my self, and as many as I can, that there may be a race of your Proclamation-births to guard your Royal Person in all exigents. Thus beseeching your Sacred Majesty to cast your benign Princely eye upon these unpolished Sermons, which are principally intended to second your
 Proclamation, blessing God Almighty that he hath re∣stored you to your Kingdome, and humbly imploring, that the State thereof may be prolonged, submissively I take leave, and rest

Waltham Abbey.
