




Right Honorable and graciously-accomplish'd Lady:
MArriage is an image of heaven, for the celesti∣al state is compared to espousals: This myste∣ry is great, Ephes. 5.32. because union of hearts in wedlock doth much resemble the glorious uni∣on. Then you have had in this kind the heaven upon earth, as much as Marriage can afford it you; for the dear, and entire, mutual and reciprocal love which passed between you and your noble Bridegroom was so eminent, that it seemed not onely to be affection, but passion: it was ex∣pressed to admiration, and it might be presented to the world for imitation. But all earthly comforts have their stints and limits. They that rejoyce must be as if they rejoyced not, 1 Cor. 7.30. There is nothing here so transcendent, but it is transitory; the sweetest fruit doth corrupt, the brightest gemms do lose their lustre; that which doth most delight us doth leave us with an heart-gripe, we must turn away our eyes from our most enamouring objects with a storm of tears. So hath it happened to Your Honour; He which lay nearest to Your heart it taken out of Your bosom, and the want of him hath caused You to be a true mourner. Thus heavenly providence doth order all things con∣cerning our temporary comforts; he will have nothing here per∣manent, that we might rely upon him which is unchangeable: it is not the wedding-ring that can endow any with lasting felicity, constant joy is not to be found in the Bride-bed; they are not our embraces that can keep fast our desired delights, nor our eager
eyes that can fix a face long for us to look upon: No, death doth pluck many a dear pledge out of our hands, and extinguish many a lamp when it is shining before us with the greatest brightness: This moth doth fret in pieces our costliest robes, this thunderbolt doth cleave asunder our most admired monuments; there is no armour of proof against this dart; when this blow is given, ada∣mantine chains break; when death doth give the knock there is no keeping within doors, when death doth come with the ground-spade, who must not be buried under ground? we had need not to fancy any thing too much, for the best is but a perishing delight; we had need to provide something that is immortal, for e∣very thing that we do here enjoy is mortall. The wisest head at last will be but a deaths-skull, and the kindest husband, we may at last take him up in an handful of dust, or go lye by him in a bed of clay. Death doth but smile when we do call any thing here our own, and deride us that we laugh in that face which with a stroke can be made pale and grisly. Your Honour therefore hath done well to furnish Your self with that which might comfort You beyond Nature, and give You engagements when all the pri∣vileges of Nature do fail: and indeed. Godliness is profitable to all things, and hath the promises of this life and of that which is to come, 1 Tim. 4.8. these are the great and precious pro∣mises, 2 Pet. 1.4. How would You have done if You had had nothing above this world to strengthen You against this trial? You did but a little (if You remember) leave Your self to Your self, and Your footsteps were well nigh gone; You did but con∣ceive Your Husband to be dead when he was not dead, and yield∣ing to Natures sad apprehensions, what a sad fit did it bring upon You? Your own life was in danger: but You no sooner left con∣sulting with flesh and bloud, and began to take up Religion to be Your director, but You were able with more patience and pru∣dence, moderation and Christian submission, to undergo what God in his high and over-ruling wisdom should appoint and deter∣mine: You could then speak to the honour of God, and conform to the will of God, saying, Why should You try masteries with God, when You knew that A sparrow doth not fall to the ground but by Gods appointment? So that (noble Lady) there is no light like to a beam of Gods Spirit, nor no counsellor like to a
sanctified heart: all the Preachers upon earth, all the Angels of heaven can hardly so well informe us as our own regenerate con∣sciences. They which fear not God fear all things; they which have learned God are taught against all exigents; therefore the fear of the Lord is the treasure, Es. 33.6. I know that it shall be well with them that fear the Lord, and do reverence be∣fore him, Eccles. 8.13. Natural perfections are a scant and fickle livelyhood, therefore the Saints fee-simple is free-grace; then have we something to rejoyce in and rely upon, when he in heaven, according to his godly power, hath given unto us all things that pertain unto life and godliness, 2 Pet. 1.3. This is the stock that is to be preferred before Rubies, yea of greater value than all the treasures of Aegypt. The Carbuncle of high birth is nothing like to the jewel of new-birth; all Academical Arts are nothing like to the eye-salve of the Spirit. There is a spirit in man, but the inspiration of the Almighty giveth un∣derstanding, Job 32.8. Here is the mind which hath under∣standing, Rev. 17.9. The most solid judgment is that where there is a quick understanding in the fear of the Lord, Es. 11.3. Through Christ I can do all things, saith the Apostle; but without Christ we can do nothing, or very little. The heart of the wicked is little worth: There is not such a faint-heart as an unregenerate person, he doth flee when none doth pursue, the least trial doth cause in him astonishment of heart; yea, the sound of a shaken leaf doth chase him, Lev. 26.37. he is like a silly Dove without heart, Hos. 7.11. We see it in Haman, who wanted nothing for outward pomp and potency, and yet the least check of neglect doth make all that he was worth a burthen, yea a very loathing to him, for, What doth all this availe me? And the like is to be seen in Achitophel, who had greatness enough, and pusillanimity, dastardlinesse enough, for being crossed he is quite confounded, his Counsel being but despised; he doth defie himself, and in an impatient humour doth ease his troubled heart with an halter: So that a meer worldling doth sink under all trials: But is a Saint no more magnanimous? yes, such an one can bear more weight then the shoulders of Sampson the puis∣sant; There is the invincible Spirit and the invulnerable brest. There is not such an Heroe upon Earth as a gracious Creature.
My grace is sufficient for thee, 2 Cor. 12.9. sufficient it is a∣gainst all the pressures of nature and buffets of Satan. Such nei∣ther fret nor faint at the saddest events. It is the Lord, let him do what seemeth him good, 1 Sam. 3.18. I became dumb and opened not my mouth because thou didst it. Psal. 39.9. Tri∣bulation doth bring forth patience, Rom. 5.3. I take pleasure in infirmities, reproches, necessities, 2 Cor. 12.10. O rare creatures that can make Miseries Medicins, Afflictions Affe∣ctions, Exigents Exercises, Ruthes Recreations, Distresses De∣lights! How can this thing be? by Gods power being made perfect through weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9. As the Apostle saith of himself, when I am weak then am I strong, v. 10. no Chymist can draw out such an Elixar; no, it is the secret of regeneration or the miracle of grace. And is it not (noble Lady) grace that hath perfected and preserved you in your trial? yes, nature made you look downward, and grace made you look upward; nature made you to stagger, and grace did stablish you; nature set you on weeping, and grace dried the tears on your cheeks; nature made you look mournfully on your dying and dead Lord, and grace made you patiently resign him up to your God. Grace is our re∣venew, remedy and refuge in all extremities; preserve your grace, and you are fitted for all future casualties, and that I trust shall never fail you; for as I know few of your Sex which do excell you in wisdom, so do I know none Superiour to you in grace. Gracious Lady, wait upon your gracious God, and he doth offer yet more grace, James 4.6. Yea, he is able to make all grace to abound towards you, that you having all-sufficiency in all things, may abound to every good work, 2 Cor. 9.8. for there is the unsearchable riches of his grace, Eph. 2.7. Well, be wanting in no grace, that you may count it your spiritual subsi∣stence; and say with the blessed Apostle, by the grace of God I am what I am; not I, but the grace of God which is with me, 1 Cor. 15.10. seems to be created to the praise of the glo∣ry of his grace, that you may be accepted in the beloved, Eph. 1.6. value this life no further then to have the grace of life, 1 Pet. 3.7. have grace whereby you may serve God accepta∣bly with Reverence and Godly fear, 12 Heb. 28. Let grace reign in your heart by righteousnesse unto eternall life, Rom.
5.21. The richest Jewel is the white stone, the most gorgeous habiliment is the wedding garment, to be the Elect Lady is bet∣ter then with Queen Cleopatra, to be able to drink a bowl-full of dissolved pearls; the Paragon of the Earth is she that hath the amiableness of vertue. Favour is deceitful, and beauty is vani∣ty, but a woman that feareth the Lord she shall be praised, Prov. 31.30. Dear and Illustrious Lady, I honour your Person, reverence your Perfections, rejoyce in your Affections, admire your Graces, prize your Exercises, magnifie your Fruits; for you do not onely profess Christ, but endeavour that the life of Christ might be made manifest in this mortal flesh; therefore I wish that that Christ which is the Consolation of Israel may be your Consolation, and that he which hath shed his blood for you, may shed his spirit into you to comfort you in the midst of your sorrows, and to strengthen you under all trials. I confess this is a very sad affliction, especially to quench so much love in a brest, when the heart was in a burning flame; and were it not for Gods irresistible will and your own Chistian obedience to his divine pleasure, I should not know how to settle your spirit, but you see from what hand the chastisement came; therefore, hear the rod and who hath appointed it, Mich. 6.9. you know whom you have be∣lieved, fix your heart upon that God, humbly yielding to the stroke, and in that God of recompences you may find this losse repaired, and perhaps a double blessing for this present sad acci∣dent. He is Shaddai, God all-sufficient. That God of patience and all consolation, strengthen and support you, and give you an ample supply of all necessary satisfactions; you can be no loser in your dependence upon God, for he can give you a firmer right then the nuptial interest, even an union and communion with himself; the band of the spirit is better then the bands of wedlock, and the joy of Gods chosen doth exceed the joyes of marriage. To comfort you throughly I should carry you up to heaven, and shew you that there is variety of comforts and blessings to counterpoise this loss; but I know your translated spirit, that you are ready there with∣out a conduct, and indeed you are fitter to be a leader then to make use of a guide. That heaven then, where your conversation, vows, hopes, tears, prayers, faith, fruits, contemplations are, satisfie you, that measure pressed down, shaken together, and running over
will be poured into your bosom, for humbling your self under the mighty hand of God. So long as you are upon earth I can comfort you up no otherwise, then by telling you and assuring you, that your noble Consort is still upon earth, though not in Person, yet in Memory; and for that end have I provided this impress. His li∣ving Image you much delighted in; my desire is, that you might still have a sight of him in this dead picture. For want of time it was but half drawn in the Pulpit, I now present it to you as I had pensilled it out by my self; stretch out your honourable hand to ac∣cept of the piece, and bear with the mean Artist. Thus with thanks for your first choice, and your firm affection, and all Terre∣strial and Celestial Benedictions wished to your Honour, submis∣sively I take leave, and rest

