



Right Honourable and admired Peer,
WHat is man, if but meer man? where grace doth not sanctifie, what is natural wis∣dome, but a subtil Cacodaemon? we may see it in this Synopsis of Davids troubles; what variety was there of strange prodi∣gious Wits? the Prototype was in Davids time, the Antitype hath been in our time. There was an Absalom that took up arms against his natural Father; and what have we had, but Absalom amongst us for these many years? Subjects (which are political Sons) ap∣pearing in an hostile manner against their natural Sove∣raign, the true Father of the Countrey? we have had the chariots & horsmen prepared, & men (persons of servile spirits, and complying dispositions) to run before the De∣signer; yea, the trumpets of sedition have been blown, and the popular perfidious cry hath been heard, Absalom reigneth in Hebron; and our Land hath been filled with as many Spies, Intelligencers, Face-triers, Speech-latch∣ers (the vermine of corrupt Commonwealths) as ever Is∣rael abounded with in Absaloms dayes. And as Absaloms rebellion began with glorious pretexts of religion, and
reformation, so have not we been sprinkled with the Rebels holy Water? what was there in this Nation for a great while, but paying of vows in Hebron, Lectures, Fasts, Self-denying Ordinances; and telling the people, that the Form of Government in this Nation was di∣stempered; but if any had a cause, or suit, and they would repair unto them, they would do them justice. Thus all the engines of execrable policy were set on work. And as in those dayes there was a Zibah that betrayed his dear Master Mphibosheth, so, have not we had many a Zibah? Yes, what have we had but infinite treacherous servants and supplanting neighbours; which, to gain the estates of renowned Noblemen, and worthy Patriots, have used all manner of undermining practises, and ble∣mishing informations? Si sat sit accusasse, quis erit inno∣cens? If a bare accusation be enough to make a man guil∣ty, who shall be innocent? yet a meer aspersion was e∣nough for a Sequestration; if this stratagem hath cost me three thousand pounds, how many Millions have there been drained, by these hellish contrivances, from many innocent and eminent men in this Land? And as there was a Shimei that cursed David, and had no better terms then bloody man, and Son of Belial, and telling him that the justice of heaven did pursue him, and that he was taken in his mischief; so have not we had as cur∣sing a generation? Yes, what was the spittle of many mens lips, but sirnames, and nicknames, Malignants, De∣linquents, limbs of Antichrist, hellish Fire brands; Cypri∣anus was called Caprianus, and Athanasius, Sathanasius? no scandalous names they thought were ignominious e∣nough to avile us, revile us, and reproach us to the peo∣ple, and this by men that professed the spirit of meekness, and knew that it was not lawfull to say unto a brother,
Racah; and did they not pronounce upon us, and say that we were taken in our mischief, judged from heaven, and that the hand of the Lord was lift up against us? Oh what adoe was there with the righteous cause! and of venge∣ance printed upon our brows by the stigmatizing finger of God Almighty. These were a people of high revela∣tions, and seemed to be Secretaries of State to the hid∣den Councils, and Decrees of the great God. That party carried it in that height, as if it had been Master of the Ordinance to the Lord of hosts, or been the very Coun∣cil of War in heaven, by authority to sentence poor Ma∣lignants (as they called us) to be shot to death: And as Ahithophel was the busie active man in that rebellion, so have not we had an abundance of Mercurial brains, and dangerous Craftmasters in this Insurrection, such as have advised Absalom to lye with his Fathers Concubines in the sight of all Israel; I mean, to counsel our State. Masters to do the most nesarious, detestable, abominable things, wch ever the Sun beheld? yea, to plunder; rifle, imprison, gibbet, to make their own countrymen Vagabonds at home, to sell them for Slaves beyond sea, to break in pieces the great Seal; nay, the Crowns, and Scepter, to rase Palaces, to demolish Castles, to set up Eunuch Parliaments, Her∣maphroditical Committees, Cyclopical High Courts of Iustice, to seiz upon Church-land, to expel the most reve∣rend Churchmen out of their just Cures; Oh how have we had Anabaptistical and Phanatick principles of State delivered, as the fundamental Laws of the Kingdome? these Ionadabs, these wily men, these Ahithophels, were accounted as the Oracles of God in those dayes? And did this rebellion go on onely with a State-vapour? or a daring bravado? no, as in Absaloms dayes, the battle was scattered over the face of the whole Countrey, and there fell twenty thousand men, and the wood of Ephraim de∣voured
more then the sword; so our treason, was it not a most satal and destructive attempt to the Na∣tion? how many pitched battels were there fought? what horrid slaughters were there committed, as if here, and elsewhere, there had been nothing but slaughterhouses to be seen? What corner hath not been sprinkled with bloud? how many mournful Families hath this war cau∣sed? we might justly be called Acheldamah. The losses of precious treasure is grievous, but the losse of mens precious lives is an astonishing, dismaying Spectacle. Now (my honourable good Lord) what shall the result of this hideous passage be, but to conclude with Samuel, that Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, 1 Sam. 15.23. For if men had not been bewitched, it could never have en∣tred into the hearts of men, or Christians, or especially such Christians as seem to defie Iesuites for treason, and rebellion, to perpetrate such barbarous things upon their natural Country, and Countrymen. Some say there are no Witches, and some say there are no Rebels; those that are called Witches, there are that say, they are but Vene∣sitae, Poysoners, or Ventriloquae, Speakers through the belly; so those which some call Rebels, are but such as have a rare art in a new way to take away the enemies of State, & can speak through the belly in a mysterious way, to cry up the liberties of the people; or if they be Witches they are to be called but Sagae, the prime Wits of the time, or White-witches, that do more good then hurt. But I doubt they will be found Maleficae, black Witches, and their very practises will declare it; 1. as Witches are discontented people, so these are Malecontents; 2. as Witches for the most part look ill, so these have a bad physnomy, they look with glating eyes, and ominous countenances; 3. as the Devils sucks a pap in Witches, so those have their consciences sucked; 4. as Witches deny
their Christendome, so these have denied all the ancient principles of faith and morality. 5. as Witches enter into league with the Devil, so these have their covenants, and engagements; 6. as Witches are fair, and plausible in speech, so these have their inchanting language; 7. as Witches are pernicious, they destroy cattel, and li∣ving souls; so these consume the estates, and lives of men. 8. as Witches seldome repent, for it is a rare thing to hear of a Witch to be a true penitent, so these seldome have remorse for their most wicked, and wretched a∣ctions, it is a rare thing to hear of a Rebel to turn true convert, some of the Paradoxes of their old Witch∣craft will a long time sticke in their consciences; what a do had David with his Witches? they had cast him out, and they would keep him out, it was a tedious thing unto them to bring back their King; so what a do had we with our cunning people, they had expelled a King, and how backward were they to reinstate him in his known, and antient rights? we had much strife with them to get them leave their old sorceries. Some would not have had the King brought in at all, and some would have had him brought in upon conditions: when they did it, they did it after an irkesome expectation, yea the Text may justly be applied unto them, Wherefore then are ye the last to bring back the King?
But (peerelesse Peere) in the midst of this Tragical pas∣sage, this was the comfort, the honour, the happinesse, that when so great a part of the Nation was under (as they use to say) ill hands, yet some were free from the Witchcraft; for as in Davids time some stood firme to him in them midst of the rebellion; as Zadok, and Abia∣thar the Priests, Ittai the Gittite, that great States-man; Hushai the Archite, that renouned Countrey worthy, Barzillai the Gileadite, Shobi the son of Nohash of Rab∣bah,
and Machir the son of Ammiel of Lodebar, &c. So there were amongst us some stable, and invariable to the King, and the Kings cause, who were true Mour∣ners all the time of his absence, and never quiet till they saw him brought back; amongst whom I may reckon your Lordship One, and a conspicuous One, you need not my pen to Characterize your worth, wisdome, in∣tegrity, fidelity, constant affection, and unshaken loyalty to your lawful, precious, and pious Prince, the whole Land is filled with the Bruit, and fame of your high en∣dowments, and your unspotted obedience to your dread Soveraigne; and truely (honoured Lord) this is the motive of this dedication; Had the Duke of Somerset been living, I should have made bold to have made you two the joint Patrons of this worthlesse piece; but He (to whom I was so infinite obliged, though I never saw his face) being translated to the glorious presence of God Almighty, Let me humbly intreat your Honour (to whom I am as much unknown, as I was unto him) to be the sole Shelter to this way-faring Pilgrime, which must travayle through the whole Nation, and perhaps into some neighbouring Countries. I love to choose Patrons by fame, aswell as familiarity, and report as acquaintance. Accept of your Suppliant Servant; who doth devote himself to the honouring of your high per∣fections, and doth prostrate his inconsiderable self, and these his unpolished labours at your Lordships feet. Thus beseeching God long to preserve amongst us, such an invaluable Patriot, and prizelesse Peere with all reverence to your Graces, and ardent desires for the increase of your honour, submissively I take leave and rest
My Lord, 
