



MY LORDS,
BEfore the sitting of this PARLIAMENT, the shadow of ONE of YOUR number was a shelter to me; and the kindly influence of HIS favour, no small refreshing. Since the beginning of it, I am more ohliged to HIM in speciall, and to YOUR WHOLE HOUSE under GOD for a peace∣able setling in that Ministeriall station wherein I stand at present. How much I am ingaged to AN OTHER, is not for me to expresse. These thoughts made me the more obedient to YOUR call for preach∣ing, though most unworthy both of the worke, and audience. And though I have as little love unto, as fitnesse for the presse, yet to shew my humble gratitude, with due respects unto YOUR HONORS, and by writing to be more usefull in the Lord, then I could be by voyce, I now present You with my second thoughts upon that grave subject the day of judgement.
Many Starres within a few yeares, have fallen from the firmament of
 YOUR HOUSE. Besides the Bishops, whose place shall know them no more, and those LORDS who dyed in warre against the COMMON-WEALTH (who have all but those two words for their Com∣mon EPITAPH
—ILLACHRIMABILES PERIERE—)
And those also who are either wandring in Forraign parts, or sit so∣litary at home, and are dead as to any place or vote among YOU: there were OTHERS WISE, VALIANT, and FAITHFULL, whom we la∣ment with wonder, HOW ARE THE MIGHTY FALLEN? and yet death hath Lorded over THEM also. When I consider these things (for we poore men are bold sometimes to thinke thus high) it seemes to me a reall demonstration that thoughts of DEATH and JUDGMENT are necessary for YOUR LORDSHIPS, as for other men.
May it therefore please YOUR HONORS to make these things the matter of YOUR daily meditation. There shall be a day of JUDGE∣MENT. This DAY is already APPOINTED. As the DAY, so the JUDGE. The JUDGE ordained is the MAN CHRIST JESUS. The WORLD is to be judged by this MAN. And this MAN shall judge the World in RIGHTEOUSNES.
For the Iudge, nec fallitur, nec flectitur, as BERNARD speakes. The day is certaine, though uncertaine. The judgement is either for salva∣tion, or condemnation. The persons to be judged are quick and dead. h. e. Iust and unjust as AUSTINE. Soules and bodies, as RUFFINUS, or ra∣ther, those whom he shall finde alive, and those who shall be dead before his coming. Among these shall he the great as well as the small. YOUR LODSHIPS among others. Then PEERS shall have no priviledge. The servant of Rulers Isa. 49. 7. shall shew himselfe to be the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.
Let these thoughts sleepe with you, and wake with you, bring them to the House, carry them abroad, let them ride with YOU in YOUR Coaches, and dine at YOUR tables, yea make them YOUR meate and drinke. Ezechiels roll had written in it lamentations and mour∣ning and woe, yet it was in his mouth as honey for sweetnesse. Ezech 2. 10. Chap. 3. 3. Such a roll is the doctrine of that day, and it will have like effect in their hearts who can well digest it. Let it therefore abide with YOU till you can by faith with diligence look for and haste unto the coming
 of the day of God, 2 Pet. 3. 12. and count it as blessed for You, as it will be Glorious for Christ. Tit. 2. 13. All that love his appearing shall receive a Crowne of righteousnesse; 2 Tim. 4 8. But how can they be said to love it, who love not to thinke of it? My hearts desire is to speake comfortably unto YOUR Honours as Paul did to the Colossians; When Christ who is our life, shall appeare, then shall YE also appeare with him in glory. But I must needs adde that which followes immediately. Mortifie therefore your members which are upon the earth, &c. Col. 3. 4 5.
And remember that besides YOUR account as men and Christians, you have more to reckon for, by reason of YOUR places, Honours, and condition. Something was amisse in the Star-chamber, and at the Councel-table; for why was the one put downe, and the other regu∣lated? State affaires at present are all of YOUR mannaging. But this above all is considerable, Religion in YOUR time hath a great change, and I am perswaded for the better; yet it will be inquir'd into, what Divine principles have acted you in Divine things? and whe∣ther you have followed the Lord fully which was Calebs praise. Num, 14. 24. In the things of Christ hath your care been to please Christ? Can you say before HIS THRONE, as he said unto his Father while he was on Earth, I have glorified thee on Earth, I have finished the worke whith thou gavest me to doe? John, 17 4. Have you indeed setled a govern∣ment in the truth and power of it according to the Covenant? h. e. ac∣cording to the word of God, and the example of the best reformed Chur∣ches. Are you resolved that YOU and YOUR FAMILIES will be sub∣ject to it? Because their is neither Jew nor Greeke, Bond nor Free, Male nor Female, but all are one in Christ Jesus? Gal, 3. 28.
To looke forwards. The hardest part of YOUR worke is yet behind. The disbanding of Armies, dismantling of Garrisons is very desirable. To settle the Militia in safe hands, pay the debts of the Kingdome, bring Delinquents unto condigne punishment, provide for Widdowes, and Orphans, must not be forgotten. And for this the vowes of God are upon you to bring the three Kingdomes unto the neerest conjunction and uniformity in Religion. But what will ye doe with Christ Iesus and for his Church? Settle the Crowne firme on his head, lay him for your corner-stone and soundation in all the parts of your building, lest he raise himselfe out of the ruines of this Kingdome, and another Crown perplex you, till you learne from his word that it is your onely safe
 rule whereby to order Civill affaires, and much more all matters of Religion.
I should say more, But I hope tbose who succeede me, as better able will drive this naile more home, and be more practicall on this Doctrine. In the meane while, that God would guide YOUR HONOURS by his Spirit, so to Judge YOUR selves, and others here, that when you come before the Supreame Tribunal, THE MAN CHRIST JESUS may wel∣come YOU with Well done good and faithfull Servants, shall be the daily prayer of

