



THis is a time of Englands trouble, most sad, and tempestuous: and if we look upon the face of things as now they are, and of the gathering of new clouds to the darkning of the heavens over us; and upon the ordina∣ry course of Gods Providence in the way of his Judgements, who can but Judge, and feare, that these are but the beginnings of troubles, and that they will be much greater and much worse then yet they are?Isai. 4. 5. 7.
The Lord doth as well create darknesse as forme light, and doth as well create evill as make peace. And there is a vicissitude of these, a succeeding of these, one in the place of another in Gods Government of the sons of men.
First, he giveth Peace and prosperity, and tryeth what the riches of his goodnesse will work upon men: he assayeth toHos. 11. 4. endear and draw them to himself, by the cords and bands of his love; to bring them to Repentance and Obedi∣ence.
But such is mans unhappinesse, since the fall of Adam, that usually this goodnesse and bounty of God is despised and abused: men quickly forget God, and grow proud, tyrannous, and Luxurious; and, waxing fat with Prospe∣rity, they are wanton, and kick against God, and do ex∣ceedDeut. 32. 15. in all manner of Impiety, uncleannesse, and unrigh∣teousnesse.
Yea, amongst them, Gods own people, who professe his Name; even they will be too much tainted with the common sins of the times, and places where they live.
With these, yet, God beareth a long time, being very loath to alter the course of his bounty, being unwilling to afflict or grieve the Children of men: but they continuingLam. 3. 33. and increasing in their wickednesse, he is enforced by his Justice and Truth, to Create and bring evill upon them, to plague and punish the whole world, or a great part of it, even so much of it as doth partake of like sinnes, with Fa∣mine and Pestilence, or other diseases, and last of all, with war, the sorest of his plagues.
In such Generall Visitations it is Gods manner commonly to begin with his own people.
For he is most provoked with their sins, and taketh it mostDeut. 32. 6. unkindly at their hands: as he saith, You onely have I known of all the Families of the earth; therefore IAmos 2. 3. will punish you for all your iniquities.
He may also first begin with them, that they may repent and give good example to the rest of the world round about them.
Also, that all men may see that God is Impartiall in his punishments.
And also that the wicked enemies of Gods people may know that they certainly shall not go unpunished, as God saith,

Lo, I bring evill upon the City, which is called byJer. 5. 29. my Name, and should ye go unpunished? ye shall not be unpunished: for I will call for a sword upon all the inhabitants of the earth.
In the dayes of King Asa there was war, not onely a∣gainst2 Chron. 14. 9, 10. gainst Judah, but in all Countries thereabout. It was with them then in that part of the world, as it is now with us in Europe. No peace was to him that went out, or came2 Chro. 15. 6. in, but great vexations were upon all the Inhabi∣tants of those Countries. Nation was destroyed of Nation, and City of City, God did vex them with all adversities.
The like Generall punishing of the Nations by war, we read of in the Prophesie of Jeremiah, which ended in theJer. 25. destraction of Babilon.
The like, when after Christs death, Jerusalem was de∣stroyed.Mat. 24. 6, 7.
God hath his houres of temptation to bring upon allRev. 3. 10. the world, to try them that dwell therein, sometimes in one kinde of tryall, sometimes in another.
At this time God is visiting of Europe and most of the Christian world with the fearfull Judgement of War.
About six and twenty years since there was Peace and great prosperity in most, if not in all, parts of Europe: but the inhabitants thereof; nay, the Churches of God ser∣ved not the Lord, with joyfulnesse and gladnesse of heart, for that their abundance of all things. They corruped their wayes, and became notoriously wicked in all sorts of abhomi∣nations. The Religion of the best, take them in the generality, was but a form of Godlinesse without power, such as the Apostle Prophesied of, should be in the last times, which temper in Religion God hateth. And as they were increa∣sed2 Tim. 3. 1. 5▪

so they sinned. Wherefore the Lord changed his countenance towards us; and hath taken the Rod and sword in hand to correct and punish us.
He caused the fire of war, the fire of his anger to begin to burn and break out in Bohemia, and in the Palatinate, (none of the worst of the Churches) yea it is run through all Germany, and where is it not now in Europe? It is now, to our woe, come into Ireland and England, and Scotland is not altogether free.
This war layeth all wast before it in other Countries: How can we think it should do any otherwise in Eng∣land?
The Symptomes of a desolation that shall over-run this kingdome are too too manifest: It was a true saying of our Saviour, A Kingdome divided against it self, is brought to desolation. Do not our divisions continue?Mat. 12. 25. do not they increase? Divisions in the Church, Divisi∣ons in the Common-wealth, Divisions in the Armie, Divisions in Counsells, Divisions every where; a∣mongst all sorts in the Kingdome, Whilst God doth thus divide us, and doth in his just judgement, give us over thus to make Divisions, certainly he meaneth that by our selves we shall be destroyed. We would not in time of Peace agree to∣gether to serve him with one consent; he will therefore that we shall agree in this, By our dis-agreements to destroy and consume one another.
I beseech you take into your serious consideration those Symptomes which argued our utter ruine and destruction to be neere, if not speedily prevented; as you heard them, so you may help your memories, if you can gain time to read them in the ensuing Sermon, which as it was Preached, so now is Printed by your Order.
Are not gray haires upon us here and there already?Hos. 7. 9. Is not much of our strength devoured? Are we blind? Or will we still winke with our eyes, and not see? And not know all this? Doth not our wickednesse (which aboundeth more and more in England, even while we are under the Rod) testifie unto our faces, that we do not return to the Lord our God; and seeke him with our whole heart for all this?
When you were pleased to call me to go before you, and to bear a part with you, in your day of Fast and so∣lemn Humiliation; I looked upon our Nation in this ill Condition, I knew no better Subject to Treate of, to be ap∣plyed to your selves and to all that then heard me, then to teach you, or atleast to remember you of a timely and pro∣fitable Use-making of the Rod of God, which is now so sore upon us; Namely, to learn what God teacheth us by it.
To be shewed our danger in which we are, and the neere∣nesse of our ruine, for our sinnes; will be no discourage∣ment unto you in the work of standing in the gap, andPsal. 106. 23. making up the breach, in which you have so long stood; and which with unweariednesse and undauntednesse you have (to your eternall Renown) endeavoured, maugre all the mountains of opposition and difficulties which you have met withall. But it should rather put an edge to your cou∣rage, as all difficulties do to men of courage and true va∣lour. You are, Honoured and worthy Patriots, the re∣pairers of our breaches, under God: Be ye Mosesses, and Phineasses to our Israel. When Israel sinned in the matter of the golden Calf, God said, He would destroy them, hadPsal. 106. 23. not Moses his chosen stood before him in the breach, to turn away his wrath, lest he should destroy them:

When Phineas executed Judgement the plague wasPsal. 106. 30. stayed; you are called not extraordinarily as he, but in an ordinary way to do it: God when he foretold his purpose to destroy the Kingdome of Judah, did look for such as you are, to make up the hedge and stand in the gap, beforeEzek. 22. 30. the Lord, that he might not destroy it.
These Worthies by prayer held Gods hands from striking,Exod. 32. 10, 27. and by executing judgement for him, did save the King∣dome, did save the people from destruction.
Whatsoever the event may prove, Noble Sirs, Let the fear of the Lord be upon you; Be strong: Let2 Chron. 15. 7. not your hands be weak, deal couragiously, The Lord will be with the good; and your work shall be re∣warded;2 Chron. 19. 11. and you may expect a happy issue: But how∣ever, it is honourable for a Souldier to dye in maintaining, or making up the breach; and your work shall be with the Lord, and if you save not the Kingdome, you shal withoutEzeck. 14. 18, 20. fail (as it is sayd of Noah, Job, and Daniel) save your own souls, and may expect some temporall deliverance.
Neither should the knowledge of our likelinesse, and neerenesse to ruine disanimate any, or should it weaken the hands of the people of the Land: For when God sent Jeremiah to Prophesie against Jerusalem that he would destroy it, and that they should be carried Captive, this is the inference from it: Therefore amend your wayesJer. 25. 13. and your doings, and obey the voyce of the Lord your God, and the Lord will repent him of the evillJer. 18. 7, 8. that he hath pronounced against you.
Moreover, let it be conceived that God is peremptorily determined to destroy a Nation, which we cannot be cer∣tain of, though we can see a Nation deserving it, and is neer to it; For God is not limitted, nor can be prescribed

to do what in like case he hath done, yet it will be pro∣fitable for a people to be warned of it: For they that fear God, will thereupon endeavour to prevent it; or toEzek. 9. 4. prepare for it. That making their own peace with God, they may be marked for safety as those in Ezekiel were, and may make their adresses to God, as to a safe and strong tower, thereby entring into the chambers spoken of in Isaiah, and shut the doores about them; and hide themselves for a little-moment, that is, cast themselves upon Gods Providence and Protection, securing themselvesIsai. 26. 20. in him, untill the indignation of the Lord be over∣past.
No man can apprehend misery and destruction more certainly to come upon a people, then the Prophet Hab∣bacuk did, at which, at the first hearing he was much terrified: yet it was much for his good and advantage. For it did cause him to humble himself before God, and to seek his face, That he might rest in the day ofHab. 3. 16. trouble, when the Chaldeans should come up and in∣vade them with his Troops; Through faith he could see safety, and matter of comfort and joy in God: so that he could say, though he should be deprived of all livelihood, and means of subsistance for his person and outward man; Yet I will rejoyce in the Lord, I will joy in the GodHab. 3. 1. of my Salvation, &c.
I have here given you some account of the choise of the Subject, whereof in my Sermon I spake unto you, and have prosecuted more fully something which I did then but hint unto you; I take the boldnesse to publish it and put it forth under the shelter of your honourable pa∣tronage.
I have onely this maine suite unto you, that you would

continue resolute for God, and his true Religion, for the Kings Majesties just Rights, for the Laws of the King∣dome, and just Liberties to which we are all born. And the Lord of Hoasts and King of kings, our good God, He blesse and prosper the work in your hands, wherewith you are intrusted, The Lord prosper your handy work: So prayeth dayly

