


My Lord,
MAY it please Your HONOUR to take this Dedication as an humble and gratefull acknow∣ledgement of those many fa∣vours and incouragements which out of YOUR exuberant Goodnesse alone, and not for my desert, (which is not) have

been vouchsafed to me: And as a token, that I would be thankfull, and duly respect∣full, if I did know how to expresse either. These are Times, wherein Truth must learn to go alone, & to stand by her own strength: The methods and depths of Satan, with the power of darknesse, are all improved against Light; and an arm of flesh will prove a broken red to those who trust in it. Yet I shall ever repute YOUR LORDSHIP among those who have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ the Lord of glory, with respect of persons, JAM. 3. 1. & who are willing [] to contend earnestly for the maintenance of the faith once given unto the Saints, JUDE. 3. And therefore though I dare not presume, or in any wise expect to ingage You on my part in the debate about Ordination and Laying on of hands, which is presented in the ensuing Papers; yet upon experience of YOUR naturall love to Godly Ministers upon all occasions, I make bold to creep under the wing of YOUR Patronage, upon occasion of this Publication.
That Honours and Dignities are slippery places; These, stormy and blustrous times;

And, that Christ ownes none as being of his side, but those who are Called, Chosen, and Faithfull, REV. 17. 14. YOUR LORDSHIP knows assuredly. And YOU need not be put in mind by me, that they who do wickedly against the Covenant (whether God's or Mans) are such as are corrupled by slatteries. Neither is this without the bounds of YOUR con∣sideration, That (Without understanding, Covenant-breakers, ROM. 1. 31.) are joyned together, in the sad Catalogue of those who are given up [] to vile affections, ROM. 1. 26. and [] to a reprobate minde, vers. 28. As the words [] sound alike, so are the things there∣by signified of like nature; and serve not only against Covenant-breakers, but against Non-covenanters, if the sense of [] be well observed. There's onely one thing which remains for me to be YOUR Re∣membrancer in; CHRIST'S promise to the Angel of the Church of Smyrna, REV. 2. 10. Be thou faithfull unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life. Which Grace; to be faith∣full unto death, that it may abide with You, and abound; and Glory, to receive a Crown

of life; That YOUR LORDSHIP may attain in Heaven, after fulnesse of dayes on Earth, is and shall be the prayer of

