


Honourable, and Renowned Worthies,
THe subject which I have treated on was well worthy of your eares: but very unseemly for my tongue. Yet because WISDOME which is THE EXCELLENCY OF KNOWLEDG is so exceeding neces∣sary to make poore England once more happy, therefore I have endeavoured to quicken your desires and prayers for the attaining of a full measure, that the want of all other rankes may be supplied out of your abun∣dance. We have amongst us the worst of evils, A CIVILL

WARRE. A KINGDOME DIVIDED AGAINST IT SEEFE. The Nations round about us might justly apply St. Pauls reproofe of the Corinthians unto us with a very little alteration *. And how can we choose but apply Cor. 6. 5, 9. it unto our selves? It may be said of England now as * one sometime said of France, THAT THERE IS MORE  de Cle¦gis de lapsu eparatione . cap. 10. RIGHTEOUSNESSE IN HELL, THEN IN THIS KINGDOME. For there norighteous man is af∣flicted, nor any wicked man punished unrighteously: but here good and evill men are all involved in common miseries, and suffer either on the one side, or on the other, and too often by both. I speake not this either to blame Gods righteous judge∣ments, or your necessary defence of your selves, and endea∣vours to suppresse the Forces raised against you; but to re∣present the most miserable condition of this distressed, and almost-utterly-destroyed Kingdome. As touching outward meanes to redresse these grievances, our hopes are in your wisdome, WHO ARE MEN THAT HAVE UN∣DERSTANDING OF THE TIMES, TO KNOW WHAT ISRAEL OUGHT TO DOE *. And sup∣pose Chro. 12. 3. the Lord should be so gracious unto us, that we might have just occasion to beate our Swords into Plowshares, and our Speares into Pruning-hookes *, which is the un∣fained  4. 3. desire of all the well-affected; there is a further taske to try your wisdome. For what is it that is expected from you as chosen instruments under God for his speciall service in these daies? Surely no lesse, (if I may use that Scripture phrase proverbially, as some interpret it) * then a new on the ation. Heavens, and a new Earth, wherein dwelleth righteous∣nesse. That is, A REFORMED CHURCH, A RE∣FORMED COMMON-WEALTH. For the one, we have had the name a long time, (as Sardis had a name to live,

and was dead.) And for the thing, we had it in part, now we would have it intirely, and without mixture. The other, viz. the Common-wealth must be suteable to the former. It's a charge laid upon those Worthies who laboured for re∣formation * By Dr. Jack∣son. in the daies of QUEENE ELIZABETH OF BIESSED MEMORY, and after, as if they had wink'd at the corruptions of the State which were knowne and certaine, and pretended to singular holinesse in the busi∣nesse of Religion as it is strictly considered. It ought there∣fore to be the lesse offensive if the Watchmen of this present generation do sound their Trumpets louder than heretofore, and cry out in good earnest for A REALL REFORMATI∣ON, The substanc of the Cove∣nant. as among themselves, and in things Ecclesiasticall, so in your selves likewise, and in all affaires and businesses whatsoever. Be not deceived, God is not mocked. It will not be taken at our hands that our goodnesse be like the morning dew, or that we should be like Ephraim, a Cake halfe baked. God requires more. He promises grace for more. The Word, and the Rod, in both which God stretches out his hand and says, Behold me, behold me, must teach us to perfect holinesse in the feare of God. The NOBLES OF BOHEMIA in the preface before the confession of their Faith rehearse some propheticall passages of their Mi∣nisters; and particularly, the words of JOHN Hus, to this effect: Corpus & S tagma Confess¦num, part 2 p. 224. We (speaking of himselfe, and other teachers of that age) as yet goe but about the surface of the busi∣nesse, and see as it were through Latices, or a Cloud, not piercing to the inward parts: but a people shall suc∣ceed which shall dive into the bottome of the businesse, and build on the solid foundation. Yet this must be done by little and little. And it shall be effected with great pressure and affliction, and with exceeding difficulty. All this is very conso to Scripture and experience, and

therefore the more to be heeded. Reformation must proceed from one degree to another, TILL THE LAMBES WIFE HAVE MADE HER SELFE READY, &c. Rev. 19. 7. And untill those other prophecies be accomplished which I shall but point you to peruse, and that because they concerne both States. Isatah 1. 25, 26, 27. Revel. 11. 15.
If the question be, When shall these things be? It must needs be answered in part with the words of Christ, It is not for you to know the times and seasons which the Father hath put in his owne power Acts 1. 7.. And yet it must also be ad∣ded, that the time for us to endeavour it is now, even while it is called to day.
For our parts who are Ministers, we know it, and rejoyce in it. Christ must increase, we must decrease, untill the time come, That the Moone shall be confounded, and the Sunne ashamed, when the Lord of Hosts shall reigne in Mount Sion, and in Jerusalem, and before his ancients gloriously See Calvin on Isaiah 24. 23..
As for you that are Magistrates, and now sitting in the Supreame judicatory of this Kingdome, I beseech you to consider what is expected of you, and from you. Shall tyranny, bribery, oppression, partiality, covetousnesse escape unpunished, or remaine unreformed any where? Will God humble Mo∣narchy, and destroy arbitrary government every where, (as certainely he will) and let inferiour Magistrates degene∣rate into the same sinnes? Must scandalous Ministers be cast out as unsavoury Salt unto the dung-hill, and shall scanda∣lous people live as if they were Lawlesse?
All this is but to praise, Qui monet ut faciat, &c. encourage, and strengthen you in your holy purposes and resolutions, notwithstanding the difficulty of the worke in hand, and the mighty mountaines of opposition which are raised in the way. What remaines, but that you be reall, resolute, and exemplary in the worke

of reformation. For thus saith the Lord. If ye throughly amend your waies and your doings, if ye throughly exe∣cute judgement betweene a man and his neighbour—. Then will I cause you to dwell in this place, in the Land that I gave to your fathers, for ever, and ever Jer. 7. 5, 7.. The Lord furnish you with all the fruits of his Spirit, whereby you may be enabled hereunto.
I shall not presume, (that be farre from me) to direct your wisdomes in any part of the great worke which is be∣fore you. Onely touching the meanes of attaining that wis∣dome which I have spoken of, I beseech you consider those words of David Psal. 119. 99, 100.. I have more understanding then all my Tea∣chers, for thy testimonies are my meditation. I under∣stood more then my Ancients, because I kept thy pre∣cepts. I know your businesse is great, and your spare houres but a few. You cannot read much, nor it may be pray long. Yet even in the Campe Alexander would finde time to read Homer, Quintus Cur∣tius. and from him he might soone learne how to husband time. . H. . . The bookes of Samuel, the Kings, and Chronicles are proper for you, and a key to the Prophets. There are many prayers with you and for you, but your owne humility and fervency in private will afford you most comfort. And that your practicall wisdome, according to the rule of Scripture may be seene and read of all men in all your proceedings, and a blessing from Heaven upon them, is and shall ever be the prayer of him who is


