




Brethren;
I Cannot but lament the Disadvantages you lie under, which not a little obstruct your Generation-work: for certainly you are set to be the Light of the World;Matth. 5.1. but how little you have been so, is too palpable. 'Tis also as certain, that our Lord hath given a Ministry to his Church,Eph. 4.11, 12. for the perfect∣ing of the Saints, —for the edifying of the Body of Christ: Yea, every Scribe instructed into the Kingdom of Heaven, is,Matth. 13.52. or should be, like a good Housholder, which bringeth out of his Treasury things new and old. True it is, we have had new things brought forth often, in this day, both in Sermons and Books; but how unsound, unwholesom, and unhealthful some of those have been, we sadly experience. This Nation is wonderfully deluded with those strange Pamphlets of the Qua∣kers, that seldom have any thing of Truth in them, but a bundle of Delusions, whereby many Souls are misled. Lamenting there∣fore the State of this Nation upon that account, what care ought to be had by others how they preach and write? But now where lies the fault, or on whom shall I lay the blame? The Ministers I cannot excuse; for I fear they have too much neglected that Charge given to Timothy, and in him to all others in the like Capacity; i. e. To give Attendance to Reading, to Exhor∣tation,1 Tim. 4.13, 14, 15, 16. to Doctrine, and not to neglect the Gift given to them; and to exercise their Meditations upon the Oracles of God and Mysteries of Christ, even the hidden Mystery: and to give themselves WHOLLY to them, that their Pro∣fiting may appear to all; and to take heed unto themselves,
and unto their Doctrine; continuing in them, that in so do∣ing they may both save themselves, and them that hear them. Without question, this Neglect hath caused so many raw and undigested Sermons, and impertinent Books. But now, alas, how should it be much better? Must they make Brick with∣out Straw? Can they give themselves [wholly] to this Ser∣vice, when the Care of their Families lies upon them, and little care is taken by the Churches to set them free from those Incum∣brances? Do we not see they are forced to leave the Work of God,Nehem. 13.0, 11. and flee to their own Fields, like the Levites in Nehemi∣ah's time, and none are yet found like Nehemiah to reform herein? Tim. 2., 14, 15. How then should they study to shew themselves ap∣proved unto God, Workmen that need not be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth, as they are charged to do? Certainly the Churches must bear the Blame, who are found guilty herein. And now amongst other things of this kind, which we have cause to bewail, there is a Book extant, printed 1672, intituled, Theopolis, or, The City of God, New Je∣rusalem, &c. wherein 'tis asserted, That the thousand Years Reign will be before the Personal Coming of Jesus Christ, in a Comment upon the 20th and 21st Chapters of the Revelation, by a Nameless Author: The Consequence whereof is very sad, tending to prompt Christians to that unchristian and unbecoming Service the Gospel no ways injoins them, and to exasperate the Government against them; a thing which all wise Men are, as much as in them lies, concerned to avoid, and enter a Protest a∣gainst. The which erroneous Opinion, I hoped had been worn out and relinquished by time, that so no Man needed openly to appear against it, since God Almighty hath given sufficient Demonstrati∣on of the contrary, by things that do run in another way, contrary to these Mens Expectations, as also by what hath been writ on the contrary. But now again, I find this Error revived by Ano∣ther, in a Book printed 1680, intituled, A Treatise of the New Heavens and New Earth, by T. M. whereunto is added
(as the Author saith) a true State of the thousand Years Time, affirming it to be before the Second Coming of Christ.
Considering now the dreadful Consequence of these Mens Opi∣nions, thus published to the World in Print, whereby some are al∣ready led into Error, &c. gives me now the occasion thus to appear, that if it may be a Means to recover some that are unbiassed, and not wedded to their Fancies, and to prevent others from falling in with them, to the great scandal of the Christian Religion, and the prejudice of its Professors. Which Holy Gospel is stiled the Gospel of Peace, and no ways countenances the contrary: Be it therefore ever remembred what our Blessed Lord said when in the hands of his Betrayers, Put up thy Sword again into its place; for all they that take the Sword, shall perish with the Sword, (which Experience hath hitherto proved true): I say again, If this be the fruit of these my Endeavours, I shall rejoice; for 'tis not any Prejudice against these Authors, (for I know them not) but their erroneous Tenets that I give my Testimony against. Nei∣ther would I seem in the least to reflect upon any good Service they have otherwise done, particularly that Part called the first Subject of the second or last Book I mentioned, i. e. the Treatise of the New Heavens and New Earth; which I would have all that read me, take notice I oppose not, but do heartily wish there were a more diligent Search after, and a clearer Knowledg of it. I will only mind the Author of one or two things as to that, and so pass it: In p. 3, 4. he tells us, That in the Renewed State, or Glorious Kingdom of Christ, there shall be no Sun, Moon, or Stars in their Courses; and no Temple, &c. Now this at best, is but an unwary Harangue. He gives this further as a Reason, "Because (saith he) there will be no Night there. But, alas, how short this is of proving that for which it's brought, will appear if we consider; 1st, The Text doth not say, There will be no Sun, &c. But there will be no need of it. 2dly, Not in every place in that time neither, but in that City. Again, in p. 5. for Answer to an Objection, he makes it a Question, Whe∣ther
there be any Hell now, viz. any Place so called? A needless Question, (in my Opinion) and of bad consequence; for by that Rule, we may as well question, whether there be any Heaven now? And then whither shall we run at last? even to question whether there be any God or Devil. Therefore he had far better ne're undertook to answer such an Objection, than left it so. 3dly. If this be true, as to the New-Heavens, and New-Earth, as I grant in the main, of what he there saith it is, then how contra∣dictory is this to the former Book, and unhinges all that was said in it by the first Author. That it is as contrary as Light is to Darkness, consider these Instances: In the first Book the Au∣thor tells us, p. 164, That if these glorious things spoke of Rev. 21. of the New-Heavens, and New-Earth, and New-Jerusalem, be taken in the Letter, are but of earthly, corruptible, perishing and fading things: The latter Author, in his little Treatise, frequently affirms the literal and perpetual Duration of these things, Rev. 21. And his 11th Arg. p. 6. is this, That the New-Heavens and New-Earth, Rev. 21.1. are utterly inconsistent of any other Sense, viz. than literal and eternal. The first Author affirms this New-Heaven, and New-Earth, and New-Jerusalem, Rev. 21. to be only Mystical and Spiritual, and to be fulfilled before the Personal Coming of Christ; as you may see p. 125, 127. And the last Author affirms it to be literal, material, and to be after Christ's Personal Coming, after the Day of Judgment, as p. 2. Thus I have shewed the Contradiction. 2dly, That it unhinges all that the first wrote about his thousand Years Reign, as to the time of it, is also evident, if you consider how he makes his No∣tion, viz. Rev. 20, and 21 chap. an Allegory; and the foun∣dation of his thousand Years Reign; I say, all his Discourse is built hereon, as you may see Title-page, and p. 229. with the whole Discourse about it.
But see how much these Men have mistaken themselves, ar∣guing from false Premisses, mistaking Scriptures, making an
Allegory of that which is spoke literally. The first Author tells us, p. 8. 'Tis alike injurious to Truth, to take a mysterious Allegory in the Letter, as to make an Allegory of the plain Scripture. Now by his grant, 'tis alone, or alike dangerous: How he quits himself of the latter, let all Men judg, when we have made a Trial.
This Author proposes, p. 10, 11, 12. First, As necessary to the Exposition of the difficult things in these 20th and 21st Chapters of the Revelation, as previous to all, and of absolute necessity: 1st, Prayer: 2dly, Reading: 3dly, Meditation: 4thly, Conference: 5thly, Practice, (all very good.)
As to the four first, I hope I may say I have herein exercised my self long before this Ʋndertaking, as many can bear me wit∣ness; and to the last, let my Work speak for me, and not my own Mouth. After these, the Author lays down some Rules to go by in order to our understanding things aright herein.
1. To compare any obscure Places with those that are plain.
2. To consider what Vision, or obscure Passage, the Holy Ghost hath interpreted in the Revelation it self; for of all such, the Exposition is undoubted and infallible; and so will the Reve∣lation be the best Expounder of the Revelation; and from those Expositions, proportionably borrow Light for the discovering of other obscure Passages depending thereupon, or relating thereto, or contemporaneous therewith.
His 3d Rule is, To observe diligently the Scope, Order and Harmony of the Prophecies; and further adds, p. 43. That where there is no necessity to take a Scripture in a figurative Sense, we are to take it in the Letter. All which I approve, and shall endeavour to observe.
But now, how doth this Author vary from these Rules by him proposed, as I hinted before? In his 10 and 11 pag. he tells us what things are plain; and amongst the rest, for our better un∣derstanding, this; That Saints shall come forth in Venge∣ance. He bids us compare Rev. 19.13. Isa. 63.2. Rev. 19.15. with Psal. 29. Isa. 63.3.

Now since by the word Saints, he means Christ's Disciples, or Believers as such; and by coming forth in Vengeance, he in∣tends in this Life, viz. before the Personal Coming of Christ; as 'tis evident p. 3. and from the whole of his Discourse.
Then I ask where this is plain in any of these Texts, when there is not one word of it, nor any thing like it in all the Texts; unless confident Assertion shall pass for a plain Evidence? Nay, where is this found plain in all the Bible? Is not this contrary to the Scope, Order, and Harmony of other Scriptures? I am sure the contrary is plain; yea, so plain, that he that runs may read it: See Rom. 12.19. Dearly Beloved (sure these spo∣ken to are Saints) avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto Wrath: for it is written, Vengeance is mine; and I will repay, saith the Lord.
But no wonder when Men have got the knack to make hard things easy, and easy things hard; as I read an Author lately affirmed, That the beginning-Principles of the Christian Re∣ligion were hard to be understood, notwithstanding the Apostle calls them Milk for Babes, &c. Thus we see oft-times Confi∣dence supplies the place of Evidence. Again, he tells us, p. 11. That, Rev. 1.20. i. e. the Mystery of the seven Stars, and seven Golden Candlesticks, are interpreted by Christ; and the Mystery of the Woman and the Waters, are explained and ex∣pounded by the Spirit; and 'tis the Divine Key of the Reve∣lation. Now be it so, that these are plain, and to be taken literally, why must not other things, that are explained also, be so accounted? For instance, Chap. 11.8. we read of a City where the dead Bodies of the two Witnesses shall lie three Days and a half: It's told us as plain as words can be spoken, what Ci∣ty this is, or at least as plain as either of the Authors explained things.
See them parallel'd, at least in one of them;
The Woman which thou sawest, is that great City which reigneth over the Kings of the Earth, chap. 17. ult.

This the Author acknowledges to be plainly meant of Rome, because Rome reigned then over the Kings of the Earth, p. 11.17. As Rome is her literal Name, Babylon is her mystical Name.
Their dead Bodies shall lie in the Street of the GREAT CITY; which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt; where also our Lord was Crucified, chap. 11.8.
Now let the Reader judg whether there is not as much, nay far more ground, to take this according to the latter than the first, viz. The Woman for Rome: All that we have to know the Woman to be meant of Rome, is but this one thing, (I deny not but 'tis enough) viz. She is that Great City that reigned over the Kings of the Earth.
But touching the other, we have not only the same Descrip∣tion, viz. That it is the great City where our Lord was Crucified; which is as well known at this time to the Churches to be Jerusalem by that Description, as Mystery Babylon is known to be Rome by the Description given in that behalf. But again, we have more in this Case; it's told us, That it's the City which was spiritually called Sodom and Egypt: Now we find Jerusalem so called, Isa. 1.10. Jer. 23.14. Perhaps you will say, Rome's mystical Name was written in her Fore head; Ergo, She might be known by it also. But pray hold! John; it's true, saw it so in the Vision; but 'twas not so plain but he still wondred, and that with great admiration, who this Harlot should be; as you may see ver. 6, 7.
And yet, notwithstanding this, at least equal (nay more) Plainness, the Author makes this an Allegory, as you may see p. 48, 49, 50. A mystical City, mystical Prophets, mystical Heaven. And why not as well a mystical Christ, and a my∣stical Crucifying in a mystical City, viz. the Hearts of Men?
as William Pen the Quaker, against Muggleton, p. 58. and in his Vindication of George Fox, p. 12. Sect. 6.
But again; Why must this City, New-Jerusalem, chap. 21. be an Allegory with this Author? Is it because St. John had not so clear a sight of this City?p. 17. 3. 21. 10. Certainly this cannot be supposed, un∣less the Author imagines that the Wilderness will give a better Prospect of Mystery Babylon, than a great and high Moun∣tain will do of the New-Jerusalem, which cannot lightly be sup∣posed; and 'tis evident, here's as plain a Description of this as the other. But he tells you, p. 164. That it's called an Alle∣gory, Gal. 4.24. Now whether New-Jerusalem be there so called, I need give no other Answer, but desire the Reader to see if he can find any such thing in that Text.
'Tis evident to all that will not shut their Eyes,. 11.10, That our God hath builded a City for his Saints, and will one day bestow it upon Abraham and his Sons for a Reward of their Losses;. 3.12. ap. 21.2. and this City shall come down from God out of Heaven: it's for the Saints, and therefore not the Saints, as this Author affirms, p. 156. The Saved Ones shall walk in it, ver. 24. Ergo, Not the City it self; There shall in NO WISE enter into it any thing that defileth, &c. ver. 27. Which cannot be meant of the Church here in this mortal State, before the Personal Coming of Christ, in the primest and purest Age that ever was or shall be. Further; This Author will have the Dragon, Rev. 12.9. and 20.2. to be allegorical or figurative, viz. the Pagan Empire, not any particular Person or Creature, p. 14, 15. although there's none of those, he calls plain things, so plainly described. He tells you of some places where some other are called the De∣vil: Admit this to be true, 'twill not prove the other; for not only in this Book of the Revelation, but in the whole Bible, there is not a plainer Speech. And we may as well, with the Quakers, conclude that all the Scriptures that speak of the Devil, are meant only of a mystical and figurative Devil: And I dare say, you may as soon find a Dolphin in the Wood, as a Devil in Hell,
if this be not he: for pray mark how our Lord describes him, That old Serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which de∣ceiveth the whole World. If this can be applied to any other, I must confess my self very ignorant therein.
But I rather conclude this Notion to be like W. Deusbery's Interpretation of Matth. 21. touching the Ass that Christ rode upon; which he hath taken the Boldness to affirm, That it was the wild Nature in all the Children of the Lord. Another saith, That it was the Lord's People. And G. W. a Quaker, likewise, upon Rev. 11.8. saith, That City is the Rock of A∣ges. And indeed, if Men may take this Liberty in their inter∣preting Scripture, then I may boldly say, The plainest Scripture will not scape their Allegorizing Frames.
But now if this Book of the Revelation be the Key to unlock the whole Bible, (as this Author confesseth) then 'tis strange the Key should be made more difficult than the Lock; for so in∣deed it is, if the most part be an Allegory, as this Man affirms it is.
It's called not only A Revelation, but The Revelation; a wrong Name, if this Man's Doctrine be true. True it is, that what is therein delivered, (as many other places of Scripture are) is set forth by Metaphors; but it follows not, That therefore the Doctrine there delivered is in it self Allegorical, or but Me∣taphorical: For instance,Chap. 1. The seven Churches are set forth by seven Golden Candlesticks; and the seven Ministers, or Messen∣gers, by seven Stars. Now will any wise Man conclude these seven Churches, and seven Messengers, are but figurative Chur∣ches and Messengers, and not really such? And so Rome is set forth by a great and brave decked Harlot; what then,Chap. 17. must this be only a Figure, (viz. Rome) and not a real City, as some gether figurative, and several others also; but this Author ac∣knowledges, the contrary. So of the Waters. Again,Chap. 12, & chap. 20. the De∣vil is set forth by a great red Dragon, (a fit Similitude indeed;)
But what then? Must this Devil be nothing but a Figure still? Sure in all such Figures, there is something figured out that is really so.p. 11. So by the two Candlesticks and two Olive-Trees, are set forth the two Prophets: But what then? Must these Fi∣gures be but a Figure of a Figure still? although our Lord tells us plainly, They are two Prophets set forth by these two famous Similitudes; and describes their Work, and the time of it, with their Death, how it shall be, and by whom; how long they shall lie dead, and where, and what shall be done to them in that time by their Enemies; and also their perspicuous and dreadful Re∣surrection and Ascension: All which cannot be applied to any thing else save two Persons. his 48, 49 Pages. Yet this Author will have these two Prophets to be but figurative Prophets still, viz. The Church of God; and others of the same stamp with this Author, Magistracy and Ministry; by some the two Testaments, &c. O what strange stuff have we here! Brave Interpreters of Scripture! But let God be true, though every Man a Liar. True it is, many things in this Book are delivered by Metaphors, but not all; and those that are so, signify something that's real: Therefore according to this Author, p. 3. the Consideration whereof calls for the greater Circumspection, Wariness and So∣briety, as indeed other Writings do, wherein are some things hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and un∣stable, wrest to their own Destruction.Pet. 3.16. I commit all that I have said to the Blessing of God, and the Consideration of his Churches.

