



VIRTUOUS LADY,
IT is enacted by the Supream Power of Heaven and Earth, That man, the Master of the Crea∣tion, should be a servant and a helper to the most contemptible creature fallen under his burden: by vertue of that Law the Ox or the Ass might Exo. 23. 5. Deu. 22. 4. challenge and command help from their owners. Doth God take care of Oxen? Surely for our sakes these things are written, to shew, that the Lord in a special manner doth oblige and command all that mention his Name, to make themselves, to the utmost, comforting and refreshing to all his people, who taste the bitterness, and feel the weight of an afflicted state. God no sooner hears the sad cries and complaints of poor op∣pressed Israel in Egypt, but Moses hears the news from Exod. 3 9, 10 God of his going with a present Message of Relief to them. Nay, the Spirit himself, God equal with the Father and the Son, shall upon the same account be Ioh. 14. 16 sent from Heaven, and this shall be the great Title he shall be invested with, viz. [The Comforter.] To comfort the Saints is a work every way suitable to the highest in Heaven or Earth to perform. When I consider these things, but especially recollect the innumera∣ble Obligations which are upon me from the constant flowings forth of your expressions of friendship to me, I (being for many years together your poor & unworthy Servant in the things of the Gospel) could not but in a special maner account it my duty solicitously to endeavor the bringing forth of something, which through the blessing of God might be instrumental to the scat∣tering of the darkness of that night which is now upon you, through the late inexpected and sadly lamented setting of that Sun which did shine so gloriously in your Horizon. And truly amongst all other things which my thoughts endeavored to engage for your refreshment, I found none so exactly calcu∣lated to your condition as that incomparable peece of Gospel

 by Mr Ob∣diah Sedg∣wick. that  and godly Messenger of Christ at the late sad and solemn Puneral of your loving and beloved Husband. And seeing the reverend Author, through a modest and humble disowning of himself, was unwilling to be Midwife to his own Birth, I have (with his consent and leave obtained, through much importunity) made bold to present it to you, as that which, through the concurrence of divine blessing, may administer exceeding abundant consolation to your drooping and decaying Spirit. I cannot but look upon this Text and Sermon as an exact Comment upon your pre∣cus husband his life and death: his life was nothing else but a continual resolution of all his actions and ends into Christ; and his death nothing else but a victory over sin, and a sure conduct into the blessed state of eternity. And now did I not fear the further opening of the sluces of your swelling passion, to the breaking in of an irresistible torrent of sadness upon your Spirit, I could very easily engage my self to a vo∣luminous Discourse of this nature: but lest the lifting up of him, should renew an occasion of casting down your Spirit, I shall the more briefly present before you, and the whole world, what in my own observation was always, since I know him, eminently deserving in him: Whereby it will plainly ap∣pear, that the Life and Spirit both of Text and Sermon did clearly shew forth themselves in him. The truth is, when I consider the exactness of his carriage in all relations, I am very apt to think, that as, for a complication of all perfecti∣ons, he while he lived was Nulli se∣cundus. second to none; so now he is gone, there will scarce another appear second to him. He was an incomparable Husband to you, an excellent Man to the State, and a precious Christian to God. He was to you the sweetest yoke-fellow in the world, not one of his carriages but apparent∣ly bearing the Image of that Fountain from whence it sprung, viz. strong, wise and intire affections. He loved ex∣ceedingly, and yet ruled discreetly. You had, I am sure, all you desired, which was his heart, but not his head. He was Plin: nat. Hist. li. 10. cap. 62. never like the hee-viper, which put his head into the shee∣vipers mouth. What God gave him to keep, he kept, and what God gave him to communicate to you, he did punctually per∣form. The truth is, both of you in this were exct Disciples

to Moses, always confining your selves to your proper apparel. That perfection methoughts which was amongst the rest, as the Sun in the midst of the Stars, was his unparalleld con∣tentedness in the want of children, like Abraham in this, that he never in the least grieved you by abraiding you, but excell∣ing Abraham in this, that he never, either to God or man, un∣becomingly complained of the want of a mercy so naturally desireable, but still expressed his sence of the full and compleat making up of that tryal, next to Christ, in your self: And when it pleased God to lay a real foundation of hopes of enjoy∣ing that blessing, he was indeed, like a Beleever, affected with the goodness and Providence of God, but not at all so trans∣ported, as if he had not been long before crucified to it. And when it pleased God to return and blast those hopes, he carry∣ed it like one that desired no will but Gods might be accommo∣dated. He expressed as much joy in his disappointment, as ever he did in his expectation. He always said in that neer tryal, Not my Will, but thine be done. He made it the bu∣siness of his delight to scatter any cloud of trouble that rested upon your Spirit; and though he naturally rejoyced in his own melancholly, yet the least symptome of sadness in you was a burthen too heavy for him to bear. The truth is, all his carriages in this relation have left behind them this true te∣stimony of him, that he rather made most worthy presidents, then confined himself to the best examples. But I fear I have been too long in surveying his perfections in this rela∣tion; and in commending him as a husband, I have discom∣mended my self as a friend, in adding too much fuel to the burn∣ing flame of your passionate affection. I shall therefore rather bury him as your husband, and present him to you again as the husband of the Common-wealth; to which indeed he was truly marryed, cheerfully spending himself in a continual faithful pursute of the Affairs thereof. He was a Timotheus in the Phil. 2. 20.  Common-wealth, naturally caring for their State: He was indeed by the Providence of God in a very short time called to several places of highest Honor and greatest Trust amongst us, wherein he always behaved himself, though as a Ruler over the persons of men, yet as a true Servant to the good of men: As in his private, so in his publike capacity, no ones

less then his own. He still desired that Justice might be as a River, and never coveted, to pale it in as a pond or his pri∣vate use. He delighted immediately to serve the publike, and at the most but collaterally himself: Yea, many a time hath he vigorously and heartily appeared against his own pri∣vate interest, that he might approve himself a faithful friend to the Publique. I know nothing he got by all his Service, except Pluta. in the life of Thraybu∣lus. p. 12 34. Thrasybulus his reward, a crown of two branches, Bays, whereby he never contracted the peoples envy, but to his last had an interest in all mens good word and affection. And (which was the crown of all) he ever stood firm to his Prin∣ciples, and could never be justly numbred amongst them who were given to change, always abhorring to wear that Glove which would fit both hands: If at any time he went with the stream, it was because the stream went with him; and stil as the tyde turned, he owned his Principles, and boldly adventured to swim against it. No man can charge him to be like the bull∣rush, which always waves with the wind; but all that knew him, can, without falshood or flattery, affirm, that nothing could move him but Reason and Honesty. The truth is, he was in this capacity a man so excelling, that every one was ambitious (as they were about Homer) to prove him to be his Homer. Countryman. But why do I stay so long in this, which, to the judgment and experience of his fellow Worthies, and al∣most to the whole Nation and City, was so certain and infal∣lible; I rather descend to speak to his spiritual part, as he knew, owned, loved and obeyed Jesus Christ, and truly in this I know none that profess the Name of God in the way of the Gospel, but may be glad to have such a Copy to write after. I have observed several things in him as a Saint, which I never saw met together in so much perfection in any man of his time.
1. He was a Real Christian; he was such a Christian, as Seneca. Seneca was a Philosopher, Plut. in the life of Seneca. more so in deed, then in name; though his face, with Moses, did always shine, yet especially, with the Kings daughter, he was all glorious within: He much delighted to be best to God, and to his bosom friends. His integrity was his perfection. I may say of him (and I know the Lord saith the same) as God spake of Job, in every

condition, that there was none like him in the earth, a perfect Job 1. 8. Job 2. 3. Gen 25. 27. Vid. car. in Job 1. 8. and an upright man, one that feareth God, and escheweth evil: That which is here called perfect, in Jacobs Character is call∣ed plain, so that the plain heart is the perfect heart, which was indeed the unparalleld perfection of this Worthy.
2. He was a Humble Christian; the higher he was in Gods account, the lower still in his own: He knew too much of God, as not to know himself: He often spake in the language of Job; I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but Job 42 5. 6. now mine eye seeth thee; wherefore I abhor my self, and re∣pent in dust and ashes. He was never like the Pharisee, who lived far from neighbors, and so was necessitated to commend himself. He did indeed for his time very much for God, yet Col. 3. 12. 1 Pet. 5. 5.  humilita∣tem animi vobis in fixam ha∣bete. was he never heard to say, Come see my zeal for the Lord of Hosts. He always observed the Apostles Rule, to put on humbleness of mind, and to be clothed with humility; for all that ever conversed with him, did, from the sweetness of his carriage, truly conclude him to be a man humble in Spirit. In the midst of all his honours he was rather pressed down with the weight of them, then puffed up with the blast of them. When he was at the highest, the poor, which received the Go∣spel, he still with much delight received as his familiars and equals; yea, with S. Paul, rather accounting himself the least, 1 Cor. 15 9 Ephe. 3 8.  Miaimorum minimo Bez. Non jacto dignitatem meam fatcor me minimum esse omnium Sanctorum. Pelica. yea less then the least of all Saints.
3. He was a Sober Christian: though he much enquired into spiritual Mysteries, yet he never was wise above what was written. I never knew him but a great Lover of the Scriptures, and a special Admirer of that they testified of, viz. the Glorious Mystery of Christ Crucified. He was never so superstitious, as against clearer ght, wilfully to retain dark and worm-eaten Principles; neither was he so slight, as upon every specious shew to sorego a wel experimented serious truth, to embrace a notional nothing. I am privy to many temptations of this kind, which he often wrastled with: But this I know, that down-right plain truths, such as Peter preached, Acts 2. (an expression he often loved to use) were more acceptable and sweet to him, then all the empty high∣flown

nations and speculations which this age, above all o∣thers, hath ushered into the world. God gave him the mercy of a plain heart, and that heart delighted in pure and plain Simile gaudet si∣mili. truth. I have heard, that there is in Scotland a floating Island, that if the Seaman cast his Anchor there, the Land will pro∣bably carry away his Ship. This excellent Servant of the Lord did never cast the Anchor of his Soul upon such an un∣certain thing, but upon Christ, who is yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever.
4. He was a Believing Christian: The life which he lived Gal. 2. 20. in the flesh was by the faith of the Son of God. He was clear∣ly taught of God that rare art of going out of himself, and acting in another. Hence it came to pass, that what he did Deus magis delectatur adverbi is quam no∣minibus. Heb. 11. 5. was not only good in the matter, but also in the manner of per∣formance, with which * God is well pleased. This is the testi∣mony which the Apostle gives of Enoch, that by faith he ple∣sed God. And the grand thing which God will take notice of at the last day, shall be the acting of Saints in a holy and spiritual manner: Well done good and faithful Servant, en∣ter Mat. 25. 21  id est,  Bez. Iob 21. 15. Quid pro∣iemus? Iun. Mal. 3 14. thou into the Joy of thy Lord. His faith led him forth to do all that he did still out of pure and entire affection to God, and the things themselves. He never served God for profit, but for pleasure; not like those which desperately said, What profit shall we have if we pray unto him? nor like those who much speak the same language, What profit is it that we have kept his Ordinance? Nay, rather he accounted the work it self, wherein he enjoyed sweet and intimate Com∣munion with Christ, as suffient wages. He delighted much to be near Christ, to see his face, and to hear his voyce: It was his frequent expression, How dull is that Sermon or Or∣dinance to me, wherein I cannot see or meet with Jesus Christ! Christ still was the Ceer of all his thoughts, which made him so little to be taken with this world, that he did not so much as carelesly mind the inheritance God gave him here, but still delighted to accommodate his thoughts with better objects: It was but a trouble to him to think of living to en∣joy that which he was heir to, he still rather desired to be dis∣solved, and to be with Christ, which he accounted best of all for him: Though his time was but short in this world, yet he

thought it extream long till he was in the arms of his Saviour. It made him to bear his last sickness with much patience and cheerfulness, because he thought after that sickness he should be well to eternity: Ʋpon that account, though he was some∣times full of pain, yet he was always full of peace, insomuch that the very day before he dyed, being asked by a friend, whom he loved, How it was now with his Spirit? his answer presently was, I have now no trouble to wrastle with, but the unwillingness of those that are dear to me to submit to the Will of the Lord concerning me, expressing in himself much joy and satisfaction in his expectation of the sudden ac∣complishment of Gods good Pleasure, wherein the Lord not many hours after did fully gratifie his longing desires, and even in the strength and vigour of his understanding and parts he sweetly fell asleep in the Lord. And now, Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that Ier. 9 1. I might weep day and night for so irrepairable a loss. I know nothing here can now take my heart, when the righteous are thus sadly taken away. But I must correct my self, and re∣tire into the Wilderness, and weep bitterly, where none shall witness it, or be prejudiced by it. Therefore now seeing God hath determined his own Will, my great business is in the strength of Christ to speak to your consolation (sweet Lady) who have the deepest share in this sad loss. The truth is, the Lord hath taken from you the most suitable and choycest Quum non satis natu∣rae, neque Gloriae, ne∣quae patriae vixsset. mercy you had below himself, and that in the midst of your en∣joyment of it; when the flower in your bosom was most fra∣grant, it pleased the Lord that the it should be withered. God took him away before he had lived half long enough to any relation; but the Lord hath done it, and it is good to be silent in his Will: Your business now is to see and receive the ma∣king up of this loss in Christ, who is not only a Father to the fatherless, but also a Husband to the Widow: Isa. 54 5. Thy Maker is thy Husband. There are four things wherein the Lord doth manifest to you his tender sense of your condition.
1. He executes all your Judgment for you; He is the wi∣dows Psa 68. 5. Defensor viduarum. Iun. Spei secu∣laris socie∣tate desti∣tutis domi∣nus sibi templum fabricat. Aug. Judg: Hers in a peculiar manner. God was so good under the Law, as to Deu. 10. 81. execute the judgment of the widow; much more is he so now under the Gospel: Whether you are Plaintiff or Defendant, seeing the Judg is yours, the Cause cannot but be yours also.
2. He establisheth mercies to you: When a husband dyes, the very pillars of the house are broken; God then appears and establisheth all again: so that now what the widow hath, though never so little, is more sure to her then to any one else: Pro. 15. 25 Constituit terminum viduae. un. 1 King. 17. 16. * He establisheth the border of the widow. It was the wi∣dows oyl in the cruse, and the widows meal in the barrel, which did not waste.
3. He threatens all that afflict you; He proclaims to all the world what he will do against them who do the least thing against you: Read often that place, Exod. 22. 22, 23, 24. Yea, if any do but so much as vex you, God numbers it in the Ezek 22. 7 Catalogue of their great prevocations.
4. He looks upon it as a signel act of goodness in all that shew mercy to you: He looks upon it as that wherein all Re∣ligion Jam 1. 7.  Curare & pro virili sublevare. Bez. Jor. 49. 11 is swallowed up: This is pure Religion, to visit the fa∣therless and widows in their affliction.
Now from all this discovery of Gods goodness to you, what is it that God may justly expect and challenge from you, but the casting of your self by faith upon him? God encourageth you to it: Let their widows trust in me. Now earth is blast∣ed and withered to you, whom should you fly to, but him in whom the life and fulness of what you have lost still do abide and continue? What Earth cannot repair, Heaven can. Oh that God would therefore by this dispensation take occa∣sion to lead you forth into further experiences of himself, that you might, while you drink down this bitter cup, taste also and see that the Lord is gracious. This I know will be your only relief, and that which in e will certainly scatter that cloud of sadness which indeed at present rests with too great dark∣ness upon your Spirit, which the Lord, by the manifestation of himself, will in his time totally dispel: In the mean while, let that sweet Scripture as a companion rest with you: Unto the upright there ariseth light in the darkness: he is gracious, and Psa. 112. 4. full of compassion, and righteous. That the Marrow and Spirit of this Text may be your Portion, is the uncessan Prayer of,
LADY,  Apr. 18. 1650.
