



THE ensuing Collection was made for your Information, and Assi∣stance, in the whole course of your lives. The Design of this Preface to perswade you to be wise, to be good be∣mes, without delay; to beware of Compli∣ce with a careless Age, or depending upon late Repentance, so common and pernicious.
In order to which,
(1.) Set your selves with full purpose of heart  serve God, though you have very few to bear u company. Get a Spirit of Fortitude, Courage, well-grounded, undaunted Resolution to go a∣ainst the stream of corrupt Nature, Satan's Temptations, and carnal Reasoning; in a way posite and contradictory to the greatest Num∣er, who are Children of the Devil: Christ's  a little Flock
Lu. 12.32.. The whole World lies in wickedness
1 Joh. 5.19.. ollow not a Multitude to do il
Ex. 23.2.. Eat not of their Dain∣ties

Ps. 141.1., lest you drink of the Cup
Ps. 75.4., and fall with them in to the Infernal Pit. The mo Epidemical and Infectious a D∣sease is, 'tis not the more taking or inticing, b dangerous; be you the more cautious and ci∣cumspect. Fear not the Name of Scrupulou or Precise, wherewith the Devil in his Discipl frights so many from their Duty, so eviden obvious, and convincing, that they are forc to run away from themselves to get rid of th Obligation and Conscience of it; and to impl their wit to find out Evasions for it; to smoth and stifle the Convictions of a future Recko∣ing; while their best Reason is unable to ensu their Presumption, or to give them such Ass∣rance as Men ought to have in a Case wher in to be mistaken is to be remedilesly undo Caleb (was of another Spirit) encouraged th People of God in their March, whilst all h Companions dampt their Hopes, stopt the Progress, brought an evil Report upon the Lan of Canaan. Upright-hearted Micajah, thoug he knew he should make himself ridiculous being singular, and 'twould cost him Impriso∣ment at least, to be sincere, goes against t Advice of four hundred false Prophets. Noa walked with God, when all Flesh had corrupt their ways. Lot held fast his Integrity, wh he only was found Righteous in Sodom. Th true goodness was left alone in the person of o single Eliah (as he once supposed) even then
e Pious, was to be Wise, and his Duty. Hea∣en's worth all our pains of getting thither, hough we could see none go before or after us in he way, and that every where spoken against. The Sons of God are blameless and harmless, without Rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and erverse Generation; and hold ast Christ's Name even where Satan's seat is
Ph. 2.15. Rev. 3.17..
They are Fools indeed, who are contrary-minded to the Infallible determination of the ex∣press Word of God, which is able to over∣allance the Suffrages of all the World, (though ll men's minds in it were perverted;) and hall stand immoveable as a Rock in all Ages o the End of the World. Nothing that's prodi∣ally loosed on Earth in compliance with a li∣entious Generation, shall be therefore loosed in Heaven, nor the Conditions of obtaining that Happy place, easier, though most live as if hey had found out a nearer way to it than ever God revealed. Not one Iota of his Law, which makes the way narrow, and the gate strait, hall pass away, notwithstanding the looseness of he Times we live in. The Heavenly Trea∣sure abates nothing of its price, whether men hink good to give it, or whether they will for∣bear. True Wisdom hath no meaner Esteem f it self, because Folly entices, gains, and en∣ertains the multitude and grandure of the World, which neither Justifies Crimes, nor will Alle∣viate Punishment: The old World sinned to∣gether,
and were drowned together: Th wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all th Nations that forget God
Ps. 9.17. Let's have but the Approbatio of a good Conscience on our side and we may well despise the Censure, and Dis∣sent of all Mankind; who will e'er long be o the same mind with us, that the saving ou Souls, and being happy for ever, is so supreamly Necessary, that nothing else, compared with it is so besides. And we need no Teacher to inform us, that we must do necessary Things; Ne∣cessity justifies the Wisdom and Honour of do∣ing all that it commands, and usually gives A∣bility to do it; making us confess Powers tha we thought not our selves to have, and to excee all our known Abilities.
Is it not wiser and safer, to follow the dire∣ction of a known undoubted Friend, who is Wis∣dom, Love, and Goodness it self, as impossible t advise us ill, for our wrong or loss; to perswad us into a course of life of which we shall eve have cause to complain, or repent of, as to deny himself? or to give ones self to the Conduct o the Devil, a professed malicious Enemy to God Goodness, and the Souls of Men; and believed to be so, as universally as he is believed to b at all? Sin is his standing Counsel, recommen∣ded to the World by his Instruments. His wiles we are sure are devised for our Perdition: There¦fore to hearken to Him, is wilfully to tread in a snare, which we know is laid for our life.

Sin will everlastingly be Folly; and Per∣verseness in it Madness, in spite of Number, Custome, Fashion, or Example. Can President change the Nature of Things? Is there any Prescription against Reason? Will publick Vogue justifie, or pass? or Multitude of Voices carry it against God? force him to alter his mind? to remove the Pillars of the World? to repeal his Laws? to revoke his Threatnings? shall we follow their Example, who thwart him? contradict and endeavour to deface the Principles of their own minds, and consciences? whom all men at least tacitly condemn, even those that bruitishly and sillily are led by them? shall we make them our Guides, who have ne∣ver sincerely tried to be truly Religious? that speak evil of the things they know not? that can be so sottish as to think, they can go on in sin, and not be punished? have so little of men in them; as to live like Beasts, and to wish they may die so too? that have so bad Memo∣ries, as to forget they have Immortal Souls? and so little Reason as to think there is no God?
Intirely adhere to him, without any Respect to the Eye and Esteem of the perverse, deceived World, notwithstanding the Envy and Hatred you incur thereby. The Purity and Holiness of Religion in the truly good, is by the scurrilous Reflections, and bitter Sarcasms of the profane, made contemptible; which is as foolish and ma∣licious, as if a Slave should reproach the Son of a King, for being like his Father. But oh, how
will these abject wretches be confounded (they will chuse rather to be covered under the Ruins of the World) then, to be a Spectacle of Ab∣horrence and Scorn before that Ʋniversal glori∣ous Confluence, when the Son of Man shall come in the Glory of his Father, with the holy Angels
Mark 8.38..
Sin carries with it so much Shame and Hor∣rour, that many of the Poets believed there was no Fury like the Conscience of having done Evil: To avoid the worm of which, so insupportable many have found it, as to cast themselves into the Fire that is not quenched. And the Ease the obdurate gain, by being delivered from the Remorse and Regrets, the Reproaches, and Re∣bukes of Conscience, is far over-ballanced by the Loss that cannot be divided from it; Namely, the Loss of the Joys of Innocence, and of the Sense of God's Favour, and Hopes of a happy Futurity. There's not an eminent Man among the Grecians (saith one of the Ancients) that dies an Heathen, or an Infidel, though they lived so. If there be Atheists in company, there are none in Hell, or alone. They tremble at that in private, and at Death, which they laugh at among the Jovial Crew. All sorts of men in all Ages (that have gone before us into an Eter∣nal State) of all Conditions, Perswasions, Opi∣nions, Tempers, Ages, Dispositions; upon Expe∣rience have found, that, whatsoever vain thoughts men in the Heat of their Youth, and Lust en∣tertain of Religion; when they come to leave
the World, they give Testimony unto it. They confess at last, that it had been their Prudence and Interest to be good betimes; and not to stay till Necessity or Experience force them to it. And that a strict and serious Life, is not the Hu∣mour of some conceited singular Persons; but, the opinion of all men, when they are most im∣partial, and serious. That they are wise indeed, who make hast and delay not to keep God's Com∣mandments, though they expect to save no more by it, but their Souls.
Religion abridges us of nothing but sin, which is Rank poison to our Souls: and exchanges the momentary Pleasures of it, for the perpetual peace of a good Conscience. The Pleas sinners use for their vitious Lives, are all such, as any man who will be but faithfull to his own Soul, may as easily answer, as invent; and see a∣bundant Reason to be singular rather than sin∣full and careless. Ask them if they ever knew any carry the Comfort of his sins out of the World with him; and what themselves will be like to think of their doings, when they shall think them over at Death, and in Eternity. If the plea∣sures of sin for a season, be worth the venturing endless Torments; and if the number of sinners that run so great a hazard, are well satisfied in their minds, that it will moderate all their Suf∣ferings, to remember what they have enjoy'd; That Hell is not so hot, nor so lasting, as to keep them out of it; and to be preferr'd before the necessary means of their prevention,
which would bring them as near Immortal Joys as their next Heir is to their Earthly Inheri∣tance; and is the better Estate for being out of this World, which is of so uncertain, so short a continuance. Did Heaven but stand in the same account with them now, as it will when that great Gulph shall obstruct their passage, they would pursue it with such vigorous and conti∣nued Endeavours, as never proved unsuccesfull. The difficulties of Religion are insuperable only to the slothfull, the coward, the inconsiderate, who are not to be consulted with, in our Christian warfare: who have never made a thorough Trial of it, nor duely considered its Reward; who would attain the end, without the means; go to Heaven by descent, without discomposing themselves, in putting off Dispositions and Affe∣ctions incompatible to that Holy place. There is no Lion in the way to a resolved mind; and if there were, little David grappled with, and slew both a Lion and a Bear; and from thence was encouraged to enter the List with the Un∣circumcised Philistin, and overcame him.
(2.) Beware of that infinite hazard of a Death-Bed-Repentance; of venturing Eternity upon your last Breath. Makè Religion your early, your continual Business, your Duty, your Obliga∣tion; which will administer a delightfull Refle∣ction on your following years, prove the truest Frugality and Improvement of Time, the greatest ease, quiet, comfort, and safety both of Life and Death. Those that now load themselves with
guilt under the delusion of Pleasure, that gives them secret disquiet while they are laying it on, treasure up shame and sorrow for the time to come, horrour and despair for a dying-hour. All men seek the Lord some time or other; only wise men betimes, while he may be found. Old Age is the Lot but of a very few, grievous and burthensome enough of it self; but disconsolate and opprest indeed, when men come to possess the Diseases, and Infirmities of it, together with the Iniquities of their Youth; bitter, if not fruitless Repentance for their mispending it. Yet Death observes not the Course of Nature, but the De∣termination of God. Boast not thy self of to Mor∣row, for thou knowest not what a day may bring forth
Prov. 27.1.. Possibly this day may bring forth thy Death, how then shall to Morrow bring forth thy Repentance, or make thee another Tender of this day's rejected Salvation. Every day puts a Period to many Lives, as well secured as ours, and who have had the same Reason of Hope with our selves. No man ever miscarried because his life was short, but bad: 'twas no loss to Gi∣deon, that he returned from Victory before the Sun was up
Jude 8.13.: There's no dan∣ger of being wise and good too soon; but all the wisdom to be learnt in another World, comes too late to re∣medy any final miscarriage in this. We may be instantly surprized by Death, or a Disease that incapacitates us to call for Mercy in general;
much more to make our selves meet for the Inhe∣ritance of the Saints in life.
Such as delay shall have more cause to repent hereafter, but less power and will: Preparati∣on for Death, which requires the whole of man in his best vigour is (oh how sad and deplora∣ble!) usually delay'd till the melancholy Even∣ing of Age, or Twilight of Death. The Trifles of this World divert them from that main Bu∣siness, to which all others should be subordinate: No man hath a lease of his life as Hezekiah had
Isa. 38.5.. In Golgo∣tha are Sculls of all sorts, and sizes: We see few Hoary Heads; most Children die before their Parents. The old Cammel (saith the Arabian Proverb) carries the young Cam∣mels skin to the Market. A Thousand Blos∣soms fall to the Ground, for one Ripe fruit ga∣thered into the Basket. The Glass runs whilst we are idle. The swiftest things in the World have been staid, but the life of man; that went a Days Journey forward, while the Sun stood still
Jos. 10.12, 13.; we ought therefore to be always ready, else, when we are most unready, or least think of it, our Lord may come
Matt 24.44.. Righteous Abel is slain by his bloody Bro∣ther, whilst friendly talking with him in the Field
Gen 4.8. Zimri, and Cozbi died in the Act of Lust
Num. 25.8.; sud∣dain Death, seases upon Eglon, sitting in a Summer-Parler which he had for
himself alone
Judges 3.15, &c., Sampson dies upon a Theatre, making sport, and Thousands with him, seeing it
Judges 16.. Rebellious Absolon meets with his Gallows, a Tree in the Forrest, which heard not his Father's Caveat for his Life
2 Sa. 18.8, 9.: Elah slain drinking himself drunk in his Steward's House, by his Servant Zimri, who finishes his own Royalty by Fire, burning the House over his own head, and dies
1 K. 16.8, 9.18.: Job's Children give up the Ghost, eating and drinking in their Elder Brother's House: His Table became their snare
Job 18.19.. In the Time of our Saviour's grea∣test Joy and Glory; when the Fashion of his Countenance was altered, and his Rayment white and glistering, Moses and Elias appear, and talk with him about his De∣cease
Lu. 9.29.. Elijah walking with Elisha, is taken up into Heaven
2 Kin. 2.11., and St. Stephen, while he's preaching Jesus, and calling up∣on God
Acts 7.. Moses is called a∣way whilst busie about what God had set him; bringing the Children into Ca∣naan
Deut. 32.49.. John Baptist's Head is given away at a grand Festi∣val
Matt. 14.6.. The Ten Virgins are summon'd at Midnight, when all was silent, and at rest
Matt. 25.6.. The Rich Fool's Soul, that Night was required
of him, when he dream'd of many Years; and that nothing could prevent them but starving
L. 12.16, &c.: Herod, while glutting his aspiring Humour with popular Applause, gives up the Ghost, in the Midst of his vain-glorious Harrange
Acts 12.21.. Thou shalt be King over Isra∣el, and I shall be next unto thee, said true hearted Jonathan to David, not knowing he was to die in the next Battle
1 Sam. 23.17, &c.. The great Arbitrer of all things, needs not Death's usual Messenger (Sickness) to prepare his way, who can thunder the proud Emperour under his Bed. And write the great King at 3 or 4 Words into trembling
Dan. 5.5, &c.: send a Fly, to fetch the Tripple-Crown before his Tri∣bunal: Make a small Scratch, or Bone, a Crum, a Hair, or the Kernel of a Grape, or Raisin, as mortal as Goliah's Spear: Un∣speak the whole World into nothing. Blow down a great Bubble, the stateliest Building with an easie Breath; undress our Souls, by unpinning one Pin. By withdrawing his Hand, take a∣way the Aiery difference between Sleep, and Death.
And oh! what a sad Appearance will the Face of Death have to those that have loiter∣ed, unthriftily trifled away their Time, that never knew the worth of it until their last hour, and then have their Work to do. Eternity at
Hand, gives value to all Holines and Sense of God in spite of the World; and lessens all things else into less than nothing, and Vanity; imprints a ghastliness and horror upon wicked∣ness and sensuality. The Thirty pieces are no∣thing worth, and the Innocent Blood above all value, when Men suffer in the Agonies of Con∣science, and fears of the approaching Judge. An House-full of Silver and Gold will not buy a Man to resist God, when the Terrible Majesty appears to him: nothing is so precious then, that a man will not fling to the Bats and Moles. When the Breath is going out of the Nostrils, how precious is sincere Holiness to those that have slighted it as a thing of nought. As if the great Truths of God's Word were never true till a day or two before we die. But these things are always so rich and valuable. True Wis∣dom is always so precious, that it disdains to borrow Esteem from a Minute of Extremity. And therefore, it mostly falls out, that those who would have none of its Counsel, and despi∣sed all its Reproofs, when they come to seek it now, cannot find it, but it laughs at their Ca∣lamity, and their Misery confutes their Confi∣dence.
A good Death is the natural consequence of a Holy Life; else, there's no such thing in Na∣ture, nor Grace neither, except by a Miracle of Grace. The most profligate and obdurate, can∣not but think that they must repent; and ac∣knowledge the Prudence and Safety of the Reli∣gious,
whom they contemned. They own their own folly and mistake, when it's too late to re∣medy: They desire to die the Death of the Righ∣teous, and promise to live their life too, if they recover from sickness. And if a Holy life be then looked upon necessary to be lived, it cannot be sufficient meerly to resolve it. Religion ne∣ver gave any a Dispensation to Sin, that's one thing. We have entered into a Covenant with God to forsake the Devil and all his Works. The Conditions of our Salvation, are our giving up our selves, Bodies and Souls, not a dying but a living Sacrifice unto God
Rom. 12.1.. To deny ungodliness and world∣ly Lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present World
Tit. 2.11, 12.. The wicked must not only forsake his ways, and the unrighteous man his thoughts; return from all his wickedness that he hath committed, unto the Lord; but keep all his Sta∣tutes, and do that which is right
Isa. 55.7. Ez. 18.21. And 33.14.: acquire and exercise the Ha∣bits of everlasting Grace, as well as mortifie and overcome all cor∣rupt Affections, and vitious In∣clinations. Christ gave himself for us that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purifie unto himself a peculiar People, zealous of good works
Tit. 2.14.. He bare our Sins in his own Body upon the Tree, that we being dead to Sin, should live unto Righteousness
1 Pet. 2.24.. And
is it reasonable that this should be wholly fru∣strate by those supposed to be redeemed by him? we dishonour, and endeavour to make void the purpose and design of his Sufferings, and Re∣demption, if we think them to be a shelter for our ungodly Living. The Gospel (the highest display of Mercy) is not a Salvation of men, in, but from Sin; and by Repentance means a Reformed course of life; and only by very si∣lent Intimations (the Tract of which is hardly discerned) leaves it possible that he should pluck some as brands out of the Fire, by giving them Repentance at last; whereas, this is now be∣come the only Repentance in use, the universal Refuge. But, the goodly price of a Death-Bed-Repentance, at which God is prized by most, even then when Religion is at the lowest, is re∣jected with Indignation, and the Everlasting State purchased by it, may be sadly called an A∣celdama, a Field of Blood.
It's in vain to ask whether God cannot save a Man after a vitious life, since his own Will seems to restrain his Power; that he will not save men without a recovery to Holiness. He is Holy, Just, and True, as well as Merci∣full. The same word that informs us, He is mercifull and gracious, likewise tells us, He will by no means clear the guilty
Ex. 34.6, 7.. That, if we live after the flesh, we shall die
Rom. 8.13.. That He cannot lye, nor deny Himself. I have no pleasure in the
death of him that dieth, saith the Lord; wherefore turn your selves and live
Ez. 18.34.; Implying, except we turn to him, his Mercy will do us no good. What Reason have we to expect it, which we have used to evil purposes, and his dishonour? that he should work Miracles for us, while we despise the means? Cause the Sun to stand still for us, because we have trifled away our day? Turn Stones into Bread, for us who have been slothful, and are ready to perish? That he should stand ready for us with that grace at last, which we have so long refused, and rejected. God is as peremptory for the Time, and Season, as for the Duty it self. There's a Time when he will not be found, nor accept our Offering. The Day of Grace, lasteth not so long as the Day of his Patience: The fruitless Fig-tree stood still in the Vineyard, uncut down, but presently withered away under that fatal Curse, Never fruit grow on thee more
Matt. 21.12.. Though he will pardon the Infirmities of the sincere, yet there's a certain Period set for the return of Sinners, be∣yond which, all their Industry is ineffectual
Gen. 6.3. Isa. 6.9, 10. Ez. 24.13. Rom. 11.8. Rev. 22.11.. Jerusalem neglected the day of her Visitation, and the things of her Peace were irrevocably hid from her Eyes: Esau found no place of Repentance (in his Father) though he sought it care∣fully with Tears: The foolish Virgins saw, and
were troubled, that they wanted oil, and endea∣voured after it, but too late, the door was shut, and no knocking powerfull enough for their admission.
The design of the Parable of the Vineyard
Matt. 20.1, &c., (so grosly abus'd) where those that went into it at the last hour, were rewarded equally with those that bore the burden and heat of the day; was to teach the Jews, that, though God had chose them first to be his People, yet at the Eleventh hour (i e. in Gospel Times, or end of the World) He would call in, accept of, and reward, the Gentiles as largely as they, not∣withstanding their repining and murmuring at this his Grace and Mercy; the Reward being to all of Grace, and not of Debt. At least it's no Advantage or Encouragement to those that are early call'd upon and ingaged, yet refuse and delay coming in, till old Age: Adjourn their serving God, to their going out of the World; for those that went in at the Eleventh hour, (a time rather to discharge than admit Servants) were not call'd before, but found standing idle, because no man had hired them.
And, for the Thief upon the Cross (that hath stole away so many Souls for the Devil) it's a bare Ex∣ample,
Lu. 23.33, &c. not confirm'd by any Pre∣mise: It's a fingle Example, without a paral∣lel in the whole Word of God: It's an extra∣ordinary Example, ranked among the Miracles
Christ wrought when he left the World: It's an Example impertinently alledg'd to war∣rant delay in us, who have the sound of the Gospel continually in our Ears, yet wretchedly cheat our selves of the Remedy of our miserable Condition, by adjourning the use of it to a late and uncertain Futurity, which seldom or ne∣ver succeeds well. Vain Men! to conclude an Ʋniversal Law, from one single Instance; a personal Grace and Privilege, extended to that one Person, that stood close to that Sacrifice, that was offering it self up to God; when the Conqueror was Triumphing over Principalities and Powers, and making a shew of them openly upon the Cross;
Col. 2.15. and displaying the Power of the dying Mediator, to forgive Sins in his lowest Hu∣miliation. The Scriptures, that are an History of more than Five Thousand years, have but this one Instance of one accepted upon a Death-Bed-Repentance; and in that, such an extraor∣dinary Conjunction of Circumstances, as will never fall out again. No man professing Chri∣stianity, hath any Reason to expect to fare as this Thief did, till Christ come into the World, and suffer again, and that between two Thieves, and he be alive at that time and place where he suffers, and be one of the Thieves, and the good one too: exercising so many Acts of a true Repentance and lively Faith in Christ, when (probably) first preached to him; when he saw him in so despicable a state, a∣midst
insulting Infidels, under all the Infamy and Misery of a shamefull and painfull Death, and nothing to make such a greatness as he ascri∣bed to him, probable; which will never be.
They dreadfully mistake themselves, that crowd up Repentance into so narrow a Room, as a Sick-Bed, when men have scarce time to reckon up all the particular Duties that make it up. That imagine the Tree that hath been al∣ways Barren, should bring forth good Fruit now it is a cutting down: That a man should live a life of Holiness, when he is just a dying: That a weak infirm Person, of disabled, disturbed fa∣culties, should build that in Three days, which others, notwithstanding all their Abilities and Diligence, find hard enough to do in Forty years: That those who have had the knowledge of God, and been call'd upon all their lives, to give up themselves to him, should be accepted when they pour out to him, instead of the gene∣rous Spirits of life, the Lees and Dregs of it. When the Blood cools in the Veins, and the Spi∣rits are ready to stand still, the Season of the Pleasures of Sin are over, and a man is no lon∣ger to live where they are; to cast himself up∣on Religion, when there's nothing else to vie with it, when all things else fail: That he must take us in at Night, though he hath in vain stretched out his hand to us all the day long. As if this state were prepared only for a Stage for Men to act their Vices and Exorbitances upon, and then God should remove them to Heaven, that have but just begun to acknowledge him by
some weak Devotion extorted even out of Neces∣sity, and given the Bulk of their Time to Sin: That have sacrificed the Male of their Flock to Lust, and even with impious Designs, kept the corrupt thing for him. That the easie Yoak, the light Burden, which cost the Son of God his life to obtain Heaven upon, an intolerable Load, and to be had on easier Terms. That God should have only the faint and feeble Services of our last Hour, for his Mercies vouchsafed to us all our Days. That he should accept of such a Commutation for the Obedience due to him, as a Death-Bed-Repentance, a few Sighs and Groans, Tears, Promises, Scatterings of Devotion, in ex∣change for all our Duties, sufficient to expiate a whole life of Impiety; with a Breath to retract all the dishonour we have done him in it. As if he had made us to take the delights he most ab∣hors, and after all to give us such a stupendious Reward. From the Word of God Men have no Promise to warrant such a Confidence; if they have, let them shew it; if they have not, they must thank (or rather condemn) them∣selves, for bringing themselves into a Condition without the Covenant, without a promise, hope∣less, and miserable. And oh! how miserabl must he needs be, that lies upon the brink of E∣ternity, incountering the throws and horrors o an imminent Dissolution, the doubts of what wi become of him in another World, the fears o Hell, the uproars of a guilty Conscience; whom God hath left to the Boiling Sea of his own Ter∣rors, and thrown him out no Anchor of Hope?
