


HAving received your commands to preach, that which first presented it selfe unto my thoughts, was the subject of this ensuing Discourse; A Theam (if I doe understand the present po∣sture of these times) both seasonable and necessary. There are some points of difference which are of an inferior con∣sequence, and stand farther off from the foundation; these be∣ing but Judicia domestica, I meddle not with: But there are other positions which pull hard at the very foundation, and which doe subvert the faith, dogmata salutis devora∣toria, as Tertullian styles them; and Religionis Chri∣stianae Carcinomata, as another speaks: against these I held it my duty, as a Christian, as a Minister of Christ, and as your servant to declare my self; And I beseech you be∣fore whom was it more fit to open those ulcerous sores, then before your selves (Right Honourable) who under God are our most choice and tender Physitians?
If any Reader should now be so unhappy in his charity as to calumniate this discovery of heresies and blasphemies to be an arrow subtilly designed against holinesse and good men: to such a one, all that I would reply is this; 1. The surest friends to holinesse have been the sharpest enemies to errours; Christ and his Apostles were so. 2. That I never

yet have learned what direct advantage did at any time re∣dound to true sanctity, by a patient endurance of heresie and blasphemy. 3. Nor can I be so uncharitable as to think, that any person sincerely holy, or incending the progresse of holinesse, durst be a friend to such damnable and soule-destroying errours. The design which I would commend to all in this time of Reformation, is this, That truth and ho∣linesse (which are so naturally combined, and so mutually interested) may be conscientiously promoted with e∣quall zeal: encourage holinesse, but contend for the truth too: maintain the truth, but countenance holinesse too: he who pretends holinesse, but regards not truth; and hee who pretends the truth, but regards not holinesse, neither of these is a cordiall friend either to truth or holinesse. For your parts (Right Honourable) be you pleased to goe on (as you have begun) in the strenuous support of them both: Both of them have a necessary respect to Gods glory: both of them have a necessary respect to mans salvation: both of them have a necessary respect to our present Reforma∣tion: both of them will prove the Kingdomes safety, your consciences comfort, and the crown of all your long and great labours. For both these you have the prayers of

