




IT is most fit that I should (most inti∣mate Friend, and dear brother) satisfie your friendly, and daily requests, ex∣pressed in your frequent Letters to me: and seeing that in your last Let∣ters you do earnestly, and courteous∣ly invite me to you, if it were conve∣nient
(I cannot dissemble with you) yet by reason of many hinderances I cannot: but as for your other request, viz. that I should give you some clear Instructions, I cannot deny you, but am constrained to gratifie you there∣in. I know the honesty of your mind, and that you do willingly hear or see any thing that is new or wonderfull in this art. I know also that you have spent good part of your estate and life in it. Because therefore you have expressed much good will, and bro∣therly fidelity towards mee, I cannot forget either, but am constrained to be thankfull, and, if I never see you more, to leave a brotherly legacy to you, and yours, as a remembrance of of mee. For I will not here only an∣swer, and cleerly instruct you concer∣ning those points only of which you have asked me; but wil also dedicate
a Book to you, which I will call, Of the Nature of things, and will divide it into nine little books. In this book I will satisfie all your requests, and further then you demanded: al∣though haply you will much won∣der, and perhaps doubt whether all these things are true that I shal write. But doe not so, yea beleeve them not to be speculations, and theories, but practicall, and proceeding from ex∣perience. And although I have not tryed all of them my selfe, yet I have them from, and have approved them by others, and know them by that kind of experience, as also by the light of nature. If in some places you cannot understand mee what I shall say, and in some processes require of me further explication, write to mee privately, and I will declare the mat∣ter more cleerly, and give you suffici∣ent
instruction, and intelligence. Al∣though I beleeve you cannot well misunderstand what I shall write, see∣ing I know you are so well qualified and gifted by God with arts, and a good understanding, Moreover, you have known my mind and meaning, and therefore will quickly, and easily understand me. Now I hope, and do not doubt, that you will respect this present worke, commended to you, and esteem of it according to its worth, and not at all divulge it, but keep it in great secresie for your selfe, and yours, as indeed it is a hid, and great treasure an excellent gem, and pretious thing, which is not to be cast to swine, i.e. Sophisters, and contem∣ners of all good naturall arts, and se∣crets, who are worthy neither to read them, much lesse to have, know, or understand them. And although
this book bee very little, consisting of few words, yet it is full of many, and great secrets. For I do not here write out of speculation, and theorie, but practically out of the light of nature, and experience, lest I should burden you, and make you weary with many words, &c. Wherefore most deare friend, and loving brother, seeing I have wrote this book out of love to you alone, and to no body else, I be∣seech you that you will keep it as a thing of value, and a a great secret, and not let it goe out of your hands as long as you live, and at your death, bequeath it in like manner to your children, & heirs, that they also may keep this book secretly, which also I shal particularly desire of them, that they wil not let it goe out of your family at any time, and be made pub∣lique, so as to come to the hands of
Sophisters, & scoffers, who contemn all things, which are not agreeable to them, and indeed detract from them: These are pleased onely with what is their own, as indeed all fools are wont to bee, whom their owne toyes onely please, not anything which is ano∣thers, hating all kind of wisdome. Wherefore they account wisdom as folly: bec. nothing doth thē any good they know the use of nothing. As one workman cannot use the instruments of another, so a foole can use no wea∣pons better then his owne sticke, or boughes; and there is no sound plea∣santer to him then the ringing of his own bell. Wherefore most dear bro∣ther be you faithfully admonished, as I have entreated you, and do what I have enjoined you, which I hope you will, and you shall doe what is right and well. Farewell with the protection of God.
Dated at Villacum in the year, 1537.
