



Right Honorable,
THese few sheets present unto your view a short but welcome discourse of the visitations of the most High up∣on the saddest spectacles of degeneracy upon earth, The poore Indian People: the distance of place, (if our spirits be right) will be no lesse∣ning of the mercy, nor of our thankefulnesse, That Christ is glorified, that the Gospel doth any where find footing; and successe is a mer∣cy as well worthy the praise of the Saints on Earth, as the joy of the Angels in heaven. The report of this mercy is first made to you, who are the Representative of this Nation, That in you England might bee stirred up, to be
 Rejoycers in, and Advancers of these promi∣sing beginnings. And because to You an ac∣count is first due of the successe of the Gospel in those darke corners of the World, which have been so much inlightned by Your fa∣vour, enlivened by Your resolutions, encou∣raged by Your fore past indeavours for God, & hope stil being parts of Your selves, to be further strengthned by Your benigne aspects and bountifull influences on them.
The present troubles have not so far obli∣terated and worn out the sad mispressions which former times have made upon our spi∣rits, but we can sadly remember those destru∣ctive designes which were on foot, and car∣ryed on for the Introduction of so great evils both into Church and State; In order to which it was the endeavour of the Contrivers and Promoters of those designes, to wast the number of the godly, as those who would never be brought to comply in such destru∣ctive enterprises; which was attempted by banishing and forcing some abroad, by bur∣thening and afflicting all at home. Among those who tasted of the first, I say not the worst sort of their cruelty, were these our
 Brethren, who to enjoy the liberties of the Gospel, were content to sit downe, and pitch their tents in the utmost parts of the Earth, hoping that there they might be out of the reach of their malice, as they were assured they were beyond the bounds of their love. God who doth often make mans evill of sin, serviceable to the advancement of the riches of his owne Grace; The most horrid act that ever was done by the sonnes of men, the rther of Christ, God made serviceable to the highest purposes of Grace and mercy that ever came upon his breast; That God doth shew that hee had mercifull ends, in this their malicious purpose: as hee suffer'd Paul to be cast into prison, to convert the Act 16. 30, 33, 34. Acts. 8. 1. 11 Jaylor, to be ship wrackt at Melita, to preach to the barbarous, so he suffer'd their way to be stopped up here, and their persons to be banished hence, that hee might open a passage for them in the Wildernesse, and make them instruments to draw soules to him, who had been so long estranged from him.
It was the end of the adversary to sup∣presse, but Gods to propagate the Gospel; theirs to smother and put out the light, Gods to communicate and disperse it to the
 utmost corners of the Earth; that as one saith of Paul, his blindnesse gave light to the  whole World, so we hope God will make their distance and estrangednesse from us, a meanes of bringing many near and in to ac∣quaintance with him.
Indeed along time it was before God let them see any farther end of their comming o∣ver, then to preserve their consciences, cherish their Graces, provide for their sustenance: But when Providences invited their return, he let them know it was for some farther Arrand that hee brought them thither, giving them some Bunches of Grapes, some Clusters of Figs in earnest of the prosperous successe of their endeavours upon those poor outcasts: The ut∣most  ends of the earth are designed and pro∣mised to be in time the possessions of Christ; And hee sends his Ministers into every place where he himself intends to come, and take pos∣session. Where the Ministery is the Harbinger and goes before, Christ and Grace will cer∣tainly follow after.
This little we see is something in hand, to earnest to us those things which are in hope; something in possession, to assure us of the rest
 in Promise, when the ends of the earth shall see his Psal. 22. 27. Rev. 11. 15. Psal. 72. 8, 9, 10, 11. glory, and the Kingdomes of the world shall become the Kingdomes of the Lord and his Christ, when hee shall have Dominion from Sea to Sea, and they that dwell in the wildernesse shall bow before him. And if the dawn of the morning be so delightfull, what will the clear day be? If the first fruits be so precious, what wil the whole harvest be? if some beginnings be so ful of joy, what will it be when God shall perform his whole work, when the whole earth shall be full of the know∣ledge Isa. 11. 9. 10. of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea, and East and West shal sing together the song of the Lamb?
In order to this what doth God require of us, but that we should strengthen the hands, incourage the hearts of those who are at work for him, conflicting with difficulties, wrestling with discouragements, to spread the Gospel, & in that, the same and honor of this Nation, to the utmost ends of the earth? It was the design of your enemies to make them little, let it be your endevor to make them great, their greatnesse is your strength. Their enemies threatned their hands should reach them for evil, God disappointed them; And let your hands reach them now for good; there is enough in them to speak then fit objects of your incouragement, they are men of choice spirits, not frighted with dangers, softned with allurements, nor
 discouraged with difficulties, preparing the way of the Lord in those unpassable places of the earth, dealing with such whom they are to make men, be∣fore they can make them Christians. They are such who are impressed for your service in the service of Christ, can stand alone, but desire to have depen∣dence on you, they feare not the malice of their en∣emies, but desire the countenance and incourage∣ment of their friends; And shal your Honors in con∣sideration of their former sufferings, their present ser∣vice, and reall deservings, help the day of small things among them; shal you interest them in your assistan∣ces, as you are interested in their affections, you wil thereby not only further these beginnings of God by incouraging their hearts, and strengthning their hands to work for him, but also (as we humbly conceive) much add to the comfort of your owne accounts in the day of the Lord, and lay greater obligations on them yet more to pray for you, to promote your coun∣sels, and together with us your unworthy servants to write down themselves,

