



MY LORD,
IF the Greatnesse of the Subject may serve to justify the Inscription of a Book to so Great a Name, I may with reason affirme that none ever treated of an Argument of more weight, extent, and difficulty then This; and consequently hope, that the Considerableness of the Matter will supply for the little Ti∣tle which the Translation hath given me in it, and upon which I have presumed to present it to your Lord∣ship. Fatality and Liberty were disputable Points in all Ages of the World, and in all Religions. But the Controversies a∣bout them have been infinitely multiply'd amongst Christians, and scarce any Questions agitated with greater heat both in the Purer and the Ʋnreformed Church. The Hypothesis of Absolute Predestination and Physical Predetermination of all Events, hath engaged its Promoters in the defence of sundry Consequent do∣ctrines, of very great importance, yet no lesse controverted then their foundation. Of which no more need here to be mentioned, besides those contained in the Five Propositions of late years with incredible subtlety and artifice contested between the Jesuites and Jesuitical Faction on one side, and the Jansenists on the other,
 in the Romane Church, viz. touching The Possibility of keeping Gods Commandments, The Resistibility of Grace, The Liberty of the Will, The Efficacy of Preventing Grace, and The Ʋniversali∣ty of Redemption.
In these Points the doctrine of the Jansenists is in some respects different from that of the Calvinists; yet not so much, but their subtle Adversaries took advantage of the Conformity, to con∣trive Five Propositions capable of a double Construction, name∣ly, both according to the opinions of Jansenius, and those of Calvin; that by this means they might involve the former in a Censure of the latter, which they doubted not to obtain, as being equally condemned for heretical by either dissenting Party, the Adherents of the Jesuits, and the Disciples of Jansenius, or (as they style themselves) of S. Augustin. The Intrigues, Confedera∣cies and solicitations for the accomplishment of which design are the matter of this Journal, as some Manuscript Pieces concerning the same affair are of the adjoyned Collection.
I know not whether at any time so ample an Account hath been given the world of the manner of Proceeding held by the Roman See in passing a Decision of Doctrine. But I perswade my self, that whosoever shall impartially peruse This, cannot have any great opinion of the Popes Infallibility (which yet is the Basis, at least of all points held by the Romanists in opposition to the Prote∣stants) when he finds that the Pope professeth himself no Divine, and the Cardinals pretend to no more but a Prudential Judgment (that is, such as is requisite to be pass'd in point of interest) that the Popes meaning in his Constitution is as much controverted as the Cause it determines, while one Party adheres to what he writes, and the other to what he speaks; and that the Authority of the Church as well as that of the Fathers, is made use of to esta∣blish Contradictions, (That I mention not the disparagement of the so much pretended Unity of that Church.) Nor can any Ex∣ception lye against the Relator who was a principal Agent in the Affair, and upon all occasions makes as great profession of zeal and affection for the Roman Church as he doth of Truth and sin∣cerity.
I pretend not, my Lord, to exhibite your Lordship a Patron of the Cause, by dedicating the History of it to your Honora∣ble
 Name. 'Tis not more indubitable that the Church of Eng∣land hath delivered her sense upon these Points with singular pru∣dence, caution, and moderation, then that your Lordship hath been always a most firme Propugner of that Church, even in the worst of times. And truely the late happy Revolution, in which your Lordship was so active as to venture all earthly Interests, hath redounded highly to the advantage of the Church, as to these very Doctrines: Since whatever Ecclesiastical Government might have been established during our Distractions, no Termes of Com∣munion could be more rigid and unreasonable, as to these Points, then those required by the two most prevalent Factions of those Times; as appears by the publisht Confessions of Faith of the Assem∣bly and the Congregations.
Should I here take occasion to mention your Lordships indefa∣tigable Industry and Assiduity, Fidelity and Disinteressedness, in the Service of the State, certainly no man could be more justly accu∣sed of a superfluous undertaking, since I should speak no more then what is already most perfectly known to the whole Nation, at least in its Representative. Nor is it to be doubted but that being now in a higher sphere, your influences will be as great for the Pub∣lick Good, since you are still accompanyed with the same Ver∣tues which rendered you a Peer of both Kingdomes by Merit, be∣fore you were so by Inheritance. Nor shall I attempt to give a Character of your Lordships personal accomplishments; as, an Ex∣traordinary Measure both of Divine and Humane Learning Per∣fection in the Moderne and ancient Languages; together with sin∣gular Generosity and Beneficence (of which a more illustrious proof could not be given then your late vigorous actings for relief of the Sufferers by the late times.) It may suffice me to say that I have found particular effects of your Lordships goodness, and that I should but little care to own the Translation of this work so publickly, did it not give me so fair an opportunity to declare the honour I have to be,
MY LORD,

