



Right Honorable,
THough I my self cannot bring forth any thing worthy your Honour's view, yet that which is dearest to me, the memory of my dear and precious wife, I com∣mend
to your Honours: and though I have ever judged both of you Emi∣nent in Piety, yet something perhaps in this deceased servant of Christ, may not be unworthy of your serious thoughts, and may further stirr up your pure mindes in the wayes of God, yet more to honour that God who hath so much honoured you: The Lord hath exceedingly blessed you both, with PiousYour marriage is conjugium non con∣jurgium. Comfortable and Eminent Yoke-fellows, and yet hath more ho∣noured you by marrying you to Gods own Son, the heir of heaven, (and in∣deed therein lies your chief and lasting happinesse). Probably this short discourse (which was very hastily written, as it dropt from my pen, in much grief and sorrow on the suddain, to divert that flood of grief which I found my self unable to withstand at present, as well as I would) may somewhat further your Honours Comforts against the hours of approaching and inevitable death: God hath called both your Honours to great estates and places, and you cannot but know that there∣in lye snares. When the Duke of
Venice had shewea to Charles the 5th. his most stately Palace, he, af∣ter the sight thereof, onely answered,Haec sunt quae nos faci∣unt invitos mori. These things are they that make us unwilling to dye: We use to say, there are two manners of Enough, and indeed there is Esaw's enough (or. much) in the world without God, Gen. 33.9. and Jacobs enough. (or all) first God, and then con∣tent in these other things with him, Gen. 33.11. This latter enough, I hope God hath given you, Christ and with him all other needfull things, Rom. 8.32. Let this Tombstone be to your Honours, as King Phillips Mo∣nitor, to put you in mind of what is certain, yet we are too prone to forget, Lam. 1.9. viz. death. The Egyptians used to have a deaths-head at their greatest feasts: thinke we of death in the greatest plenty. When Moses and Elias talked with Christ, at his glorious transfiguration on the Mount, their discourse was about death, Luke 9.30, 31. Christ once cured the blind mans eyes with clay, so may he still more open our eyes with the consideration of our clay,
and mortality; do as EumolpusEgo sic semper & nbi{que} vixi tanquam ultimum diem, nun∣quam re∣diturum, consume∣rem. said he did, namely endeavour to live every day as if it should prove his last day. God hath of late much exer∣cised both your Honours with weak bodies, (so that what would be a curse to some, would be a blessing to you, to wish that which John wished to Gaius, 3 John 2. that your bo∣dies may prosper as your souls pros∣per). The gracious God give you these two choise mercyes, which are most sweet when they go together, Psal. 103.3. forgive your sins and heale all your diseases. I hope you will not take it ill from me (whom you have Constantly so muchI may say of both your Honours with Je∣rome, vobis & quod possum de∣beo, & quod non possum. fa∣voured) that I propound to your Hon∣ours so mean a person for your imita∣tion: be pleased to consider, that its the best that I had,, said the poor Grecian to the Empe∣rour. and whose ex∣ample I my self desire to follow in the way to life; It is the use at the Election of the Emperour of Germa∣ny, to shew to him on his Election day severall marble-stones, desiring him to chuse, of which of those he would have his Tomb-stone made, to mind him even then of his Death; I
have here shewed you the Tomb∣stone of one that lived very holily, and dyed very happily, which may en∣courage your Honours against the night of sable death; Satan is busie to vex whom he cannot destroy, and though he cannot bring a childe of God to Hell, yet he will bring Hell to a childe of God; and oftimes brings his sharpest darts towards his death; though Satan cannot make him fall out of the state of grace yet he labours to make him fall in the state of grace, & its good to have your hearts Comforted against that day. Se∣narclaeus saith of John Diarius, that the day before he was slain by his own brother, (as Abel was by Cain for Religion's sake) he spake to him so sweetly, and feelingly, that he thought that he felt the holy Ghost come pow∣erfully upon him with his words; and surely I could say much to this pur∣pose concerning this deceased servant of Christ, that she spake even to her death with that affection, warmth, and life, as one that first felt what she spake, and then spake what she felt: That holy learned man Mr.
Brightman, (who dyed about fifty years since) desired much (if the only wise so pleased) to dye a suddain (though to him not suddain) death, & so he did. Augustus Caesar was wont when he heard of any that dyed easily and suddainly, to wish such a happyWhich he called . death. I cannot say that she dyed exceeding suddenly,Though she was at the Congre∣gation twice on the Lords day, De∣cemb. 6. and asleep in the Lord on Thurs∣day, De∣cemb. 10. but I can say that she dyed exceeding happily. May your Honours in these saying-dayes, (wherein is so much disputing and unedifying janglings about Religion, 1 Tim. 1.4, & 6, 5. wherein Ra∣chells sight exceeds Leahs fruitful∣nesse) may your Honours (I say), take that counsell, which holy and learned Melancthon gave his mo∣ther (then troubled with variety of disputes about Religion) namely, Go on in holy practise, to do what you know, and trouble not your selves (as you do not) with the endlesse and needlesse brabbles of the times, which would weary, and not edifie you: and which made holy Strigellius and Melancthon (very learned pious men) to desire to dye, to be freed fromThey de∣sired to dye, to be freed, ab impla∣cabilibus odiis The∣oiogorum. them; how many in stead of heart-searching
& holy practising, mind on∣ly opinions notions and disputes, which the serious thoughts of death might happily aellay: the Poet saith (and perhaps you know), that swarmes of Bees meeting in the aire, will some∣times fight with great violence, yet if you cast a little dustVirgil. Hi motus animorum at{que} haec certamina tanta Pul∣veris exi∣gui jactu compressa qiescunt. Sir Hen. Wotton Provost of Eaton, would have no other Epitaph on his Tombe but this, Hic situs est author illius Sen∣tentiae, Dis∣putacdi pruritus fir Ecclesiarum scabies, saith learned Dr. Arrows. And Luthers prayer was, à doctore glorioso, a pastore contentioso, & inutilibus quaestioni∣bus liberet ecclesiam suam Dominus. amongst them, they are presently quiet; Oh that the serious consideration of our dust and mortality might cease and quiet our needlesse differences, and unprofitable disputes. Go on I be∣seech you to study Gods word, and your own hearts, death, and your great account; Learned Suarez used to say, that he more esteemed, that little pittance of time, which he con∣stantly set apart every day for the private examination of his own heart, then all the other part of the day which he spent in Voluminous contro∣versies; hold on therefore in Gods work and fear not to lye down in the bed of the grave which Christ hath
made soft for you; Christ hath, both conquered for you, and conquered in you: the great work is past here, if God hath made you new Creatures, raised you from the dead, (the death of sin and nature) hath changed you from darknesse to light, its an easier work to put that new Creature so made, so raised, into heaven, and to remove him from the lesser light of grace to the greater light of glory: he that hath done the greater (which you ex∣perience) will surely do the lesser.—But I cease your Honours further trouble, onely humbly crave your pardon for this my boldnesse, here∣in, and my plainnesse in the ensuing narrative, (for sorrow knew neither exactnesse of method, nor curiosity of phrase) and when your Honours have leasure, vouchsafe to read the life and death of her, who was most dear to him that is,

Charter-house near Kingston upon Hull.
December 23. 1657.
