



Right Honorable and Right Worshipful,
WHat the French Chronicler saith of his Countrey-men in the Preface to his History, much more truly may be said by us of this Nation, viz. That we have lived in a time of miracles, and our posterity will hardly beleeve the wonders done in our days; and every yeer as devils and men have heightned their rage and malice against the Church, the more God hath multiplied the loaves and fishes of his mercies wonderfully to us-ward. I beseech
 your Honors and Worships to help us so far as you can; that what prayer hath got, praises to God, and justice to men, may keep and wear: You may re∣member that while Judg Thp one of your Lordships was ex∣ecuting justice impartially here the last Assizes; that costly Castle of pontefract (being the last strong hold which the enemy had in all this Nation, as your Honors mentioned in your Charge the last Assizes, which is deservedly since Printed) was delivered up into the Parliaments hands, and thereby this poor shattered County (which hath had Armies in it con∣stantly now these ten yeers together, cleared up from any open enemies in Arms: And now this Assizes while you are still upon the execution of justice, the Lord hath sent us in the joyful news of such wonder∣ous works which his right hand hath wrought in Ire∣land, August 2. as makes us all like them that dream. While the Church was praying for Peter, Act. 12. God cast in Peter amongst them, as the answer of their prayers; and when the wrastling flock of Christ (at least many of them) had not onely in private, but in publike been weeping, fasting, and praying for Ire∣land, August 1. the Lord of hosts did by a handful of men that so his hand alone might be seen, and have the glory) work a marvellous deliverance for that poor Nation of Ireland, August 2. The shield, the sward, and the battel were broken in Salem, Psal. 76. 1, 2, 3. God sometimes saith, That men were too many to work withal, never that they were too few, Judges 7. 2. Go on I beseech you Right Honorable in doing justice (and therein exalting the Nation) freely in that way committing the event to God, notwithstanding all carnal objections. You may perhaps remember
 those verses that were writ over the Court of Justice in Zant.
Hic locus odit, amat, punit, conservat, honorat,
Nequtiam, pacem, crimina, jura, probos.
True it is, that God hath taken away by death, many godly worthies in these our times, both in Church and State; but if we do as the London Clerks in their weekly Bills, set the Christenings against the Burials, I mean compare the young ones coming on in University, City and Countrey, with those lately translated hence, those I think will exceed these. True it is likewise (as in the Sermon is mentioned) that of latter times, Heresies have much overspred this Nation (a sad case I confess:) But if we likewise con∣sider how far the glorious Gospel hath spred within these last seven yeers into those places where in Truth and Purity before it came not, and shines more bright in some places, where before it did come; as also in the just liberty afforded to humble consciencious men since these times, I think our gains (a primo ad ultimam, if we judg super totam materiam) exceed our losses: Heretofore, in many places how were Ser∣mons on Lords days in the afternoon, Lectures, Exercises, &c. forbidden? How were men (if suspect∣ed for Puritans) made offenders for a word, Isal. 29. 21. If men did meet together to weep and pray (though with most integrity) on the Churches be∣half, it was well if they escaped scorching, either in their Persons, Liberties, or Estates. We grumble that things go on no faster, when yet our selves have hands in plucking off the Chariot wheels; we are not content that the Lord do his own work his own way, but are too much of Namans spirit, would
 have God limited to our time and pace, 2 Kings 5. 11, 13. not justly considering that mans extremity is Gods opportunity, that Jerusalems wall is usually built in the most troublous time, Dan. 9. 24. & 12. 1. The wise God oft times goes forward when he seems Gen. 42. 38. & 45. 9, 10, &c. to us to go most backward, as in the case of old Jacob and his children, when they were most driven out of hope, then were the greatest mercies brought about. While Moses was a great Courtier, and the Kings great favourite, he never delivered Israel, but when banished, had been fourty yeers a poor shep∣herd, and had lost his favor and Courtship, then doth God use him in that great work. My Lords, God hath hitherto carried you on couragiously, and un∣dauntedly in the Cause of God, and the Common-wealth, ride on in Gods way and prosper: Judg Thorp One of your Honors I have known intimately a long time, and am not willing to say what I know to be truth concerning you, lest the carping world should say that I give flattering titles to men (a thing which Eli∣hu Job 32. 21, 22. condemns, and which (I thank God) I could never learn, neither in Court nor Countrey;) but your justice and integrity are (I am confident) cleerly manifest to the consciences of all who have known your carriages, especially the last and this Assizes here; notwithstanding all the objections of your riding the circuit in your own native Countrey. You have both of you been tryed in these sifting nes, and been found faithful in the grand Affairs of the Common-wealth. These Notes were preached at the intreaty of Master High Sheriff, and you my Lords were pleased to own them in publike, and my self in private, and to require them to be Printed, which I
 the rather am content to suffer, to testifie my obedi∣ence to your commands, and to shew how much I value your judgments above my own. I am sure I can do nothing worthy of this quick-sighted age. I will trouble you Right Honorable and Right Worshipful no more at present, but will freely pour out my soul at the Throne of Grace to God for your Protection, Sanctification, and Eternal Salvation; for Gods Spiritual Blessings within you, and his Prospering Blessings upon your just Endevors, and humbly sub∣scribe my self,
York, August. 14. 1649.

