


Right Honourable,
IT was an excellent saying of Lewis of Bavyer Emperour of Germany, Hujusmodi com∣parandae sunt opes, quae cum naufragio simul enatent, such goods are worth getting and owning, as will not sinke, or wash away if a ship∣wrack happen, but will wade and swim out with us.
A meditation never more needful to be studied and practised, then in such Naufragious times as these, wherein we have seen the Greatest States in the
 world, the Greatest Families in those States, and the Greatest Persons in those Families to have suffered the most fatall and Tragicall shipwracks.
The windes and Sea were never more high and rough, nor the ship more Tos∣sed; the earth never more rent with Earthquakes, nor the world lesse setled. What is to be done? There is a Fort that standeth firme when the earth is Re∣moved. There is an Arke that swims a∣loft when the whole world is drowned, and the highest mountaines thrown into the midst of the Sea: This Fort is Faith; This Arke is Conscience.
These are the goods to be gotten and made store of in these dayes: These make one truly rich, and safe and happy. All other goods whatsoever without a man be they Inheritances of houses, lands and honours are but bare Movea∣bles, uncertaine and unconsiderable Moveables, one may have them, but he cannot say how long he shall hold them. These whoso hath shall hold. Other goods are put into the worlds Inventory (these never) which therefore saith (but falsly) such a one dyed rich, for he dyed worth so many thousands, valuing the
 man by his estate. They are mistaken. They might say so much he had, or at most he lived worth so much, but when he died he might die worse then no∣thing, what is the state to the soule? One living Dog is better then many dead Lions.
But Faith and good Conscience are the onely goods to be put in the Christi∣ans Inventory, the man that had them we may say he died rich, dyed rich though he lived poor, and which is best of all, his riches he carryed with him. He li∣ved and dyed  rich toward Lu. 12. 21. God, for such a one dies worth as much as both Christ is worth and heaven is worth; as Christ for Grace, as heaven for Glory; as Christ for Promise and secu∣rity, as heaven for performance and sa∣tisfaction: For good Conscience departs (not dyes) possessed of them both. And it is infinitely more for one to be able to say one of these two is mine, then to say a thousand mines of gold are mine. He that hath these hath all, Rev. 21. 7. He shall inherit all things, for God will be his God, he shall be his son: And as long as God hath any thing to give he shall not want.

 A good Conscience then, if had and kept, all is safe, all depends upon it, Grace and Comfort here, Glory & Blisse here∣after But this if lost or neglected, all goes to wrack, and is but losse and dung, and worse, if worse may be, and the man a lost man for ever. Take this, take all, as one said well, Tolle Caelum, Tolle animam; so I may add, Tolle Christum, Tolle Caelum; Tolle Fidem, Tolle Christum; Tolle Consci∣entiam, Tolle Fidem: Yea, Tolle Conscien∣tiam; Tolle omnia. Take away Heaven, said he, and take my Soul too; so say I, Take away Christ, take away Heaven; take away Faith, and take away Christ; and take away Conscience, you take away Faith; yea take away Conscience, and you make short work, and take away all. For what were my Soul worth if it were not for He n? what were Heaven worth if it were not for Christs what were Christ worth to me if it were not for Faith? and what were all Faith worth if it were not for Conscience? Therefore as dying Gar∣diner said truely, Open that window once, assert Justification, and deny merit, and farewel all together, farewel Popish Reli∣gion: So say I, Assert Liberty and deny Conscience, open that window once, and
 farewel all together, farewell all true Re∣ligion: Yea take but away part of Con∣science, and you take away all; take but away one syllable, and what is simple sci∣ence good for without Con? to shew that it is not science but Conscience that makes the Christian; and no Conscience but that which is entire and kept whole that ma∣keth the happy Christian.
Your Lordship is descended of Noble and truly Honorable Progenitors, high∣ly Honoured for their Greatnesse; highly Beloved for their Goodnesse; their Good∣nesse shining eminently in the discoveries of their Religion, Loyalty, Valour, and A∣ctivenesse to serve their Country in the greatest perils. They were to Truth Pa∣trons, to Religion Ornaments, to Peace Champions, fighting her Battels (when she was in danger) both by sea and land; and to their Country Dear and Cordial Patriots; some of them not loving their lives to the Death, have sacrificed them to the service of their Country. Their persons through the lustre of their Virtues and Heroick actions shone out in their high∣er and greater Orbs, while they lived; and their precious Names and memory (though themselves withdrawn) leaving
 a splendor and brightnesse behind (as the Sun when set) continue immortalized in our English History and Chronicles to all Posterity.
Your Lordship is the head of a great Family, and the highest Branch of a nu∣merous name, all whose sheaves do wil∣lingly bow to your Lordships sheaf, as gladly and willingly as Josephs Brethren did to him, accounting themselves Ho∣noured not so much in your Lordships Honour, as Honourablenesse, and honour∣ing you not so much for your Great and Honer est honorantis, Honorabi∣litas hono∣rati. High Birth, as Greater and Higher worth and aprroved sincerity in these trying times.
My Lord, Hold fast that you have re∣ceived: secure your Faith, and you se∣cure your soul: Secure your Conscience, and you secure your Honour, yea your Crowne. Then you shall not be shaken Rev. 3. 11. with any shakings, nor afraid of any a∣mazement.
That your Lordship may do worthily in Ephratah, and your name and Family be famous in Israel, as it is all the aime and ambition of this ensuing Treatise; so it is and shall be the Prayer of the Au∣thor, who craving your Lordships par∣don
 for this boldnesse and Prolixity, and a favourable acceptance and perusal of this homely Treatise, shall continue to efflagitate and importune God, that as he hath made you high in Place and Honour and Dignity: So you may be made much more high in Name, and Praise, and Grace, and Glory.

