


Right Worshipfull and much honoured Sirs,
THE eagernesse and importunitie of those amongst you whom it most concerned, so pressingly inviting me to come over to you for the service of your Faith, the worke of the Mi∣nistery, when dangers and troubles should arise in mine owne Hemi∣phere, together with your unanimous and free choyce of mee for that work, during the continuance of such stormes, have moved mee to hazard my selfe on the publique censure, that I may hereby acknowledge your kind respect, and returne you deserved thankes. Ac∣cordingly when stormes arose at home, and the provi∣dence of God opened a doore; at your request I came over to you, why I staid not with you, (but remain here at Bverly, six miles from you, and forty miles from the smoake of mine own cabbin) you well know: I have
 not now to accuse any, or Magistrate, or Minister, or people; this only I am most confident of, that the great God who now knowes, and ere long will reveale and judge the secrets of all then, will manifest that in this bu∣sinesse I had (and I verily so think of you) neither inten∣tion, nor endevour, but such as are agreeable to Gods Word, and the Parliaments order: I heartily wish that the succsse of this businesse may further (that which in the Sermon I drive at) both in you and me, Broken hear∣tednesse and contrition of spirit: my prayers are, that the publique curses wished may never fall on you; but that the blessings of peace may ever flourish within your gates, both peace within you, peace of conscience, by framing your conversation to Gods Word; and peace above you peace with God, through the Reconciler Je∣sus Christ; and peace without you, peace with men, which is alwayes good and pleasant, especially now, and chiefly in your Towne, when it is attendant to truth and holinesse. The Lord ever keep you from that evill spirit of dissention, Judg. 9. 23. and grant that those especially who ought most to be men of peace, may never for their own Num. 11. 29 otherwise affe∣cted were Iohn Baptist, John 3. 29, 30. and Paul, Phil. 1. 18. honour, gaine, or private ends, make any breach in the walls of Jerusalem. I had rather with Jonah be east into the Sea, then wilfully make publique rents in Christs seamlesse Coat. My intreaty to you is, not to trust in any outward strength or fortifications, lest selfe∣confidence be your ruine, Isa. 30 3. Jer. 17. 5, 6. you see in Isa. 22. verl. 8 9, 10, 11. that Judah got Armes and souldiers, made ditches, trenches, bulwarks, &c. But heare what God saith, vers. 12, 13, 14. That without Heart-breaking and humiliation, all these could not save them: You know what was said to Phocas, If you build your walls to heaven, yet if singer in, it will ruine them all: These fortifications cannot keep out the worst enemies, as first sin, second Gods wrath, third sicknesse, fourth death, fifth devils, sixth burning conscience now, seventh hell, &c. Labour therefore, I pray you, for true
 repetance, that is the way to make a Kingdome or Towne stand, Matth. 11. 21, 23. had Sodome and Go∣morrah repented, they had stood till this day. How did this prolong Nineveh? Jonahs first words to Nineveh implyed this, and holy Bradfords last words at the stake expressed it, viz. Repent, O England, repent, repent! Of al enemies and treacheries take heed of that cheating theefe, and devillish traytor, raigning sinne: that would both discourage and ruine you. I remember a sweet and experimentall passage of the old Earle of Essex (Father to his Excellencie that now is in the Field) which was preached at Pauls Crosse the Lords day next after his death; When I have gone out in a morning (said he) and found some guilt lye on my conscience, no man was more cowardly then I; but when I went to prayer in a morning, and found a cleare conscience and evi∣dence of peace with God, I durst have encountred an armie of men, as bold as a Lion. Such like expression I find of that Leicester-shire Martyr, old Father Latimer. Secondly, practise that which was the close of many of the Martyrs Letters, Pray, pray, pray. When Jacob stood like a Vertue betwixt two vices: on one hand, had had Laban, and now Esau and his crew on the other; Jacob goes over the brooke alone, and wrestles with God; and though the longer he strove, the weaker, the lamer he grew, yet holds out (like Moses on the Mount) till the day, til he got a blessing, and Esau's killing is tur∣ned to kissing, Gen. 32. 24. & 33. 4. See how prayer helps and saves in the worst times, Joel 2. 31, 32. I remember what I have read of Luther, that he prayed five houres a day (easque studio optissimas) and that when he dyed, the bords of his closet, where he used to pray, were found rotten with tears that fell from his eyes in prayer. Thirdly, labour to beleeve, 2 Chron. 20. 20. by faith get into those chambers of protection, Isa. 26. 20. the cham∣bers of Gods attributes, of his decrees, of his promises, of his speciall providence, principally the rocke Jesus Cant. 2. 14.
 Christ. I remember another passage of Luther, when they told him of the malice, power, and preparation that the Pope and his complices had against him; Come, come (said he) let us sing the 46. Psalme, and let them doe the worst they can: O but (said some) they have made a decree against you at Norinberge; Oh! (said he) but there is another decree in heaven, and that must stand; I (said he) have hitherto kept out Pope, Spaine, and the Devil, by prayer; and when I am gone, they that would keep him out must use the same way. But the porch growes great; give me leave to present these ab∣rupt meditations (such as they are) to your hands, eyes, and hearts; and to shelter them (that I say not my self) under all your Patronage: The blessing of him that ap∣peared in the Bush go with them, and be on you; who shall ever have the ferventest prayers, heartiest thanks, and true affections of him who is,

Beverley,
Jan. 5. 1642.
