


Right Honourable,
I Do with much confi∣dence presume to joyn your Ladiships two Great Names in the De∣dication of this plain Treatise, as so well knowing how long, and how firmly you have been joyned in heart by the best hand, and in the best bonds of mutual Love to each others persons, and mutual re∣joycing in each others Graces and Ver∣tues, and especially in these two, viz.
1 The truth of love to God, and his
 people and wayes, which are in your Ladiships esteem, the onely excellent, and wherein is your whole delight.
2 The love of the Truths of God, which you have kept fast in this houre of Tentation, which hath come upon all the earth to try the approved, Rev. 3. 10. as knowing from whom you have re∣ceived them, and that they are able alone to make you wise unto salvati∣on through faith which is in Christ Jesus.
And truly these two Graces, TRUTH OF DIVINE LOVE, and LOVE OF DIVINE TRUTH, I reckon the two richest Jewels which can adorn a Ladies breast. They are the Evangelical Urim and Thummim.
Such were you both, I can speak of my own knowledge for about this Thirty years, and such you are still: And as it was the highest glory of the Highest Elizabeth of this Land (the glory indeed of her Sexe) so it will bee your Ladiships to bee Semper Eaedem, while so many others have to their shame, left their first love, if not Rev. 2. 4.
 to their damnation forsaken their first 1 Tim. 5. 11. faith.
I have had the happiness, together with many others, long to know your Ladiships pious & exemplary conver∣sation, manner of life, faith, charity, humility, meekness, patience, con∣stancy under sundry and great trialls; In which regard I must say of your Ladiships, what was once said of Timothy, I know none (or very few) like-minded. Phil. 2. 20.
Yet truly when I consider, that as it is the nature of Hypocrisie (which takes up one part of this Discourse) like Hagar presently to swell, and lift up it self upon the first Conception, though of a Bond son. Gen. 16. 4.
So of Sincerity (which makes up the other part of this Discourse) like Elizabeth, to keep in, and hide her Luke 1. 24. self after her conception of a reall God-son, a childe full of grace, and of the Holy Ghost, chusing with Rebeckah, or with Moses to put on a vail to hide that beauty and glory from the view of the world, which is best seen of him who sees ,
 and looketh into the hidden man of the heart.
And further, when I consider the common vanity, that I say not greater crime of this present age, as in Fune∣ral Sermons, so in Dedicatory Epistles, to over-lash or break out into exube∣rant and excessive (and often undue) praises of the persons spoken of in the one, and spoken to in the other. I confess I was resolved to chide my Pen, and to lay my hand upon my mouth, remembring that of the Poet,
Haec amat obscurum—
But when I call to minde again on the other side, that even the holy Apostles, in their Canonical Epistles have spent some good part of their holy lines in the ample commenda∣tions of those eminent Saints to whom they wrote, as Paul in his to Philemon, and John in that of his to an Honourable Lady, and that other to a meaner Gaius, and that they went not behinde the door, as wee say, to whisper, but as on the house top, did proclaim the Religious and pious
 practises of those more choice Chri∣stians to the imitation of others.
And further, when I consider again in the sight of God, that with like truth that may bee asserted of both your Ladiships, which the Apostle speaketh of Demetrius, a rare, and not ordinary Testimony. Demetrius hath good report of all men, 3 Joh. v. 12. and of the truth it selfe, and wee also beare Record, and wee know that our Re∣cord is true. Or what is recorded of 2 Chron. 31. 20, 21 Hezekiah, Thus did Hezekiah through∣out all Judah, and wrought what was good, and right, and truth before the Lord his God; And in every work that hee began in the service of the house of God, and in the Law and Commande∣ments, hee did it with all his heart and prospered. And in hope that like use might bee made of such examples as of the Corinthian forwardness, which the holy Apostle therefore com∣mended, That your zeal and for∣wardness might provoke others. I then resolved,
—Cupit haec (or decet haec) sub luce videri.

 What, and if the wise and sober take offence to behold rotten wood, and base copper, covered over with gilt and paint; is there any just cause, that the envious world should take offence to see the gold and chrystal appearing in their native purity and splendor, which neither ignorance or malice can make any detraction from, nor Art, nor Eloquence make any ad∣dition unto?
The character and testimony given unto your Ladiships is that which thousands will attest, Even every eye that hath seen you hath blessed, and every ear that hath heard you (as was said of Job) hath born witness to you, and every mouth of such as have had Job 29. 11. knowledge of you, will break out in the words of Solomons mother, Many Daughters, (many Ladies) have Prov. 31. 29. done vertuously, but you have excelled the most of them all.
What were your Ladiships when you lived there but the two Eyes or Breasts of your Country? The two Pillars of two great and eminent Families? The two Staves of Bands
 and Beauty? Two Beacons set upon two Mountains? Or two Glasses for Ladies and Gentlewomen to dress by: Such as Tryphaena and Tryphosa in the holy Kalender, who laboured much Rom. 16. 12. in the Lord. Of whom I fear that will bee said when you are dead and gone, which was of those rare Trees, and the Spices presented by the Queen of Sheba to Solomon, There came no more 1 King. 10. 10, 12. such, nor were the like seen after.
It was a high word which Nazi∣anzen spake sometimes of Gorgonia, That whatsoever vertue was to bee found in other women, was to bee found also in Orat. in laud. Gorg. her; and whatsoever vertues were not to bee found in others, were yet to bee found in her: And I know not of whom it may bee more truly said than of your Scipio quam genuit, Paulae sudere paren∣renres, Grac∣chorum sobo∣les, Agamem∣noni Incli proles—Ro¦mani prima Senat us Pau∣periem Christi & Bethlemiti∣ca Rura secutae &c. in Epitaph. Paulae. Ladiships.
And what Jerome said of Paula, that though shee was descended of the greatest and most ancient and Il∣lustrious Families both among the Greeks and Romans, as of Agamemnon, Scipio, and the Gracchi, yet did shee of her own accord quit her stately Pallaces, Dignities and attendance to
 exchange Rome, and the glory of the world for obscure Bethlehem, pre∣ferring the poverty and contempt of Christ above all the riches, honours, and pleasures of this world. Shee was, hee said, Nobilis genere, sed No∣bilior sanctitate. The like may bee said of your Honourable Ladiships who have shewed like contempt of the vain and transitory splendor of this world, to the love of Christ, whose first birth made you noble in the eye of men, but your second Birth made you Noble indeed, Noble in the eye of God. Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou hast Isa. 43. 4. been honourable, and I have loved thee, saith the Lord by Isaiah.
I observe how the Holy Ghost in giving Titles of honour when com∣paring persons with persons, and Nobi∣lity with Nobility, gives the precedence to the Beraean, before the Thessalonian. The Thessalonian was the greater in Act. 17. 11. the worlds Heraldry (it was of old the Metropolis of Macedonia, fa∣mous for the victory of Philip over the Thessalians, whence it had his
 name given it, and the richest City at this day, saith Ortelius in all Greece) but Beraea was the greater in Gods ac∣count. Thessalonica bred the more honourable Citizen, Beraea the bet∣ter Christian, and therefore it is said, Those of Beraea were more noble than , Dicuntur in∣genio & inte∣gritate, Aret. in Act. 17. those of Thessalonica, in that they received the word of God, and searched the Scrip∣tures daily whether these things were so.
Truly your first Birth (Ladies) was high, yet but of Thessalonica, that which gave you a great name and place, as was said to David, Like unto 2 Sam. 7. 9. the name of the great ones in the earth; But your second Birth hath made you more noble, being like that of Beraea, and hath given you an eminent place among the Devout and Honourable women, whose names are registred in the Book of Life, as being, , not of a better bloud, but spirit, their ingenuity, and integrity, saith Aretius, made them reckoned more noble. Summa est probiores fuisse, magis inge∣nuos & pios. The short, and the long of it is, saith hee, they were of more Ingenuity, Piety, and Integrity, there∣fore of more Nobility.

 It is a great deal of Honour (Noble Ladies) yea Double Honour, that God hath put upon you above many others both of higher and lower ranks. You will, and must think your selves the more bound to honour him again with what ever is (yours, shall I say? Alas! What is that? Just nothing, but with what ever is) his own, your Honours, your Digni∣ties, your Graces, Abilities, Sub∣stance and Estate. For the truth of it is, you can never so much honour God, as hee hath honoured you, nor is it Religion which receives from you (though much, yet not) so much Ho∣nour as you receive from it: It is not the Gold which did beautifie the Mat. 23. 17. Temple, but the Temple which did sanctifie the gold, which made it grea∣ter.
Great Ladies! It was a sad Pre∣diction that of the Apostle that in the last dayes there should bee a foul de∣fection Tim. 4. 1. from the purity of the Go∣spel by shameful Apostacy, and Hy∣pocrisie. Our eyes have seen the like fulfilled upon our Nation beyond all
 our beleef and expectation, as was foretold Hazael, who with astonish∣ment 2 King. 8. 13. replied, What is thy servant a Dog? that I should do thus.
Wee have lived to see (which was part of Elies doom) an enemy in all the habitation of God, and in all the wealth which God gave Israel. A sad See 1 Sam. 2. 32. with the marginal Note. hand-writing, or as others read it, The affliction of the Tabernacle, for all the wealth which God would have given Israel.
Wee have lived to see the honest and sincere generation of our old Pro∣fessors worn out, and instead of the Golden shields wont to bee seen in the Temple in Solomons dayes, now 1 King. 14. 26, 27. Shields of Brass. They mourned once when time was (the elder Israelites that remembred the former Temple) to see how much short the second Ezra 3. 12. Temple Fabrick, was of the glory of the former: And may not we much more, to see how much our Professors fall short of their late Fore-fathers? this is it indeed which (above any thing else at present through the good hand of God) makes the Prophets at this day
 prophesie in Sackcloath, to see what a great forsaking there is, as the Prophet Isa. 6. 12. saith, in the midst of the earth.
Wee have seen great Stars fallen, and much of wormwood fallen into our waters to imbitter them, and a Rev. 8. 10, 11. strange multitude of multi-formed Locusts creep abroad, though Rev. 9. 7, 8, 9, 10. with Crowns upon their heads (of specious pretences) yet armed with sharp stings in their Tayles.
It hath been the power of rich grace that hath upheld your Honours in your integrity, that you have stuck to the word of truth, and have kept your Garments from being defiled. And while others seek to adorn them∣selves with Gold, and Pearl, and Pow∣ders, &c. that you have sought to in∣rich your Noble Breasts, with those precious stones that were in the High Priests Breastplate, the very same that are the glory of the New Jerusalem, Compare Ex. 28. 17, 18, 19, with. Rev. 21. 19. and to be like her whose Daughters you are, who was cloathed with the Sun, trampling the Moon under her feet, and having a Crown of Stars, of Scripture Doctrine and Graces upon your heads. Rev. 12. 11.

 I shall only bespeak your Ladiships care with the words of the Apostle in his Epistle, wherein hee mentioneth those two Elect Ladies, that you Look to your selves, that yee lose not what yee 2 Jo. v. 8. have wrought, but that yee may receive a full reward; which short Epistle, I de∣sire I may recommend to your Ladi∣ships, as a fair and rich Glass to be al∣wayes in your eye.
And if you shall please to cast an eye also into these two Glasses men∣tioned in this following Discourse, especially the later, which is your own, all but the plainness and homeli∣ness of it; I hope, I may say, though it bee no fair, yet it is no false, nor Counterfeit-Glass: no nor yet the for∣mer neither, though it bee of purpose provided to shew the false and coun∣terfeit face and vizard.
Now the Lord himself under whose shadow you have chosen to sit (as was Ruth 2. 12. said to Ruth) give unto your Ladi∣ships a rich increase of his Grace and Spirit, and a full recompence of all labours of love and piety shewed to his name and servants, Giving you an
 inheritance among such as are sanctified.
And what was promised to the house of David, that it should never want a light, or to the family of the Rechabites, that there should never 2 Chron. 21. 7. want some of that Race to stand be∣fore him; so that it may please God Jer. 35. 19. successively to bless those great and noble families of which you were des∣cended at first, and into which you were happily ingrafted. That the Ce∣cills, and Egertons, and Talbots, and Armins, may never want Ladies of like Spirit and Grace to build up those Ho∣nourable houses, yea such as with Leah and Rachel may build up the house of Ruth. 4. 11. Israel, that the Children, and Grand∣children born in those Families, may with the inheritance of your Names and Honour, and States, and Bloud, bee Heirs also of the same life of Grace, which is your present greatest Honour, and of the same grace of life, which is 1 Pet. 3. 7. your future Hope, Is, and shall bee Right Honourable Ladies,
The prayer of 
