



Madam,
THese Collections being Preached unto You, whilst I was Your Minister, had Your Approba∣tion and Hearing: now they request Your Acceptation, and Your Read∣ing. And though they lose much of their life, (Printing being but a dry Preaching) I hope they will not lose their labour, they issuing onely from an Obedience to Your Commands, which, to my endeavours, have alwayes been candid, and favourable.
I have often been thinking, That when
Age, or Sicknesse, or any other bodily in∣firmity deprives us of the Publick Mini∣stration of the Word, there are two wayes whereby we may comfort, and improve our selves; Either by Conversing with Men; or with their Works.
1. By Conversing with Men, when we may have them: So the Disciples did with Christ; And the Eunuch did so with Philip. The breathing Instructions of good men are most profitable, and have an operation in them beyond the dead Let∣ter. Now, of all men, those that by Office are to speak a word to weary soules, are most to be conferred with, as speaking to us in Christs stead: We are Ambassa∣dours for Christ, 2 Cor. 5.20. An Am∣bassador is one, who is Vicarious, or Offi∣cious for another; Alterius locum tenet — He supplyes the place of another. But the
Grecians call him , one that stands in anothers stead; Just such Ambassa∣dours are Ministers; they are Christs Offi∣cialls, they beare his Person, and stand in his stead; so it follows, We pray you in Christs stead, be ye reconciled to God: Such men as these we must chiefly conferr with, whilst we have them.
2. By Conferring with their Works, (when we want them.) A man that would improve his skill in remote Countries, ei∣ther adviseth with a Mapp, or with a Traveller. So, a man who would improve his Heavenly skill under the exercise of crosse Providences; either consults with a Traveller (an experienced Traveller) one that hath had his graces exercised under various dispensations: Or els he consults with a Mapp. Jehoshaphat did the one, when he was doubtfull, whether, or no, he
should goe up to Ramoth-Gilead, thinks it his best course to enquire, and take ad∣vise, (not of the Captains of his Hoast, but) of the Prophets of the Lord of Hoasts; he consults the men. But David did the other; he consulted the Mapps — Thy Testimonies are my delight: and my Counsellers, Psal. 119.24. What∣ever duty, whatever divine truth, what∣ever case of Conscience is necessary for man to know, God doth plainly determine by his Spirit, answering, and resolving us by the Voyce of his Written Word; Da∣vid therefore consults them. Thus Mapps are of great use, and Books may instruct, and improve as well as Men. 'Tis Stori∣ed, The Word Read converted Cyprian. And Thomas A Kempis was wont to say, He could finde rest no where — Nisi in angulo cum libello — but in a corner
with his Bible — so I translate it, 'cause the best Writing — yet it may be any other Writing. 'Tis true, we should principally reade the Book of God, as most fit to in∣fluence our soules, and to improve us. Theodosius, Alfred, and Alphonsus King of Arragon, are renowned in Histo∣ry for their constant Reading of the Scri∣ptures: Yet with subordination to that great Book, we may reade all other good Books, as means of comfort and improvement — Give attendance to reading — saith Saint Paul, (1 Tim. 4.13.) And indeed St. Paul himselfe gave so much attendance to read∣ing, that (as you will finde in his Epistle to Titus, chap. 1.12.) he confuted the Cre∣tians, and other learned Heathens, out of the Books of their own Writers, Aratus, and Menander.
Now, if among many other Books, You
vouchsafe Your Eye upon these worthlesse Papers, it will not onely give a splendor to them; but, a high favour to him, who is in all humble Offices,

Septemb. 28. 1668.
