



Friends,
I Having had cause my selfe to suspect mine own condition, have been put to search & try my self, and not willing to bee mistaken in a point of so high concernment, I did lay and bind up together these Meditations (tending to the anatomi∣zing, and the turning of the inside outward of a Christian) to be as a Looking-glass or Touchstone for my help herein. And finding them somewhat usefull for mine own purpose, and supposing they may be so also to some o∣thers in my case; And having vehement cause to suspect, that many thousands amongst us in this golden time, go with the wind and tyde in the general profession of the Gospel, and know not (because they try not) what they are, or whither they are going, or what they doe: Therefore I have sent it amongst you as a watch-word. And now consider, were there any one amongst you to have a goodly Mannor in a remote country for which
 he hath a conveyance for the payment down of a little sum of money, and is to go shortly thither to shew his conveyance, pay his mony, and take his possession: And should I tell him his couveyance hath a flaw in it, and this is to be helpen before he go, and that the mony he iutends to carry will not pass for currant there; will he not be willing to hear and re∣ceive advice from me? To this purpose is all this that I am saying; That your Evi∣dence as it now stands is not good for Hea∣ven, the money you intend to carry with you, that you have to lay down for Christ, will not be taken for currant there. If I should tell any of you that are trading with your whole stock, whether you shall thrive or not, or that you are in the way to be undone, and how you may thrive and be exceeding rich: Or if I should tell you that are now going a voyage by Sea in a Ship, wherein you adven∣ture your lives and all your estate in a dan∣gerous passage between Rocks and Sands: Or you that are going about a work of mighty concernment, in a journey by land, in a soli∣tary way, where are Robbers, Lyons, Bears, Wolves, Brakes, Pits, &c. and there is but
 one way of safety onely, and that you are in the dangerous way, and should offer to put you in the safe way: Or if I should tell any of you that stand to be chosen to a place of Preferment, that the having of it will make him, and the losing of it will undoe him, that he is out of the way for it, and which way hee may be sure of it, who would not hearken to me? How acceptable would my conusel be to such? My design therfore in this word of Advice is, to shew you how amongst all your gettings you may get wis∣dom Prov. 4. 7., and in your trading pur∣chase that incomparable Pearl, which to get with the loss of all is an incomparble pur∣chase Mat. 13. 45, 46, 47.; and to put you in∣to the narrow way to eter∣nal life, which so few find, and so many are mistaken in, who then would not but hearken to it? who would but be at the cost and pains to buy and read it? And now if any one by the reading hereof shall find himself to be mistaken and out of the right way, it will be his advantage to be guided into it: It is better to run again than to run amiss, Melius est re∣currere quam male currere. and to beginne all again than to
 end that which being ended will be to no purpose. And for others that are in the right way, albeit they may be hereby som∣what affrighted and shaken, yet it Bonum est timere. will make to their faster settlement at last. The last chapter of the Book * Hag. 2. 7. 9 Eph. 5. 6. Prov. 28. 14 is a peece of another mans, an Ad∣dition to the fourth chapter of the Book; for the further clearing of this point; That true Grace doth not lye in the de∣gree or quantity, but in the nature and quality. And it is like to the man, learned indeed. All the defects and mistakes of my part of the work, must be imputed to me & the Printer. All the good of it (if any bee therein) must be attributed much of it to o∣ther men, some living, some dead, from whom I borrowed it. But (be it whose it will) if you get any good by it; give to God the glory, for to him it doth belong; And look on me as a poor well wisher to all that enquire what they may doe to be saved.

