



SIR,
TIs not any ambitious desire to appear in print, that hath occasioned the birth and production of these ensuing Letters, and Discourses; as being conscious, 1. Of my own disabilities to discuss the several points and particulars thereof, with that learning and judgement, which the great weight, and present usefulness thereof requireth: As knowing 2. my more then ordinary ob∣noxiousness to the censures of all parties, by reason of that fidelity, and obedience to the commands and orders of our sadly distracted and persecuted mother the Church of England, the which I am perswaded in conscience I ought, as far as in Christian prudence I may, to preserve inviolable.
For 'tis not the violent dissolution of Ecclesiastical Go∣vernment, nor the manifold Heresies, and Schisms, that assault, wound, and divide this once flourishing Spouse of Christ, which can warrant either an aberration from her orthodox Doctrine, or the neglect, much less contempt of her Apostolical orders and constitutions.
The sad condition wherein now she lies, stript naked of all her goodly attire: Her authority despised: Her commands slighted: The crown faln from her head: Her sacred body rent, and mangled: On all hands revi∣led, and reproached both by Heretiques and Schisma∣tiques;
do render her too conformable to her persecuted, abused, crucified Lord and Saviour, to be abandoned and forsaken in her distresses: although all obedience to her orders in such a sad juncture of time, can expect no other portion, but to drink with her of the same cup, scorn, and derision, if not
persecution.
These considerations may sufficiently perswade the Reader how unwillingly I appear in print, if not 1. by way of chal∣lenge provok'd: and
2. In conscience of my duty enfor∣cedly mov'd thereunto.
The occasion, as it is not unknown to you (Sir) so it is very fit it should not be unknown to the Reader also.
First then a Letter of strange, scrupulous, and unheard of Questions being sent to your house, and receiving their short, and sudden Answers by way of Letter, under your roof, it was your desire they should both be made publique, if perhaps some of the many misguided souls amongst us, might re∣ceive satisfaction thereby; together with A Discourse of the holy Spirit, (intended for the private satisfaction of your vertuous Lady) for the further clearing of the said scrupulous questions.
This first Edition being disperst, it was the Stationers desire it should be reprinted; whereunto I the more wil∣lingly condescended, and withall added the other Discourses thereunto, because a Reply to the foresaid Letter of An∣swers, and Discourse of the holy Spirit, hath appeared pub∣liquely in print also.
Not that I think it either prudent or
profitable, to have any further contestation with those strangely seduced per∣sons, who sent that Letter, and publish'd this Reply, or to make any Rejoynder thereunto; for that were but , to beat the ayre, and fight with shadowes, they being such kinde of persons whom S. Augustine cals, Sinefine dicentes, who know no end of vain words, not distin∣guishing betwixt respondere posse, and tacere nolle: ha∣ving neither knowledge enough to give a right an∣swer, nor prudence enough to hold their peace; as think∣ing sure, that he who speaks loudest and longest, and will have the last word, carries away the Bell.
To wave therefore all intermedlings with their printed papers, which sufficiently answer themselves by their im∣pertinencies and railings: (more then to take notice thence upon what grounds both they, and most of Here∣tiques do build their erroneous opinions, viz. The pre∣tence of the Spirit, and of immediate Revelation, back'd with many misinterpreted, and misapplyed texts of Scripture) I conceive it more useful, to adde to the doctrine of the Holy Spirit, formerly delivered, that of Divine Reve∣lation; and the rather, because 'tis so much objected against the former Discourse, that therein Revelation is denied, which is that great Diana so much worshipped, and cryed up by all late seduced, and deceived persons, through the misunderstanding of some places of holy Seripture, which in the close of that Discourse of Revelation are cleared from such misconception.
The intention of the third Discourse, is chiefly to lay down such grounds, and to give such directions, as may assist against the infection of Errors in Religion, the plague whereof is grown so Epidemical, that there was ne∣ver more need of Antidotes, and Preservatives there-against: And this cannot well be effected, but that the
nature, kindes, reasons, and dangers of Error, Heresie, and Schism, are first to be considered, which is the sum of that Discourse.
It is a plausible and taking way, and very many un∣learned, and unstable souls are thereby bewitcht into new,strange, and erroneous opinions, viz. That there is a far nearer cut to understand the things of God, then the ordinary way of study in the Schools of the Prophets, and of industrious search into the Books and writings of the learned, and that's the way of the Spirit, and of immediate Revelation. as if there were no more requi∣red for the acquiring of spiritual wisdome, then to sit still and wait for divine inspirations from above, without any use of those means, which God for that end hath ap∣pointed: And hence by crying up the Spirit, the Prophets of the Lord are cryed down, to whom the Spirit of Pro∣phesie, or of publique praying and preaching, after an espe∣cial manner is peculiar, and proper: And in stead of ado∣ring God for his spiritual gifts of learning, as well Hu∣mane as Divine, imparted to some men more then to others, to be employed for the advancement of his service, and his peoples salvation; those men are chiefly cryed up, who under pretence of praying and preaching by the Spirit, and without the helps of heathenish Learning, as they call it; most presumptuously vent many religious insignifican∣cies, devout non-sense, impertinencies, and specious no∣things, i. e. many good words perhaps, Zealous expres∣sions, and Scripture phrases, but for want of order, cohe∣rence, and due application, conducing nothing either to the information of the minde with solid soul-saving truths, or to the reformation of manners by
Grace and obedience: And not only so, but they prophesie lies also, and preach many false and erroneous doctrines, the delusions of their own hearts, if not the suggestions of Satan, and all must passe (but most blasphemously) for the dictates of the ho∣ly Spirit. So that hereby preaching is not only turned into
foolishness indeed, but into sinfulness also: and that holy ordinance intended by God for the conversion andconfirmation of souls in Truth is become (through the abuse of unskilful and illiterate Zealots) one of the Devils engins, whereby he entraps the unsteady souls of men into errors, and deceits.
And that which further hath added to increase this infe∣ction and plague of the holy, and true Religion, is a crying Reformation, and Liberty of conscience, [which are ne∣cessary, if righly understood, and kept within their due limits] under which specious pretences many necessary and useful Truths are decryed, and
licentiousness of opinion hath got footing: every one taking liberty to believe, and dis∣believe what he list, to be of this, of that, and of every opi∣nion, but what is orthodox, and true; and under the cloke of Religion, wounding, and even stabbing to the heart that sacred body through its own bleeding sides: using the sharp, and severe instrument of Reformation, not only to pare the nails, but cut off the hands, and many the most principal parts, and Members of the body spiritual: cry∣ing down publique Prayers, confessions of Sin, Catechisms, Creeds, the Commandements, Sacraments, and preaching down even Preaching it self, and the preachers also: there being not a few, who with the same breath, dare both presumptuously blaspheme, and sacrilegiously invade the high and holy calling of the Priesthood: calling lear∣ning, a mark of the Beast; and lawful ordination to the Ministery, a badge of Antichrist; Decency and order in Gods service, the painting of the strumpet, and deckings of the whore of Babylon; reading of holy Scriptures, sing∣ing of Psalmes, and all discreet forms of devotion, and me∣thods of divine service, beggerly elements, pieces of wil∣worship, and
carnal Gospelling; and the Scriptures them∣selves, a dead letter, and uselesse to them who understand the Mysteries of godliness by immediate Revelation.
It would be endless to rake into the puddle of those ma∣nifold pollutions, wherewith many thousands of people in these broken and distracted times have both polluted themselves, and endevoured also to profane, and unhallow what ever is most sacred, and dear to all discreetly pious, and knowingly conscientious Christians; whilest the authors of all such confusions (with those grand Heretiques, the spawn of Simon Magus in the daies of Irenaeus) are called by them∣selves, The elect, the perfect, the seed of God, having an unction from the holy One, being taught from above, &c. Whereupon their hearts are so uplifted within them, that they deny all respect to their superiours, speak evil of dignities, despise their Mother, (the Church) smite their brethren and fellow servants with reproaches and injurious revilings; calling them the wicked of the world; the seed of the Serpent; the Reprobate; for whom is reserved blackness of darkness, &c.
Nor may we here justifie our selves, (though perhaps free from the infection of such wilde opinions, and bold heaven-daring presumptions) as if therefore we did con∣tribute nothing there unto: But rather in all humility, and godly sorrow, we must confess, that both our
national, and personal sins, have provoked the most just God to give up our holy orthodox Church to be torn, and mangled by such confusions, and disorders: and our holy Religion to be eaten up by such vermin as our own corrupt manners have bred and nourished.
For when men see such as professe the Truth, to be guil∣ty of all kinde of disorderly and licentious living; the truth it self becomes hereby scandalized, and that Religion which such wicked persons professe is called in question, and doubted whether it be of God, or no. That therefore which S. Paul said unto the Jewes,
Rom. 2.23,24. is toomuch appliable to many Orthodox Christians amongst us, who professe the Law of Truth, and declaim much against Heresies and Schisms in Religion, and yet through their lewd and exorbitant lives, breaking those very Lawes of Truth which they do professe, the Name of God is thereby dishonoured, and that Truth whereof God is the Author, is blasphemed and evil spoken of by the Heretical gainsayers, and opposers thereof.
There are but two waies for the suppression of those Heretiques, who stop their eares, and harden their hearts, against the Doctrine and instruction of the Church.

1. A well established Ecclesiastical Government, by whose coercive Lawes, the people may be kept with∣in the limits of the true faith, as to the outward pro∣fession thereof in themselves, and debarred the seduction of others.
 2. An Exemplary piety in the professors of the Truth, that others may be won by their good conversation to the acknowledgement of the truth.

And now that the former of these, viz. The arm of
Ec∣clesiastical Government is broken, and the hedge of Gods
inclosed Garden thrown down, which should have kept out the
Foxes from eating up the Vines: there is no way left us to put to silence gain-saying, and seduced persons, but to adorn our profession with holiness of conversati∣on, and carefully to avoid all those disorderly and licen∣tious manners, which scandalize our Religion, and unhal∣low the blessed name of Christ, which is called upon us: Having your conversation honest among the Gentiles (and such as oppose the truth) that whereas they speak against you as evil doers, that they may by your good works, which they shall behold, glorifie God in the day of visitation, 1 Pet. 2.12.
This is required of all persons whatsoever, but most especially of persons of rank and quality, after whose example even without command, not only most of their Dependants, but even of their inferior neighbours do frame their conversations: Such therefore are obliged to remember that the main end why God hath plac'd them in degree above others, is, That as their supe∣riority of place is a stamp of the divine Supremacy over all, so their sutable demeanor, should be a lea∣ding star of holy and divine perfections unto all: Be∣ing followers of God in all piety, and purity of life, and action: that therein their people and dependants may be fol∣lowers of them.
Nor is it the least reason, why God hath suffered this late upstart generation of Heretiques, to deny that re∣spect and honour which by the Lawes both of God, and man is due to their superiors, because superiors have not given unto God that honour which is due unto him, by being as Images of his superiority, so ensamples of his per∣fections, in all holiness, justice, charity, purity and inte∣grity of conversation.
Since it is the desire therefore of all good Christians, that all Heresies should be rooted out, and holy Truth restored, together with a respective obedience to all our superiors, according to the several relations and con∣ditions, without which we must never hope either for Truth or Peace to flourish amongst us: there is assured∣ly no readier way now left us hereunto, but that every one in his place, and calling, make conscience of his waies, or in the words of the holy Spirit himself, That
every one who nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity, 2 Tim.
2.19. Denying ungodlinesse and worldly lusts, and living soberly, righteously, andgodly in this present world, Tit. 2.12. And this un∣doubtedly (Sir) is no other but the way of your own peace and tranquillity here, and eternal felicity hereafter. To the effecting whereof, the Prayers and endevours shall ne∣ver be wanting of

