


My Beloved, and much esteemed in the Lord.
FOr your and the e∣dification of all o∣thers, the Inhabi∣tants of this place, this Sermon was first studied and Preach'd; and at your request, as appears by your prefixed Letter, (in order
to a more publick benefit) with some little enlargement, it is now Printed. I wish, that nei∣ther you, nor any that heard it, may finde cause to say of it, as Queen Elizabeth once did of a Sermon Preach'd before her Majesty, and Printed at her command; of which (after the reading of it) she said, It was the best Sermon Preach'd, but the worst Read, that ever she heard and read. If you judge the like of this after you have read it, I shall not think it strange; being well assur'd, that my Sermons (by reason of the plainnesse of my stile) are fitter for the Pulpit than the Presse, and more acceptable in preach∣ing
than they can be in read∣ing.
And therefore, whatever you may think of it, I am fully con∣fident, I shall be diversly cen∣sured for the publication of it, according to the various judge∣ments, dispositions, and affecti∣ons of such as happily may be at the pains to read it. Some perhaps will charge me with flattery; of this my highly and worthily esteemed Friend, in his most ingenious Epistle to the Reader, hath sufficiently cleared me. Others, no doubt, will accuse me of injuring His Majesty, by drawing and ex∣posing His Portraicture to pub∣lick view in a dresse so homely,
and unbefitting a Prince of so much worth and excellency: With these I shall not quarrel, but beg my Sovereign's pardon, for handling His Personal and Princely perfections in so rude a manner; and I doubt not but I shall obtain it. He that hath so freely offered an Act of Grace to his worst of Enemies, (who shall lay hold of it) will not stick to pardon the unavoi∣dable weaknesse of a Loyal Subject, when his mercy is im∣plored. However, having ex∣posed my self to censure upon your desires, you cannot but hold your selves obliged (with the utmost of your power) to vindicate my name from all
aspersions which, upon this ac∣count, may be cast upon it. And this (besides your continu∣ing stedfast in the fear of God, and in loyalty to his most sa∣cred Majesty) is all that is at present desired of you, by
(SIRS)

Lyme-Regis, June 4. 1660.
