



SIR,
THese following Questions being sent to your house, and receiving their short and sudden answers under your roof; and the Author his sub∣sistence from your courtesie and benefi∣cence; It being also your desires they should be made publick, if perhaps some satisfaction might be given to any of those too too many seduced and wavering souls amongst us: Be pleased therefore, that under your name and patronage they may appear, as a covert to veil their imperfections and defects: Defective they must needs
be in many respects; neither can the Answers to so many strange, scrupu∣lous, and unheard of questions, being conceiv'd on a sudden, by way of answer to a Letter, be expected to be satis∣factory and full, as to all particulars: Longer time for further and more mature deliberation, might in some good measure have supplyed many de∣fects; but that I was unwilling to add any thing to what was dispatcht away by way of answer to the Letter (or rather Libell) of the scrupulous Questioner, that so both might appear to the eye of the world verbatim, without addition or diminution.
Hereunto, as a back or second, I have annexed a Discourse, both short and plain, Of the Holy Spirit of God, so much by those sduced souls preten∣dd unto; and to the grief of all good Christian hearts, too much profan'd by such pretences: And 'tis a Discourse which was desired by your virtuous Lady, for her private satisfaction: The subject whereof being fully cleer'd to
the mindes of men, by some more wise and abler judgements, would both discover, and strike at the root, and dissolve the ground-work of many those infectious errours, which at pre∣sent so much overspread and prevaile amongst us.
And indeed, how can we expect or hope for other, since 1. unity and uni∣formity both in the publick worship of God (whereby all men of the same Church and Religion, do worship God in the same way, even with one heart, and one mouth, and after one manner) is not onely decryed, but also dismist our Congregations: And since 2. the Pale of Ecclesiasticall discipline is pull'd down, by whose coercive laws all men were kept within the limits of the true Faith, and of Obedience and Charity, as to the externall profession thereof: And since 3. under the name and priviledge of Liberty of consci∣ence, licentiousnesse of opinion hath got footing in the mindes of men; who take liberty under that pretext to
become vain in their imaginations, to be of this, or that, or what opinion they please in Religion: As also to perform the publick parts of divine worship, according to the severall dictates of their owne mindes, even in any way, but what is decent, reverend, uniform and orderly: Since such (I say) is the sad and confused condition of our Church, it is no marvail though there daily arise new Sects, and new Opini∣ons; such which are not onely strange, wilde, and fanatick, but even destru∣ctive to the very being of true Christi∣anity: Nor must we hope for other, till the God of all truth and peace be plea∣sed, together with his truth, to restore unity and order in his worship; whereof for our manifold sins he hath so long deprived us.
It is most true, what the Apostle saith of the necessity of heresies,
1 Cor. 11.19. They must come,
Ad hoc enim sunt Haereses, ut fides habendo tentationem, ha∣beat etiam probationem, Tert. de praesc. adv. Haeret. c. 1. that they which are ap∣proved may be made manifest: But
it is as true, what our Saviour saith of Offences in general,
Matt. 18.7. Woe unto them by whom they come: Their conditi∣on must needs be sad and deplorable who broach and introduce the infecti∣on, as being herein the instruments of Satan; or in the language of our Lord, They are of their Father the Devill,
Joh. 8.44. and his works they doe; for he was a lyar from the beginning, and abode not in the truth: Now although this Grand-father and promoter of lies aud untruths, be by the God of all power and goodnesse enchained and li∣mited, otherwise he had long since overrun the world, as in times of Pa∣ganisme of old: Yet sometimes for the sins of a people (whereof we are now too sensible) his chain is lengthe∣ned,
1 Pet. 5.8. and the roaring Lyon hath more scope then ordinary to roam about, see∣king whom he may devour: And he devours or destroyes the souls of men two wayes: 1. By blinding their un∣standings, whereby they become apt to be seduced in the entertainment of er∣roneous.
opinions and belief of lies. 2. By poysoning their affections with the false paint of worldly vanities, whereby they are inveigled into sinful∣ness and vice. And now (Sir) that neither you, nor any that belongs unto you, may in either of these respects be deceived and perish; neither with the blinde and giddy to fall into the ditch of error on the one hand, or with the vicious and unclean to wallow in the mire of sinfulnesse on the other, but to keep the way of the righteous, and to walk in the path of the just; which is no other undoubtedly but the way of your owne peace and tranquillity here, and eternall felicity hereafter; it shall be the endevour, and is the daily prayer (Sir) of

