



Worthy Gentlemen,
WHen the World was shaken by Adams sin, God secured it by the promise of his Son. When Canaan was distressed by the Gen. 3. 15. Judg. 6. Midianites, he sent his servant Gideon a Sa∣viour to it. Now England is distracted, and her foun∣dations out of course, he hath raised you up (the un∣wearied Worthies of our Nation) to repair the brea∣ches, and settle the foundations thereof. A work albeit very honourable; yet (as your selves have very well experimented) very hardly accomplished. For wha from the rage of professed adversaries, the in∣constancy, ingratitude, ignorance, and wilfulnes of seeming friends, blinded with their own unruly pas∣sions, whereby they have foolishly mistaken the men and their meaning, Your selves have been som∣times by the mutinous distempers of the common multitude brought into great perill of destruction: those whom you have saved, & who for your safety ought to have sacrificed themselves, being willing to have you destroyed and sacficed. But unsearchable providence (hitherto your Sanctuary amidst these perils) hath wheeled and driven on (though in som∣what
 a dubious method) your great Counsels, through your adversaries attempts. And its often appearing for you and your Armies (as from under a Cloud) doth assure my self, & the many thousands that love and honour you, that a work carryed on with so many hands and heats; so much prayer life and spirit; so much faith and patience, cannot by the rage of man (which in all times hitherto hath prai∣sed Psal. 76. 10. God be disappointed of its end.
And now Right honourable, sith this providence hath given you, in appearance, some hope of a little breathing time. I crave leave humbly to present you with this smal Treatise of the ore last things, Death, Iudgement, Hell and Heaven: wherein are plainly but profitably handled things of highest concernment, and therefore well becomming men of choisest im∣ployments. I know your wisdoms and piety need not be minded in whose presence you stand, whose part (in the managing of the weighty affairs of the Math. 12 16. Kingdom you act, to what strength you are engaged for all your glorious, and never to be forgotten de∣liverances, Rom. 2. 6 and to whom ere long for the work you have done, words you have spoken, and ends you have had therein, you must give an account. You nd not be minded that for every word you speak, an account must be given by you, who by speaking one word may make or mar a Kingdom Wee need not tell you that it is a double crime which is com∣mitted
 under the sacred name of authority and great∣nes; that the sins of great ones in the pollitique, are as dangerous as pestilent Feavers to the natural body. Ps. 82. 8. Shall we minde you (Gods amongst men) that you shall hrv die like men, and that impartiall Death knoweth no faces, that Heaven is the reward of the righteous, Tophet is prepared of old for Kings: That you and we must all appear before he highest bar, where all your judgments shall be rejudged, your secrets discovered, and your selves rendered responsable not onely for all the good you have not done, but for the evill you have not hindred: have we need to com∣fort you under your matchlesse labours, and to tell you of Beds and rest at hand? you know how to Esa. 57. 2 arm your selves against Reproaches, Censures and Slanders, with the meditation of the day of Revelation when the Lord shall bring to light the hidden things of darknes, Rom. 2. 5 1 Cor. 4. 5. Math. 10  6. and then shall every man [that deserves it] have praise of God. And that there is nothing d but shall bee then made know. These generall truths, and such like as these largely discued in this Treatie, albeit you do very well know already, and are established in them yet since the best of men to so easily forget them, and are at some time or other to seek in them; shall I beg leave in these few lines to become your remembrancer thereof? The Lord hath many times (Right Ho∣nourable) remembred you in your low estate; his people from all places are mindfull of you, you have
 the blessing of many thousand prayers upon you; you are engaged in as acceptable a service to God and good men, as ever any Assembly was; as great expectation there is from you as ever was, from any Parliament of England, and as likely you are to have opportunity to render your names renowned to succeeding generations, as ever any Parliament of ours had. There are still those amongst us that would again cast us into the Fire and Water, Marke 9. 22. And we say to you our Masters, help us, save, or else we perish; If you can do any thing have com∣passion on this almost expired Kingdome: the Lord grant you may keep back nothing from us that may do us good; and that your own wayes, ends, wils, and interests may be sallowed up in that work you are called unto; and that therein your motion may be like that of the Heavens, intrinsical and from within swift with the primum mobile; but slow with your own: And if herein you may have any further∣ance by these plain meditations, it can be no disho∣nour to you, but will be much honour and com∣fort to me, who begging pardon for my boldnes and plainnes, Pray, that the God of Heaven will give you all such a spirit as is fearlesse of danger, faithfull to your trust, and succesfull in your great work.
Which will be the daily Prayer of

