



SO much of late hath been written
about the times, that Spirituall Dis∣courses
are now almost out of sea∣son.
Mens mindes are so hurried
up and downe, that it is to be fea∣red,
they are much discomposed to thinke seri∣ously
as they ought, of their eternall concern∣ments:
Alas! Christians have lost much of
their Communion with Christ and his Saints;
(the heaven upon earth) whilst they have woe∣fully
disputed away, and dispirited the life of Re∣ligion
and the power of Godlinesse into dry and
saplesse Controversies about Government of
Church and State. To recover therefore thy
spirituall Relish of savory pradicall Truths,The principal subjects hand∣led in these Sermons.
these Sermons of that excellent man of God,
of precious memory, are published: Wherein
thou art presented,1. Of the Mar∣riage-feast be∣tween Christ & his Church. 1. With an invitation to
a great and wonderfull Feast; the Marriage-Feast
of the Lambe. An admirable Feast indeed,
wherein Jesus Christ the eternall Sonne of God
is the Bridegroome, where every Beleever that

hath put on the Lord Jesus, (the wedding gar∣ment)
is not onely the Guest, but the Spouse
of Christ, and the Bride at this Wedding-supper.
Here Jesus Christ is the Master of the Feast,
and the Chear and Provision too. He is the Lamb
of God, the Ramme caught in the thicket. Hee is
the fatted Calfe;Prov. 9. 2. when he was sacrificed, Wise∣dome
killed her beasts,Matth. 22. 3. Prov. 9. 2. At his death,
the Oxen and Fatlings were killed.. His flesh is meat
indeed, and his bloud is drinke indeed. And that
thou maist bee fully delighted at this Feast,
Christ is the Rose of Sharon, the Lilly of the Val∣ley;
he is a bundle of Mirrhe, a Cluster of Cam∣phire,
his name is an ointment poured out, and his
love is better than Wine. In Christ are all things
ready, for Christ is all in all. And great is the Feast
that Christ makes for Believers; for it is the
Marriage Feast which the great King makes for his
Sonne. The great designe and aime of the Gospel
being to exalt the Lord Jesus Christ, and give
him a name above every name. Great is the com∣pany
that are bid, Luke 14. 6. Jews and Gentiles.
God keeps open house; Hoe every one that thir∣steth,Isai. 55. 1.
come,Rev. 22. 17. and whosoever wil let him come and freely
take of the water of life.Gen. 49. 20. Great is the chear that is
provided; every Guest here hath Ashers portion,
royall dainties, and bread of fatnesse. Here's all ex∣cellent,
best wine, wine upon the Lees well refined.
Here's fat things, yea fat things full of marrow.
Here's the hidden Manna, the water of life, and the
fruit of the tree of life which is in the midst of the
Padise of God. All that is at this Feast is of the

best, yea the best of the best. Here's variety and
plenty too, here's bread enough and to spare: Caligu∣la
and Heliogabalus their Feasts,Super omnia vultus accessére boni. who ransack'd the
earth, aire, and sea to furnish their Tables, were
nothing to this. And above all, here's welcome
for every hungry thirsty soule; hee that bids
thee come, will bid thee welcome, he will not
say eate, when his heart is not with thee: the invita∣tion
is free, the preparation great, and the enter∣tainment
at this Feast, suiting the magnificence
of the great King, is full and bountifull. All
which is at large treated of in these excellent
Sermons, which are therefore deservedly intitu∣led,
The Marriage Feast between Christ and his
Church. We read of a Philosopher, that having
prepared an excellent Treatise of happiness,
and presenting it unto a great King, the K
answered him, Keep your Book to your selfe, I
am not now at leasure. Here is an excellent
Treasure put into thy hand, doe not answer 
I am not now at leisure. Oh doe not let Christ
stand knocking at thy heart, who will come and
sup with thee, and bring his cheare with him. Oh
let not a deceived heart turne thee any longer aside
to feed upon Ashes, feed no longer with swine upon
Husks, while thou mayst be filled and satisfied
with bread in thy fathers house.
But this is not all, if thou wilt bee pleased to
peruse this Book, thou wilt finde there are many
other usefull,2. Of the vail of ignorance and unbeliefe, and the remo∣vall of it seasonable, and excellent subjects
handled besides the Marriage-Feast.
2. Jesus Christ hath not only provided a feast,

because hee is desirous that all those for whom
it is provided should come to it, (which onely
they doe that believe) he takes away the vaile of
ignorance and unbeliefe from off their hearts:
and here you shall finde this skilfull Preacher
hath excellently discoursed, what this vaile is,
how it naturally lyes upon all, and is onely re∣moved
by the Spirit of Christ. And if the Lord
hath destroyed this covering from off thy heart, we
doubt not, but the truth of this heavenly Do∣ctrine
will shine comfortably into thy soule.
3. Jesus Christ to make his bounty and mer∣cy
further appeare in this Feast;3. Of Christs conquest over Death. hee hath given
his Guests the Bread of life, and hath secured
them from the feare of death: They need not
feare, there's no Mors in ollâ, at this Feast wee
may feast without feare: Jesus Christ by his ta∣sting
of death hath swallowed it up in victory. Christ
doth not make his people such a feast as it is re∣ported
Dionysius the Tyrant once made for his
flatterer Damocles, who set him at a Princely
Table, but hang'd a drawne sword in a small
thread over his head. But Christ would have us
triumph over the King of Feares, who was slain
by the death of Christ,Heb. 2. 14, 15. and wee thereby delivered
from the bondage of the feare of death.. At other
Feasts they were wont of old, to have a Deaths
head serv'd in amongst other Dishes, to minde
them in the midst of all their mirth of their
mortality: (wich practise of the Heathens
condemnes the ranting jollity of some loose pro∣fessors
in these times.) But here, Christ serves

in Deaths head, (as David the head of Goliah)
the head of a slaine and conquered death. Our
Sampson by his owne death hath destroied Death,Hos. 13. 14.
and hath thereby ransomed us from the hand of the
grave, and hath redeemed us from Death, and the
slavish feare of it: All which is at large handled
in these following Sermons for thy comfort and
joy, that thou maist triumph in his love through
whom thou art more than Conqueror.
4. Because it is a merry heart that makes a con∣tinuall
feast,4. Of the Christians teares, and the wiping them away. and that this feast might be a Gau∣dy-day
indeed unto thy soule, Christ doth here
promise, to wipe away all tears from off the faces of
his people. The Gospel hath comforts enough to
make glad the hearts of the Saints and people of
God: the light of Gods countenance will refresh
them with joy unspeakable, and glorious in the
midst of the valley of the shadow of death. A
truely godly person can weep for his sinnes,
though the world smile never so much upon
him; and though hee be never so much afflicted
in the world, yet hee can and will rejoyce in the
God of his salvation. In these Sermons thou hast
this Gospel-promise sweetly opened and apply∣ed;
wherein thou shalt finde directions when,
and for what to mourne and weep, and the bles∣sednesse
of all true mourners, whose sorrow shall
be turned into joy.
5. In these Sermons you shall further finde,5. Of the Re∣bukes and Re∣proaches of Gods people, and the taking of them away.
that though Jesus Christ respect his people
highly, and entertaine them bountifully, yet
they have but course usage in the world, who

are wont to revile them as fooles and madmen, as
seditious Rebels, troublers of Israel, proud and hy∣pocriticall
persons. But blessed are they that doe
not stumble at this stone of offence, that weare the
reproaches of Christ as their Crowne, and by well do∣ing
put to silence the ignorance of foolish men: for
let the world load them with all their revilings,
yet the spirit of glory rests upon them, and in due
time he will rowle away their reproach, and bring
forth their judgement as the light, and their righte∣ousnesse
as the noon-day.
6. And because a Christian here hath more
in hope than in hand,6. Of the Pro∣mises. more in reversion than in
possession, walkes by faith rather than sense, and
lives by the Word of God, and not by bread alone,
Thou shalt have here (Christian Reader) a sweet
Discourse of the precious promises of Christ
which hee hath left us here to stay the stomack
of the soule, till wee come to that feast of feasts
in heaven; that by this glimpse, wee might in
part know the greatnesse of that glory which shall
be revealed, that the first fruits might be a pawne
of the Harvest, and the earnest of the Spirit a
pledge of that full reward wee shall have in hea∣ven,
where we shall be brim-full of those plea∣sures
that are at Gods right hand for ever. Christ
hath given us promises to uphold our faith and
hope, till faith be perfected in fruition, and hope
end in vision, till Jesus Christ, who is here the
object of our faith,7. Of the ho∣ly Scriptures, and the divine Authority of them. be the reward of our faith for
ever.
7. Now because the comfort of the promi∣ses

is grounded in the faithfulnesse of him that
hath promised. This godly and learned man,
hath strongly asserted the Divine Authority of
the holy Scriptures, proving that they are
, that they are the very Word of God,
that they are , & , worthy of all ac∣ceptation,
and beliefe, for their owne sakes. A
truth very seasonable for these times to Anti∣dote
thee against the poysonfull errors of blas∣phemous
Antiscripturists.
8. Lastly,8. waiting up∣on God. because that God often takes a
long day for performance of the promise, thou
shalt finde herein the Doctrine of waiting upon
God excellently handled. A duty which wee
earnestly commend unto thy practice, as suit∣able
to these sad times—Say, Oh say, with the
Church,Isai. 26. 8. In the way of thy judgements, Oh Lord,
we have waited for thee: and with the Prophet,
I will wait upon the Lord that hideth his face from
the house of Iacob,Isai. 8. 17. and I will look for him. And rest
assured, that none of the seed of Iacob shall seeke
him in vaine; he will not disappoint their hope, nor
make their faces ashamed that waite for him.
Thus we have given you a short prospect of
the whole, a briefe summe of that treasure
which these Sermons containe. Wee need say
nothing of the Author, his former labours
sufficiently speak for him in the gates, his memory
is highly honoured amongst the godly-learned.
He that enjoyes the glory of heaven, needs not
the prayses of men upon earth. If any should
doubt of these Sermons, as if they should not

be truely his, whose Name they beare, let him
but observe the stile, and the excellent and spi∣rituall
matter herein contained, and he will wee
hope be fully satisfied. Besides, there are many
Eare-witnesses yet living, who can cleare them
from any shadow of imposture. They come
forth without any Alteration, save onely some
repetitions (which the Pulpit did well beare)
are here omitted.
The Lord make these, and all other the labors
of his Servants profitable to his Church: And
the Lord so destroy the vaile from off thy heart,
that thou maiest believe, and by faith come to
this Feast, the joy and comfort whereof may
swallow up all the slavish feare of death, dry up thy
teares, and rowle away all reproach: and the Lord
give thee a waiting heart, to stay thy soule upon
the name of the Lord, to believe his Word, and
his faithfull promises, that in due time thou maist
rejoyce in the God of thy salvation. This is the
earnest Prayer of
London: Apr. 19.
1650.

