



Honoured Gentlemen,
I Here Present you with a Review in Particular of that which in General
your selves were no stran∣gers to.
The Reasons that indu∣ced me to this Publication, were,
 The Advice of some grave Divines and others, upon the Consideration of the Good that many a weak and distressed Member of the Church of God might receive thereby; to which magnificent Structure, if I could but add one Stone, I should think my self happy in so doing, for Afflictis
opitulari munificum est.
 That I might not omit to make some grateful re∣turn of Praise and Thanks-giving, in an eminent and publick manner, to the God of all Mercies, which in a way and measure so ex∣traordinary and marvel∣lous, did shew his goodness towards me, hath consi∣dered my Trouble, and known my Soul in Adver∣sities. If for the least of Gods favours we owe to
Him an Hymn of Thanks-giving, then surely we ought to speak abroad of all his wonderous works.
 That by this publication of things in particular, I might more particularly express my thankful ac∣knowledgment of all your singular favours most un∣deservedly confer'd upon me in this time of my Con∣flict, (as well as at other times) since I have had the honour of a long acquain∣tance with you.

 The reason (most worthy Friends) that I have de∣fer'd the Publication thereof this many Years, was, That I might have some Probation of my self, whereby I might fully ex∣perience the sound Consti∣tution of my Body and Mind; and although some for whose sake this is in∣tended (and I hope they by my Conflict, as I by others, may receive some benefit) may think it long e're I made this Publick; yet the
great Enemy of Mankind may think it too soon, be∣cause most of his Serpen∣tine Wiles and Artifices, his false and deceitful Arguings, are here expo∣sed and Confuted. And although I publish this not for any Ostentation of mine own,
1 Cor. 4.7. (for what have we that we have not received) but to the Praise and Glory of my Creator and Redeemer, and the good of his Church, into whose Treasury, if I can cast but
in one Mite,
Mark. 12.44. I should think my self happy. And be∣cause the Subject thereof is against him that is Ab∣baddon and Apollion, a Destroyer, as being a Deceiver, I shall take care that he shall be able to ob∣ject nothing of that nature against me, by representing all things in this Dis∣course with the greatest Veracity, as being most re∣pugnant to his Nature,
John 8.44. who was a Lyar from the beginning.

 But whereas it may be doubted, how I should re∣member the several steps and gradations thereof in particular after so long a time: For Satisfaction herein, be pleased to know, That although I durst not adventure the recapitula∣tion of things too soon, yet I was not too remiss in per∣petuating a Memorial of so remarkable a passage of my Life, by a Collection of the heads thereof in Wri∣ting, which hath enabled
me in this undertaking. As to the truth of things here related, next to the testimony of a good Consci∣ence, I have for my support your Attestation, whose known Justice is such, that as it will not Patronize any thing that is false, so your Clemency is so great, as will not be wanting to Coun∣tenance any thing that is True: And if in any thing I seem to make too much digression, by inserting too much of the particulars of
my Birth and Life; I know you have Candor enough to overlook the same, for con∣sidering that many persons have taken the liberty to Write the Lives of others, I hope the like freedome may not be denied me to Write my Own, no person knowing the several passa∣ges thereof more then my Self: And seeing I have Selected those things that Substract, as well as add to my Reputation, the one to be matter of Humilia∣tion,
the other to be mat∣ter of Praise and Thanks-giving: I hope I may not be suspected for partia∣lity, and the rather, be∣cause it is for the satis∣faction of my Reader, who must necessarily enquire in∣to the forepast Life, which had such subsequent dire∣ful Effects; for although I cannot excuse my Self from many Faults and Er∣rors of my Life,
2 Chron. 6.36. For who Liveth that Sinneth not? Yet I know not any
Capital Fact that might more particularly occasion this my sad dejection.
Therefore (to avoid pro∣lixity) let no man that hath, is, or shall be, cast into such a deplorable Estate of de∣sertion and Melancholy, think that his Condition is singular; for although the Method that Satan useth may be different, yet there may be something in one, that may Simpathize with another, which may afford matter of comfort and con∣solation:
and however, let no person whatsoever de∣spair of Cure, Peace, and Restauration, who hath me hitherto for an Example, who am, and desire to ap∣prove my self to God Al∣mighty, a living and lively Monument of his Grace and Mercy.
Thus, good Sirs, craving your Pardon for this Pre∣sumptuous Dedication, I commit you to the Protecti∣on of the Almighty, that hath wonderfully preserv'd
and Blessed you hitherto, desiring him to return your many kindnesses & favours towards me sevenfold, giv∣ing you a long opportunity of doing good in this world, and at length Crowning you with everlasting Glory, which is, and always shall be, the hearty and fervent Prayer of him, who is,
Most Worthy Gentlemen,

