



My Lord,
IT were a piece of very great and intolerable vanity, (which would need a bigger Apology than even the prefixing your Lordship's great Name to this mean Discourse) to think, that I could say any thing more or bet∣ter than what has been already said on this Subject: particularly of late years by the Pious and Learned Dr. Patrick, in his three several excellent Treatises of the Holy Sacrament. I can therefore truely assure your Lordship, that I was very far from any such perswasion or thought in the publishing these Sheets.
The chief reasons that I had to do it were two: First, that as this plain Dis∣course was primarily design'd only for the benefit and use of the people of my parti∣cular Charge; so are there some things in it fitted for their peculiar needs and tempers: with which no man can be so well acquainted as my self. The other reason was, that though I could easily have recommended them to very many far better Treatises of those holy Myste∣ries, yet I have observ'd, that most men are much more ready to read attentive∣ly, and seriously consider any thing publisht by a person whom they know, and with whom they daily converse, (& by whose Neighbourhood and Conversa∣tion, they have contracted a particular Friendship and Familiarity with him, which begets a mutual confidence and endearment) than they would, a better Discourse of one altogether unknown to them. For their sakes therefore, chiefly have I adventured it abroad: but if it may be useful to any other the meanest Soul, in the promoting a more frequent
and Devout use of this deplorably neg∣lected Duty, I shall have my desire and aim. And in prospect of that end and Design, shall be content to run the ad∣venture of the Censures of all men what∣ever. Against which, I shall be the bet∣ter guarded, if the many imperfections of this Discourse, (particularly it's ex∣traordinary plainness even to a fault, though in that, it is adjusted to the Capa∣cities of them to whom it was first deli∣vered, and for whom it is principally in∣tended) may not hinder your Lordships vouchsafing me and it your Blessing and your Patronage.
I cannot but remember your Lordships great earnestness at a late Visitation, in pressing us of the Clergy, to recommend a more frequent and Ʋniversal practise of this Duty to our People. And I thank God, this small evidence of my obedience to that injunction, as it brought with it some considerable success to my People, so I have great reason to believe, that (how mean soever it really be) by put∣ting it into their hands, it may be
greater yet. However such as it is, it is humbly laid at your Lordship's Feet, by
My Lord,

