



Madam,
THese rude and uncompos'd Airs aspire into your presence, that from your Touch they may receive Time and Laws. If you shall gra∣ciously vouchsafe to read them, they will Live and Breath. It pleased our Renowned Lady, Queen Elizabeth, to preferre the learned Authour to the choise honour of her Favourite, and to conferre with him in his Naturall language. Neither doth that Most Illustrious Name, rest on your High∣nesse without a designe of Provi∣dence, since it speaks in you her
Piety, and Early Bonds, and whatso∣ever Shee wore of greater Value then her Crown. May it please you here∣in to countenance the Parallell. One∣ly accept the Endeavours of the un∣worthy Translatour, and give them Admission to your Vertuous Hand, not valuing the Present, but receiving the Homage: For the Authoritie of your Judgement is so pregnant, of so Royall and Early Growth, and so he∣reditary, that Verses licens'd by your Approbation, like sealed Measures, are justifi'd against Inferiour censures by their mark.
Playes are the Mirrours wherein Mens actions are reflected to their own view. Which, perhaps, is the true cause, that some, privy to the Uglinesse of their own guilt, have issued out Warrants, for the break∣ing all those Looking-glasses; lest their deformities recoyl, and become
an eye-sore unto themselves. This dim Chrystall (fully'd with An∣tiquitie, and a long voyage) will return upon your Highnesse some Lines and Shadows of that Pie∣tie to your deceased Father, which seats you above the Age, and beyond your Years: Which makes you better then your Countrey, and higher then your Enemies: Which lodges you in our Eye as our Ex∣ample, and in our Heart as our Treasure.
Be secure (most illustrious Prin∣cesse) you are not so much guard∣ed from flattery, by the Acts and Vi∣gilancy of the States, as by the Tran∣scendencie of your own Merits. The Historie of your Name shall be an Academie, whence obsequi∣ous Rhetorick shall draw forth En∣comiums to bleach the defects of unaccomplisht Queens.

MADAM, Your Vertues com∣mand: Let Your Clemen∣cie favour the dutie of my ambition, Which is, to be

