






ACcept, Dear Mother, from your meanest Son
These Fruits of Dutifull Affection,
Or but Leaves rather; since too sadly true
Our Oarch-yard's robb'd, where all such Plenty grew!
Where could I so deservedly bestow
(Had I ought worth Acceptance) as to throw
It and the Authour at thy Feet, whose Brest
First gave us all, both Thriving, Food, and Rest?
Yet (since grown up) thy Sons rebellious prove,
Slighting Maternal, and all Filiall Love,
Kicking, like Jesurun, where they should kneel,
No Sympathy with bleeding Mother feel!
While, like Herostratus, some for a Name
Stick not to set thy Temples all on Flame!

And with that Cursed Emperour can sing,
While the best Room is thus a Martyring!
Ready with savage Nero to Dissect
Their Mothers bowels, and her life exact!
But that an Heavenly Promise doth thee Guard
From Hel, and Hers, making that their Reward!
These Syllables together spell complaint,
And Title thee too truly Militant!
Mean time, a faithfull Spouse o'th' King of Kings
Thou shew'st Thy self, B.'s eccho'd Sufferings!
Who from his own, streind Tortures did indure!
And all Those too for his Tormentors cure;
So here the servant fares but like his Lord,
Corforming to his Head, Side, Hands, Feet, Bor'd!
All waiting on thee, in Red-Garments here,
That once shall with Thee, in White Robes appear.
Thus as Thyn, so thy members Life's a warr;
A double one, Spiritual, Corporal Jarr!
That Dragon Vomiting a Floud of Foes,
Against our Mother as She Teeming goes!
The barb'rous Crescent, and proud Eagles wings
Wild Boar, Home-Foxes; all breath Threatnings!
Thy Little Flock yet (through their Lyon's ayd)
Shall have their Fights, with Crowns of conquest paid:
Then Cheer up, (Honor'd Mother) cease your grief,
And let me bring your Tears this Handkerchief,
Millions of sons their Duty still Retaine,
And at least, Pray for your faire days again:

But though your Emblem were a wayning Moon,
And that too here Eclips'd a while, yet soon
Thou shalt be cloathed with the glorious Sun,
And be as bright, as now thou seemest dunne;
Crownd with the sparkling Jewels of the skie,
The Moon thy footstool, for all change too high:
While thy fierce, numerous, oppressive Foes,
Shall be sequestred to contrary woes!


This Noble Armie then of Martyrs, grant
Most due (once Hers) to the Church Militant.


