



SIRS,
ALthough I dare not give you flattering Titles, with the pen of a Sycophant; yet I can truly say that I love you (as you abide in the fear of the Lord) with the heart of a plain-dealing friend.Job. 32.22. Its recorded in the Scriptures of truth, that imperious Haman (flush'd with his advance to his short-lived honor) did strenuously endeavor to have cut off the necks of thou∣sands of innocent Jews, upon Mordecaies stiff knee: The murderous design being laid, the subtle old serpent that ruled in this man of blood, was not to seek of an expedient to bring it into execution. Let but the Kings approbation and Decree be obtained, and then this proud Courtier maketh sure, of satisfying that lust upon the Jews throats, which he could by no means effect upon Mordecaies knee. To this end Ahasuerus his ears must be filled with suggestions, as full of falshood as malice. These harmles people are slanderously repre∣sented to him, to be very evil members of his body politick;Est. 3.8 both by reason of the diversity of their Laws from all other people, and also their disobedience to the Kings Laws. And therefore it could not well consist with the Kings profit, to indulge to such a heterodox generation (within any of his Pro∣vinces) the benefit of breathing in the common air.
Although Haman be dead, yet that foul spirit by which he was acted, survived him throughout all generations, unto this very day: When Christ the Sun of righteousness, began
to rise in the brightness of his glory, and so out shine the faint glory of all the Jewish Rites, Worships, Services; the Rulers,Mat. 26.4. Priests, Scribes, Pharisees, and the people also (by the Chief-Priests perswasion) conspire his death. The life appeareth, but the letter would destroy it; the power is brought forth, but the form standeth ready to devour it. But Christ is innocent,1 Pet. 2.22. there being no guile found in his mouth. And therefore since he cannot be impeach'd (as an evil doer) for matter of fact, he must for matter of Opinion, Judgement, Principles. Although he hath done no evil (being in his conversation holy,Heb. 7.26. Mat. 26, 61. harmless, undefiled, and separate from sin∣ners) yet it is by them presumed that he thinketh evil, be∣cause they judge him to have spoken evil, viz. dangerous words about their Temple,Vers. 65. nay blasphemous words against God; and therefore (by the consent of Priest-ridden Pilat) he is hurried to the cross to suffer as a Deceiver.Eccles. 1.9.
Is there any new thing under the Sun? Is not the same spirit of pride, and persecution (clothed in the garb of seem∣ing zeal) found walking openly in the streets of our Cities, Towns, and Villages at this day? Are not the innocent (now as of old) traduced to you both by Press and Pulpit, un∣der the notions of Quakers, Hereticks, Blasphemers, and Deceivers? And where malice cannot reach them as trans∣gressors of the Civil Law (being thereunto obedient for conscience sake) are they not (with Daniel) ensnared con∣cerning the law of their God?Dan. 6.5. Have not the impetuous insti∣gations of the Pulpit of late, had that destructive influence upon many in authority, that (contrary to the righteous law of this Nation) it hath been made matter of crime unto many peaceably to travel upon the high ways? Nay have not several persons,One and twenty in a few days ta∣ken up by ar∣med guards and sent to Exon Goal, of which one di∣ed there. that have been constantly faithful to the States interest, been violently surprised, as they were travelling about their lawful occasions, and cast into bonds, among Rogues, and Felons, for no other transgression but this, that they did own but the name, or the person, of one that is called a Quaker? An unheard of inrode upon the liberties of English men; and a practice rarely to be parallel'd in the times of the forest persecutions that history maketh men∣tion of;

It's storied of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus,Euseb. Hist. a Roman Emperor, that (in the time of the fourth persecution of the Christians) being reduced to a great exigent, both because he and his Army were streightly environed by their enemies in the midst of Germany, and had also wanted fresh water for the space of five daies. And having called (but in vain) upon his Country Gods for relief, he sendeth for a number of Christians; against whom (at their first approach) he was not a little enraged, for that they came (saith Anto∣ninus himself) without either Weapon, Munition, Armor, or Trumpets, as men abhorring such preparation, and fur∣niture, but only satisfied in trust of their God, whom they carry about with them in their CONSCIENCES. These, falling prostrate upon the ground, prayed to a God (saith he) ƲNKNOWN of me; upon which there fell pleasant showres upon Antoninus his host, but a storm of hail mixed with much lightning, upon the host of his enemies; by which means it came to pass, that he, and his, were refreshed, and his adver∣saries discomfited. Whereupon he writeth an express to the Senate and people of Rome, in these words; If any shall apprehend one that is a Christian, only for that cause, I will that he being apprehended, may without punishment have leave to confess the same, so that there be none other cause ob∣jected against him, but that he is a Christian; but let his accu∣ser be burned alive.
I write not this (the Lord is my witness) as desiring fire from heaven, upon those that thirst after mine own, and the blood of thousands in this Nation, because we cannot wor∣ship the image, which they would set up; but only to mind you, that, even among the heathens, it was deemed unreaso∣nable, that, where mens conversations were otherwise honest (being compared with the just laws of men) they should notwithstanding suffer for what they did beleeve, and practice, concerning the law of their God. Nor is it my design to blunt the edge of the sword against the transgressor. The righteous law was made for the unrighteous person,1 Tim. 1.9. and upon him doth the stroak thereof justly fall. Whilst your sword is born a∣gainst the evil doer, its the sword of the Lord: But beware
of turning the edge thereof against the innocent; for then its no longer the sword of God, but the executioner of your own lusts.
I do well know how passionatly ye are invocated (by those that long to be in the Chair) to enact Laws to establish Church Government (as they call it) and punish Hereticks; that is, in plain English, to make every Parish Teacher a Bishop, to give Laws to yours and other mens consciences. Neither am I ignorant with what longing expectation, many that call themselves Ministers of Christ (though none of his Ministers ever persecuted any man) do wait to receive Commission from you, to exercise the matchless cruel∣ty of that villanous Tyrant, in stretching all that are too short to the just length of their bed, and cutting all those shorter who in length do exceed it. But however they may incessantly urge you (pretending a vision from the Lord) to establish laws to bind the conscience; yet know, that it's Christs prerogative to give laws to that; and you will be in his esteem but Ʋsurpers, whilst you undertake to rule there,O. P. In his Speech to the Parl. in the painted Cham∣ber. Sept. 12. 1654. where he is of right sole King, and Law giver. He spake truth, who said, That liberty of conscience is a NATƲ∣RAL right. So that he that maketh an intrenchment upon that, doth (what in him lieth) bereave me of my birth right.
Sirs, Deceive not your selves, nor let the lips of any false Prophet deceive you;Page 30. for I say plainly to you (and you shall one day witness what I say to be true) that it will neither be for your honor, or your peace in the great day of your account, that any Act shall be found enrolled among the Laws of your establishing, whereby the holy one of Israel hath been sought to be limited Which of you can mean sure the waters of the great deep in the hollow of his hand?Isa. 40.12, 13. or mete out heaven with his span, or comprehend the dust of the earth in a measure, or weigh the mountains in scales, and the hills in a ballance? Or which of you hath at any time di∣rected the Spirit of the Lord, or being his counsellor hath taught him? O how then is it, that you should but once think to pale and limit (within the scant circumference of mans cloudy reason) that Sovereign WIND, which bloweth when, and
where, and how it listeth?Gen. 17.14. There is a time when circumcision is commanded upon pain of death; there is a season when the same thing maketh Christ unprofitable to the user.Gal. 5.2. There is a time when swearing by the name of the Lord is commanded;Deut. 6.13. and there is a time when the great Law-giver (whom under penalty of being destroyed we are commanded to hear) cuteth off all exceptions, and saith swear not at all.Act. 3.23. Matth. 5.34.  "ΟΛΩΣ. Take heed of forbidding where Christ commandeth, and of commanding where he forbiddeth. In the counsel of the Lord stand, and you will find direction near you. The hand of grace doth hold the candle of the Lord (a measure of the light of Christ which you have received) in all your Consciences;Joh. 8.12. being guided by which, you will be safely led on to enact laws (ac∣cording to that Royal law written in the heart) for God, and not against him. At this Oracle, the spiritual light of Christ (so despised by the wise among men) you may take counsel in your greatest streights, and find certain resolution. You shall neither stagger nor err, for its conduct is in the sure and clean paths of peace, not contrary, but according to the Scriptures of truth, which were given forth by the holy men of God, who dwelt in the same light of Jesus. Take heed of acting that thing for which the witness of God in your consciences do condemn you; for if that condemn you, God is greater then the conscience. Finally, Remember that whilst you abide faith∣ful with the Lord, he will be with you, but if you forsake him,1 Chron. 28 9. Isa. 59.10. he will forsake you; and then you will be left to grope as in the dark at noon day, and stagger in your counsels as a drunken man staggereth in his vomit. And know,Isa. 19.14. that as all powers in this nation have stood firm, whilst they stood for God so it hath been, and will be, the certain fore-runner of their sudden ruine, when once they begin to clash, or contend, with the Lord, or his people. The Lord God Almighty be your sun and your shield.

