



Worthy Sir,
WHen God made Man, he left nothing to make more but him∣selfe Man, that Man might eternally en∣joy himselfe. For he fore-seeing that Man would lose himselfe, though he had made him perfect, so farre as was consi∣stent with such a creature, determined to finde him againe, by searching him out through bryars, and brakes, and bushes, worse then those Thickets in Paradise, in which Man hid himselfe after he had sinned. In these thornes Christ was caught, like Abrahams Ramme, by the head, whose seed whilst he took hold of, he was taken hold of, and by wicked hands crucified and slaine, for bearing witnesse to the truth. If the Sonne of God, the
Lord of glory hath thus suffered for the Servants, shall not the servants for their Lord and Master? All this he did to set us an example, to take up the crosse, whose heavie burthen the world will impose upon his disciples sufficiently, though the world like the Pharisee, will not touch it, nor endure the touch of it with one finger.
Let the world straine at Gnats, and swallow Camels; I am perswaded better things of you, and your worthy family, though I thus speak. For as you have been ever industrious to finde the truth, so ne∣ver wanting to support it, in what shape soever it hath appeared to you, being not ashamed of the Crosse of Christ. Now as you have not been ashamed of it, so you must not be dejected under it. Though, I confesse, the losse of so vertuous a wife, is a great tryall; But to be prevented of her due obsequies, addeth to the affliction; being a custome allowed by all Nations to the dead, except by the Massagetae of Scythia, who eate up their ancestors to prevent the wormes; and the Hircanians and Caspians, who buryed the dead in the mawes of wild beasts, and the gorges of vultures, to prevent Funerall charges (peradventure.) As the Bactrians de∣voured
their dead by dogs, kept for that purpose, to avoid all Funerall ceremonies. Which buryalls were good enough for them, who neither feared God, nor reve∣renced Man, who made no difference of a dead man, and a meere Carrion, as some doe not of a dead Christian, who dies in hope, and an Heathen that dies without. Whose stupidnesse neither the examples of Scripture, nor Antiquity, nor laudable Customes, nor the allowance of the State, nor the permission of the Reverend Synod, can remove. Poore soules! What Le∣thargie now troubles them, being the Li∣turgie (by them so called) is taken away?
But this prevention of your Funerall Rites, happened through your love to me, and your earnest desire, that I should doe that last duty for your deare Spousesse. Which prevention I feared, and premo∣nished, though you had the leave of all those that were interessed in the Church. For those few that in your parts disaffect me, are of Ammons disposition, (it seems) who when he had ravished Thamar, could not abide the sight of her, though he him∣selfe had done the wrong. Like an Ape, he would break that glasse, which shewed him his visage. God forgive the, they
have ravished me of my living by mis∣constructions where I lived many yeares in good repute (I thanke God) taking great paines as is well knowne, and gi∣ving no just offence; what ever some might take through ignorance or ill will, (which never speaketh well) though now some cannot abide to see me, because they see their owne ill deeds in me. Which it seems facient iterùm, si se fecisse crediderint, as saith Seneca; hoping to over-awe ju∣stice by their violence, and to make Au∣thority, like themselves, take pleasure in oppression.
But their troubling of me turned to my good, for the Honorable Committee found themselves abused, by their false reports, as well as my selfe. Now therefore, being I was prevented of preaching this Ser∣mon, by their false suggestions, procuring a Warrant, which took me off as I went before the Corpse, I cannot deny your just request for a Copy of that, which I meant to have said at that time. Wherein you may and shall perceive, how fearfull these men were, where no feare was.
For the false accusation of our endea∣vour to preach, without the Ministers consent, and the rumour of Souldiers rai∣sed
to support me, and Malignants gathe∣red together to heare me, was but a ridi∣culous pretence to get a Warrant to hin∣der the Sermon, The thing therefore which they feared, was no carnall wea∣pons, but the Spirituall weapons of the true Christian warfare, viz: the sword of the Spirit the word of God, with two edges, and the mutiny which that might make in their own guiltie consciences, of which you will finde me very tender in this Sermon: (not that I would excuse sinne, but) because I would take occasion, from them that seek occasion, to blame my Ministery of spleene or partiality.
As therefore you have the greatest part in the Crosse, and the greatest right to the Sermon, so I pray accept it as a crouch to rest the Crosse upon. Remem∣ber, that the devill bid Christ cast him∣selfe downe; worldly sorrow seconds him; I hope you are too wise with Christ, to o∣bey either; much lesse to vexe your selfe at those, who doe after evill counsell.Psal. 37.1. The fooles sport is to do mischief, for he flings fire-brands, and saith it is in jest. Let them therefore walk in the light of their owne fire,Isa. 50.11. and in the sparks that they have kindled, they shall at last sit downe in sor∣row.
For the deceitfull man seldome rosteth what he took in hunting. Non gaudet tertius haeres. But as the crack∣ling of thornes under a pot, so is a fooles joy, soone in, and as soone out. God know∣eth the way of the righteous, but the way of the ungodly shall perish.
I meane not hereby that you should so carry this wrong, as to be infensible of it. For Ferendo injuriam, fortasse invitas novam: A wrong not rightly carryed, may invite another: But so to beare your selfe, that Dum non vis calcari, neque videaris posse calcari, as you would not be trodon, so to shew your self above their wretched spleene, by whose teeth a poore wretched corps cannot passe without be∣ing snapt at. But as it was said of So∣crates, so let it be of you, who retreating in the reare of his retyring Troops, lookt with such a countenance, as put courage in his pursued friends, and daunted his fol∣lowing enemies. Even as a friend of yours, a Commander, did look that day upon the guilty faces of your Funerall-disturbers, whom they answered with ma∣king faces, altero ad frontem sublato, altero ad mentum depresso supercilio, by pulling one eye-brow up, and the other
down, or else turning their backs. God keep every good man from envy, hatred, malice, and uncharitable men.
So entreating I may be excused for so long detaining your right from you, which you had received long since in a better character, but that mine adversaries sto∣ny hearts, have bred upon me Calculum in renibus, the Stone in the Kidneys; a disease I never knew till I fell into the gravell-pits of their digging, where I have suffered by paine and griefe a petty martyrdome.
But God, I hope, who hath, will still deliver me from unreasonable men, and from every evill way. To whom I commit you, and all your worthy family, resting

