



SIRS,
IF the Highest himself shall esta∣blishPsalm 87. 5. Zion, there is encourage∣ment, sufficient and abund∣ant for You his Servants re∣joycingly to serve him, in the countenancing of his Truth, and contend∣ing with the men of this Generation for the Faith once given unto the Saints, by the most proper means and methods which the Lord of lords in his wisdom hath direct∣ed, and shall lead you unto. The Liberty proclaimed to Godly-Gospel-Preachers, and your fostering of Orthodox Pastors
 and Teachers, will much conduce, by the Spirit of Christs mouth, to the con∣sumption of the Man of Sin; and what abuse soever is made of the Press for the spreading of Anti-Scriptural and Anti∣christian Errors, yet it needeth not to be feared, while Pulpits and Presses are open (through Your Highness and Honors fa∣vors) for a Testimony against them, but that God will confound their Language, who by false and perverse Interpretations of the Scriptures, would seduce the mindes of the simple, into an expectation of no∣thing but Immediate Raptures and Reve∣lations.
Some indeed cry up nothing but Club∣law against the men, called Quakers, and can give no other measure then their Pre∣latical Fathers to those that dissented from them: But by Your Indulgence and For∣bearance of Saints erring and otherwise minded, many have conscientiously made enquiry after those Truths which lay hid, or were defaced; and have the more hear∣tily embraced them, and do hold them fast, after Scripture-conviction. And how∣ever
 the Men, I deal with, for the present do debate the Scriptures, and decry the Ministery, Churches, all New Testament external Worship, and whatsoever bear∣eth the stamp of Divine Authority, as not to be found among us, yet by Your Le∣nity and Gentleness exercised towards them (while You espouse, or patronize none of their Errors) it may be firmly expected that the Elect (supposing such among them) shall be reduced: And as for others that are evil men and seducers (from that perverse Principle of their Self-adoring Light) they shall wax worse and worse, and as the madness of some is evident, so shall the folly of other be made manifest 2 Tim. 3. 9. to all who are not bewitched with their Spiritual sorceries.
MY LORDS, Let but the Saints, and the Churches of Saints, according to Scripture∣evidence, be protected and cherished (as You have graciously begun) and the Office∣ministery will soon be known, setled and established. Let every stumbling-block, as speedily and safely as lyeth within Your Power, be removed from the way of the
 blinde, and occasion cut off from them that seek occasion, and ere long the Lord him∣self will rebuke them to silence, that they shall neither talk nor write so presumptu∣ously, nor shall arrogancy come out of their mouth. The lip of truth shall be established forProv. 12. 19. ever: but a lying tongue is but for a moment. Let Learning be advanced among pious men (for God hath his Wits, and his Learned ones) and through the sanctified Improve∣ment thereof, Ignorance (its froward ene∣my) will creep into corners, as darkness va∣nisheth before the light. Some of these men Lip of truth opened, by Tho. Lawson, page 13. Christs inno∣cency pleaded by Tho. Speeds Epistle, with his Guilty co∣vered Clergy∣man unvail'd. page 69. begin to appeal unto the Consciences of the Learned, for Idioms and propriety of speech, in Hebrew and Greek, with the Do∣rick dialect: they will give us leave then to make use of our English dialect also, and speak vulgarly, while we think as the Phi∣losopher. Our contentions with them are not about , , tu, or , or , but pro aris & focis, for the lamp & life of our Religion, the Rule of the Holy Scriptures, the Glory of the Blessed Trinity, the peculiarness of the Covenant of Grace; the sole matter of our Justification before God, the continu∣ance
 of our Christian warfare, during this natural life; the truth and efficacy of Christs own Institutions, &c. Amidst which di∣gladiations, our Lord Jesus is fighting a∣gainst them with the Sword of his mouth, and him wee'l trust with the issue of the battel; whereupon
I humbly supplicate, That every person whatsoever may not, impunè, strike them corporally, in the Steeple-house, streets or prison; for they think it a great triumph to have this to object, That any are tolerated with this mutinous word in their mouths, Answer to the Quakers Catech. p. 19. Fight Lads for the Gospel; and they'l still cry out Persecution, as they have done, if every Turn-key or Tapster in the prison, may, without check, be permitted to wreak their teem and spite upon them, with some base, illegal and inhumane usage or other. But while any of this Sect, for their exorbitant courses, meet with legal and due correcti∣on, Be pleased to let them all know that we are guarded by a better Law then what they Teachers of the world un∣vail'd, p. 29, 30 upbraid us with, enacted in the Marian times: And, that while they carry Popish and Jesuitical Doctrine along with them,
 they are to have no more liberty for divul∣ging it in our Assemblies, then the men of that profession. Popish Doctrines and Ido∣latries are as abominable as ever were the Paganish: And some of these mens Te∣nents are as reprobate stuff as the Jesuits; Their blasphemies as horrid as the Popish Parasites. What is Rome but Babylon the Mo∣ther of Abominations? And what is this Sect, but a daughter of that great whore? who doubts but the Romish Emissaries are abroad to se∣duce? Some quondam Professors of the Go∣spel have lost their Garments, and men see their shame. They bid farewel to Imputed Righteousness, in the Scripture-sense, and how they can be girt with inherent Graces, who put off the Saints, or believing sinners best robe, I see not. The Setters and Abet∣tors of this Sect, would be more narrowly watched, and according to their crimes stig∣matized. There is one This for each Parlia∣ment man, by George Fox, page ult. hath suggested to the Right Honorable Parliament, after this maner, All that have a word from the Lord seek not to stop them, and limit them from speaking it, by the counsel of those Teachers which are made by the will of man, and have not the
 word of the Lord; according to the word of the Lord they are to be stopt, and to be silent. And after the same measure, shall it not be me∣ted out to them? But whereas he con∣cludeth with an Interrogation that hath a sting in the tayl, Is there any law or limit to be made to limit the Spirit of God? I shall close with Christ his own charge (for the purity and peace of the Churches) which some Brightman Cotton. of no mean account do conceive was partly fulfilled by the Edict of Da∣rius, Ezra 6. 11 13. Cant. 2. 15. Take us the Foxes, the little Foxes, that spoil the Vines, for our Vines have tender grapes.
Now, that Your Highness, and Your Honors may be all as Angels of God, di∣scerning the false spirits and the true; such as proceed out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet, from Him that proceedeth from the Father, and from the Son; that Ye may be established in the old and pre∣sent Truth; that Ye may be preserved blameless; that all men may acknow∣ledge their Mercies under Your Govern∣ment;
 that Your Graces may be height∣ned yet to farther Service of the Lord, and his peoples Interest in the three Na∣tions; And, that Ye may be prospered in all Your high undertakings, at home and abroad, for Glory to the Highest, is, and shall be the Prayer of

