



THE Israelites being sore pinch∣ed by reason of the three yeeres drought, and the famine ensuing upon it under Ahab, had yet a promising message of raine, and plentie sent to them from hea∣ven, before they sought unto the God of heaven for it: It seemes their Idolatries, and Apostasies were growne so connaturall unto them that they were not sensible of their miscarriages. I wish that it were not so in England. The Sword hath been feeding upon flesh, and glutting it selfe with
blood for a long time: and yet there is cause to complaine with Salvian, Plectimur à Deo, nec flectimur tamen; corripimur, sed non corri∣gimur. Though the Lord hath made us sicke in smiting, yet few there are that repent of their wickednesse, saying, what have I done? but every one rusheth into sin, as the Horse rusheth into the battell. Ier. 8.6. And no marvell, for unlesse the Lord give a minde as well as means, sight as well as light, and irradiate the Organ as well as pre∣sent the Object, we cannot but erre: neither is our naturall blindnesse, the only cause hereof; but Sa∣tan also puts his black hand before our eyes, that we may not see the dangerous paths wherein we walke. The world also by laying forth her two faire breasts, of profit and pleasure, hath cast down many wounded, yea many strong men have been slaine by her, as it is said of the whorish woman, Prov. 7.26. These are the principall causes (I conceive) why so many halters in Religion are to be found among us, after so long enjoyment of so cleare light, and so many smart rods, wherewith the Lord hath chastened us. How often have we been taught from God, that we must serve him
truly, and totally, without halting, or halving? and yet how many thousands are in this Kingdome which still continue in their sins, and even hate to be reformed? The multitudes of carnall Gospel∣lers, formall Protestants, combining, and comply∣ing with the Papists, to whom Satan hath lent his seven heads to plot, his ten hornes to push at the Saints of God, doe sufficiently demonstrate the truth hereof. But our comfort is that the Lord will disappoint the craftie in their devises, so that their hands cannot performe their works, Iob. 5.12. The Lord will raise up Carpenters to cut off those hornes (as you were learnedly, reasonably, and plentifully instructed in the morning Ser∣mon;) And our hope is, that as the Lord hath (in great mercy both to our Church, and State) mira∣culously preserved your persons, supported your spirits, and carryed you on thus farre in repairing our breaches, so he that hath begun this great worke by you, will in his own gracious time perfect the same, whereby the puritie of Gods ordinances being setled among us, we may be freed from halt∣ing, and halving in Religion. And how ever though in the mean time you cannot be wholly free
from the aspersions of black mouthed instruments of Satan, who by their manifold calumnies, and reproaches seeke to retard the worke of God: yet I doubt not but you will remember what was the u∣suall saying af that holy Martyr Master Brad∣ford; Doe well, and heare ill, is written upon heaven gates. You doe causam posteritatis age∣re: The Lord make you faithfull, and alwayes blesse you with his gracious presence, guiding you by his counsels, and afterwards bringing you to his glory, which is the daily, and hearty prayer of

