



Right Honorablt,
THere are two ranks of men extremely differ∣ing in regard of their estate and condition, that use for the most part to go with staves in their hands; but not to the same end, or
 purpose. The Nobleman carries his as a badge and embleme of his of∣fice, and high honour. It being an ancient custome for Princes to give the investiture into places of digni∣ty and eminency, per traditionem ba∣culi, by the delivering of a staffe. The common traveller takes up his, the better to support him in the length of his journey, and to ease him in the difficulty and roughnesse of the way. But these staves of Honour God hath cut asunder, as he did those of beauty, and bands, Zach. 11. 7. having had for these late years a sharp contest with the Cedars of the Land. And which is a lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation; hath dried up the roots from whence they sprang.
That which I presume to put into your Honours hand, is the staffe
 of a traveller, yet not of such an one, as beats the common rode and path of the world; but of such who pro∣fessing themselves strangers and so∣journers on earth, both seek, and minde an heavenly countrey. And to be amongst the number of those (I am perswaded) you do not only count it your duty; but also make it your work, esteeming it a greater glory to be one of Zions Pilgrims, then of Englands Peers. Now how expedient and necessary a staffe is in this journey, I would the times themselvs did not abundantly speak; the difficulties of which have beene such; as that to many Religion it self hath become a stone of stum∣bling, and a rock of offence. Others as dejected, have fainted in their profession, and have cast away their confidence, for want of looking
 up unto the promises, which in such seasons are the belevers only support and assurance, that though the way, of the Lamb, be a way of blood, yet the end is a throne of glory, and a crown of life. That I may therefore strengthen your hands in God, and be serviceable to your faith, I have) made bold to dedicate this small Treatise of the Promises to your Honour, which I wish might prove in your hands as the rod of Myrtle▪ in the hand of the traveller, which as Historians report, doth keep him from growing weary. And that it might so tend to the encrease of spi∣ritual strength, as that when the youths shall faint, and the young men urterly fall; you may be as those that wait upon God, that run and are not weary, and walk, and are not faint, Esay 40. 31. However, though
 I can cōmunicate no vertue unto it; yet I shal not cease to follow it with my prayers, beseeching God, that both it, and all other means which through his grace you may enjoy for the welfare of your soul, may prove so successeful by his blessings, as that you may reap the rich fruit of all the Promises in the everlasting fruition of life, and glory; And that your Noble posterity may be heirs also together with your self, of the same mercies. So I test,
Octob. 26. 1654.

