


Right Honourable.
IT is acknowledged that like Martha, you are cumbred a∣bout much businesse,  regard of the loud clamors of the men of the world, whose chiefe affections are taken up with civill affaires, as in a flourishing State; with the ap∣purtenances thereunto belonging, (as in a free trade. &c.) But there is an Ʋnum necessarium, which is farr from their thoughts, and I feare not very neare yours (viz. the flourishing of the Kingdome or Church of Christ) which ought to be your chiefe object to adorne, in that the other would fall in of course, as our Saviour affirmeth, Mat. 6. 33. &c. A chapter worthy of your most serious meditations in your now present imployments. For doubtles providence doth as well extend it self, over whole Nations, as over a particular Person, or a Sparrow; but such is the fraile condition of our Natures, that we dare not trust God with our temporals; the best of us are ready with Jacob, to ca∣pitulate with our Maker, and to indent with him, viz. that if God would grant him food, rayment, protection, &c. then he would build God an house, Gen. 28. 20, 21, 22, &c. So we, if God will but first build us seeled Houses, make us great and eminent men in the world. put us into a gallant state, capacity, &c. O then we will promise to doe great matters for God. As in a reforma∣tion of Religion, which shall be Jure divino, or agreeable to the will, and appointment of Jesus Christ, but we will doe nothing for him before, unlesse with Jacob, to poure a little oyle upon the stone, where we intend to erect our promised Fabrick. Right
 Honourable, you have with Jacob, made large promises touching a full, perfect, and thorow Reformation, viz. to pluck up Anti∣christ, root and branch, and that without respect of persons; and the Lord Christ having performed your request, on his part, doth now expect a performance also on your part to him, as he did from Jacob; but so backwards are you in matters of Divine concernment, as that he is also constrained to invite you to it, as he did Jacob, Gen. 35. 1. Therefore in Christs stead I desire you to imitate Jacob by your free assent, who immediatly upon the reminding him o his promise, did in∣stantly, as a preparative to the worke) stirre up his Fami∣ly, to put away the strange gods which was then amongst them, and to be cleane, and wash their Garments, as also to a∣rise and goe with him to Be where he would erect an Altar unto God. who had answered him, in the day of his de∣stresse, and had been with him in the way which he went. Now how neare that his relation did, and doth agree, with your past, and now condition, I appeale to your selves. O that you had now also hearts to doe the like to your Family of the Common-wealth, whereof under God you are Keepers; as al∣so that your Houshold of the Nation, would as willingly relen∣quish their Heresies, and Schisms, as the other did their Idols and eare-rings; which that they may doe with more freedome of spirit, I hav (by Divine assistance,) attempted a discovery of them, to the end, neither you, nor they may be mistaken in them, viz. Neither they in their Voluntarie, delivering them unto you, or you in the buriall of them.
I am bold also in Christs name, to minde you of something further to this purpose, as in relation to your duty in this pre∣sent designe of Christ, which I presume you are not ignorant of; or if you be, that you will not continue so, having your understanding illuminated; At the present, it is visibly appa∣rent both to you, and all Professors, that the Reformation in point of Religion, is at a full stand, which is by meanes of two distinct Parties, viz. the Presbiterian, and the Independant, the one pulling one way, and the other another, by which meanes it is betwixt them, even almost pulled in pieces; the Presbite∣rian
 Party being such, as would dwell upon a forme, and the o∣ther being contrary to all forme, running themselves into a Chaos of confusions, their distempered spirits, being utterly voyd of all order, or decency, so that it is as impossible for these two extreames, to unite into one, as Hell, and Heaven; I have therefore (by Divine assistance,) attained to the discovery of the Golden Meane, by which they may not only be reconci∣led together, but also brought to practise Jure Divino, according to the will, and appointment of Jesus Christ in his Word; which thing is the now grand designe of Christ, therefore it behooves you, to stirre up these two parties, to comply with this revealed insuing Truth, which though it be as yet despicable, yet i will prove most honourable. It is confest, you have by Divine pro∣vidence, acted very much, in relation to a Reformation, viz. you have passed over the Red Sea of Prelacy, in which Pharaoh and his Hoast were drown'd, but all that Spirituall Egypt is not de∣stroyed; many of them uncircumcised ones have marched with us into the wildernesse we are now in. There be yet thousands of Cavalier Priests amongst us, besides, you are to know, that before you can enter into the promised Land, you are also to beare the Arke of God, over the River Jordan, viz. that of Pres∣bitery, it being also an obstacle in the way, albeit not so seeme∣ing dangerous as the other. Right Honourable, the Cloud doth now remove, and you are by providence brought even to the brinke of that River, through which you must passe, or you will never enter the Holy Land; take courage therefore right Wor∣thies, by considering what the Lord hath done for you, and how he hath to that very purpose, purged you, both from the Episcopall, and Presbiterian drosse which were amongst you; and how he hath made you, and your Government, as that new Heaven, and new Earth, from, and unto which, the new Jerusalem is to descend; the Lord being pleased to make this Na∣tion the Theatre on which he will begin to act his present De∣signe. I shall further presume to minde you, that as you have, so you are yet to swallow up such waters, as the Dragon of Pre∣lacie, with his Presbiterian Tayle, shall belch out against the Woman (you being the earth appointed for that very purpose)
 untill you have dryed up their Sea, and River, which you by pro∣vidence have almost accomplisht; but till you have thorowly drained them dry, you obstruct the descending of the new Jerusalem, or the Marriage of the Lambe, which is immediatly to insue. Therefore I beseech you to delay not time, but with a Christian courage resolve to act a full Reformation, which you will never effect so long as you support the Prelaticall, or Pres∣biterian Clergy, either in office, or maintenance, that of Pres∣bitery being a Romish Hierarchy as the other, as in this insuing Treatice is proved at large; and therefore that River Jordan, ought as well to be dryed up, as either Euphrates, or the Red Sea. Rght Honourable, there hath been much paines taken by severall worthy men in this Nation, by writing, and preaching, which hath been also dedicated unto you to this purpose; I be∣seech you, let not them, or this lye as wast paper in your Studies, see∣ingViz. Mster Iohn Owens Srmond, of the shking and  ig of Heaven and Earth, as also M. Dels Booke, of praise and unity amogst the ihfull, as also Mr. Brine's Book of Bols fall in the foolish Virgins, &c. As also on ld, The Mystery of the true Mini∣sty unvailed, &c. all which are very pei∣nent to this very purpse. it is the chiesest worke you have to performe, for without all Coutroversie, you are the men whom God intends to honour, as his Instruments to pluck up Anti∣christ, root and branch. Blessed be you amongst men, for what you have done in it, and the Lord stirre up your hearts more, and more, to accomplish the rest of the worke. And know also, that you have a Call unto it, even from your adversaries the Presbiterian Priests, who have so much urged you to suppresse Schismes, and Heresies in this Nation.
Now if it be proved from the Word, that they are such them selves, how can they with modesty be offended; if you meet to them the same measure, they would have had you (as their vassels) to have measured to others. Sure it is, you have found that Tribe so much averse to your proceedings, as (had you not been right valiant) might have utterly obstructed the work in your hands; and be assured, that so long as that Judas of the Clergy liveth, it isVVitnesse their utter disaing of the now present Government, and eggement therunto. impossible that the State should be at quiet, their ambition being such,
 as will admit of no injunctions from you, unlesse of their owne framing, so that you must resolve to suppresse them, or be supprest by them. Now the Lord knoweth how the Soules of the Saints (as yet under the Altar) desireth to be at liberty, who are yet kept in bondage by that meanes, of your yet supporting them; stirre up your selves therefore like men of warre, by suppressing them, as also by giving way to such a method of gathering Churches, as there is a cleare president for in the Word; as also by such as are most meet for such imployments, as also to have them Churches so gathered, to be regulated in such a method, as Christ and his Apostles hath left in the Word, so that the true Ministers of Jesus Christ may be knowne from them of Aarons order; and in so doing we shall be in so happy a condi∣tion, as that it wil be said of England, as it was sometimes of Antioch, where the Disciples were first called Christians; so if you will admit of Christs owne peculiar Government, without any Antichristian mixture; you wil not only bring glory to this Nation, but also immortalize your names to all posterity; thus Christ is pleased to honour you with the first proffer of restoring his Church to its primative purity, (which is a thing you have also ingaged your selves to performe) to the discovery of which this Treatice tendeth. Which I most humbly present to your Honours, hoping that the Lord wil so stirre up your hearts there∣by, as to accomplish the desires of him, who would glory to see the flourish of the new Jerusalem, (of which I trust you wil be∣come Denizons) as also that England may become a patterne to all that desire to professe Christianity in the whole World, which the Lord in much mercy give unto your hearts to accom∣plish, whose worke it is, and who also must move you to it, in daily expectation whereof, I subscribe my selfe,

