


Beloved,
YOu are the people, among whom my lot hath fallen, for these fourteen years and upwards; un∣to whom I came, and with whom I have been, in weaknesse, and in fear, and in much trembling. Yet in regard of Gods presence and indulgence of Preaching-li∣berties (with some successe) all the Prelates times, and since, with his protection in these times of warre, I may say, The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places; yea (in God, the portion of my cup) I have a goodly heritage. And for you, I cannot but remember (to Gods honour) that inviting report which was given of you, that you were a fasting and a praying people; which I found true, among the best of you, who gave me a call hither. I doe not forget what example
 of Non-Conformity to Prelaticall injunctions you held out to me; nor what forbearance you allowed me for a time, in the use of the Ceremonies, which M. T. Weld. my Reverend and godly Predecessour had refused, and I through inconsiderate timidity and temerity had introduced, till God convinc'd me of my folly. I must needs acknowledge with thankfulnesse to God and you, that some competent number of you have fallen in with me in a time of Publique Reformation, to witnesse against Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Schisme, Heresie, Profanenesse and Formality, and have helpt towards their Extirpation according to Covenant.
But in this, I question how the rest of you are, or will be approved to Christ, and your consciences: Some, for leading, others, for following and persist∣ing in a way of Needlesse separation from me and your Brethren, and that privately, as publikely; and that after you had (upon conferences and debates) gran∣ted a true Church here in being, and have seen it come forth more visibly, in the way to further purity; after our renouncing all dependency upon Prelacy, our ca∣sting out of Ceremonies, and Service-book, as a menstruous cloth, with a Get thee hence; our seeking after, with joynt-consent, all Christs own Institutions and our chusing of his Officers: this is an un-Saint-like separation, not to be justified, scarce to be parallel'd. Some for running to another Baptisme, or disclaiming my Ministery, and the above mentioned first Call, which other of your Brethren have stuck to, avouch∣ed and renewed: by these, as other evidences (which might be produced, but that I spare you) it appears,
 the more Christ hath whistled and wooed you in, the more you have fled from the fold; the more I, his poor servant have been yours, the lesse you have been mine, and with a clear conscience I may write and publish it, the more I have endeavoured to love you abundantly, the lesse I am loved of you.
But that which Christ hath most against You (the ignorant and profane multitude I mean not, but Pro∣fessours) is, that some have taken upon you the office of teaching, and re-baptizing; others, have hearkned after you, and you with them after false teachers, who have drawn disciples after them, not only to a∣nother Baptisme, but to another Gospel (never fancied, but ever abhorred in this place, since I knew it, and before, in my Orthodox Predecessours time) which yet is not another; for the Gospel of Christ is but one eternall Truth; but there be some that trouble you, and would pervert the Everlasting Gospel, by preach∣ing an universall (and when all comes to all but tem∣porary) Redemption by the death of Christ (as they say) for all. He that started this first among you, stirred my spirit, least this leven should speedily spread thorow the whole lump, with all instancy and constancy, on Lectures and Lords daies, publiquely to witnesse (in these following Sermons) against that which was too publiquely and boldly vented, though in a private house.
And as at that time I acquainted you with some reasons or causes, why I conceived God sent in that subtle seducer, so now I will re-minde you of them. 1. For your countenancing the way of Anabaptisme, and compliance with what they (who run that course)
 say and doe; as if all they said were Gospel, and all they did were godlinesse. 2. For your want of love to the truth, and of this truth, That Christ died but for some, which is a truth, or Christ died in vain for the most of men, for what shall it profit if any of Christs purchased ones should win the world, and not win Christ, but lose their souls? and all grant, most men will lose their souls, and, that it is a blasphemy to say, Christ died in vain. 3. For your Triall, Deut. 13. 2, 3. whether you doe soundly love God, and sincerely pro∣fesse Christ crucified. There must be such heresies among you, that they which are approved may be made manifest, 1 Cor. 11. 19. in their solidity of judgement, sincerity of heart, and stedfastnesse of conversation, among you. 4. For your caution, lest contending for circumstances, above the substance, you lose the substance, while you catch at the shadow. For Satan (by Gods permission) hath set Pioneers, while you are seeking to set up the Roof, on work to undermine and rase the Foundation. 5. To quicken up your diligence in the search of the Scri∣ptures. And lastly, To make you more carefull in holding fast of all Gospel-truth, lest you be plunder∣ed of it.
Now, if any of you have been plundered, tis possible Brethren to recover this (with other truths) out of the hands of spoilers. Bestir you therefore, and quit your selves as living stones of the spirituall Temple, of the living God, the Pillar and ground of truth. Doe not only regain, hold fast, but as you hold out any colours of a visible Church, hold forth the truths that appertain to the Head of the Church, visibly, gloriously.

 And I do now more solemnly call you out to witnes with me against this Errour of Vniversall Redemption (let it be qualified how it will) it hath an ill savour and report. I wish you were all of you, as I hope most (for the present I know not any one who joyns in vi∣sible, publique Communion, but are) free of this leven. Some in the Town are yet nibling at the bait, which the Fisher brought, near a twelve-moneth since; whom I lookt upon, as one of our common vagrants, who scattereth vermine upon the bench or place, where he nestleth for an hour or two; and still I doe look upon this and other errours (with every Sermon that broacheth them) as very like to the river Nilus, which after the over-flow leaveth a world of mud behinde, that breeds nothing but venemous crea∣tures. Such muddy mindes had many after M. Oates his Sermon (as it was imagined of free grace) which have engendred to strange conceits of their Redeemer, free-will, falling away, &c. which makes me think, some are very neer to falling indeed, from that they have imagined to be in them, and from the true doctrin of free-grace, which we are sure is yet retained in this, of many other publike Congregations.
My counsell and request further is, that you do not only witnesse against errours and heresies, but love the truth. Beware of subtle spirituall pride; keep close to fellowship; help to reduce seduced ones; follow peace with holines. Beware of scattering opinions, ungroun∣ded jealousies; make no needlesse, and so, sinfull separa∣tions; Come in to your Brethren, you that are wilfully or weakly at a distance; you that do not hear us, read us, and recover your hearing; you that hear, redeem
 sometime for reading these poor Labours, which I present to you. Read, and pray, read and meditate. You have here not only the substance, but words, for the most part, as I preached them; a few enlargements, which I then pen'd not down, are wanting; you have in recompence thereof some enlargement added to our Answer of the Question, about Christs purchase of common benefits for wicked men: And all that which is inserted against Testardus his tenet, of Christs dying for all, to procure a present freedom from perishing, for want of a satisfaction to justice, which he shores up by his assertions, of a generall intention, Covenant, Cal∣ling and Grace. Which discourse I have made the more familiar for your Countrey-understandings, and did insert it here, the rather, because since Oates his Ser∣mon, much noise there hath been in Town and Coun∣trey, of a Call that all men have by the creatures, and that Nature is Grace, &c.
Minde I beseech you what is practicall, as what is controversall; and if you that have been misled and blinded by others, and of your selves have cooled and decaied, recover any heat with light; or if you that have been stedfast, preserve what you have, Let God have the glory, let me have your prayers; and I shall re∣joyce that I have not run in vain. Only shew the pow∣er of all, in the purity and beauty of a Gospel-becom∣ming conversation, and I am, for Jesus sake, my Pearl and Treasure,

