


My Dear Friends and Parishioners.
IT is not for any other Satisfaction so important, as the discharge of my Con∣science towards God and your souls, that puts me upon this dangerous adventure of writing unto you at this time. Wherein I do apparently hazard more, as to all secu∣lar respects and aimes, then any byassed advantage can compensate. But as it was S. Paul's pious care to write Epistles unto those places where he had formerly Preached; so it shall be mine, chusing rather to speak unto you by my Pen, then not at all.
It is now almost eight yeers since I had the freedom of speaking unto you as your Spiritual Embassador from Christ. The sufferings, hazards, and extremities I
 have undergone since that time, for the preservation of my heart from a deliberate wound (though it be the matter of much Spiritual joy and thanksgiving, as the highest honour that poor flesh and blood is capable of in this vale of misery) yet to waste any of this Paper in a particular Narrative thereof, would savour more of a mendicant designe, then of that sincere advice I intend unto you. 'Tis enough ye know, that God hath hitherto preserved and supported me by his unspeakable mercy and goodness; and I hope (in his secret wisdom) hath reserved me for his further service, in the place where he once set me. In the mean time, I hope a well meaning man, who hath been peaceable and faithful in our Israel, 1 Sam. 20. 19. may have leave to publish those serious Conceptions which are within his heart, like wine that hath no vent, Job 32. 19. and can no long∣er with duty and Conscience be suppressed.
To pass by the Controversies of these sad times so unsuccessively disputed both in Ink and Blood; I shall only represent
 unto you the Map of your Native Country in its present blindness, iniquity, and con∣fusion; which is (doubtless) so much the greater, by how much the less we are sen∣sible of the severe hand of God upon us. For that which makes our wonnds so despe∣rate (if not incurable) is our averseness to have them searched by a faithful hand. He that shall enter into the sad contem∣plation of Englands present estate and condition, and compare it with what it was of late yeers, shall discern a very strange and visible Eclipse of Gods fa∣vour towards it, and (notwithstanding all pretenses of Reformation, or new lights, or glorious days) shall have reason t suspect that the Candle of the Gospel is either in danger to be quite extinguished, or at least burns very dimnly amongst us, and does apparently dwindle.
For to begin with that which should be most dear unto a Nation (the establishmnt of Religion in its Purity and Luster) who is not sensible how far the Ark of God (namely our Religion, the glory of our
 Israel, and the Christian world) hath been surprized by profane and sacrilegiou hands, whilst the name of the Gospel an Reformation hath been used as a stalking horse, to disguise and palliate the blackest designs the Sun ever lookt upon; insomuch that the Church of England may complain and cry out, as once the Church of Israel did,, Isa. 24. 16. My leaness, my leaness, wo unto me; the trecherous dealers have dealt trecherously; yea the trecherous dealers have dealt very trecherously. Cer∣tainly there is no Divel so improved and compleat as the white Divel; the Prince of Darkness is never so perniciously fortu∣nate in his mischief, as when he transforms himself into an Angel of light; and our Religion could never have received so deep a wound from any infernal stratagem as from the plausible pretensions of refining and securing it unto u. How welt it is refined and secured, your selves may judge by the present Complexion of our Dear Mother, stript and mangled, and wound∣ed to death by the sons of her own bowels.
 Her Government dissolved; Her Feasts (the Religious Commemorations of the great mysterie of salvation) abolished; Her sacred Forms of Prayer (the sweet har∣mony and agreement of hearts and voices) vilified and scorned; Her Prophets (the Ambassadours of Christ for Peace and Reconciliation) imprisoned, impoverished, and reputed as the filth and off-scouring of the world. Her Champions (that should maintain her Doctrine against the frauds and fallacies of her subtle and malicious Adversaries) expell'd and banished the School of the Prophets. Her Doctrine (extracted purely from the Fountain of living water) invaded, and trampled into a muddy puddle. Her Discipline discharg∣ed and treatned, not daring to appear against avouched, and professed Heresies and Blasphemies. Her Temples either de∣faced and demolished, or else locked up by the Military Power; Insomuch that in one of her Cities (as I have been credibly informed) viz. Lincoln, the Sacramental Bread and Wine hath not been communi∣cated
 for three years together. And lastly the True Protestant Religion (which b solemn Protestation we were obliged t maintain) is now squeezed into such  narrow room, that few or none dare ow the Profssion of it, unless it be upon th scaffold, where innocence is secured from any future blow of malice.
So that as when a mirrour is broken in pieces, it represents the same object divi∣ded and deformed, which before was entir and amiable; so the Bond and Composur of Religion, when it is once broken an dissolved, is apt to splinter it self into  thousand Heresies and Schismes, which nothing less then a miracle can piece and redintegrate. Thus (by sad experience) we see our just and angry God hath forsaken his House, deserted his Heritage, given the dearly beloved of his soul into the hands of her enemies; Jer. 12. 7. And now, how do our enemies round about us, th Jesuite abroad, and the Schismatick a home, I and the infernal spirits under us clap their malicious hands, saying, There,
 There, so would we have it! not knowing, that the severest Persecution is not the weakest Argument of the Gospels Professi∣on, in its greatest candor and sincerity.
In the second place, if you shall cast your eyes upon the Civil Government, you cannot but discern the goodliest Fabrick of the Christian world demolished, and dissolved into nothing else but rubbish and confusion. Certainly God was not well pleas'd with your disputing the rights of King and Parliament by Tumults and Arms, and secret fallacies; who hath suf∣fered you to wade into that difpute so far, and with such ill success, as to have nei∣ther King nor Parliament left you for your shelter and protection, unless it be such a Parliament as God in his justice hath design'd to be the general grievance and disease of the Kingdom.
Not to expatiate far in describing the excellency of the Regal, beyond all other kinds of Government whatsoever, as ha∣ving its foundation first in Nature, and afterwards its establishment over that
 People, where God himself was the Le∣gislative Power. 'T will be enough to satisfie all dis-interessed Persons to know, that it was propounded unto the Israelites not only as the best form of Government, but as a reward of Ʋprighteousness and Integrity, and a particular expression of Gods mrcy and favour towards them, as appears, Jer. 22. 34. Thus saith the Lord, Execute ye Judgement and righteousness, and deliver the spoyled out of the hand of the Oppressor, and do no wrong no violence to the stranger, fatherless, and widdow; and then shall there enter in by the gates of this House, Kings sitting upon the Throne of David, riding on Chariots, and Horses, he and his servants, and his people. And when that people should sin themselves out of that blessing, See how God threatens them with a con∣trary punishment, Isa. 3. 5. The people shall be oppressed every one by another, and every one by his neighbour; the child shal behave himself proudly against the ancient, and the base against the ho∣nourable.
 And for that Text which is so much insisted on to prove the evil of this Government, be that shall look upon it with a single eye, as men ought to look up∣on those sacred Oracles; shall find, that the people were not reproved for asking a King (for that kind of Government was determined unto them long before, as ap∣pears, Deut. 17. 15.) but for rejecting their God; They have not rejected thee, but me they have rejected. 1 Sam. 8. 7. Sure I am, the Scripture cannot contradict it self, which says; For the Transgression of a Land, many are the Princes thereof. Prov. 28. 2. And Balaam being enlight∣ned from God, and prophecying of the fu∣ture prosperity of Israel, contracts the cha∣racter of a peoples felicity into a very few words; saying, The Lord his God is with him, and the shout of a King is among them. Numb. 23. 21. And if these Texts be looked upon as Old Testament, and so of Jewish concernment only▪ see hat was prophesied many hundred years before, upon the accession of the Gentiles, wherein
 we uo selves are included. Behold, I will lift up mine hand unto the Gentiles; and set up my standard to the people, and they shall bring thy sons in their arms, and thy daughters upon their shoulders, and king shall be thy nursing Fathers, and Queen thy nursing Mothers. Isa. 49. 22, 23.
If it be yet objected, that the forecited Text speaks only of some favours which the Church was to receive from the indul∣gence and benignity of some Heathen Kings and Emperours; and that Christs Kingdom is spiritual, and the subjects there of discharged of their obedience to any Temporal Monarch: Such may know, that they have borrowed an Argument from the Jesuits, that savours more of subtility and ends, then any true solidity, and is sufficiently answered; 1 Pet. 2. 13. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man, for the Lords sake; whether it be to the King as supreme; or unto Go∣vernours, as unto them that are sent by him; &c. and if you would know who they are who are thus commanded to sub∣mit
 they are described v. 9, to be a cho∣sen generation, a royal Priesthood, an ho∣ly Nation, a peculiar People: Terms of as high sanctity and priviledge, as any can pretend to within the Christian Pale. All which I have mentioned, only to lay be∣fore your eyes that ancient and glorious form of Government which our blessed Reformers (by your concurrence and en∣gagement) would pluck up by the roots, and abure for ever; as if it were some monstrous or accursed thing.
To this may be added, the experience we have had of this Government for so many generations; and the dismal change we have tasted from the want of it, for these last seven yeers; enough to write that counfel of Solomon upon our hearts with a pen of iron: My son, fear thou the Lord, and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change; for their calamity shall rise suddenly and who knoweth the ruine of them both? Prov. 24 21, 22. That is (as Deodatus on that place) who can foresee or avoid these
 two sudden thunders, of divine vengeance, and a Kings wrath? And sure, if there were neither of these Terrors to aw us in to our duty, yet the love of that peace an prosperity which is infallibly annexed to the observation of the fift Commandment; is inducement enough, Honour thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long; or, as it is in another place, Deut. 5. 16. that thou mayst have many, and good days, &c. where by Father, the Ci∣vil Parent is (by all Expositors) as well in∣cluded as the Natural. Now if we shall enquire how it comes to pass that our ma∣ny and good days (which heretofore w enjoyed in peace and plenty) are changed into few and evil days; the sacred Ora∣cle will resolve us, because we have had very little or no respect at all to the obser∣vation of this Commandment.
Plutarch tells a story of a Serpent, whose tayl was discontented that the head should have the power to govern, and carry it which way so or it pleased; and there∣fore ptitioned, that the same Power
 might reside in the tayl another while; Which being unwarily granted, upon great importunity; the tayl (a member very active, but withal blinde) carries the head and body through many holes and crevises, till at last it brought it self into such streights, that it could not stir, but head, body, tayl and all were destroyed. This story (though but a Fable in it self) has yet a moral truth in it, which we have seen and felt by direful experience. To these high injuries and affronts done to our common Mother (the Church) and to our common Parent (the King) I might remember ye of our Laws, Liberties, Privi∣ledges, Properties, Peace, Prosperity; which ly trampled under foot before your eyes, as so many heaps of rubbish and con∣fusion; to proclaim to all the world the impudent and ungodly frauds of those that pretended to be Guardians of these Com∣mon Jewels; and the infatuation of the to credulous world, that would believe them all this while.
But if those m have thus notoriously
 betrayed their trust; you will reply per∣haps (with the chief Priests and Elders) Mat. 27. 4. What is that to us? Let them look to that: ever man is responsible for his own, but not anothers guilt. 'Tis tru indeed, these grand Troublers of our Is∣rael shall bear the guilt of Principals, i the great and general day of account, when Inquisition shall be made for blood; bu every inferiour wheel by which they have moved shall bear the guilt of an Accessory. Judas, and Pilate, and Caiphas, had th chief hands in the Treason and murther of our blessed Saviour; and yet the guilt of tht blood extended to the whole Na∣tion of the Jews, and to their posterity after them In the case of blood, where the mur∣therer was concealed, so that no man would acknowledge the fact, the Law commanded the Judges of those times, to measure unto that City which was nearest unto him that was slain; and the Elders of that City, though they were innocent, and not so much as privie to the murther, were yet commanded to Sacrifice an Hei∣fer
 and to pray in this form: Be merciful O Lord unto thy People Israel, whom thou hat redeemed; and lay not inno∣cent blood unto thy People Israels charge. Deut. 21. 8. So precious in those days was the blood of any private person. It would be a sad contemplation, to lay before your eyes that red sea of blood which hath been shed like water on every side of our Jerusalem, by those who dare not so much as pretend to have (of themselves) a power over the lives of their fellow Subjects: But, as if all this were not guilt enough to weigh them down to the bottomless pit, there hath been added to that scarlet sin, the blood of one Sacred Person, of more value then 10000. of the best of his Subjects, by the Scriptures own computation, 2 Sam. 18. 3. namely, the light of our eyes, and the breath of our nostrills. Lam. 4. 20. In whose life and go∣vernment all the thousands that reside within his three Kingdoms, are really and nearly concerned, as in the life of their common Parent. An act so horrid and pro∣digious, that as no language can express it,
 so no history can parallel it. And yet, tho the guilt of this blood be as visible to  world, as it's clamorous in the ears of G yet so far are men removed out of the  of their repentance, that no man will  it; not so much for the guilts sake, as f the ignominy and merit that belong to s transcendent Traitors. And if we (who  to deal impartially with all men) charge t guilt of this blood, where by the law of G and man we find it lye; the Councel ( rather the Conspiracy) is presently as high enraged against us, as was that of the Ph∣rises against S. Peter, and proclaim us m∣lignants and delinquents, that our design  to fill Jerusalem with our Doctrine, a intend to bring this mans blood upon the Act. 5. 28. Well, what shall we do then, f the clearing our selves? Why, we will m sure to the next City; and see if Ezeki w belongs not to it. Wo to the blood City, to the pot whose scum is not gone o of it, bring it out piece by piece, let no l fall upon it; for hr blood is in the mid of her, she set it upon the top of a rock, 
 which is all one, upon the top of a Scaffold, she poured it not upon the ground to co∣ver it with dust; that it might cause fury to come up to take vengeance; therefore saith the Lord, I also have set her blood upon the top of a rock, that it should not be covered, Ezek. 24. 6, 7, 8. The meaning of the Prophet is very plain; The bloody City is Jerusalem, arraigned here by the Prophet, for the bold justification of her murthers and oppressions; and therefore her blood (saith God) shall be alwaies in my sight, as a remembrancer of vengeance, which shall be so certain and general, that o lt, no casualty or exemption shall pre∣vent the utter ruine and destruction of that City.
And truly (my beloved friends) when I enter into a serious contemplation of the guilty condition of our bloody Jerusalem, for her boldness in murther, sacriledge, and oppression, I am heartily sorry that you (my Parishioners) are so nerly allyed unto her in your neighborhood and relations; but f more sorry you are so nearly allyed unto her
 sins, as I fear you are; for if I am not m∣staken in the history of these sad times;  is no slight contribution that you have gi∣ven to the miseries we complain of, b know not how to remedy. A man may be ac∣cessory to the guilt of blood-shedding, more ways then perhaps you are aware of: T only I shall nam; first, in contributing assi∣stance to the fact before it is committed 2ly, by approbation and justification of th fact after it is committed. For (to borrow  resemblance from the learned Salmasius upon another reflection) what think ye? Sup∣pose a Gentleman who is peaceably psses∣sed of his house and estate, shall be assaulted and surprized by a combination of theeves▪ receiving strength & encouragement from the neighbours, tenants, and servants of that Gentleman: This man, by this con∣spiracy, is robbed, stripped, and dispossessed of his estate, bound hand and foot, and tyed unto a tree, and there left, tll a wild beast comes and destroys him: when inquisition shall be made for the blood of this man, it will be very easie to determne at whose
 dore the guilt will be found (namely) at the tenants and servants in some degree, as well as at the grand Conspirators. Or sup∣pose these theeves shall be so impudent and pleasant in their wickedness, as in a mock∣ery of justice, to erect a Court among them∣selves; and execute their own votes and conclusions in a form of Law, upon pretence the Gentleman was none of the best hus∣bands of his estate: will this extenuate the murder, or palliate the violence, or clear the adherents? I trow not; but will prove rather an high aggravation of the wicked∣ness. I shall leave every man to make his own application, with this assertion only; That he that is not ashamed to draw up a charge against himself in this particular, is in the hopefullest way to obtain his pardon.
It was our Saviours change against the Scribes and Pharisees, that his Fathers house (which was wont to be called the house of prayer) was by them made a den of theeves Mat. 21. 13. I would to God it were in the power either of my Pen or Prayers, to cleer those that sit at Westmin∣ster
 (once the house of God) of this deep guilt; or You of your assistance or aherence to them in contracting it; for they who at first (with Absolom) stole away the hearts of our Israel, upon pretence of a zealous care of Religion and Judicature; have since thrived so well in their dsign (by the strong contribution of our sins) as hath en∣abled them to rob God himself of his truth and honour, the King of his revenue and life, and the Church of its patrimony, the Kingdom of its peace, and all peaceable and faithful men of their secular iterests; and while they please themselves with the sad execution of some petty robbers (who their injuries have driven into extrem want) these sit undaunted and unconroul' upon the throne of iniquity; like the grea whore upon the many headed Beast, carv∣ing to themselves the satisfactions of their own pride, ambition, and covetousness, b vertue of their unjust and byassed Ordi∣nances, imposed (as so many snares) upo the tame, infatuated, and abused people.
But you'l say, what we have done hi
 therto in twisting with these men, we have done either out of ignorance or compulsion, not suspecting their ways would have been so bloody and abominable, or their ayms so vast and particular to themselves. Well, if this plea of yours be as sincere as it is plau∣sible; you have the less to answer for. But yet give me leave (with an Apostle) to pro∣fess the fears and jealousies I have of you, and to tell you, that when you went to Whitehal in your long boats, with the mouth of your Canon toward your Soveraign, in∣structing the whole Kingdom to follow you in that loud clamour, I am sure you were not prest into that strange service. Or ad∣mit that unhappy officiousnes of yours want∣ed eys to guide it unto its right object and that you mistook Whitehal for the black house of Commons, by the direction and per∣swasion of those Prophets, who put light for darkness, and darkness for light, Is. 5. 20. Yet it seems very strange to me, that you, whose judgements are presumed to be above the ordinary pitch of other mens, by the advantage you have of forrain obser∣vation,
 you, who have found the high repu∣tation you had formerly with all Nations, where you were employed, changed int contempt and scorn, for your unnatural an barbarous deportment toward your King You, who were (many of you) obliged by pa∣ticular Trusts and endearments. You, w have bin eaten up to bare bone by the ca∣terpillars of the Land; who have felt th little finger of your severe masters, heavi then the loyns of your late pious Soveraig (to the honour and approbation of the ship mony-tax by all posterity) You that hav served an apprentiship of more then 7. yee to these Egyptian Taskmasters, seen the jugling Arts, found your selves cheated often in your expectations, that you (wh all the world beside, look upon them as th prodigious monsters of this age) should be far bwitched with their sorceries, as to b still their servants (or slaves) and no Pilat wife among you to suggest a Christian ca∣tion, is a sad and sur fate, which I not  much admire as condole, and which indee hath commanded this plain dealing Tre∣tise into publike view.

So that what before (by the eye of God and man) might be lookt upon as a sin of Ignorance (like that of the 200. men, who by smooth perswasions were induced to fol∣low Absolom in Rebllion, in simplicity of heart, not knowing whither they went, 2 Sam. 15, 11. will now be found (if ye per∣sist longer therein) a sin of choise and deli∣berate resolution; wherein ye declare to the world (pretend what you will) that you high∣ly approve of the unparalleld iniquities of these men; and not only do the same things your selves, but take pleasure in them that do them, as well as take pay from them, and contract their guilt unto your own souls in a deeper measure by your Approbation, then you have done by Acting with them.
For, give me leave to argue and conclude no otherwise then the Scripture does. Was Saul found guilty of the blood of the Pro∣tomartyr Stephen, only for consenting to his death, and keeping the rayment of them that slew him? Act. 8. and are not those men guilty of their Soveraigns blood, who by their clamorous Petitions cried aloud; first, for no Treaty with him, and afterward
 no mercy on him? and since have seized, not his rayment only, but also his revenue; and are resolv'd to do as much by the heyr (if God preserve him not) that the inheri∣tance may be setled in themselves? What difference was there (in point of guilt) be∣tween the hands that drave the nails in our Saviours crucifixion, and the bold Soul∣diers that stood by to maintain the execu∣tion? What difference between the Souldi∣ers that were upon the scaffold where our Soveraign was murthered, and those which stood under the scaffold, and drew their swords in approbation of that fatal stroke, which at once cut off the head of our King, and dismantled the Peace and felicity of his three Kingdoms? Or what difference between those that then drew their swords in approbation of that horrid fact; and those that now draw their swords in de∣fence of those visible betrayers and mur∣therers? sure if there be any difference, the last are by much the deeper delinquents; for Non semper corrupta est mens male ope∣rantis, at semper corrupta est male defen∣dentis. The mind of him that worketh evil
 is not alwaies corrupt, but the mind of him that defendeth evil, is alwaies corrupt. And the reason why this sin is so fearful and desparate, is, because when a man com∣mends and justifies a wickedness (knowing it to be such) its a certain signe that his judgement and conscience are both corru∣pted; insomuch, that he hath neither eys to se it, nor heart to be touched with the guilt and horror of it.
But youl say perhaps, our hearts did ever abhor the taking away the last Kings life, (for I instance in that only as the most notorious addition to all other evils) and were our hearts legible at present, it would be seen how zealous we are for setling the present King in his just power and autho∣rity. But alas, we are under the grasp of an Arbytrarie power, and if we were not, what can single endeavors do?
These, I presume, are the thoughts of some of you, for I have heard them from your own mouths: Truly, you have great reason to do somthing extraordinary for your King, if for no other reason, but to out do what you have done; but I have great
 reason to suspect your minds do but faintly incline this way; for quid verba audiam, cum facta videam? what do you speak of plausible intendments and desires, wrapt up in smooth words, when your actions look clean another way? If you have executed the Lords command (saith Samuel to Saul) what meaneth the bleating of sheep, and lowing of oxen in mine ears? If your hearts are as you pretend, what means the noise of your drums, and thunder of Cannon at Sea, in opposition and defiance of your Kings Commissions? what means the changing your Flags, and razing your So∣veraigns Arms out of your Sterns, in de∣tstation of his government? These (to my apprehension) are strange characters of loyalty in Subjects: And such as speak more devotion to Cesars picture in his Coyn, then to his Person or Power. Ado∣ring that new minted Mammon of your new masters, in which were the cross (once a mark of the Beast) changed into a pair of Gallows, or into the Divels cloven foot, would yet (I fear) find too warm a recepti∣n in too many of you. It is thought by ma∣ny
 wise men, that had not you been the first and fiercest of the Kings enemies, the Royal Throne had been established, and the Kingdom setled long ere this; And I beseech you look well to it; for if the king∣doms miseries increase for want of its na∣tural Shepherd, which is more then proba∣ble; 'tis because you have taken away the wooden bridge that should convey him in∣to his Dominions: and certainly, the guilt of all the sad consequents which shall arise upon the want of him will one day be laid at your Cabbin dores.
But men must live in that calling where∣in God hath placed them, and provide for their families, or be concluded worse then Infidels▪ 1 Tim. We cannot (with all our endeavours sayl against wind and Tide; the current of the Times is strong, and he that spits against the wind, spits in his own face.
Well, let all this be granted, and what else can be alledged to this purpose, and yet that maxime and conclusion of Solomon shall stand in force; He that justifieth the wicked, and he that condemneth the just,
 even they both are an abomination to the Lord, Prov. 17. 15. And that Precept of Moses shall out-live all the changes of the world, Thou shalt not follow a multitude to do evil, Exod. 23. 2. It was never good world, since things have been carried all by Votes; and they that pretend to act what they do by vertue of a Power derived from the People, do most of all abuse the People; making them speak as the Divel did the Heathen Oracies, or as Friar Bacons bra∣zen head (i. e.) what is most serviceable to their own ends. In an Age so miserably corrupted and depraved, the major part is seldom found to be the melior. And he that designs himself always to the strongest side, will certainly be involved in the broad way, which leadeth to destruction, Mat. 7. When you sayl together in a fleet, your Art instructs you (as you are Sea men) not to sayl as others do, at random, but that eve∣ry man steer according to his own Compass; and sure, as you are Christians, and in your voyge toward the Haven of eternal hap∣piness, Religion obligeth you to steer, not as ohers do, but according to the direction of
 your own Consciences, guided by the infalli∣ble compass of Gods Word; he that does otherwise, runs an irrecoverable hazard, and it is not by choice, but by chance, if he get safe to shore.
And as touching the support of your fa∣milies; as he is worse then an Infidel that provides not for those of his own house; by his lawful and honest endeavours; so he is no better then an Insidel, that stands in such aw of the Divel, as (with the In∣dians) to worship him, ne noceat, that he may not hurt him; and out of a secret dis∣belief of the divine Providence and good∣ness, puts himself upon hellish and unwar∣rantable ways for support and advantage. You know who it was that said, all these things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall down and worship me; And though the times should prove so severe and particular as to some mens designs; that S. Johns Prediction should be verifi'd among us, viz. that no man might be allowed to buy or sell (orto have the benefit of the Law) save he that had the mark of the Beast in his right hand; and that as many as would
 not worship the image of the Beast, should be killed, Rev. 13. 15. &c. yet those who are not irrecoverably sold to their secular respects and interests, shal do well to remem∣ber that serious expostulation of our Sa∣viour; What shall it profit a man if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? Or, what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? And therefore the rule is fixed in the next verse, Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, in this adulterous and sinful ge∣neration; of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he cometh in the glory of his Father, with his holy Angels, Mat. 8. 36. Sure I am, that (notwithstanding all our bustling after the trash of this world) we shall carry nothing beyond the grave but our Consciences, unless some certain woes and curses, contracted by the voluntary de∣serion of our dearest friends (our Consci∣enes) Among which, those of the Prophet Habbakc will certainly have their share; Wo to him that coveteth an evil covetous∣ness to his house, that he may set his nest on high, that he may be delivered from the
 Power of evil. Thou hast consulted shame to thy house, by cutting off many people, and hast sinned against thy soul. For the stone shall cry out of the wall, and the Beam out of the Timber shall answer it. Wo unto him that buildeth a Town with blood, and stablisheth a City by iniquity. They that will be rich, will as certainly fal into Temptation, and a snare, and into ma∣ny foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition. 1 Tim. 6. 9. And they that love to fish in troubled waters, or trouble the waters that they may fish for profit, seldom think of the ma∣lignity of those Curses, that are wrapt up in their ill gotten wealth; The wealth is winged, and will soon take its flight, Prov. 23. 5. But the curses are of a longer du∣rance, and stay behind. That which was a snare to the soul in the acquisition, is ve∣ry likely to prove a curse to the family in the designation. It is a snare (saith Solomon) to the man, who devoureth that which is holy, and after vows to make enquiry. Alas (my dear friends) what comfort can you take on your death beds, in bequeathing
 things unto friends or posterity, that stand before your trembling eys, but as so many witnesses and remembrancers of guilt and iniquity? with what comfort or Conscience can you dispose of your Estates, when you know not what to do with your immortal souls? how is it possible you should set your house in order, when your better part (your mind, which should do it) is in the greatest disorder and distraction? when all that you have grasped by the hand of Power and op∣pression, shall not be able (in the least mea∣sure) to release you of the horror and amase∣ment wherewith your mercenary souls will be surprised. Therefore if any accursed gain stick to your fingers, my advice is very short, but withal safe, and I hope, not unseasona∣ble; Make to your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye fail, ye may be received into everlasting habitations. Matth. 16. 9.
The last objection I foresee, is very ge∣neral, and very desperate, and runs parallel with that of Cain and Judas; Mine iniqui∣ty is greater then can be forgiven. 'Tis true indeed, if you set your selves before the
 glass of Gods law, and look upon your selves with an impartial ey (as God looks on you) you have reason enough to be highly disple∣sed with your ugliness and deformity. Or if you suffer your actions to be scanned and try∣ed by the Municipal Laws you were born under, which are the best security you have for any propriety, you cannot but discern your Persons and Estates (in justice) to lie at the mercy of Confiscation and Censure. But yet, for you to stand so much in your own light, as to turn your backs upon all of∣fers of Grace and Mercy, and to prefer your own guilty fears before your Princes fa∣vour, is to add more weight to the afflicti∣ons of your injured Soveraign. To conclude him severe, because you are pre-resolv'd not to tast of his benignity, is an high breach of Charity and Gratitude; But to say with∣in your selves, Nolumus hunc regnare, for no other reason, but because you adhere to those who killed his servants, murdered his royal Father, and seized on his inheritance, is cleerly and undoubtedly to rebel, not only against his Prerogative (the means of your Protection) but against the Gospel it self,
 the means of your salvation; and insteed of giving God and Cesar their due; you do at once dny King and your Christ together.
I rather wish and pray, that you may learn of Benhadads servants, a safer way to peace and reconciliation; Behold (say those hea∣thens) we have heard that the kings of the house of Israel are merciful kings; and therefore they resolve to address themselves to the king in a posture of humiliation. And so will you (I hope) if you are not bewitch'd into your own ruine. You have a merciful king to deal withal; one, who is bone of your bone, and flesh of your flesh; One, in whom the heroick spirit of his Grandfather Henry 4th of France; the peaceable mind of his Grandfather K. James, and the merci∣ful inclinations of his martyr'd father, do all concur to make up an incomparable king: who (when we are tyred and jaded with disputes) must at last be trusted, or can be no king; and is not in a capacity to shew mercy, till he hath power to do otherwise. For, where the word of a King is, there is power saith Solomon; and without that power, mercy is not mercy, but servile and slavish compliance.

So that if there were nothing to be al∣ledged in defence of the Regal power, or in demand of the Subjects duty, yet judge within your selves whether it is better for you that all the sons of Jerubbaal (which are more then 70. raign over you; or else, that the natural head be restored to the body, for the preservation and rest auration of our languishing gasping Church & State? Whether it be better to return to our former Laws and Government, or remainunder a perpetual fluctuation of Arbytrarie Power, which rowls from one faction to another, & the wisest among us cannot imagine where it will settle? Whether one form of doctrine and Discipline, or a thousand Heresies and Schisms be the better Religion? Whether one King or fifty Colonels is like to produce the more safe and quiet Government?
It is said of some who adhered to Saul (who was none of the best kings) that they were a band of men whose hearts God had touched; but for those that despised him, and brought him no presents, they are branded with the name of children of Be∣lial. And in another place, we read of a
 fierce contestation between the men of Is∣rael, and the men of Judah, who should ex∣press the greatest zeal in bringing the king to his royal Throne; oh, that it might please the God of Peace and Order, to close all our unnatural and bloody differences in such a sweet emulation and agreement, that the last contestation among us, might be that of outvying one another in the seasonable expressions of duty and allegiance; that our Absoloms, and Sheba's, and Achitophels, & which are worse then these, our sins, being supprest; we would be as zealous and active in restoring the Throne of Gods Anointed, as we have been fatal and unfortunate in the demolishing of it; without which I fear the youngest amongst us will never live to see the settlement of Truth and Peace up∣on any firm and assured foundation. And though his Majesties present condition will not enable him to give you fields and vin∣yards, and to make you Captains of thou∣sands, and of hundreds; yet the villany of these times hath not stript him of all power and capacity to reward; for he hath a re∣ward of Pardon, for such as shall submit
 themselves, and return to their allegiance; which perhaps, may be worth the looking after once in seven yeers, as things may fall out. And he hath a reward of Bounty and Benignity, a reward of Merit, for such as shall act remarkably in his ser∣vice; which if any man believe not, I shall suspect him haunted and pursued into a de∣spair of mercy, by the clamouring horrors of his own guilty Conscience. And when any of you (my Parishioners) shall desire to make tryal of, I doubt not but I am so well un∣derstood at Court, as to procure you an expe∣riment of the Kings mercy, whensoever you shall look after it in the way of duty and allegiance. But if you shall say, That all is well done which hath been done of late yeers; that the foundation of those glorious days which some of you dream of, is well & safely laid in Perjury and Sacriledge, and the blood of your Soveraign, that you can∣not, nor will not deny the right hand of fel∣lowship and assistance to those whom you take to be the Patriots and Protectors of your new form'd Commonwealth. And that I might very well have spared my pains in
 disquieting your thoughts with strange do∣ctrines, hard sayings, and sad reflections on what is past; being resolved aforehand, not to be diverted out of the way you are in. To such, I have no more to say, but to signi∣fie my grief and sorrow of heart, for the strong Delusion and Infatuation wherein they are involved; My soul shall weep in secret for them; and God forbid I should sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray for them, while they are on this side te grave; only thus much I would beg of them for charity and christianity sake; that no pre∣judice or byassed respect whatsoever, may alienate their hearts from me their Mini∣ster, or divert their eys from looking upon this following Treatise, which (for the do∣ctrinal part) I dare avouch to be no other then a sincere extract of sacred Scripture (what black mark soever may be set upon it by those who now sit at stern) which I have published, meerly out of tenderness to those many thousands in my Parish, who in times of tryal have not known their right hand from their left, nor the right way from the wrong; and not without some se∣cret
 hopes (under the mercy of the most high) to recover some of those many, who I fear, are yet in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity; wherein, if I have been over bold or severe in any expressions, I have been instructed into this roughness by my Saviours example, who was never so invective against any, as the Scribes, Pha∣rises, and Hypocrites of that age. And truly my reprehensions have not been so sharp & prssing out f any other satisfaction, but to shew you your own guilt in order to your re∣pentance and conversion. Those diseases which fester inwardly, require a faithful, though rough hand to search them; men that are fallen into a deep sleep, must have loud cries to awaken them, and a rude band may very well be born withal, to recover a man that is fallen into a swooning fit. And for those of my own Coat, if I have dealt unseemly with them, in discovering the na∣kedness of the spiritual Parent; let them know, I have borrowed this sharpness from S. Paul, who, as he was a person of extra∣ordinary meeknes and condescention where he met with weak brethren, as appears by
 the Circumcision of Timothy, and his own character of himself, in being all things un∣to all men, that by all means he might save some; So there were three sorts of per∣sons with whom he would never twist and comply, namely, proud, ambitious, and aspi∣ring persons, such as loved to have the pre∣heminence in all thing, of whom he fore∣warns Timothy. 2. Covetous persons, who subverted whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, only for filthy lu∣cres sake. 3. Cowards and dissemblers in Religion, such as durst not profess Christ for fear of persecution; Truly, I shall ever declare an versness to quarrel with any of my fellow labourers, neither do I (from my present low condition) envie them in any of their Promotions; I love their Per∣sons, but I hate from my soul those foul & scandalous sins of Pride, Cowardise, and Covetousness, which have rendred them both at home and abroad so odious and un∣evangelical. I wish they may ever have be∣fore their eys, the grand consideration of a watchmans charge, who is to be faithful in his warning, and constant to his station in
 all weathers; otherwise the people may pe∣rish in their sins (for the merit of their ini∣quity) but their blood will be required at their hands.
And now I beseech you, my dear friends, and Parishioners, to entertain these poor labours of mine, as they are sent to you, from the tender bowels of your spiritual shepherd, which may be followed with more, accord∣ing to the candour and benignity of their reception. What may be the consequent of this my adventure, as to my self, I know not, I have tasted of the house of Jonadab (the prison) for your sakes already; which may be prosecuted (for ought I know) with per∣petual banishment out of a ruinated Vin∣yard, wherein there is sueb a visible want of faithful labourers, as a sutable addition to the injuries and extremities I have en∣dured for these last seven yeers. I have sate down and considered the extent of human power and malice; and God hath made me a fenced brazen wall, as once he did his Prophet Jeremy, nor shall I think my self a loser by this piece of devotion, should it be written with my own blood, provided I may
 be offer'd up on the sacrifice and service of your faith and conversion, accounting it a most fatal & accursed choise, to hazard so many thousand souls, for the saving of a sin∣gle fortune, or a bubble life. And if I never return to my own Country and Cure, to Preach the Gospel, as I ought to speak, Gods will be done; 'twill be a fixed comfort both in life and death, that I have discharged my self to you in the fidelity of a spiritual watchman; so that having nothing else wherin to express my care of you, my friends, and my charity to my enemies and oppres∣sors; I thought it agreeable to Christian duty, to recommend these Papers, which I shall follow with my Prayers.
That the God of all grace, and Father of lights, would give you a ght o the error of your doings in these irregular and rebellious times; and withaa give you grace to turn away from it, that you may return to him by true repentance; and to your Sove∣raign Lord, the King, by true faith and allegiance; that God may return in mercy to you, and dive those heavie judgement which seem to gather like a black cloud over you; and clense your souls of all presumptuous sins, and guide your feet into the way of Peace; Thus Prays

