


My Lord,
IT hath not been out of a fantastick humour, as some think, that I did in my late warn∣ing piece, &c. compare you to Moses, or that I went about in the least to claw you, but that I was assured, that as the Lord had decreed that his people in these latter days should have judges as at the first, so likewise Rulers as at the begin∣ning, which doubtless had reference, as well unto Mo∣ses his power and authority, whom it is evident, did in Gods stead select Judges for the people of Israel, which Judges did not in the least impower Moses, or add any authority unto him, but contrariwise, he unto them, as he was the immediate Minister of God: and therefore beware how you receive any Commission from this present Assembly, either as to your relation as a soul∣dier, or upon any other account whatsoever; for in so doing, you cleerly deny Jesus Christ to be King of this Nation: so that you are to make no further use of them, then to appoint them to destroy Antichrist in his Dra∣gonical and Priestly power, with their appendancies, and to advance the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, with his Laws and Ordinances (to which purpose the whole scope of this Treatise tendeth) which when you have once put in an orderly posture, that then you would in like manner order them their several stations in the Commonwealth, for Moses did not keep the Elders of
 Israel continually together in a lump, but dispersed them as occasion was offered, making the same Elders he had chosen, heads over the people, &c. Exod. 18. 25, &c. reserving the chief management of affairs to himself, which certainly was not barely to himself a∣lone, but with the assistance of his faithful Officers of war about him, of which I hope you may be plentiful∣ly supplyed, so that the Church or kingdom of Jesus Christ may appear in its now proper posture (viz. ter∣rible as an Army with Banners, unto all the Nations upon the face of the whole earth. And therefore your and their posture will not now be to sit still, and sing a Re∣quiem unto your souls, saying, Soul, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry, thou hast goods laid up for many yeers; but to persevere in the work of the Lord, in forraign parts, and not to make peace with the Gibeonites, or any other Nation which the Lord hath a controversie with∣al, and who are designed to destruction, to the end you may rest quietly upon your beds of Ivory. For if you do, know assuredly, that as you have been parallel'd with Moses in your acts of valour, so you shall likewise die in Mount-Nebo, which the form or Model of the house you live in, is not much unlike: but I hope the Lord hath not onely intended to shew you the Land of Canaan, but will also lead you over the flood Iordan, in∣to the Land of the Canaanites, &c. (viz. over the Nar∣row Seas, into Holland, France, and so to Rome it self, to the end you may pluck up all Antichristian power whatsoever doth oppose Jesus Christ in the least, which is the earnest expectation of Truths, and

