


My Lords,
SHort warning is some apo∣logie for slight performan∣ces, and what I cannot far∣ther fairely excuse, your no∣ble Candor can freely par∣don. The Citie Petiti∣on for execution of Iudgement, Ordin. Octo. 24. 1644. and your Gol∣den Ordinance, for giving no quarter to Irish, or Papists borne in Ireland, taken in Armes against the Parliament; led my thoughts to this Argument, as seasonable, if not as necessary.  Gladi∣tus, à vastan∣do dictus, à  deva∣status fuit. The Sword like it selfe,
 layeth waste and desolate; bleeding Eng∣land groaneth and cryeth, Ierm. 47.6. O thou sword of the Lord, how long will it be ere thou be quiet? put up thy selfe into thy scab∣bard, rest and be still: Many Soveraigne sword-quieting Remedies have been recom∣mended to your Honours: as faith acted, prayer fervent, Humiliation unfained, re∣formation reall, of persons and families. And this of executing Iudgement, hath in it an healing vertue also. Though when all is done, Christ alone must dry up our bloudy issues, and that living Corner-stone, must be our blood-stone. It was your Honours just at∣tempt long agoe, to bring delinquents to con∣digne punishment, the opposition whereof by an adverse partie, hath occasioned these Civill warres, and intestine broyles in the Nation, so that the Case of the Israelites opposed by the Benjamites, runs Parallel with our present quarrels; The Israelites had a gene∣rall Assembly, a kind of Parliament, where∣to complaint is made by the Levite, Iud. 19. last. against the men of Gibeah for their horrid, their non∣such delinquencie. Hereupon the Assembly
 Orders and Decreeth their punishment, sends out Messengers to the Benjamites, Iud. 20. and faire∣ly demands that those Children of Belial might be by them delivered up to Iustice; but the Benjamites would not hearken to their Brethren the Israelites; take up Arms rather to protect their Delinquents: and thus the war began, which for a while went on du∣biously, for the Israelites (though friends to Truth and Iustice) lost in two battailes for∣tie thousand men; yet the warre ended suc∣cessefully. God directed the Israelites to a Stratagem, whereby all the Benjamites ex∣cept six hundreth were destroyed. And all this may Incourage your Honours to work for, and wait on God. And when perhaps some else-where Nobles, may be solemni∣zing The So∣lemn Festi∣vals. Decemb. 25. these approaching Idolized Festivals, with Playes and Interludes, which in Ludorum scenicorum delicata est insania. Aust. lib. 1. de Civ. Dei. cap. 32. Austins Language is a delicate madnesse, Your Ho∣nours, I hope, will be fasting, praying, hea∣ring, and receiving the word with all readines of mind, which will be your Act. 17.11. , more noble. non genere, sed virtute & pietate nobiles, Bez. in Loc. Berean Nobilitie; And though others may be hatch∣ing devilish designes for the pouring out of
 blood Innocent; Your Honours will in∣gage your Selves in due execution of Iudge∣ment; and so offer to God a Isa. 34.5,6. sacrifice of blood nocent. I know there may be many Politick Reasonings in the Case, but when God giveth out a Command, he expecteth downright Dutie, not any subtle Dispute. A due and Regular execution of Iudgement, will gild over your Coates of Honour, and as it were Royalize your blood already no∣ble. The Heathens got a name, a kinde of immortalitie, for their morall endowments; Socrates for his wisdome, Aristides for Iu∣stice, Cicero for his eloquence, and Cato for gravitie, &c. And your Lordships zeale for God in execution of Iudgement, will make posteritie to mention your Names and Families with Honour. I am

