



Renowned Worthies,
WHat the Pulpit sent to some of your eares, the Presse now sends to some of your eyes; the good God send it into every one of your hearts, and through your hearts, into your hands, and lives; the Argument is worthy of your eares, eyes, hearts, and hands, for it is of the highest, God and Christ, and of the sweetest, God in Christ.
Your thoughts have need enough of high and heart∣ning subjects, for the work that a gracious Providence hath ingaged you in, is of high concernment, and the oppositions you meet withall, are high also: The buil∣ding of a Temple and of a Ierusalem, is by God and his people put into your hands, Church and State lie un∣shap'd, unform'd, before you; let me mind you of To∣biahs, Sanballats, Rehums, and Shimshai's, acting their parts to the life; and be you excited and inga∣ged thereby to appeare still as so many Ezra's, Zerub∣babels, and Nehemiahs: see a coincidency of provi∣dence betwixt those times, and ours; Iudah's ene∣mies, and ours in some particulars.
 When the foundation of the Temple was laid, there
was great joy,
Izra. 3.11, 12, 13. and as great a mourning; and when Sanballat and Tobiah heard that there was come a man to seek the welfare of the children of Israel, it grieved them exceedingly, and when they heard that the work went on,
Neh. 2.10. Neh. 4.9. they were very wroth; We have a godly generation among us, that shout for joy, and praise the Lord, and an ungodly generation that weep with a loud voyce, and complaine their gods are gone, their god Episcopacy, their god Liturgy, the Or∣gan, and the Surplice, the Crosse, and the May-Pole, the Sabbath-dance, and the Whitson-Ale; they grieve exceedingly, and are very wroth, and if you aske any of them, What aileth thee? he may an∣swer,
 What have I more? And thus the harmony of times begins,
Ezek. 4.2, 3. see how it goes on. The subtile adversaries come to Zerubbabel, and to the chiefe of the Fathers, and say, Let us build with you, for we seek your God, as yee doe; but Zerubbabel and Ioshua were too wise to trust them, and said unto them, You have nothing to doe with us, to build an house unto our God; the seeming builder is more dangerous then the professed destroyer.
 This plot failing, they hired Counsellers to frustrate the purpose of the Iewes,
Ver. 5. Jun.  loc. all the dayes of Cyrus, even untill the reigne of Darius Longimanus, the fourth from Cyrus; and the Popish, with the Prelaticall faction have hired Counsellers, subtile-headed, false-hearted Statists and Lawyers, to hinder the Reformation from the dayes of Edward the sixth,
 (that English Iosiah) untill the reigne of a fourth Prince amongst us.
Vers 7, 8, 12, 13. The work now goes on amaine, yet Rehum and Shimshai, with their companions (accusers of the brethren) lay heavie things to the charge of Ierusalem, it is a rebellious and a
bad City; when it is built, will not pay toll, tri∣bute, and custome, the revenues of the Kings will be much endamaged, and it was not meet for them to see the Kings dishonour; thus glozing sycophants with specious pretexts of tendring his Authority, profits, and honour, flatter Artaxerxes, when their designe was to cut the throat of the Iewes and of Reli∣gion at once. This in sinuation prevailes so farre,
 that the King sends out Decrees,
Vers. 21. and commands to cause the builders to cease:
 and to carry on this unjust De∣cree, they take up arms, and by force and power,
Vers. 23. in a way of open hostility make the builders to cease, and our Tobiahs and Sanballats are caried by the same spirit, or a worse, pillaging and plundering their very friends, that freely quartered them, acting hor∣rid barbarismes in Ireland and England, slaying the husband before the wife, or ravishing the wife before the husband; reviving the cruelty of Phocas to Mau∣ritius, slaying his wife and children before his face,
Melanc. L. C. and then putting him to death also.
By the view of this parallel, you see right well, how it stands you upon to be famous Ezra's, Nehe∣miahs, and Zerubbabels in your generation, and how you need all helps and supports from without, you may find all in one, in the Rock of Israel; and in∣deed glorious things are spoken of, and more glorious things are done by this Rock of Israel; onely that you may have interest in, and get vertue from this Rock so glorious, each man among you must make it good, that his name is Israel,
Drusius likes not this cry, for in sono vecis tantum est. Psal. 46.8. which by the etymon of the word is (as some) Vir videns Deum, a man seeing God; and the true Israelite among you, sees and consi∣ders the works of God, what desolations he hath
wrought upon the earth; sees and knowes God not as a Creator only, (so the Gentiles saw him by the dark light of nature) but as a Redeemer also, and that not through the cloud of legall sacrifices and shadowes (so the Jewes of old saw him) but in a perspicuous and cleare light,
John 1.18. Matth. 5.8.  com∣pounded of  principa∣tu obt. nuit, and  Deus. So the holy Ghost expounds it, Gen 32 28. Hos. 12 4. Legh. Crit. Sac. in Christ, and in the gospel; yea the glory of hea∣ven consists in a full sight of God, lies in vision: the man whose name is Israel, is Princeps Dei, a Prince of God, hath power with God, and from God; he that Iacob-like wrastles with God by strength of faith, by importunity of prayer, and prevailes, goes away with the name Israel; and though he goe halting away, (spoy∣led of his estate, deprived of friends, &c. in these con∣flicting times) yet he carries a blessing with him, comes off with comfort and honour, and having a pre∣vailing power with God, you need not feare but you shall prevaile over Esau's as hairy, as rough, and rugged as they are; yea, that faith which prevailes with God, will subdue Kingdomes also,
Heb. 11.33. and that faith which sub∣dues Kingdomes, will easily (if put out in the strength of it) subdue the prophane and malignant crew of a Kingdome,
Isa 8 9, 10. who though they associate themselves to∣gether, and cry, A confederacy, a confederacy, yet shall they be broken in peeces,
Psal. 112.7. So Answ. Psal. 20. for God is with us. And therfore be not at any time afraid of evil tidings (or heare-say) but let your hearts be fixed, trusting in the Lord. Trust not in
Such they used to fight to of old. Charets (cald by the Greeks
Weem. Chr. Syn. Psal. 33.17. , because they held two) nor yet in hor∣ses, though strong and swift, they are vaine things to save a man, neither shall they deliver any by their great strength; but remember the name of the Lord your God, trust in that God who once helpt the poore distressed Romans against Rhadagaisus,
King of the Goths, when in oneday above an hundred thousand Goths were slaine,
Austin. de civ. Dei, l. 5. c. 23. Ne uno quidem non extincto, sed nec vulnerato Romanorum. Isa 42.8. the King and his sonnes taken prisoners, yet not one of the Romans slaine, no nor wounded; trust in that God who hath ingaged his very God-head, his I AM, for Israels good; I am the Lord, that is my name, and my glory will I not give to another, neither my praise to graven Images. Againe, let me beseech you for the Lords sake, to study singlenesse of heart, and abhorre pri∣vate-selfe respects in managing the publike cause of God, startle at the very thoughts of hedging in your owne ends, or personall advantages, in point of honor,
Rem magnam p. aestas Zoile, si boeus es. Austin. Qui contemnit judi∣cia laudatium, contemnit suspi∣cantium teme∣ritatem. gaine, or command, either for you or yours; to be squint-eyed, and selfe-aimed in transacting the great affaires of God and his Church, stands not with a love of Truth and Peace; move upon pious principles, goe on with plaine honest hearts, neglect the judgement of those that praise you, and contemne the rashnesse of those that censure you; who would not be faithfull in the cause of God, and in the quarrell of his people, when they see others to be faithfull slaves and vassals to the Pope and Devill?
M. Reguli fi∣detuas inim∣c faceret nos fideles Deo & hominibus. Who would not be faithfull by the light of grace to God, and the Godly his friends, when Mar. Regulus a Heathen, by the light of nature, was faithfull to his very enemies?
Honoured Patriots, I will hold you no longer in the gate or Preface, but humbly intreat you to hoise up your sailes of pious resolutions, or if up already, doe not narrow them, much lesse take them quite downe, for all the prayers in the world that are worth the having, are yours, and make up a full gale to carry you on amaine; you shall ride over all the waves and billowes of contradictions and oppositions whatsoever; Wherefore
be clothed with Christian fortitude, and magnanimity of spirit, as with armour of proofe. Watch yee, stand fast,
1 Cor. 16.13. . quit your selves like men, be strong; you have to deale with adversaries which are slie and subtile, therefore watch; which are unwearied, which never have done, therefore hold out, stand fast; which are stout and hardy, therefore quit your selves like men; be strong, to break through difficulties and dangers, though many,
1 Cor. 15.58. mighty: Be stedfast, immovable, al∣waies abounding in this work of the Lord,
. & know your labour shall not be in vaine in the Lord; be stedfast, by faith founded upon Christ, as a house built upon a Rock,
. and from thence, be immovable, unsha∣ken by winds or weather,
. and  by feares or flatteries; be a∣bounding, and alwayes abounding in this work of the Lord; know you can never doe enough for that God, who hath done so much for you, and will doe yet more also; let your hearts be alwayes flaming with love and zeale for God, his cause and glory, let your heads and hands be alwayes working, and know for your comfort and incouragement, God will abundantly reward you What though you spend your time, your strength, your estates, God will recompence it even seven-fold into the bo∣some of you and yours: your labour shall not be in vaine in the Lord. Consider the goodly man-child of Reformation is come nigh unto the birth, it will be your comfort and honour unto eternity upon pious principles to midwife it unto a safe delivery; let the feare of God put you upon the work,
Exod, 1.21. alluded to and then he shall make you houses, shall multiply your chil∣dren, inlarge your estates, make your names and fa∣milies great from generation to generation; God is for us, who can be against us? the condition of
England and Scotland, is, as of old, the case of Israel and Iudah, we were opprest together, and all that took us captives held us fast;
Jer. 50 33, 34. they refused to let us goe, but our Redeemer is strong, the Lord of Hosts is his Name, he shall throughly plead our cause, that he may give rest to our Land, and disquiet the inhabitants of Babylon; so prayes, so hopes

