



Right Honorable:
I Intend this Epistle, not for Ceremony, but for Service.
There are two Things of great Con∣cernment, and Consideration in the Church at this Day.
1. The Cleering the Principles of Christianity, in the Knowledg of these Six Principals:

1. Our Selves.
2. The First Man.
3. The Person of Christ.
4. The Nature of God.
5. The Power of the Spirit.
6. The Use of the Scriptures.

2. The Converse of Christians, with Men on Earth, with Jesus Christ in their Hearts, with their Father in Heaven.
The Clouds that lie upon these Things, gather from a Two-fold Occasion:

1. Jesus Christ rising upon the World in a Mysterie.
2. The Devil raising himself in a Mist.

Both These, our Saviour, and Satan are exprest in Scripture, by Serpents. One hath his Subtlety beyond all the Beasts of the Field, Gen. 2. 1. The Other hath His Sublimity, or Mysterie, beyond all the Princes and Philosophers of this World, 1 Cor. 2.
But there is this Difference between them. In the De∣vil; the more Subtlety, the more Sensuality. In Christ; the more Mysterie, the more Majesty. But such is the Artifice of this Old Deceiver, that he makes Sensuality seem a Mysterie; and Majesty a Subtlety. Yet for all this, the Serpent, that goes on his Belly, is the Cursed One: the Serpent, that is lifted up, is the Healing One.
Happy, and Blessed s he, in whom the Living Word, the Two edged Sword, so discovereth, distinguish∣eth, divideth; that he is neither Infolded by the De∣vil, in the Methodical windings of his Tayl; nor Ex∣cluded by Christ, from the Manifold wisdom of His Spirit.
This man alone is able to discern Evil-Angelical Temptations from Evangelical Triumphs.
The Cleer stating, and Compleat satisfying of One Question, seems to me to tend much to these Purposes, and will take in the Particulars mentioned above.



Whether a Christian in the Dayes of his Flesh may be set free from the Moral Law?
This Question proceeds by Two steps.
1. Step. How far a Christian is freed from the Mo∣ral Law?
2. Step. If he be free Absolutely; in what Case he may be supposed to be so?
I will begin at the first Step of the question.
1. Step. How far a Christian is freed from the Mo∣ral Law, while he lives on this Earth?
There are two Things in the Moral Law.

1. The Legality of Moral Things.
2. The Morality of Legal Things.


1. The Legality of Moral Things divides it self into six Branches.
1. Branch. A Working Covenant. Moses de∣scribeth the Righteousness which is of the Law: The Man that doth these things shall live in them. Rom. 10. 5.
As the Sun brings forth another Sun upon a Cloud; which hath the same Similitude, but in a several Sub∣stance: So God in the Law brings forth Man in a Di∣versity from Himself, though in a Resemblance of Him∣self. So God and Man stand as Two in Treaty, upon their own Tearms and Bottoms.
2. Branch. A Wrathful Condemnation. 2 Cor. ap. 3. The Law is called a Ministration of Death,

ver. 7. The Ministration of Condemnation, ver. 9.
As the Fightings of the Elements are to bring them into One substantial Form: So the Workings of the Law are to ripen the Diversity between God and Man, to a Contrariety; then by the Contrariety to make way for a Harmony and Unity.
3. Branch. A way of Compulsion. The Law is styled, Our School-master, Gal. 3. 24.
As Physical Purges are said to work by Antipathy with Nature: So doth the Law. It sits upon the Heart▪ as a Man upon a Horse, riding it with Switch and Spur.
4. Branch. A Command from without: Or an outward Letter. 2 Cor. 3. That which is signified by the Letter, ver. 6. is interpreted of the Law ingraven in stone, ver. 7.
The Law holds in one hand a Rod over us: in the o∣ther hand a Book before us.
5. Branch. The conforming of the Natural man to a bounding Rule: A Distinction in Natural and Bo∣dily operations by Precepts, and Prohibitions. It hath been said of old: Thou shalt not commit Adultery: Thou shalt not Kl: Mat. 4. ver. 21. & 27.
The face of the Law, is like the Times, the Life of the World, checkered with Day and Night: a Com∣mand, and a Countermand: Do this; Leave that undone.
6. Branch. A Shadowy pre-figuring of Christ to come, Heb. 10. 1. The Law is sad to have a shadow of good things to come.
A man under the Law, is like him, that standing on the Brink of a River, looks not up, to see the glorious Image it self of the Skie, but looking down, sees the Sha∣dow of it at the bottom of the Waters.
In these things doth the Legality of Moral things consist.
Now it is universally acknowledged; that a Christi∣an is All free from Part of this Legality: and Part of him free from All Legality.
The new Man, the Bride in a Saint is One Spirit with her heavenly Husband, the Lord Iesus, 1 Cor. 5▪ 17.
Heb. 7. 16. Jesus Christ is said to be made a Priest▪ not after the Law of a carnal Commandment, but af∣ter the Power of an Endless life.
Thus the Regenerate part in thee is entirely free from the Legality of the Law, which is its Carnality.
Thy outward Man is no more under the Covenant of works, no more under Condemnation. Thy fleshly members are no more the Ox, or the Goat under the Law, for legal sacrifices: but, as the Ass, and the foal of the Ass, which the Lord had need of in the Gospel, to ride upon them. They are the Instruments of the Lord, not the Hirelings of the Law. They are Servants in the House, not chained slaves in the Mines, or chained of∣fendors in Prison.
I have done with the Legality of Moral Things. I come to the second Part.



The Essence of Man, as it is the Subject, not of Phi∣losophy, but Divinity, is defined to be,  shadowy-I∣mage of God. So the Word TSELEM signifies, Gen. 1. 26.
Four Essential Properties flow naturally from this Primary Constitution of Man.
1. A Representation of the Divine Nature. This

is Mans way of glorifying God Manifestatively, as Di∣vines speak.
2. A Subordination to God; as our Beginning, first Copy, and End.
3. A Distinction between the Light and Darkness in the Nature of Man: the Image, and the Dark Matter, in which that Image is formed▪
4. A Domination of the Light over the Darkness, or of the Image over its dark Matter. The Prophet Esaiah toucheth upon these two last Properties, Esa. 5. 20. Wo unto them that call Evil good, and Good evil; that put Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness.
All those Operations of the wil of Man, either Elicite, or Imperate: either Immediate, or Mediate: either in∣ternal in the will it self, or outward, imprest upon, ex∣prest by the body, which are founded on, and flow from the Essence of Man, as Natural Beamings of the Divine Image in that Darkness, according to those four Properties: These Operations are properly Moral, and have an Obligation upon us, which lasteth as long as their Subject, or Foundation, the first Creation.
Thus the Law against Adultery is Moral: as it is rooted in the Primary Constitution of Man, who was made Male and Female: and they Two made One flesh: as a Figure of Christ in the Trinity, in the Church.
Thus all Laws against Intemperance, Sensuality, Inordinacy, beside their peculiar Moralities, are Mo∣ral in this: that they prohibit the predominancy of the Darkness over the Light, and Divine Image: to the Defiling of the Light: the Disordering and D∣facing of the Image: as when the foot of some Beast de∣faceth a Figure made in the Sands.



1. Natural.
2. Supernatural.
3. Spiritual.

1. Natural: The Natural Image of God is that, in which Man was at first Created, and by which he is made a Man, differing from the Rest of all the Creatures. All the Precepts, and Prohibitions grounded upon, This, are Moral, and as Immortal, as the Generations of Mortal Men upon the Face of the Earth. Provide for things honest, in the Sight of God, and Man.
The Shiings forth of the Natural Image, are Honest, Beautiful, in the Sight of God and Man, at once. For This is Gods Image, and Mans Essence▪
2. Superaural. There is an Image of God, which is more than Natural; yet less than Spiritual: A ly Image, but by Divine Institution made a Super-structure upon the Primitive Constitution of Man in lsh. An Earthly Image, but by Revelation super-added to the first Creation of Man on Earth.
The Sabbath set up after the Compleat Making of Man, is a Representation of this Image.
This is the Ceremonial Law made up of Types, and Figures.
This was added, as a Light, and Glory upon the Na∣tural Man, in the Absence and Place of the Spiritual Image. This is, as the Moon, the Vice-roy to the Sun in the Firmament, till himself appear, and swallow up her less Glory. The Natural Image is the Firmament: The Ceremonial, the Moon: The Spiritual, the Sun.
3. The Spiritual Image. This is the Lord Jesus in the Spirit. He comes first to put a period to the Cere∣monial Law; but to pitch his Tabernacle for a Season in the Natural Image; to dwell in it, before he dissolve it; not to ruine, but restore it, in all things that are Moral.
He comes the second time at the last Day, to set an End to the Natural Image, with all its Moral Excellen∣cies; not confounding them with an inferior or con∣trary Spirit; but consummating them in a superior, a Spiritual Glory.
But thus much for the first Step in our Question. Thus far we all go together in asserting a Freedom from the Law. Let us now pass to the second Step.
2. Step. If a Christian be absolutely free from the Law, while he lives among men on Earth; in what cases he may be supposed to be so.
I will first propound those Cases, then examine them. I beleeve they will all appear to be, either Falshoods in the Universal Notion; or Phantomes, Fancies, in the particular application; or, as Saint Paul speaks, the Truths of the Gospel, perverted, transposed, ana∣grammatized, reversed, like a Traytors Coat, set up∣on its Head, with its Heels upward.
Before I propound the Cases, I humbly premise, that my purpose is by no means to charge these Suppositions, as Assertions upon any Persons, or Opinions: but to consider them, with all Simplicity and Sweetness, as the Discourses of my own Spirit, according to the pre∣sent enlightnings of the Holy Spirit; for the discovery of the Truth, as it is in Jesus.
The Cases, which I am able to suppose for the free∣ing of Man absolutely from the Law, are six.

1. Case. If he know God to Be, to Do, All.
2. Case. If himself be Al-spiritualized, and made Divine.
3. Case. If his Natural Man be immediately, constantly acted by the Spirit of God in an ordinary course.
4. Case. If thy Natural Man be acted by the Spirit of God, in an extraordinary way.
5. Case. If the Difference between Good and E∣vil, be not; or be taken away.
6. Case. If there be a Dispensation, in which the Fairest Vertues of the flesh are to be stained with the foulest Vices.

1. Case. If he know God, to Bee, to Doe, All.
The powerful blowings of the Spirit, as a North Wind, to winnow well this Case, will drive most of the Chaff away from the rest of the Cases, and leave us the pure Wheat of Truth to be gathered up into our Barns, our Bosoms, with much less trouble.
There are peculiar maners of speaking concerning God, worth our inquiry; How far they agree with the Dialect of the Holy Scriptures; how far they have a right Sense; how properly they import that Sense.

1. God doth All.
2. God is All.
3. All is in God.
4. All is God.

1. God doth All. This Language is Currant: For the Holy Ghost speaks it, 1 Cor. 12. 6. The same God worketh All in All. But the former part of the Verse

forewarneth us, that there are diversities of Operati∣ons. Besides that, the Two Alls plainly hold forth a double diversity.
1. Diversity in the Works: God bringeth forth his works in Subordinations. Heaven is a work, on which he layes out much cost and skill, to make a Throne for Himself. The Earth is a cheaper and courser peece of Work, for a Foot-stool. Hell is his strange Work: A work, in which he estrangeth himself from himself; in which he goeth to the vastest Distance, to bring forth a Work most unlke himself; in whch he hides the Work∣man in the Horror of the Work, and shews him, by hiding him so deep.
God bringeth forth his Works in contraries; Light and Darkness; Good and Evil; Michael and Hs Angels; the Dragon, and His Angels.
2. Diversity in the Ways of Working.
The Father worketh All in Jesus Christ. Col. 1. 6. , In him All things were made.
The Twofold Principle. 1. Of Love. 2. Of Wrath; are the Two Hands of Jesus Christ, in or by which he worketh All, Matth. 25. 33.
All Good things are wrought in a Principle of Love, through the Good Angels, from the Right hand of Christ. These things come as Effects of Divine Love; as Objects for our Love.
All Evil things are wrought in a Principle of Wrath, through the Devil, from the Left hand of Christ. These things come, as Effects of Divine hatred, as Ob∣jects for our Hatred and Grief.
The Divine Power worketh Two ways:
1. Way. By a Universal Concurrence with each Creature.
2. Way. By a Particular Confinement in each Creature.
Divines say, The Creating Power, as it is termina∣ted in God, is God; as it is terminated in the Crea∣ture, is the Creature.
1. The Divine Power in its Universal Concur∣rence is God: It is that Eternal Word going forth with every Particular Operation, and Temporal Pro∣duction; as a Back to it. The Sun and Man, bring forth a Man. Jesus Christ, and the Creature, bring forth Every work in the Creature. Joh. 1. 3. Without him (apart from him) hath been done, not any one thing which hath been done So it runs in Greek, word for word.
2. The Divine Power, as it is Particularised, Cir∣cumstantiated, Confined in each Creature; it is that Creature. The Work in the Lowest, and Least things, on Gods part, on Christs part is a Universal Work; and therefore not to be exprest by any Particular Name, except it be in a Figure onely.
Colos. 1. 17. Christ is said to be, Before all things, and all things consist (, stand together) in him. Every work, on Christs part, is an Omni-form Work, a Universal Peece, in which All his Works lie together in One, and are perfectly One: Although on the Creatures part, it be a Divided Peece, a Small Particular.
As therefore the Name of Christ, so each Work in the Creation, as it is Christs, and Gods, is above every Name, that is named, both in this World, and that which is to come, Ephes. 1. 21.
2. God is All. I know not any Place of Scripture, which Countenanceth this Expression, except it be That,

1 Cor. 15. 28. That God may be All in All. God is un-changeable. He is All in All, Essentially, to him∣self. He shall be All in All, Manifestatively, to the Creature.
Take these Directions for the Sense of it.

1. God is not All, Collectively; as the World is This All; a Heap, a Composure of many Beings in Rank, and Order. Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is One.
2. God is not All, Distributively. He is not This, or That Particular Thing. God is not as Man, saith the Holy Ghost. If God were any Particular Thing, He were not an Absolute All.
3. God is All, by way of Efficacy; as he doth All.
4. God is All, by way of Excellency. He is the Truth, Substance, Life of All. All Things compared with Him, are Dead Pictures, Shadows onely of Him; as Nothing in comparison with Him.

3. All Things are in God. I confess, that the Scri∣ptures often speak to this Purpose. Yet there is no maner of Speaking, that requires more Distinction and Cau∣tion, in taking a Right Sense of it. Corolaries are drawn from This by all Companies of Men, to colour their Apprehensions.
Things may be said to be in God, six ways:
1. Materially. So none of all the Creatures can be imagined to be in God▪ as any Part of Him, as making up His Being, as the Matter of It. The Divine Na∣ture hath neither Parts, nor Particulars. It is Simple, Undivided, Un-compounded. Psal. 50. 13. Will I eat the Flesh of Bulls, or drink the Blood of Goats? saith God.
The Essence of God, and That alone, may be said in a Figurative Sense, to be as the Matter in the Godhead.
2. Formally. No Creature is in God formally, according to its Proper Form and Being. John 1. 1, 5. God is Light, and in Him is no Darkness at All. Darkness is the Principal Thing in the very Essence, and Form of the Creature; I mean a Negative Dark∣ness. To what will ye liken me?
There is no more the Formality or Proper Essence of any Creature in the Form and Essence of God, then Angels have Lips, Ears, Eyes.
The Three Persons of the Trinity are Formally in God, and They alone. There are Three, that bear Record in Heaven, 1 John 5.
3. Virtually. Thus All things are of a truth in God: Forasmuch as He brings forth, bears up All things by the Word of His Power, Heb. 1. 3. Thus All Colours are said to be in Light: Heat, and All Ele∣mentary Qualities, in the Heavenly Bodies.
4. Eminently. It is most true, that All things Crea∣ted are in their Great Creator, Eminently, Psal. 139. 12. The Night shineth, as the Day; the Darkness, and the Light are Both alike to Thee.
Darkness, and Light, are Both in God; not onely Representatively, but Really; not in their Ideas onely, but their Identities; yet not Materially, nor Formally, but Eminently; after a more Perfect maner than they are in themselves; as in the Supream Unity of All Perfections.
So the Darkness of Sense may be a Beautiful, Bright Notion, or Form in the Understanding. A Wound in a Bleeding, Fainting Person may make a Pleasant

Picture, as it lies in the Riches of the Painters Fancy, and Colours.
5. Immediately. Jesus Christ alone is this way in God. 1 Cor. 3. 1. Christ is Gods. As the Firmament, or Eighth Sphere, in which the Innumerable Stars are set, is held by some to be immediately next the Empyrean Heaven, or Heaven of Glory: So Jesus Christ, in whose Person, the Saints are set like Stars, lies in the Bosom of God.
6. By Mediate Subordinations. Heavens compre∣hend the Earth; Themselves are comprehended of An∣gels; Angels of Christ; Christ of God. For God brings forth Angels by the Mediation of Christ: Col. 1. 15, 16. Jesus Christ manageth this World by the Mediation of Angels: Heb. 2. 5. The Angels govern the Earth by Heavenly Influences, Hosea 2. 21.
By this Subordination the Frame of Nature lies in God.
All Pure, and Spiritual Things are in the Spirit of Grace, Gal. 5. 25. This Spirit is in the Love of Christ. Christ is in God.
All things Corrupt, and Carnal, lie in the Devil, 1 John 5. 19. The Devil lies in the Wrath of Christ. Christ is in God.
Accordingly the Ideas, or Original Images of things have a Proportioned Order in the Divine Nature. For God is a God of Order, not of Confusion, in His own Essence. On this Mount is the Pattern of that Order, which is set in the Church; and the Creation.
Jesus Christ, who is the Word, the Book of God, the Eternal Image of All Images in the Eye of God: He is a Wisdom. This Wisdom is the Platform of

that, which is drawn out; in the Creation of Nature; the Regeneration of Grace; the Condemnation of the Devil.
4. All is God. This seemeth to me the Unsafest Phrase. The Holy Ghost no where hath any thing like it, to my Knowledg; neither doth it seem Savoury to the Tast of my Spirit. I would willingly go over such Depths of Divinity, upon those Bridges of Notion, and Expres∣sion, which the Scripture layes out for me.
Object. It is true, that God beholdeth All things, that are, as they are: that He contemplateth All things in the Glass of the Trinity, seeing in Himself, what ever He seeth: that Every Thing in God is God. For God is Light, and in Him is no Darkness; that is, nothing besides the Pure Light of Divinity, 1 John 1. 4.
Answ. But my Answer to them, who so reason, is this. God seeth not▪ as Man seeth. The Seeing is like to the Being, of Things, in God. Both are by Way of Emi∣nency. This abates not the Certainty, or Cleerness of Vision; but increaseth Both: Because it is, by Way of Eminency. Shall He, that made the Eye, not see? More Exactly, more Excellently, than the Eye?
The Eminent Way of the Creatures Being, and being Seen, in God, is Excellently set forth by Jesus Christ, Luke 20. 38. He discourseth of the Dead Bodies of the Saints. He proveth the Resurrection of Those Bodies, after this maner, God is the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. He is not the God of the Dead, but of the Living. For all live to God.
The Dead Body of a Saint, Keeps its Relation to God. It is ever in the Eye of God; yet not, as Dead; but, as having a Life, in the Eternity, Glory, Bosom

of the Divine Nature. It lives to God.
This Life is a Glass, in which is seen the course of the Body, thorow Mortality, and Death: according to its severall stations: its proper Relations, in those Stati∣ons: its true Denominations, by thse Relations: all, as at a Distance, in Themselves: but all, as Present in the Glass of This Life.
This Body living alwayes to God, like the Lamps burning before the Altar: is that own Body, which Saint. Paul saith, God will give to each dead Body, 1 Cor. 15. 38.
The Understanding separates the Dregs of gross Mat∣ter, from the Images of Sense, and Fancy; refines them: makes them intellectual Images, of one nature with her self. So She beholdeth all things of Sense and Fancy in those Refined Images, without any Communion with the fleshly Substance, or sensual Nature of those things. Thus all things are Intellectual to the Intellectual Part of Man.
This is a shadowy Similitude of that transcendent Way of Seeing, and Being in God.
There is a three-fold All: . 1. All of divided Parts; which is this Visible world: 2. All of Diverse Powers; as the Angelicall World: 3. All of Supream Eminency, and Unity.
To name the first All, the only God; is Sadducism: Joyntly, with another All; Blasphemy, Idolatry: the second All, Heathenism: the third All, sober Philo∣sophy; and One Article of saving Divinity.
I hope, it now appears, that a Right knowledge of the True sense, the Spiritual sense, in which God is, doth, All, will be so far from confounding, that it will mightily confir the Morality of the Law.
The Law moves upon the two fore-wheels of Pre∣cepts, Prohibitions: the two hinder-wheels of Pro∣mises, Punishments.
He, that takes off these Wheels, must cut off the Two Almighty Hands of Jesus Christ: the two-fold Myste∣rie, from the Divine Nature, Love, and Wrath.
If all things do flow forth from the Divine Fulness; if they do re-flow into the Sea of Divine Glory: yet is it in two Divided channels; the Spirit of Christ, the Devil: by two different Moths; Love, and Wrath.
Doth God see thy Sin, in a Glass of Glory? yet He sees it in that Glass of Glory, represented thorow another Glass of Wrath. He sees it, as sin, in its own Place, though like  dead Viper, it be mortified, to make up a Glory here, in the Light of God.
But, whether have I launched? I have endeavoured to be the cleerer in this Case, which is the leading Case to all the rest: that I may give a quick Dispatch to each of them.
2. Case. If thou be Al-Spiritualized, Al-Divine, no more wearing a garment of Flesh. I will say to this, Three short things. 1. Doest thou believe thy self, while thou affirmest this? 2. As Christ with Thomas▪ Convince us by a Divine Light. Make us to see, that thou hast not Flesh and Bone, as Mortal Men have: but as they lie in the Eternal Spirit, in their original Copy; and are brought forth from thence at pleasure, by an infe∣riour Apparition to inferiour Senses. 3. The Moral Law is the natural Image of God in the natural Man. Art thou Spirit? then thou hast in thy self the spiritual Image of this Law? Doest thou come forth into a natu∣ral Appearance? Come forth then in the natural I∣mage

of this Law. Otherwise we may fear: if you be a Spirit, you are a Devil, not Divine.
3. Case. If thy natural Man is acted immediately, constantly by the Spirit, in an ordinary Way.
If it be so: Thy natural Man is the Spirits shadow, in its Being, Beauty, Motions. The Law of the Letter is in like manner a shadow to the Law of the Spirit. Then make these two shadows answer one another.
4. Case. If thy natural Man be acted by the Spirit in an extraordinary way, as a sign to the World.
I have a few things to speak to this, briefly.
1. Pharaoh was acted by an evil Spirit, for a Sign.
2. Depend then, on God, in an extraordinary way, for thy Justification, Protection.
3. The Spirit of the Prophets is subject to the Pro∣phets. If thou be acted by the Spirit, approve thy self to those that are Spiritual. A spiritual Ear tasteth Words, and Actions: as a musical Ear doth Sounds.
5. Case. If the distinction between good and evil be none, or be taken away.
The distinction between Good and Evil was real in their several Essences; Representative, in the Under∣standing of the first Man; When yet it was not misera∣bly active in him, by woful experience. The Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, grew in Paradise, before Eve fed upon that Tree.
Jesus Christ came the first time, not to Destroy, but Uphold, and Heighthen, the Law of this Distinction between good and evil, Mat. 5.
When He comes the Second Time, it is to make Good, and Execute this Distinction to the Heighth, between the Blessed, and Cursed; by Separating the Tares for

unquenchable Fire, the Wheat for the Garner of Glory.
6. Case. If there be a Dispensation, in which the Fairest Vertues of the Flesh, are to be stained by the Foulest Vices. I beseech you to weigh with me a Few Considerations.
1. The Righteousness of the Law is not an Enemy, but a Friend to the Bride-groom; while it Represents Christ, as Star-beams point to the Bride-groom of the Skie; while it Resignes to Christ, as Stars do their Glory to the Rising Sun; yet Retaining their proper Brightness, though Clothed-upon with His Beauties.
2. The Natural Man is a Shadow. Thy Moral Beauties are the Image of God in this Shadow. Take these away; Nothing will be left, but Darkness, and Confusion.
3. Morality is the Law of the Natural Man; to Expire, when this Husband dies. The Wall may as well cease to be Warm, and Bright, when the Sun shines upon it: As the Natural Man cast off Morality, when Jesus Christ looks forth in the Spirit. Spirituality is the Gold, Morality the Guilding. Jesus Christ is the Sun; the Law of the Letter the Reflection of that Sun on our Fleshly Part. The Flesh of the Saint is the Loving Dog, that cannot sit at the Table, but would pick up the Crums, which fall on the Ground.
4. The Cross of Christ Crucifies the Lusts, and Passions of the Flesh, first: then the Flesh: then the Beauty of Flesh fades, when Man dies. So the Stone from the Mountain strikes the Feet of the Image, mixt with Iron and Clay: the Image falls: the Gold∣en Head, and Silver Arms are broke to Pieces, by the Images fall.
5. The Way of Christ is to make a Less Glory lose

it self in a Greater. The Outward Man with its Ex∣cellency must sweetly Consume, and Expire in a Fire of Love, not of Lust; in the Arms of a Heavenly Glory, not of a Hellish Confusion.
6. Doth the Spirit of God burn up the Gold of our Earth, to leave the Dross? Throw down our Finer Flesh to set it up in Filth? But the Prophet proclaims, Wo to them that call Bitter, Sweet; Sweet, Bitter. He makes this Reprobate Sense, a Seal of Wrath upon them, for the Present.
He, that defaceth the Prints, and Image of the Eter∣nal Word in his Natural Man, Crucifies his Saviour in the Flesh, a Second Time.
Blessed in the First Place are they, who have Oyl in the Vessel of their Spiritual Man; and the Lamp of their Natural Man Burning.
They are Happy in the Second Place, who have Oyl in their Vessel, though their Lamp be Extinct. Such will be awakened with the Cry of the Bridegroom, when He comes; and enter into His Chamber with Him.
Right Honorable. I have onely one word more to you. If I have in my Sermon set Persons for General Figures of Things; I have done it with Authority of Scripture, and Allusion to the Sense of the Names; as Saul, for a Monarchy by Will: Ishbosheth, for the Fruit of that Monarchy, Cruelty, and Confusion: David for Christ Warring: Ishai for the Natural Image of God in Man: Solomon, for Christ Triumphant.
But, I have been too long. I rest, Praying Continually for your Honors in my Spirit, and Professing my self,



