



MY owne occasions, together with some other difficulties and impediments, have hither∣to hindred a purpose that I had, from the very first time that the papers of this worthy man were in∣trusted to me, to communicate them to the World and to you. But I have now done it, and I hope it is not too late, either to re∣vive his memorie, or your remembrance of those things you have heard from him. I will not beleeve that you have forgotten, or can forget a Pastor whom you did so much
love and reverence: For he was a burning and shining light,John 5.35. and yee rejoiced in his light. I have taken this paines to peruse his notes,Heb. 11.4. that he againe though dead might still speake unto you: and I doe endea∣vour that now after his decease you may have these things alwaies in your remembrance.2 Pet. 1.15. God was pleased to send you a rich treasure by his Ministerie;2 Cor. 4.7. but this treasure was brought unto you in an Earthen vessell; and least haplie when that earthen vessell was broke by sicknesse and death, and the shards throwne into the Earth, you saved not the treasure; I have now gathered some of it, and kowing to whom it did belong, have brought it back to Restore it unto you Now what remains,Ephe. 4.21. but that you enjoy it & use it▪ let that be your care to be answerable to the Do∣ctrine you have received; to walke so as yee have learned Christ. If so bee that yee have heard him, and have been taught by him as the truth is in JESUS. This is the onely thing that I have to say unto you; that your conversation may tell the world you doe re∣member him. Let him live in your lives; That so even they who never knew him, nor ever heard him preach a Sermon, may see by your practise what and how hee preached
And as yee have made a Monument for him in your Church; set up one also in every one of your lives; you shall thereby doe him a greater honor, then that stone-work (though otherwise a Commendable Testimonie of your love and respect) can doe him. Be yee your selves his Monument, his Statue,Phil. 4.1. his Trophee,1 Thes. 2.19. and as the Philippians and Thessa∣lonians were to St. Paul,2 Cor. 3.2. his Crown of glory∣ing. Be yee his Epistle known and read of all men: Let all men see what he writ in you: What precepts of Holinesse, of Righteous∣nesse, of Temperance,Psal. 45.1. hee wrote downe in your hearts, when his tongue was the pen of a readie writer so long among you. He was a Father I suppose unto manie of you, I have heard some of you professe it,1 Cor. 4.15. (though yee have ten thousand instructers in Christ, yet have yee not many Fathers,) If in Jesus Christ hee hath begotten you through the Gospell, bee followers of him, imitate him so, as that men may say of you, when they see the grave and sober, and godlie carriage of any of you, he hath his fathers Counteinance, he hath his fathers Gate. He set a most faire Copy, doe yee imitate the hand. He did as his great Ma∣ster,Iohn 10.3.4. 1 Tim. 4.12. he went before his flocke: And was an example of beleivers, in word, in Conversa∣tion,
in Charity, in Spirit, in faith, in purity; In all things he shewed himselfe a patterne, a stampe,Tit. 2.7. that is the Apostles word, such a stampe,. as makes an Image of it in Coine, or such a stamp as Printers use, which leaves an Impression on the Paper: be yee his Impres∣sion, be yee his printed worke; be yee the Commentary your selves, and then yee need not buy it at the shops: He was Typus Gre∣gis, be yee Antitypon Pastoris: Goe through the world like good and current Coine, with the right stampe.Mat 22.20. Shew whose Superscripti∣on and Image you beare; on one side Gods, on the other side Cesars, and both stampt upon you by your Pastor, who was wont to Preach unto you those two points, Holi∣nesse and Obedience. Shew that you suffe∣red him while you sate under his Pulpit, to enter deep into your hearts: A deep stamp is long before it is worne out; let it appeare that these fifteene yeeres since he dyed, you have not forgotten the word of his exhorta∣tion. They heare best,Luke 11.28. that practice best: If any of you be prophane and unholy, if de∣ceitfull and dishonest in your dealings, if in∣temperate, voluptuous and wanton; yee might happily bee his Hearers, and in the throng, but none of his Disciples, but such
as listned with the other eare to your lusts. But I am perswaded better things of you,Heb. 6.9. and things that accompany salvation, though I thus speake: for I know your husbandman was skilfull, and the seed good.Math. 13.3. 1 Pet. 1.23. Beare not therefore thorns and briars, for such ground is rejected and nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned; but rather shew your selves to be the earth that hath drunk in the raine that came oft upon you, and bring forth fruit, that so you may receive a further blessing from God. Unto whose blessing and most gra∣cious protection I commend you, and re∣maine,

