



Honored
GIve mee leave to bespeake you in a word of an Apologetick preface for this my in∣trusiō upon your good∣nesse. After sixteene yeares residence in Ox∣ford, and many yeares
forraigne travells, upon my returne in these tu∣multuous times not be∣ing able to enjoy my owne charge in Oxford I betooke my selfe to sea imployment under the Right Honorable the Earle of VVarwick, and after two voyages my lot for residence fell into Rochester, and cal∣led to Saint Margarets, have there two yeares exercised my ministery comfortably. Here af∣ter my dispatch of the
whole doctrine of the new Covenant, I let fall some conclusions in satisfaction to doubts now agitated in the world, whereof the first was the subject of this new Covenant, to wit, the Church, which unexpectedly were not so cleare to some as I intended and wisht for. After I con∣tracted their largeness into this modell, and delivered them in Graves-end. Excepti∣ons
were taken by such as heard them not de∣livered, but by report, and the Author there∣of defamed, with what bitternesse let others that heard it judge. I was therefore required for my owne vindica∣tion, and such noble Friends as had cast a gracious aspect upon mee to publish them, which here I now hum∣bly present to your cen∣sure and patronage, who now (blessed bee
God) are the happy in∣struments of the peace of the County. I have not to my best memo∣ry omitted nor added a materiall passage or sentence, except the examination of the termes in Scripture sig∣nifying a Church as V. T.  and  which the Septuagint for the most part ren∣der by  though sometimes the various readings of Aquila, Sy∣machus, and Theodorus
gives that by . The N. T. use still  which the Syriack tran∣slation expresse by the former word  or  familiar also in the very same sense with all the Orientals, so that I inferred as a generall issue from the Etymon of the word,
A Church was a collected body called together in the businesse of the Lord.
This is the substance
of all was omitted from the first delivery, which I have not inserted in this Copy, because I did beleeve the excep∣ter would not trou∣ble himselfe with any examination of the cry∣ticisme. My spirit I confesse hath ever been averse to publish or to have beene taken no∣tice of this way, I am too conscious of my owne weakenesse and insufficiencies to seek to make a noyse: my
inclination to obscurity and retirednesse is wel knowne, and a meane condition (if a setled one) in privacy to ap∣ply my thoughts to stu∣dy hath beene always my strongest intenti∣ons. Other things of greater importance (in literature I meane) I have prepared, which did providence see good to give me a setled con∣dition (wherein I might compose my thoughts to a setled sixtnesse,
and center my selfe in some rest to follow my study, the greatest out∣ward mercy I long for and value in this life) I should humbly begge your patronage and protection. In the in∣terim untill Divine pro∣vidence shall effect so great mercy to mee: giue mee leave to beg your patronage & pro∣tection of this rude draught () of the nature of a Church) and let mee subscribe
my selfe to bee ever really found,

From my study in Rochester, Nov. 20. 1646.
