


READER,
THou art here presented with a Narra∣tive
of one of the most saddest Stories
that hath been related in this latter age,
in which you have these three parti∣culars:
First, A true Character of T. W. late
Minister of Langley Buriall, his life and
actions, according to his own Confessions, Letters and
Accusations of his own dear fellow-creatures, whilst he
continued Ranting upon the publique Stage of Wilts, with
the proceedings of the Justices against him the said
Webb.
Secondly, Thou hast laid before thee a Catalogue of
Parson Webbs most notorious untruths dispersed in his Mass
of malice against his Judge, the Justices of Peace, and his
accusers and prosecutors, &c.

Thirdly, Thou hast divers of those untruths guarded
with replies of truth tending to clear up the innocency of
the most falsly accused E. S. from those fierce, foul and
hell-invented aspersions laid to his charge by the malevo∣lent
mock-Parson T. W.
And the Narrative aforesaid is now made publique,
First, To inform the world upon what grounds Tho. Webb
was prosecuted and tried for his life in the County of
Wilts; and wherefore he was ejected the Parsonage of
L. B.
Secondly, To give a true Character of the most delu∣sive
Parson T. W. that others be not deceived by him, as
many hundreds in Wilts have been, many of whom are
bound to curse the day that ever they saw his fawning face,
or heard his deceitfull tongue.
Thirdly, To clear up the innocency of those in Autho∣rity,
and to make it manifest that their proceedings against
the said T. W. were neither unjust, illegall, nor malicious,
as the Author of the Mass of malice and his Ranting gang
give out.
Fourthly, To lay open the weaknesse, wickednesse and
vanity of the Ranting principle and practice, that Wis∣dom
may be justified of her children, &c. and the mouth
of ungodlinesse stopped.
To conclude with the Psalmist, Blessed is the man that
maketh the Lord his trust, and respecteth not the proud, nor
such as turn aside to lies, Psal. 40. 4.
Reader, Thou art desired to take notice of two particu∣lars,
for the better understanding of the Author, in the en∣suing
Narrative.
First, That it is not his intention in any wise to cast re∣proach
or contempt upon any of the Godly, able Mini∣sters

of the Gospel, for such he accounts worthy of double
honour, according to that 1 Tim. 5. 17. whom to despise,
is to despise Jesus Christ, whose messengers they are, sent
out to proclaim the grace and love of God to sinners, that
they may be turned from darkness to light, from the power of
Satan to God; whose number the Lord increase for the glo∣ry
of his great Name.
But prophane, ignorant and scandalous Ministers, and
such as take upon them the work of publique Ministers and
Preachers, when never sent of the Lord, nor allowed or
approved of men, nor any way gifted and qualified for so
glorious a work, whose light is but darknesse, whose con∣fidence
is in the flesh, whose God is their belly, who glo∣ry
in their shame, who minde earthly things: Amongst
which number you shall finde the painted sepulchre, and
wandering starre T. W. with his most besotted faction and
adherents: These are the mock-Parsons and Priests men∣tioned
and intended in the Narrative, and none other; and
who in their best estate make but a fair shew in the flesh, to
accomplish their wicked and most pernicious ends, which
when obtained, their abominations appear to the great
scandal of Religion, and the righteous waies and people
of God.
The second particular is to let the Reader know that the
said Narrative is the more dark and hard to be understood,
because the names of many persons, principall actors in
the Wiltshire Rant, and others deluded and abused by them,
are at this time past over in silence, and not made publique,
and that for these Reasons:
First, Many of them seem to repent of their folly and
madnesse; and if their repentance prove true (and not
like that of T. W.) their names shall be concealed for ever
by this Author, otherwise they may appear with their
actions in due time.

Secondly, Some of them have been but as weak instru∣ments
in the hands of the mighty Ranters, and therefore
wholly past over in silence.
Thirdly, Some of them have promised to publish to
the world the Wiltshire Rant more perfectly then the
Author, and therefore at present their names are left
out.
Fourthly, Some being in great esteem as yet amongst
the godly people, the Author was unwilling to publish
those words and papers which he received from others of
the Ranting crue, concealing them in hopes that they will
acquit themselves like men; and withall knowing that
the Ranters, especially T. W. and his fellows, are like
to the Cretians, who are alwaies liars, evil beasts, slow bel∣lies:
But they shall proceed no further, for their folly shall be
manifest unto all men.
