



I Could not minde you of any thing bet∣ter then that which God would have alwaies before your eyes; your latter end, and your last account, that it is ap∣pointed for all men once to dye, and af∣ter death the judgement; that after death, a mans workes follow him either in eternall punishment or rewards, and that with God there is no respect of per∣sons; he that hath received but one ta∣lent shall give an account for no more, and he that hath received five, shall give an account for five; the trust indeede and honour is the greater; but so will also the account be, to whom much is gi∣ven, of him much will be required.
It will be a dreadfull thing for all men with naked consciences to appeare before the Judgement Seate of Christ, when the Thrones shall be set, and the Bookes shal be opened, and the dead shall be judged out of those things which are written in the bookes, according to their workes. But above all others, the Accounts of Kingdomes, and the accounts of soules must needes be dreadfull. And yet Angels and men may stand amazed to consider with how much precipitancy and inad∣vertency
men rush upon both these, as in sinne men abstract the pleasure from the sting, and therefore powre out themselves with greedinesse; so in rule men abstract the honour and advancement from the account and judgement, and then its no wonder if with vi∣olence they are carryed after the one, when they wholy cast off thoughts of the other.
I beseech you therefore let my counsell be acceptable to you, which I know, yee will all wish you had taken in the great day of your ac∣count.
Bee holy your selves even as the Lord is holy in all manner of conversa∣tion; these white Robes and Crownes become none so well as they doe the Elders; that as yee judge with God, so God may dwell in you, that yee may have a double Image, not onely his Image upon you as Magistrates; but his Image in you as Saints. Yee have greater opportunities to improove; greater temptations to resist; greater oppositions to conflict with, and (which is most of all to be considered;) a greater account to make then other men; and therefore neede more of Gods grace; more of Gods presence and his blessing. Yee have begun a worke of Reformation, and yee have professed a more close walking with God then other men, and are the first Parliament in this Nation, that have undertaken by a pub∣lique Covenant, with hands lifted up to the most high God, to en∣deavour a perfect Reformation, and that to begin at home, in refor∣ming your owne wayes;
. l. 1. c. . so that wee mry safely, and without flattery give you the same encomium that is given by Lactantius to Con∣stantine the Great: Primus Romanorum Principum, quirepudiatis er∣roribus Mijestatem Dei singulariis acveri, & cognovisti & honorsti. These are the Titles that yee hold forth to the world knowne and read of all men; therefore the eyes of the whole Christian world are upon you, and the expectations of all the reformed Churches: The Lord teach you to answere them; That ye may have something which is suetable to your profession without, that, that may not be objected to you as a reproach which the Father doth to the Philo∣sophers.
 l. 3. c. 15. Quos non aliter intueri decet, quàm medices, quorum titusire∣media habent, pixides venen. Least yee make sad the hearts and shame the hopes of the Saints, and cause those who are both enemies to holinesse, and to you to blaspheme.
Let not pollicy give rules to piety, and set the bounds to your Religion; an evill that hath interwoven it selfe into even the very constitution and fabricke of most Christian States, to appeare for God; so farre as still to take care of themselves, and to venture into this sea of Re∣formation; so as they may see a safe harbour to put themselves in∣to.
This is the way to lose all your labour: Its an empty win that brings forth fruit to it selfe, if men fast to themselves, rule for themselves, live to themselves, they will also dye to themselves; what pretences so∣ever men may fancy to themselves, and what pleas they may have; ut honeste piccare videantur.
Bee also a refuge to the Saints, love holynesse in others; there is not a greater testimony of holynesse in a mans selfe, then i he love the same in another. God loves his owne Image wheresoever it is; so should yee also, there is nothing will honour you more before God and men. Davids eyes in his Government were upon the faithfull; so let yours be, and let not the Kingdome have cause to continue the complaint, that none are preferred or respected by you, but friends, kindred or creatures, and if he be never so faithfull to God, and never so serviceable to you; if he come not under one of the fermer Titles, whatever his desert or his condition be;
, &c. . Orat. adver. Julian. 1. p. 64 . Ethic. l. 8. c. 12. Hister Aminah∣um. par 2 c 4. Brisson. de repub. l. 8. c. 1 S. 19. Camerar. operat. succifiv. l. 1. c. 12. yee have no respect to him, no pray on him; Surely that precept extends to you also; doe go to all but specially to the household of faith. Na∣zian speakes it both of the goodnesse and wisdome of Constantius; that he did in his government affect nothing more, and laboured nothing more, then the encrease of Christian Religion, and the flour shing thereof. For he wisely considered that as Christianity flourished, so did Rome, and the encrease of holinesse in the Church, was the glory and stability of the commonwealth.
Bee tenderly affected to the people that God hath put under you, the Ti∣tles of Fathers and Nurses call for bowels. The difference that the Philosopher gives betweene a King, and a Tyrant is, the one rules for himselfe, and the other for the Subject. And in an Epistle to Alexander, he did tell him, that a Magistracy was appoinied by God, ; to doe good to the Com∣monwealth, and not to oppresse it, or insult over it. Its said of the Pelican that her yong one being hurt by a Serpent, she doth reco∣ver them with her owne bloud, which Franzius doth apply, as a glorious resemblance of Christ. But John the 2 King of Portugall, did make it an Embleme of a good Magistrate, and caused that bird to be put into his escuttchion, to minde him, and his successors of their duty to be willing to be spent for the people.
Let not the glossy condition of this world deceive you, there is a time to be borne, and a time to dye, a time to put off your Robes as well as to put them on. Its a Ceremony that they use at the Popes inauguration, one stands with two Reedes or Canes in his hands, on the one a burning torch; one the other a little course flaxe, which he lights, and by and by its out, and this he doth thrice, and
the Master of the Ceremonies cryes, Sancte Pater, sit transit gloria mundi. Have you such considerations alwaies with you, that yee may never enter into your house, but with an expectation to be cal∣led by God unto his Barre as soone as you rise.
The Lord make you such as feare God, men of truth, and hating co∣vetousnesse; that what yee doe or have done for this poore distres∣sed people; (that wereas sheepe not having a shepheard) may be all fruite abounding to your Account.
So prayes 
