



GOD hath made all his Ministers Stewards,1 Cor. 4.1.2. and a great Trust hee hath committed to them,Heb. 13.17. The mysteries of God,2 Cor. 2.17. and the soules of men. That they may rightly dis∣charge this Trust,2 Cor. 3 11. a double qualification is required in them,  and , Ephes. 4.4. sincerity of spirit and liberty of speach: We are nei∣ther
to use a , a sleight of hand to wrest the word to our sense; nor a , to temper it to the lusts of men.. Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 7. . Iustin. Mart. Epist. ad Lenam & Serenum. 2 Cor. 4. 2. Ier. 23.31. Let false Prophets smooth their tongues, and fill the eares of deluded soules with spirituall flatteries. Those that God hath sent, must speak as the Oracles of God, not sparing the sinnes, nor fearing the faces of men, least they be confounded before them: And amongst all that confluence of mercy, which I desire may be powred down upon your Honourable Assembly from Hea∣ven, this is not the least, that God may give you, and continue unto you Pastors after his owne heart, who may discharge their trust with boldnesse and faithfulnesse towards God and you; and that you may receive with meek∣nesse the engraffed word, which is able to save your soules.
What is here presented to your veiw, I hope gave no offence in the delivery, nei∣ther will it in the reveiw, being made pub∣like by your command. However, I have discharged what I apprehended to bee my duty,Bonae. res nemi∣nem scandali∣zant, nisi ma∣la entem, Tertul de ve∣land. virgin. cap. 7. to God, to you, and to the whole King∣dome in you; for the wounds of this people will never be healed with sweet words. If any
one shall conceive something to be spoken here, as savouring of too much boldnesse and plainnesse; I must answer him with Salvian in a like case, Non à mea sibi haec linguâ di∣ci aestimet, sed à conscienti suâ; It is not my tongue, but his own heart which makes the Application.
Two great evils God hath blamed in his people in all Ages,Vt accipinat importuni, do∣nec acceperunt inquieti, & bi acceerunt in∣grati. Bern. de consider, l. 4. c. 2. unthankfulnesse for mer∣cies, and wantonnesse under them.
1. Vnthankfulnesse; Wee are very apt to bee importunate for mercies, when we want them; and to despise and under-value them when we doe enjoy them. Its a very hard matter to have the same esteeme of them in our prayses, which we had in our prayers. God hath ho∣noured, loaden, yea crowned you with mer∣cies; his faithfulnesse and truth hath been your sheild and buckler: Hee hath not onely given you these Ancient mercies, that of 88 and this: The Remembrance of which you did upon this day celebrate; but hee hath shewed you greater things then these; that you and the world may wonder; hee hath since delivered you, from many invin∣cible Armadoes, and many Powder Plots
at once. Let these mercies never wax old to you;Haec beneficii intet duos lex est. Alter sta∣tim oblivisci debet dati, al∣ter accepti nun∣quam. Sen. de benes. l. 2. c. 10. it is an evill that we are all prone to, that as time will weare out the sense of sinne, so it will the esteeme of mercy; and hee that shall keep either the one, or the other alway fresh before him, had need be annoin∣ted daily with fresh Oyle.Docuerunt lin∣guam suam grandia loqui, cum operentur exigua. Largis∣simi promissores, & parrissimi exhibitores, &c. Bern. de con∣fider, l. 4. c. 2. Neither should our thankfulnesse bee onely the fruit of the Lips, but of the Life, The Lord is bet∣ter pleased with the language of our hands, then with the language of our tongues. And this must not be for a day and no more; mercies are eternall obligations; and while wee enjoy the fruit of them, its but reasonable that God should have the glory; and that we should say with Hezekiah, The Lord was ready to save us, therefore wee will sing our songs to the stringed instruments, all the dayes of our life in the house of the Lord, Esay, 38.20.
2. Wantonnesse under mercies; Iesuron may wax fat and kick; and when the filling of a people is according to their pasture,Deut. 32.15. Ieshuron à  aspexit solicite, observavit: quia Israelitae vide∣runt presentiam gloriae divinae. Shind l. Hos. 13.6. their hearts may be lifted up, and they may forget the Lord; It was Vzziah his sinne and ruine, hee was mightily helped till he was strong, and then his hert was lifted up to his own destruction. To
loose the fruit of an affliction is a great pro∣vocation, but much more the fruit of a mer∣cy; when cords of love make a people sit more loose from God, to draw iniquity with cords of mercy, this is the highest way of sinning.
Its a great testimony that is given of Ie∣hosaphat, The Lord established the Kingdome in his hand,2 Chron. 26.15 Perdidistis uti∣litatem calami∣tatis, & miserre∣mi facti estis & pessimi prman∣sistis, Austin. de civit. l. 1. c. 33. 2 Chron. 17.5.6. His vincit, qui se vincit in victoria. and all Iudah brought him pre∣sents; and hee had riches and honours in abun∣dance; and his heart was lift up in the wayes of the Lord. Wee should be like a spire Steeple, which is minimus in summo; least in our own eyes, when God hath made us greatest in the eyes of other men; we should acknow∣ledge the Lord to bee the God of our mer∣cies, make him the God of our prayses, and con∣secrate not onely the mercy to him with Hannah, but our selves also, as Hezekiah ex∣horteth, to give the hand, and as the Churches of Macedonia did, who gave themselves to the Lord.2 Chron. 30.8. There is as great danger of mer∣cies as of any of Gods dispensations:2 Cor. 8.5. Our mercies may become our snares, and that which should have beene for our welfare may become a trap, to take us; for the ground that drinks
in this raine of mercies, as well as that of ordinances, and brings not forth herbes meet for him by whom it is dressed, is nigh to cur∣sing. These will make the sinnes of peo∣ple like Summer fruits,Socrati cum multa multi pro suis quis∣que facult∣hus offerrent, Aescines pauper Audtor, Nihil (inquit) dignum te, quod dare tibi possim, inveo. Itaque dono tbi quod unum habeo, me ipsum, Sen. de benef. l. . c. 8. Amos 8.1. ripen them the sooner.
If it prove so with us, wee must re∣member that there bee changes of the right hand of the most high;Psal. 77 10. muta∣tones dexiera, Cal. hee may repent of these mercies, as he did, that he had made Saul King; he may become our enemy, and fight a∣gainst us, and may resolve to destroy us, after he hath done us good.
The light that God hath caused to rise to us in obscurity,Iosh. 24.20. Zach. 14.6. is such as is neither clear nor dark; we are in continuo crepusculo; we cannot as yet say all our feares are over, and that the Sunne hath risen upon us to a perfect day; and hence it comes to passe, every mans heart is become a merchant, Psal. 38.10. traf∣fiking too and fro, not knowing where to rest. Leave your former mercies with God, but so as to improve them for God; while you doe enjoy them, commit the keeping
of your mercies to him as well as of your soules in well doing; that if he change his hand towards you againe, your hearts may not reproach you, and say, the time was we had a price in our hand, but wee had no heart. Let your mercies make you more faithfull, more fruitfull; and then doubt not, but if God lead you into new troubles, if the bush be brought into the fire againe, the good will of him that dwelt in the bush, shall bee with you.
And though the Enemy, now his power is gone, sets all his Policy on work, and it may bee, hopes to effect that by the one, which hee could not by the other; Yet the GOD of your salvation, who hath given you these former mercies,Psal 74.14. as the Head of Levia∣than for food to your faith, and hath in the latter mercies, opened to you in the Valley of Achor a doore of hope;Hos. 2.15. I say, the same GOD who hath taken the Lions, will in his own time, take the
Foxes also; For hee takes the wise in their owne craftinesse; Which is the daily prayer, and shall be the constant expecta∣tion of him,

