



MADAM,
THese few notes following were preacht but with an ordinary intention, but thorow Di∣vine mercy, both with your self and others found more than ordi∣nary reception; so oftimes I have ob∣served when there is least of mans strength, there is most of Gods. Many have been too wise, and too mighty to do Gods work; but never any too foo∣lish or too weak that have been imploy∣ed by him. The Word is that spiritual sword wherewith God wounds the hearts
of his enemies; but as Scanderbeg's Sword could do nothing without Scan∣derbeg's Arm; no more can this sword, unless it be weilded by the arm of Omni∣potency. The reason why men do not be∣lieve our report, is, because the arm of the Lord is not revealed, Isa. 53.1. Sure I have reason to hope, that that day when we discoursed of Gods opening Lydia's, there were many other hearts opened also. My Notes which were de∣sired by your self, and several others, I could not so easily do by transcribing them as by publishing them. And though Truth need no Apology, yet I must tell the world, that this had been as like to have slept in darkness, as many other Exercises have, had not the more than ordinary success wherewith God atten∣ded it in preaching, provoked me to this service.
Ministers are by Christ called spi∣ritual Fishers; a busie imployment, full of toyl and danger, sith the place of fishing is not a shallow stream, but a raging and tumultuous sea, in which after we have tired our selves, and spent
our strength, nothing so breaks our hearts as this, that we labour all night and catch nothing. But Oh if at last we cast out the Net, and inclose a multitude, 'tis no wonder we are not able to bear our own joy, being astonished as Peter, Luk. 5.9.
Madam, excuse my boldness in pre∣fixing your Name to this small Manual. And indeed I had not had confidence, but that I presume you have with that other Mary sate too long at Christs feet, to be ashamed of Christs Truth. What inward comforts soever God hath given you by your constant and diligent at∣tendance on his Worship, give God the glory; a dram of that sweetness that flows from the upper springs, will allay the bitterness of those Mara-like wa∣ters wherewith God drenches his dearest Servants. For our part whom God hath intrusted with the Mysteries of the Go∣spel, though we are on every side op∣prest, yet 'tis mercy we are not sup∣prest under all other hardships; we have yet cause to bless God, who hath not taken the Word of Truth utterly
out of our mouth. He never well under∣stood what, the calling of a Minister was, that thinks strange of any suffering in the service of Christ. It would well be∣come a Ministers mouth what Pompey once replied to the Mariners, who dis∣swaded him from sailing in a storm, when he was imployed for bringing pro∣vision to Rome, under a strait Siege; 'Tis necessary that Rome be relieved, but 'tis not necessary that we should live. Sure 'tis necessary that Christs sheep be fed, but 'tis not necessary that we should live.
The subject of these few Papers is of incomparable weight. The more I know my own heart and its deceits, the more jealous I am of others: Oh what a wily enemy do we carry in our own bosoms! How many treacherous reaches hath it to ruin our Immortal souls! Simon Ma∣gus seemed zealously to desire the Spi∣rit, and would have bought it at a great price; but this poysoned his Re∣ligion, that his heart was not right in the sight of God. Ah what faint and frigid services do we bring before God,
while we serve him with our mouths▪ and honour him with our lips, but re∣move our heart far from him? 'Tis true till the heart be renewed, God will have none of it; but when once 'tis renewed, it makes every thing else to be accepted. 'Tis the same to all other services that Benjamin was to his Brethren, and there is no seeing Gods face without it. Oh how sad were it, if at last we should spoil all our services and sufferings by doing good duties with bad hearts. For preventing which danger we have cause to bless God for the labours of many e∣gregious servants of his, who have left the Church a rich treasury of instructi∣ons, into which if by casting my mite I may in any measure serve the Lord Je∣sus and his People, 'tis more than suffi∣cient recompence to him, who subscribes himself,

