



Right Honourable:
IT is an argument that God hath advanced a man in mercy, when he gives him a spirit suitable to his honour, when his disposition is no∣ble according to his condition: Otherwise Dig∣nitas in indigno est ornamentum in luto,
Bern l. de con∣sid. & but as beauty in a faire woman without under∣standing.
A Princely spirit is mainely seene in two things: In great services, and great satisfacti∣ons.
1.
Inter initiae principatus, quo∣tidie secretum sibi horarium sumere selebat; nec quicquam ampliù, quam muscas captare. , 8. All delight arising from suitablenesse be∣tweene the minde and the object; a minde that is truely great cannot please it selfe in these low things that others doe: To eat and drinke, ga∣ther riches, build houses, and delight themselves
in these contentments of the flesh. As Sueton re∣ports of Domitian: Who had the great affaires of the Empire to busie himselfe in; yet he did constantly spend some time every day in cat∣ching of flies: But a truely noble spirit is with David considering how he may lay out himselfe in some great service for the glory of God, the advancement of his Ordinances, and the en∣largement of the Kingdome of his deare Son. As for other things he lookes upon Them as beneath him,
Hister. Ammian Char∣ceila l. 0. As The∣mistocles after a great victory won against the Persians, walked up and downe among the slaine, and saw here & ther some great & rich spoyles, which he disdained to stoope for, but said to one that stood by him,
Recte recusat conditionem banerut omni∣bus liqudum sit quiequid postea Abrabae conti∣git, contingere tantum  e∣nedictionem Domini, en ex hominm savo∣re. Lu be sin Gen. 14. Tolle haec, tu qui The∣mistocles non es. Let such take care of these things that have spirits fit for no higher things.
2. Such as a mans spirit is, such will his sa∣tisfactions be. A noble spirit as he doth all unto God, so he exspects to receive all from God; and he admires nothing but God, and the things of God. He cannot be content only to be rich in this world, but he must be rich to∣wards God; or to be honourable among men,
he must have the honour that comes from God only. He saith with Abraham,
Valde preresta∣tus sum me nolle sic satiai. Melch. Adam.  vita Luth. it shall never be sayd that the King of Sodome made Abraham rich. And with Luther when a great gift was sent him, that God should not put him off with outward mercies, he would not be satisfied with any thing here below.
God hath highly advanced your Lordships a∣bove your Brethren; let it appeare by your Princely spirits, in laying out your honour, yea and laying it downe also for God. He hath raised you to great honour, and given you such opportunities as your ancestors never had: See that you answere the price put into your hands. Let his glory be precious to you, if you doe expect that yours shall be precious unto him: And know if it be not,
. Nazian. oret. 20. all the outward embal∣mings of men will never be able to keepe your names from stinking and rotting: For the word is gone forth of his mouth; they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed.
I shall only commend to your Honours that two fold study of Basil and Nazian. As worthy of your Noble spirits. 1. Esteeme this to be a great thing: to be, as well as to be called Christi∣ans;
to have it in truth, as well as in name. 2. So to live here with hopes of Heaven, having your hearts, affections, and conversations there, that you may as it were prevent your departure, and seeme to be stollen thither before hand.
That the Lord would thus enoble and raise your spirits, set you upon the highest services, with the greatest successes, and give unto you the fullest satisfactions; himselfe, and the honour that comes from him alone: That your glory here may be but the pledge and the first fruits of that crowne of glory which he hath prepa∣red for them that love him. This is, and shall be the humble and constant prayer of

