



Right Honourable, and Right Worshipfull:
A Word spoken in season,
. is a word upon the wheeles Solomon tels us. Prov. 25.11. both grateful and successefull, which is the blessing that I begge of God upon these poore and meane endeavours, which in obedience to your command I humbly pre∣sent unto you.
It was the fittest subject that in this juncture of time I could fix my thoughts upon, when mens hearts are too ge∣nerally turned to hate Gods people, and to deale deceitfully with his servants; therby (I feare) to prepare instruments in judgement for that last act of the tragedy upon the Saints in the Reformed Churches, the killing of the witnesses, which I conceive, as the bitterest affliction, and the sharpest persecution is yet to come.
God hath put great opportunity into your bands, and it may be hath raised you to honour for such a time as this: do you countenance, and act for the Lords holy ones, and it shall be accepted as a service by him who is King of Saints: doe you become as a correcting Cherube unto this Arke of God among you: for next to the honourable title of Defen∣der of the Faith, is that of Protector of the faithfull: for God and his people are engaged in the same cause and quar∣rel and all opposition shall end in the destruction of the oppo∣sers,
and they shall perish by their hands whom they oppose, even by the vengeance of the Temple.
But no man will ever be faithfull to the Saints, but hee that is himselfe a Saint, in whom the spirit of God dwels as a man, and acts as a Magistrate; all other men though they may give good words for a time, yet they will meet with a , an opportunity of temptation, and they will fall off,
Pelago se non ita commissu∣rus esset, quin quando libe∣ret, pedem re∣ferre posset. engaging themselves in the cause of the Saints no further, then may stand with their present purposes, and designes: As the King of Navarre told. Bez. he would lanch no further into the Protestant cause, then he might see which way to put into a safe harbour.
There is nothing that concernes Magistrates more then to gaine the hearts, and keepe the prayers of these beloved ones, and they must be faithfull to God that shall expect it; for God and his Saints are in a League offensive and de∣fensive,
Simulatque faedus cum Romanis per∣cusseris; noli expectare ali∣um de me ca∣lumniatorem, sed statim ve∣luti hosti po∣puli Romani cavendum pu∣ta. Polyb. hist. l. 3. and the Saints are ready to say to men as Hanni∣ball did to King Antiochus, while he continued an enemy to the Romans, so long he should be sure of him as a friend; but if once he made a League with them, he should immedi∣ately looke upon him as his enemy; so doe the Saints say, while faithfull to God; they are firme to you; but if you be false to God, it will not be long ere you will be cast out of the hearts of his people also.
And that you may cleave close to the people of God, there is a great deale of courage required in these dange∣rous and doubtfull times; in which mercies are accoun∣ted injuries, and to give thankes for them is set upon men as a brand of cruelty and infamy, when so many forsake their first Principles, and labour to build againe that which hitherto they have destroyed. At this time I say, men have neede of courage, or else they will feare and faint, and fly when danger presents it selfe.
Truely duty is better then safety, and suffering is bet∣ter
then sinning or shifting; crooked wayes will never bring a man to right ends; there is too much of the Ser∣pent in them; a lying tongue is but for a moment,
Perde te,  pereas. Salv. and he that will save his life shall lose it.
Satan hath an especiall designe upon men of eminen∣cy and authority in such times as these, that he may carry them in Tryumph, and act by them to the corrupting of many. As the Romanes having an evill eye upon Ptolo∣my King of Egypt for his wealth, which they resolved to seize upon, but knew not how to pick an occasion, he being in League with them; therefore they appoynted Cato a man in high esteeme for justice and uprightnesse, as Publi∣cus Praedo, ut summa turpitudo facti authoritate tanti viri aliquantulum tegeretur, by the name of the man to collour over the basenesse of the act; so Satans great de∣signe of late hath beene upon the Stars in our Horizon, and wee may with feare remember how many are fallen.
Engage yee therefore with and for the Saints, and let the present dangers raise your resolutions: a great minde doth rise by difficulties, and true courage is heightned by oppositions. Let the birelings fly, let meteours fall, and those that have cleaved to the Church of God by flattery be detected; yet is the righteous an everlasting foundation. Let the blessing of Ioseph be on your heads whom God hath seperated from your brethren: let your bow abide in strength, and the armes of your hands be made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob, which shall be the constant and dayly prayer of

