



MY LORDS;
BEsides your Appointment (which carries the sacred authoritie of a command with me) there are three things somewhat incline me to yeeld this Sermon to the Presse, notwith∣standing, the just sense I have of mine own weaknesse, and its unwor∣thinesse.
First, The birth-day of it, allowed not suffici∣ent time for a full delivery, your Lordships great occasions after the Morning Sermon, so strait∣ned the time of your Evening-Sacrifice, that by your late coming together, I was compelled wholly to lay aside some parts, and to deliver the rest by pieces Raptim, as I could in such haste:
Now the Presse hath given me leave a little bet∣ter to gather the materialls, which then I scatte∣red, and to couple all into some better propor∣tion by the sinewes of coherence, that I may present you with the intire (though yet un∣polished) body of my Meditations intended for you
Secondly, The matter which was suited to a day of Praises before your Loraships, may be very usefull (if not necessary) at all times; Even nowA Fast ob∣served by both Hou∣ses of Par∣liament. when You are putting on Your mourn∣ing-garments, and when the whole Kingdome seems to be in a more sad posture then it was Novemb. 5th. Our praising God for his being with us in a thanksgiving-day, may effectually admonish and prepare us to mourne after Gods presence, in a day of humiliation with more af∣fectionatenesse. For as it is true, Monendo laudat, it is likewise true inverted, Laudando monet. Yea, the paying of God his due tribute of praise for the great things he hath done, is the way to in∣gage him to doe greater things for us in a future time of need, if we doe it heartily: it ministers courage and resolution in the cause, and gives an unconquerable strength to our faith in ex∣pectation of a happy end. Iehosaphat therefore
made the praising of God a part of his preparati∣on to battell, when a dreadfull Army of enemies came against him,2 Chron. 20.21. 2 Chron. 20.21. He appointed Singers unto the Lord, that should praise the beautie of holinesse, as they went out before the Army, and to say, Praise the Lord, for his mercy indureth for ever. And it was not in vaine, their praising God prevailed, as if it had been praying to him;Ver. 22. for ver. 22. When they began to Sing, the Lord set Ambushments against the Children of Ammon, and Moab, and Mount-Seir, and they were smitten. Wee are behind with God in this, above other duties: Nature and self-love can prevaile with us, to a kind of prayer in time of distresse, because that is the ordinary knowne way to obtaine reliefe; but praising God is a more refined and spirituall dutie above Nature, and requires both puritie and strength of grace to be well performed. 'Tis not impossible, but this plaine and home-spun Discourse, may stirre up the endeavours of some in this neglected du∣tie; one of ten to returne, and give God praise; and so contribute somewhat unto publique benefit. Be not You guiltie of unthankfulnesse to God, (most Noble Peeres) lest the Lord lose his end in bringing in publique mercies, lest wee fare the worse, and prevaile the lesse in a good cause; yea, lest you bring evill upon the Land; as He∣zekiah
did, by not rendring againe according to the benefit done unto him; for, therefore was wrath come upon him, Chron. 32.25. and upon Iudah, and Ierusalem, 2 Chron. 32.25.
Thirdly, You are the Men (my Lords) with whom God will plead the Kingdomes cause, and through whom, in this great Controversie now on foot, wee look for Gods presence with England, by Gods being in your Counsells, and by his blessing of your martiall affaires, we all say, The Lord of Hosts is with us. It much concerns you, it much concerns us all, that You earnestly seek after, and carefully keep God with you in your great imployments, and that we all strive by prayer for Gods presence with You, that God may stand and judge in the Assembly of our gods; and therefore doe I thus humbly present this poore peice to Your Noble acceptance and patronage, that it might happily put You in remembrance of your dutie, if You cast your eye upon it, or the people of theirs, in praying for You, that God may be with You in the great work of Church and State; which is, and shall be daily the prayer of

