



My Lords and Gentlemen;
TWas a sad presage of Israels ruine, when the Lord in anger threatened to break these two Staves of his beauty and bonds: if ReligionZac. 11. be the one of these two Staves, the Law shall be the other; these are semper gemella nun∣quam singula in foetu, two Twins, mercies that live and die together, Israel at once lost them both, Hos. 3. 4. The Children of Israel shall be many dayes without a King, & without a Prince, & without an offering, and without an Ephod, &c. corruption is the mother of confusion, Dan and Bethel, the place of Judgement, and the house of God, had been corrupted together, and therefore 'twas just they should be destroyed together: wickednesse had usurped the seat

of Justice at Dan, and Bethel, the house of God, was become a Bethanes, the house of lies. What violent adventures have been made by many of this Nations own degenerate Sons to break the staffe of beanty, I need not tell you; I fear the next generation will scarce live to see Religion healed of some of these scars and wounds she hath received in our late unhappy wars, of which, oh may she not complain in the Prophets words, that she hath been wounded in the house of her friends: The quarrel begun with Religion, but ended against policy:Zac. 13. 6. Those that are burthened by the Gospel, can live without the Law; Sine Fide, sine Rege, sine Lege. The staff of bonds hath of late had its turn, and had not both been held in the hand of a strong God, sure the issue ere this had been confu∣sion.
My Lords, That both Justice and Religion finds yet the countenance of so egregious Patrons as your selves, is a Val∣ley of Achor, a door of hope to our Israel, that we shall once more see Jerusalem in Jerusalem, when truth buds out of the earth, and righteousnesse looks down from heaven, thenPsa 85. 11, 12. have we ground to hope that our Land also shall give her en∣crease.
What evidence have you given the world, not only of your integrity in doing Justice, but also of your zeal to Religion? This makes your name which you have left behind you, like a sweet perfume. Not to flatter you ('twas but your duty) how often to provoke others of quality to imitate your Religious practise, have I mentioned, that joy that possest me to see a Judge so constant and serious in writing Sermon notes; like those Noble Berians, Acts 17.
The two short Sermons following, however esteemed by your Honors, and others, had never seen more light then came in∣to my Study window, had I known how else to have satisfied the earnest importunities of many Gentlemen, and others, that

were my Auditors; but beyond all, the joynt desire of your Lordships, was of sufficient authority to make me consent; this liberty only I must crave, when there was one only desi∣red, to present you with two: They are both of the same mould, and like Ruth and Naomi, they are resolved to go together. What may be the censure of others (though I am sure to have my back-burden) doth very little trouble me: The Smith's Dog (they say) doth not fear the fire; it hath been my lot for some years, beyond many of my place, to be exercised by a generation, whose inward parts is very wick∣ednesse, and their throat an open Sepulchre; so that experi∣enceAnabapt. Quakers. Sensualists. hath sufficiently steel'd me against reproaches. What e∣ver be the welcome that this weak Essay finds among others, yet I am sure wisdome is still justified by all her children.
To your Honors then, and the rest of the Gentlemen, whose desire I have gratified by this impression, I humbly inscribe these weak conceptions of mine. And oh that God would once more make another impression of them upon their hearts; and as he hath honoured you among his people, and advanced you above others in place, so may he make you all more eminent in piety; that having served your generation in the several trusts committed to you awhile, you may cheerfully resign your Offices, together with your Souls, and give up your accounts to him who shall come to judge quick and dead, at that last and great day. So doth he promise to pray, that is

