



WHen I first heard that I was designed unto this solemne service, I could not entertaine the motion without feare, and many mis giving thoughts, both of mine owne unworthinesse of so great an honour, and unfitnesse for so pub∣lique a worke, being both by parts and place, rather destined to privacy and obscurity. But, your command put me upon it, and some experience that I have had of God in other kinds did strengthen me in it, who doth not usually deny unto his, an assistance proportionable to the service which he employes them in.
Your diligent attention, and gracious acceptation of these my meane endeavours, manifested not onely in the thanks returned, but also in an extraordinary favour, and undeserved honour the same day conferred, is ground enough of dedicating these my first frutis unto
you with all thankfulnesse, and of taking it both as matter of encouragement, and also as matter of en∣gagement, so far as there may be any possibility of ser∣vice unto you, in so low a spheare as mine; unto whose service, I call God to witnesse in that day of Revelati∣on, as far as I know mine owne heart or wayes, I have bin from the beginning devoted, in this great Cause of God and his Church.
I hope nothing will be found in this Discourse upon its review, that will be offensive to any, because, I hope none will be offended at truth; but, if every thing bee not so propery and cleerely expressed as it ought to be; I humbly beg this further favour, sc. a favourable and candid interpretation, professing my selfe to be far from the study of parties, in any thing that is here represented to your view, and the worlds.
The subject, I know, you cannot but judge necessary, whether you consider your selves as men, or Magistrates. And that of Solomon, sc. Remember, for all this God will bring thee to judgement: A more weighty admonition then that of the Romane Monitour to the Triumpher,Tertul. Apol. cap 33. Suggeritur ei à tergo. Respice post te, & hominem memento te.
Its reported of Zeuxes that famous Painter, being asked why he was so exact in all things, and did them tam lento penicillo;Drexell. de ater∣nitate. his answer was. Diu pingo, quia aeternitati pingo. Had we this consideration alway be∣fore our eyes, and did live under the command of it; that what ever we do hath influence into eternity, stands upon an eternall record, and shall be brought forth to an account in the dreadfull day of the Lord, it would make us act and walke with much more exactnesse then we do.

 Assuredly (Right honourable) when a man upon his death-bed, shall begin to looke over to the shore of ano∣ther world, and all his former comforts, honours, plea∣sures shall leave him, as a brooke that passeth by, and his soul shall have the dreadfull thoughts of Iudgement to conflict with, it must needs fill him with hor∣rour and amazement, who hath not a judgement of ab∣solution passed in his owne heart by the blood of sprink∣ling before. And that prayer which is recorded of Lip∣sius at his death will be ours,Brn. super quia. bitat, &c. Se. 8. Adsis Domine famulo tuo cum tota aeternitate decertanti. How dreadfull must it needs be, judicandum astare illi tam terrifico tribunali, & incertam adhuc expectare sententiam?
With these thoughts, I humbly desire you to attend your great works; with these debate, and with these Iudge: And it shall be my daily prayer that God will use you, honour you, and when any of you shall be gathe∣red to your Fathers, bind up your soules in the bundle of life, because you have done good towards God, and to∣wards his house, and when you shall awake out of the grave, may finde mercy with the Lord in that day; and that all the service you doe towards this shattered kingdome may be fruit abounding to your account.

