



Right Honorable and Worshipfull,
AS it was your request, that occasioned me to offer these my Me∣ditations to your ears in the Pulpit: So is it nothing else that brings them forth (such as they are) from the Presse to bee thus presented to your
view, and under your names, that so they might have a passe into the world: they have been already in your eares, they are now before your eyes, the Lord write them in all our hearts, that we may be do∣ers of the word, and not hearers onely, lest we deceive our own selves! When I stood upon my watch to see what the Lord would say unto mee, that I might speak unto you, he directed me to make this Discovery of Peace before you, when you sate in the dust before him, humbling your soules, and crying migh∣tily unto God, to turn from his fierce an∣ger that we perish not: and indeed God is never more ready to give out himselfe, and to communicate his thoughts unto men in a spirituall way, then at such a time; nor is the soule so capable of divine Discoveries from God at any time, as when it is in such a posture of humiliati∣on: which gives me hope that God inten∣ded
to send home into your hearts some light and influence from this truth, to en∣courage and keep up your spirits against all the opposition which you finde in the cause of God and the Kingdome, and to maintaine your zeale and forwardnesse therein, for which your ever-to-be-re∣nowned Citie is now so much and so just∣ly honored. For though the vision be yet for an appointed time, & in the mean time the sword devoureth on the right hand & on the left, yet we may wel wait for it, because it will surely come, and will not tarry, and when it commeth it will bee a tree of life. Now that God hath revea∣led unto you his gracious thoughts for the ending of his peoples calamities, (even such as you could expect) he look∣ethth at you should do somwhat for the furtherance thereof, that may be worthy of your place and eminencie whereunto the Lord hath advanced you: To help
forward an expected end is a work wor∣thy the hand of a Prince. Numa built a Temple,. wch he dedicated to Faith and Peace, because hee desired that they might dwell together under one roof: the worke that I lay before you, (honoured Gentlemen) is altogether as honorable as Numa's: I need not now shew you how to doe it, you are partly directed in the Sermon, but you have given the world ful proof that you know how to doe it, in that you have done it, and do it at this day, so effectually with your Armies, with your Estates, with your prayers, everie way: Goe on and doe still like the Citizens of London: and if God blesse your endea∣vours, wee may yet hope to see what Nu∣ma never saw, Truth and Peace dwell together under one roofe in this Kingdome. Be pleased yet to en∣tertain a word or two, to expedite your willing endevours in bringing our
Churches calamities to an expected end: you know there are a generation of Ambo-dexters among us, that do pretend to seek the same God, & to build in the work of the Lord with us, as the Iewes adversaries did in the building of the Temple, Ezra 4.2. But as Zerubbabel and the chiefe of the Fathers were aware of them then: so our Zerubbabels (I hope) and you the chiefe of our Fa∣thers, are also aware of these now: Are they not even such as the Psalmist describes? They put forth their hands against such as be at peace with them, they break their covenant; the words of their mouth are smoother then butter, but warre is in their hearts; their words are softer then oyle, yet are they drawn swords? Psa 55.20.21. Their words are peace, peace, & pacem poscimus omnes, but they love not truth and peace, they broak for treaties of peace, under which they wold now betray us. For in truth their designe is to hinder your endevours in bringing on this expected end: it will not be unnecessary that you have an eye upon them. Next, let me prevaile with you to bee tender of Gods honour, in what peculiarly belongs unto him, as you expect God should be tender of us in bringing the Calamities of our Church unto this desirable end. Our Worthies in Par∣liament have piously provided for the sanctifying of our Christian Sabbath, improve your Authorities for the exe∣cuting of such wholsom laws, so much concerning the Lord our God, especially reforme, I beseech you, all Exchange-meetings
that day, unlesse you could be sure that men would come thither with a desire of no other news then what they might heare from heaven that day: if any thing, surely this is a blemish, & that in the face of your beautisul Citie; you have worthily cleared your streets of the notorious oc∣casions of Idolatry, let not anyplace be left (especially such a publick place) in the midst of you, an occasion of pro∣phanenesse. And go on, as I hear you have piously resolved, to take inn God more solemnly, into your publick consul∣tations, then formerly, by beginning and ending such your meetings,Aus N. A. l. 7. c. 10 with prayer, like Pub. Scipio a famous Ro∣man (of whom it was said, Ejus vita erat diis dedita) who was wont to go to the Capitoll before he went to the Senat, to his prayers before his publick businesse. And I doubt not but the Lord will continue to protect and honour this your famous Citie, in delighting to use it as a choyce and eminent instrument in his hand, to bring the present and pressing calamities of our dear countrey, to an expected end, and to continue you in a peaceable and quiet habi∣tation. For which purpose I commend this whole Citie, together wth your government, Counsels, persons and im∣ployments to the blessing and care of the most high God. And this shall be the prayer of

