


Honorable and worthy Gentlemen,
WHEN you were solemnly met before God, to mourn over your sins, it was my duty to fur∣ther, what I could, the melting of your hearts, that you might powre them out before the Lord. I knew not a better ar∣gument for such a purpose, then to set before you, God mel∣ting over sinners, his repentings kindled together, and his bowels turned within him fer them: it cannot but pre∣vaile upon an ingenuous spirit, and make it mourn after the Lord. Qui nolit impendere amorem, Aug. saltem re∣pendat, saith a father.
And the voyce of Mercy (after the windes, and earthquakes, and fires of judgement, that have gone before, and have shaken the mountaines, and broken the rocks in pieces) be but a still small voyce, yet it may prevail more then those, if God be in it; and I hope he is: For, if I mistake not, Mercy is the present receipt which the great Physitian hath prescribed to make up the cure of sick Eng∣land, a Cordiall after blood-letting, and many bitter pills, that have pul'd her down. God is now powring out one mercy after another upon us, and (as I may say) rub∣bing and working in the oyle of Mercy, to take away the stiffnes of our hearts and to make them pliable. Now that the language of providence herein, might be both more ar∣ticulate
 and impressive, I have brought the Word, to set home upon the heart, Gods own dispensations, God makes the doctrine, in preaching Mercy, and that in most reall demonstrations, I have endeavoured to make the applica∣tion of Mercy unto our hearts, that by may of use, it might bring us to repentance, and teach us to feare the Lord and his goodnesse. It seems to be a lesson God would fain have us to learn at this time, I have therefore willingly de∣livered it unto you from the pulpit, where you heard it with patience. And likewise (at your appointment) I now de∣liver it unto you and the world from the Press, with pray∣er that by both or either (hearing or reading) the Spirit of God may bring it in, with a blessing, to reach the heart.
And whereas, when you had sent up the cry of your souls unto God upon the fasting day, I presented unto your eares the cry of many thousand souls, out of the North, where they cry for food, but there is none to break unto them the bread of life, and you willingly hearkened: give me leave to re∣new my motion (as Nehemiah to Artaxerxes) for the place of my fathers Sepulchers, which lieth waste. It is a work of so high importance and difficulty, that none are worthy to take it hand, but a Parliament, none can bring reliefe (under God) but you, who are the repairers of our breaches, and the restorers of paths to dwell in. The noble and worthy Gentlemen of your honorable Committee for sending Ministers into the Northern Counties, know, that they have long been in darknesse, even when the light of the Gospel brake forth gloriously over all other parts of the Kingdome in former times of reformation; and yet, though that honorable Committee have been zealous and piously diligent in the trust you have committed to them, (whereby they have procured and sent some labourers into
 the Vineyards of York, and Duresme, and Northum∣berland, as a happy fruit of reformation by this Parlia∣ment) some Westmorland & Cumberland of those desolate Counties have not so much as tasted of your charity in this kind, to reap the fruit of your religious Ordinance, wherein you have worthily pro∣vided for the maintenance of some godly Ministers there.
The scarcenesse of Ministers, the remotenesse of those parts, the smalnesse of Church-livings there, and the gene∣rall backwardnesse in Ministers to goe into those cold Countries, are some of the chiefe obstructions. For the first, I doubt not but your wisdoms will find out a better Anti∣dote against the scarcity of Ministers, then liberty of pro∣phesying (which some plead for upon this ground): if the Ark be shaken, Uzzah may not (under that pretence) put forth his hand to hold it. Rather your Parliamentary care, to reduce and reform our Universities, to view all publick Schools, whereby children of pregnant capacities, may bee brought up in a way of learning, to incourage the study of divinity in Colleges, to see that Scholars dwel not too long in Fellowships when they are fitted for the service of the Church (according to the provisoes that are made already in the statutes of some Colleges in Oxford): your wise co∣sideration (I say) of these and like things, will beget great hopes of a plentifull harvest (even of labourers) in the next generation. And in the mean time (as to the want of Ministers in the North) a few bright-shining lights well disposed of in those dark places, set up (I mean) in the most eminent towns of Westmorland and Cum∣berland; by preaching there, and travelling about, would give great light every one of them severally a great way in the circumjacent Countrey.
For the second and third impediments, I need not tell
 you that their maintenance had need to be such as may en∣courage Ministers, against remotenesse and coldnesse of the countrey, which may be sufficiently provided for, if it may please this honorable House, that the Impropriations which are sequestred, and the small Church-livings in those Counties, be collected and treasured up in faithfull hands, as one publick stock for the maintenance of such as faith∣fully labour in the harvest there. Touching the backward∣nesse of Ministers to goe into those Countries, since it is God that inclines the hearts of men, it hath been, and is my prayer, that God would stir up the hearts of his servants to undertake so glorious a work, as the planting of the Gos∣pel in those barren parts, wherein some faithfull Ministers have in former and later times laboured with abundance of blessed successe.
In the first reformation of Scotland, when godly Mi∣nisters were so few, that, many places of the Kingdome were like to be unsuppli d, the Ministers advised the great Councell of that Kingdom, to use their authority (with con∣sent of the Church) for the sending of Ministers of ability to bestow their gifts where was most need. I presume not hereby to president your godly wisdomes, but in all that I have said, my desire is to provoke your zealous and mature consultations, to find out some effectuall way, for the setting up of a godly Ministery in the North: wherein, as also in all other your weighty undertakings for the Church or Common-wealth, that the blessing of heaven may crowne your unwearied labours, with success, hath been, is, and shall be the prayer of
From my study in Broadstreet, Nov. 29. 1645.

