



Honoured Sir,
It isCamb. Eliz. reported of Queen Elizabeth (that Deborah of our Nation) that in a letter to the King of France she should use this expression, That if there were any unpar∣donable sin, it must be ingratitude. AndPlut. in vita Pyrr. Plutarch relateth concerning Pyrrhus King of Epi∣rus, that he took the death of Aeropus very impati∣ently, because he was thereby cut off from all opportu∣nities of requiting the courtesies which he had received from him. I think, Sir, there are few that have any relation to me, but know something of my obligations to you. And though I cannot strictly comply with the former, yet I blesse God I have not the same cause to complain with the latter. Notwithstanding, the only requitall I am able to make you, is by these lines to give you a Bill under my hand that I am your debtor. I shall ever hold my self engaged toIngratus est qui beneficium accepisse se ne∣gat, quod ac∣cepit; Ingratus qui dissimulat; Ingratus qui non reddit; Ingratissimus omnium qui oblitus est. Sen. de benef. lib. 3. cap. 1. remember the frequent and reall kindnesse which your liberal self and loving Consort, have freely bestowed on me and mine: For which I may say to you asIdem de ben. lib. 2. cap. 25. Furnius to Augustus, Hanc unam Cesar habeo injuriam tuam, effecisti ut viverem & morerer ingratus, This is the only injury you have done me by your courtesies, to force me to live and die ungrateful.
Your voluntary closing with them in the Parish that seek to advance the power of godliness, your honouring them that fear the Lord, your disesteeming vicious per∣sons,
 your charitable contributions to the poor upon all occasions, are certainly recorded in Heaven; and there∣fore; for the honour of God and encouragement of others deserve respectfully to be mentioned on Earth. In testimony of my gratitude I now present to your eyes, what was lately preached in your ears, with the addi∣tion of some things then omitted, either through the defect of my memory or want of time. Acknowledging both the weight of the matter delivered, and my weak∣ness in the manner of its delivery. It is very visible that this Child is like its Parent, I mean my Book (if these sheets may be called by that name) too too much resembleth my body in infirmities. And indeed the consciousness of my own inabilities hath been the chief reason why I have not yet satisfied the desires of some persons of quality in Publishing two former Sermons composed on the like occasion. Onely my respect to you hath caused this Sermon,Gen. 27.36. like Jacob to supplant its elder brother by getting away the birthright, and likeGen. 38.29. Pharez to make a breach upon hisi. e. A Ser∣mon preached at a former Assize on the former part of the Text, not yet printed. brother Zarah, and get into the world before him. But the Almighty God (who is a free Agent) often worketh great things by small means. He can by the blowing of Rams horns cause the strong walls ofJosh. 6.16. Jericho to fall down; with commonJohn 9.6. clay he can make a precious salve to open the eyes of the blind: It pleaseth his wisdome by the1 Cor. 1.21. foolishnesse of preaching to save them that believe.Dr. Reynolds epistle before Meditat. on Lords Supper. Herein the soveraignty of the Gospell is most excellently set forth, in that it leadeth the soul by the hand of a child, Isa. 11.6. and is as truly though not as abundantly powerful from young Timothy as from Paul the aged, 1 Tim. 4.12.
The favourable and extraordinary acceptance which this Sermon obtained when it was heard, moveth me
 to hope that through the blessing of Heaven, it will be profitable when it shall be read.
Sir, In it you may discern thatPsal. 119.96. there will be an end of, and that there is an emptinesse in all earthly perfections. That death is the great leveller making all equall, seizing as boldly on, and dealing as hardly with the greatest Emperour as the poorest beggar.
Divesne, prisco natus ab Inacho,
Nil interest, an pauper, & infima
De gente, sub dio moreris,
Victima nil miserantis orci.
Omnes eodem cogimur, omnium
Versatur urna: serius, ocyus
Sors exitura, nos in aeternum
Exilium impositura cymbae.
Hor. lib. 2. Ad Del.
That the rich mans wealthProv. 10.15. which is his strong City, and an high tower in his conceit, cannot secure him against the assault and battery of this grand adversary.Their bones and skellitons have no In∣scriptions or Titles of ho∣nour remai∣ning on them, Vines Ess. Fun. That the grave mketh no difference between the dust of Princes and Peasants. That they which cannot be contented with much Earth while they live, will be contained in a little when they die. As theK. Philip. Macedo∣nian King having got a fall in the sand, as he was wrestling at the Olympick games, when he rose again seeing the print of his body in the sand, cryed out, O how little a parcel of Earth will hold us when we are dead, who ambitiously seek after the whole world whilest we are living!Dan. 2.32. That Image in Daniel doth notably set out the frailty of worldly greatness; The head of it was of fine gold, (that spake the Chaldean Empire) the breast and arms of silver, (this that Empire of the Medes and Persians) the belly and thighs of brass (by these the Grecian Empire is understood) but the feet
 were part of clay. The feet of this Image were the strength and foundation of the image, and speak thus much to us, that all worldly pompe and majesty will fail, all earthly power and dignity will fall; for the Image stands upon clay.Q. Cur. Nudus pascit aves, jacet en qui possidet orbem, Exi∣guae telluris inops. Claudian of Pomp. Mag. Cyrus therefore did fitly cause this Epitaph to be engraven on his tomb, O man whosoever thou art that shalt come hither, know that I am great Cyrus, that first erected the Persian Monarchy; there∣fore envy me not this little Earth that now covereth my body.
From it you may learn, That your greatest care should be to fit your self for your last hour; your main work is to doe your last act well. The Roman Gladiators appointed to death, were very solicitous how they should contrive their bodies so, as that they might fall hand∣somely and die modestly. Your business is so to furnish your soul, that you may die piously,Hujusmodi comparandae sunt opes quae simul cum naufragio ena∣tent. to get such riches as will swim out with you in a shipwrack, to beLuke 22.21. rich towards God,Jam. 2.5. to be rich in faith, to be rich1 Tim. 6.18, 19. in good works (Alas how poor is that  who hath no other riches then what are at the courtesie of the thief, mo, and death!) hereby you will lay up a good foundation against the time to come and lay hold on eternal life.
It will shew you, how absolutely necessary an experi∣mental knowledge of a crucified Christ is to a dying Christian; that no weapon is more requisite (for us to have and use) when we enter the lists and encounter with our last enemy, then the shield of faith: O how cheering and comforting to a dying body will the warm blood of the Lord Jesus be, being applied by a true lively faith to the soul! He and he only may look on the King of terrours without fear, that hath first looked on the King of Saints with the eye of faith.

It will acquaint you that a saving work of grace must be wrought, upon the heart, before death can be a passage to the weight of glory.A Painter may paint fire, but he cannot paint heat. A person civilli∣zed may attain to the out∣ward actions, but cannot to the inward af∣fections of a sanctified Christian. That all the godliness of an unregenerate man will die with him. That the lamp of profession which shineth gloriously whilst a man liveth, if it be not fed from oyl in the vessel, true grace in the heart, a renewed nature, the image of God stamped on the soul, it will go out in a stink when he dieth, and not advantage him at all. And therefore Christians should not like some Tradesmen live altogether upon their credit with others, but labour to find some testimony within them, that there is a real change wrought upon them.
It will tell you, that it highly concerneth you to be labo∣rious for your soul, for your Saviour now you live, because you must rest when you die. That you should be much in thinking highly of God, in speaking humbly to God, in acting vigorously for God.1 Cor. 15. ult. That you should abound more and more in the work of the Lord. Saints must notJosh. 10.12, 13. Falsi illi sunt, qui diversissi∣mas res expe∣ctant, ignaviae voluptatem, & praemia virtu∣tis. Salust. Non incepisse sed perfecisse virtutis est. Aug. ad fratr. in erem. like Joshua's Moon stand still, much less like Crabs goe back∣ward; no, not like the Snail, creep forward; but like the Sun, rejoyce to run his race. The path of the just must be like the shining light, that shineth brighter and brighter to perfect day, Prov. 4.18.
Truth of grace is ever followed with growth in grace. though perfection be the honour and reward onely of the Saints in Heaven, yet it is the desire and endeavour of the Saints on earth. That you should persevere and encrease both by your pattern and precept, in discouraging the bad, and encouraging the good. That you should improve all op∣portunities, employ every talent, your honour, riches, power, life, health, strength, relations, interests, all you have, are or can be, to the utmost in his service, and for his for glory, who (I hope) hath loved you, and washed you in his blood.Gen. 47.6. Pha∣raoh would have active men to be his servants; the great
 King of heaven is a pure act and he loveth most and liketh best those servants that are most active for him. Hereby you will please the most high God, though hereby you will displease prophane men. The world indeed whom the Spi∣rit of God compareth to2 Pet. 2. ult. His speech sa∣voured more of wit, then grace, who counselled his friend not to come too nigh unto truth, lest his teeth should be bea∣ten out with its heeles. dogs, if a man go softly will be quiet; but if he ride a pace in the way to heaven, they will bark exceedingly, yea and bite if they can: do but hinder their progress in sin, and like waters stopt at a bridge they will roar and make a noise to purpose: But surely the fa∣vour of God will bear up the heart against all the anger of men. Those persons which the wicked besmear with ca∣lumny, and those actions which ungodly men speak of with scorn and contempt, God will entertain with an Euge and reward with glory:Matth. 25.21. Well done good and Faithfull servant, thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many Cities, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.
Sir, My hearts desire and prayer to God for Rickmer∣sworth is, that it might be saved. And I hope the Divine providence wil ere long put a greater price into your hands then ever yet you had, wherein you may manifest your fear of his Majesty, your zeal for his glory, your hatred of ini∣quity and your real love to the place of your Nativity: which that you may faithfully discharge at this day, and comfortably account for at the last day, and that you and yours,2 Cor. 5.1. when these earthly houses of your tabernacles shall be dissolved, may have a building of God, an house not made with hands, but eternall in the Heavens, shall be the prayer of him whose desire is to be
Rickmersworth June 1. 1657.

