



IT is the custom of our Country (and if I mistake not, a Statute Law of the Nation) that children should be kept and maintained by those places in which they were born. This book, (which treateth of the Babe of grace) was conceived in your Parish, brought forth in your Pulpit, and now presenteth it self to you, (not for your protection and patronage but) for your perusall and practice.
I confess that I am bound to many of you in courtesie, to all in duty, and I know not better how to express my thankfulness to some, and my faithfulness to all, then by deal∣ing uprightly with you in the concernments of your souls.
Rom. 1.9 God is my witness whom I (de∣sire to) serve with my spirit in the Gospel of his Son, that without ceasing, I make mention of you always in my prayers: And can through the strength of Christ, much more rejoyce in one of your conversions, then in all your possessi∣ons.
Ye know what a large Epistle I have al∣ready written to you (I beseech you to read it often,
To the Reader, in Hell and Heaven epitomi∣zed: and) O that the Lord would write it within you. We live in days that are full of division; but all that have any face of reli∣gion, or form of godliness, will acknowledge the things which I have written to you, to be the commandments of God. My cheif work is, and hath been to preach unto you Repen∣tance towards God, and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, which are of such infinite weight in order to your unchangeable welfares. And could I prevaile with you heartily to embrace those essentials of Gods word, I should have confidence of your joyful appearance in the other world. Tis a sign of a very foul sto∣mach, to loath such solid food as those vitals of Christianity are, and to pick at Kickshaws or Sallads, (I mean either) the new-fangled opinions of some upstart way, or the vaine flourishes of humane wit. O how gladly would I stand forth to your comfort at the judgment feat of Christ! which that I may, I earnestly request you again and again (in obedience to your blessed Saviour, and for the sake of your precious souls) to ponder and practice these three particulars. Consider, that they are not onely commended to you by your weak and dying Minister, but commanded you by your Maker, who will within a short time reckon with you for the performance of them.
First, Make conscience of, & be diligent about the means of grace; neglect not secret, private
or publick ordinances. Your bodies may as probably live without diet, as your souls without duties. This is Gods way by which he infuseth grace where it is wanting, and in∣creaseth grace where it is. As the head by the nerves and sinews as organs, conveyeth ani∣mal spirits to the whole body; So doth the Churches head Christ Jesus by ordinances convey his Spirit and grace to his members. Doth not experience teach you, that your hearts are like water, though heated a little while over the fire of the means of grace, yet are no sooner taken off, but they are returning to their former coldness? Mariners that swim against wind and tide, must row hard and con∣tinue at it, if they intermit but a little while, how far and how forcibly are they carried backwards! It is not unknown to you (if ye have any knowledge in spiritual affaires) how busily and unweariedly the Devil, world and flesh are drawing you to hell; it highly con∣cerneth you to be always, by duties, fetching in supplies from above, if ever ye would ar∣rive at heaven. I do not wonder that many in our perillous times, (who live above duties) are given up to sensuality or blasphemies. The Papists say that if they can get the Pro∣testants out of their strong holds of Scripture, into the open fields of Councils and Fathers, they should quickly be able to foil them. If Satan can prevaile with men but to throw a∣way the Word of God (which is the sword of the Spirit,) and the prayer of faith (which
engageth Christ himself in the combat) he will never doubt the conquest. While men wall in the Kings high way, between Sun and Sun, they have the protection of the Law; if other∣wise, it is at their own peril; If you keep the way of God, he will be your guard; but if you wander and leave him, no wonder if he leave you. And certainly wo will be to you, when God departeth from you. A dreadful night of darkness must needs be expected, when this Sun is departed.
The ministry of the word is called the salt of the earth.
Mat. 5. Saints are called Doves; Who are those that fly as doves to their windows! Now the property of Doves, is to be exceedingly in love with a salt-stone. Kites and Rooks care little for it, but Doves are mightily inci∣ted to it: Graceless persons neglect and de∣spise the means of grace, but they that ever enjoyed God in them, cannot but set a due price upon them. The beggar, the poor in spirit will know that door again, at which he hath received a good dole; I will never forget thy precepts, for by them thou hast quickned me.
Secondly, Mind the religious education of your children. Bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. It was the wish of Crates, that he were upon the top of the high∣est hill in the world, that from thence he might cry out against monstrous parents, that toile to leave their children great estates, but take no care what maner of persons they should be which should enjoy those estates.
I doubt not but ye are careful to breed your Sons Gentlemen, or to bring them up to trades, that they may know how to live a few days in this world; but alas how few of you are solicitous, to breed them new crea∣tures, and to bring them up to Christianity, that they may know how to live for ever, in the other world! I remember that Augustine speaks mournfully, Some praise my father for be∣ing at such cost (even beyond his estate) in my nurture, but alas his care was to make me an ora∣tour, not to make me a Christian. I am confident, many a child bemoans that, now he is dam∣ned in hell, which the Father did when he was converted on earth. I cannot condemn the education of children according to the qua∣lity of their parents, nor their bringing up to particular callings (this latter I am sure is a duty) but that which is first should be last, and that which is last should be first. Your greatest care, and that in the first place, should be to seek the Kingdom of God, for your selves and children, and then other things shall be added to you; Caleb gave his daugh∣ter the upper and the neather springs. O la∣bour that yours may with Jacob have the dews of heaven as well as the fatness of the earth.
Elisha wept when he saw Hazael,
2 Kings 3.12, 13. and foresaw that he would slay young men, and dash the children against the wall: do nor some of you give far far greater occasion of weeping (if possible, teares of blood) in slay∣ing
and murdering the souls of your dear children, teaching them by your patterns, to live like Heathens and Atheists! Believe it, God committeth the charge of, and will ac∣count with you for all the souls in your fa∣milies.
Gen. 4.3, 10, 11. When Cain had flain his brother Abel, God called to him, Where is thy Brother Abel? And Cain said, I know not, am I my Brothers keeper, And the Lord said, What hast thou done? the voice of thy brothers blood cryeth unto me from the ground. And now thou art cursed from the earth, which hath opened her mouth to receive thy brother, blood at thine hand. So suppose God should whisper one of you in the eare, Cru∣el Father, Careless Master, Where is thy child or servant, that dyed so many months or years ago? You may possibly think what Cain spake, Lord I know not (whether in heaven or hell.)
Holy Greenham saith, that many mens children shall fol∣low them up and down in hell, cur∣sing them and cry∣ing out of them, for neglecting to instruct them. Was I their keeper? (O think of it with speed and reform.) May not God reply very truly, Cursed sinner, vile wretch, What hast thou done? The voice of thy child, of thy ser∣vants soul-blood cryeth to me from hell. And now thou art cursed from hell, which hath opened her mouth to receive thy sons, thy servants soul at thine hand. Friends, Friends, what will you do, when God shall thus deal with you, for your neglect of relative duties! Possibly ye may think I deal too sharply; but truly the reason is because I know that sin will not deal mildly, either with you or yours; And should I not give you warning, the blood of your own and childrens souls, would be re∣quired
at my hands. Good Lord that ye did but believe what it is to be guilty of others blood! Heathens and Infidels provide for the body and temporall well-being of their chil∣dren; and what do many of you more? Bears that bring forth mishapen whelps, will by licking them, bring them to a better form. Your Children are brought forth enemies to God, and are by nature children of wrath, and heirs of eternal death; doth it not be∣hove you to strive that by religious nurture, they may become children of the promise, and heirs of eternal life.
Thirdly, Make sure of Regeneration; be never satisfyed, till ye can upon Scripture grounds affirme that your natures are rege∣nerated. This, this is the one thing necessary, Your All hangs upon this hinge. If this be not done, ye are undone, undone eternally. All your profession, civility, priviledges, guifts, duties are cyphers, and signify nothing unless Regeneration be the figure put before them. It is Regeneration that will make you the sons of God, the members of Christ, the temples of the Spirit, that will give you an holy improvement, of all providences, a right to all the promises, and at last the purchased possession. It is Regeneration that will teach you to live like men, like Chri∣stians, like Angels in the love and fruition of the infinitely blessed God. O the price of this pearl is not known in this beggerly world!

 A grave and wise Counsellour of France (being desirous in his old age, to retire him∣self) was intreated by the King, to write down some directions, and leave with him for the more prosperous government of his Realm. The Counsellour took some paper, and wrote on the top, Moderation; in the middle, Moderation; at the bottom, Moderation; Demosthenes being asked what was the chief thing in an Oratour, answered Elocution; and being demanded the same question three times, what made an Oratour, he still gave the same answer.
Aug. pist. 56. ad Di osc. Augustine being demanded, what was the greatest requisite of a Christi∣an: What was the first, second, and third? still answered, Humility, Humility, Humility. Truly, what the Counsellour said of Moderati∣on, the Grecian of Elocution, and the Father of Humility, I shall say of Regeneration; If you ask me, what is the chiefest thing in the world, for a man to mind? What is that which is worthy of all his time, and strength, and thoughts, and words, and actions? I an∣swer, Regeneration; If you demand What is that which is of greatest necessity, and excel∣lency, that bringeth in the greatest profit, de∣light and happiness? I answer, Regeneration. He that hath this hath all that is worth ha∣ving, the having of this is heaven: He that wanteth this, hath nothing: the whole world cannot make up the want of this, the want of this is hell. O Sirs, your everlasting making or marring, dependeth upon your sincerity, or
hypocrisie in this. Of what infinite conse∣quence is it therefore to you (in whatsoever ye come short) to make sure here. Alas when ye come to throw your last cast for eternity, how will the stoutest of you do, to look death in the face, without Regeneration in your hearts? God hath in an hundred texts of Scripture, devoted all unregenerate ones to the unquenchable fire, and can any of you think to make him a lyer? Believe it, as soon as death landeth you at the other world, you will have other thoughts of God and his Truths, then now ye have.
For your help in this work, which is of such absolute indispensable necessity unto your never dying souls, I commend to you this Treatise, beseeching the blessed God: to make it serviceable unto your salvations. Ig∣natius when he heard a clock strike, would say, I have one hour more to answer for; I must tell you that ye have eighteen hours, eighteen Sermons more to answer for. When they were preached, they had from some of you a favourable attention; now they are print∣ed (it is not unknown what providence brought them to the press) I wish they may have within you all an effectual operation, that both the Author and his labors may ap∣pear to your joy at that great and terrible day.
These things being signified,
Act. 20.32. I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to (bring you home who are out of Christ
and to) build you up, (who are in Christ) and to give you an inheritance among them which are sanctified: And subscribe myself,

Ianuary, 10. 1659.
