



THough Philosophers difference Man specially from Brutes,
Lactant. de ira Dei. by his chief Natural quality, Reason; yet some Divines like rather to do it by his Su∣pernatural excellency, Religi∣on: Probably upon this twofold ground, part∣ly because Religion is the highest and truest rea∣son, & therefore causeth the greatest Essential distiction. What can be more rational, then for the Supreme Truth to be believed, the chief∣est
Good to be embraced, the first cause to be acknowledged; and those who were made by God, and live wholly upon him, to improve all for him, and to live wholly to him? The giving up our Souls and Bodies unto God, is called our reasonable Sacrifice, Rom. 12.2. Those that are irreligious, are termed unrea∣sonable, 2 Thess. 3.2. Indeed Atheists are but Beasts shaped in the proportion, and drest in in the habits of men. It is impossible for man to manifest more want of Reason, then in wandring from God, the Fountain of his being, and the well-spring of all his blessedness: Who ever, unless bereft of his wits, and di∣stracted, would murther his Body, much less his precious Soul for ever? As soon as ever the Prodigal came to himself, he came to his Fa∣ther: 'Twas a clear sign he had lost his reason, when he left bread in his Fathers house, for busks amongst Swine. Means hearts natural∣ly are (like Nebuchadnezzars) the hearts of Beasts, grazing onely in fleshly Pastures, and savouring onely Sensual Pleasures, till their reason returneth to them, then they bless and honor the most high God, who liveth for ever, Dan. 4.31. then they minde Spiritual Dainties, and rellish Celestial Delights. The irreligious are
Fellow-Commoners with Beasts, the Reli∣gious with Angels.
Partly, because Religion is the end and ex∣cellency of the Rational Creature, of which Brutes are wholly incapable: Brutes were made to serve God, Men onely to worship him. The Iewish Talmud propoundeth the questi∣on, Why God made man just on the Evening be∣fore the Sabbath? and giveth this answer, That he might immediately enter upon the Sanctification of the Sabbath, in the worship of the blessed God, the end for which he was made. Purity or Re∣ligion, was our primitive, and therefore must neds be our principal perfection: All who have any knowledge of the great God, will easily grant, that man was a curious piece, rare workmanship indeed, when he came immedi∣ately out of his Makers hands: It is is im∣possible, but that the childe must be amiable and beautiful in a high degree, which was be∣gotten by, and is the Picture of such a Father.
A Religious life (which consisteth in ex∣alting God in our affections, as our chiefest good; and in our actions, as our utmost end) is the life of God himself: How high, how no∣ble, how excellent a life doth the blessed God live! Ephes. 4.18. Others live like Beasts,
like Devils; true Christians onely like An∣gels, like God, above these carnal comforts, and drossie delights; The way of life is above to the wise, Prov. 15 24. Atheists, like Hedge-Sparrows, settling here below, are easily taken in Satans snares, and destroyed; when Saints, like Eagles, soaring aloft, are free both from his shot and limetwigs, They are not terrified with the worlds affrightments, having Armor of proof. Those that are at the top of some high Tower, regard not the croaking of Frogs, nor hissing of Serpents below; like the Moon at the full, being fixed in Heaven, they can keep their course, though Dogs bark at them here on earth;
It is called  by the Gre∣cians. They are not entangled in the Worlds allurements. The World indeed like a Serpent (some write of) when she can∣not overtake the fleeing passengers, doth with her beautiful colours so amaze many, that they have no power to pass away, till she hath stung them; but they see her emptiness and vanity under all her painting and dawbery: Besides, their eyes behold the glorious God in some measure, in his brightness and beauty, and are so dazzled therewith, that as those that look on the great Luminary of the world, in its Meridian splendor, they can see no glory
in any thing besides. These poor Candles are slighted into disappearance, because the Sun himself hath arisen upon them. How quick∣ly, how quietly did Abraham leave his Kindred and Countrey, when once the God of Glory appeared to him, Acts 7.2. Ah what pitiful fare is the Worlds most luscious food, to them that ever feasted with the Holy Iesus!
The old Grecians,
Eustath. in Homer. who had altogether fed on acorns before, when bread came in among them, made no reckoning of their mast, but reserved it onely for their Swine.
Senec. de Benef. The Lace∣demonians despised their iron and leathern mo∣ney, when gold and silver was brought into their Cities: When a Soul once cometh to know the onely true God, and Iesus Christ whom he hath sent; what toys and trifles, what ba∣bies & butterflies are the honors, and riches, and pleasures of this beggarly World to him? nay, how doth he befool and bebeast himself,
Psal. 73.31. for doting so much upon specious dreams, and gilded nothings! Now he is elevated to the top of the Celestial Orbes, even to Hea∣ven, and therefore the whole earth is but a small spot of ground, a little point in his eyes.
The driving of this high and heavenly
trade, is the sum and substance of this Trea∣tise; which I present to you both, as a testimony of my gratitude,
Diodo. Sic. lib. 2. for the great engagements you have laid upon me. The Storks amongst Fowls, is said to leave one of her young in the place where she hatcheth them. The Egypti∣ans amongst men are famous in history for a thankful people, and are recorded to have made Eunuches of ingrateful persons, that the world might not be plagued with their posterity.
Quidam furti∣ve gratias agunt, & in angulo, & in aurem; non est ista verecundia sed inficiandi genus. Senec. de benef. lib. 2. cap. 23. The Master of Moral Philosophy, upbraideth them sharply that steal favours by private acknowledgements: the truth is, a publique confession of your kindeness, as it is the least (since providence hath given me the opportunity) so it is (next my prayers) the greatest requital I am able to make you. If my pains have yielded any fruit in these parts, those that received it, owe the ackow∣ledgement (under God) to you.
Though neither of you love to hear your own praise, nor did I ever love flattery, know∣ing by too much experience, that pride will burn and continue (like the Elementary fire) of it self without any fuel; yet I esteem it my duty to publish some things to the world or example to others. The place to which I
am presented, hath not half a maintenance, nor so much as a house belonging to the Mi∣nister; but the Lord hath given you such compassion to Souls, that you have given me both a convenient dwelling, and a consi∣derable maintenance (besides the Tythes, above seventy pound per annum, out of your own inheritance) that I enjoy, through the good hand of my God upon me, a compe∣tent encouragement, and comfortable em∣ployment. When others refuse to draw out their purses to hungry bodies, the gracious God hath enabled you both to draw out your purse and hearts unto starving souls: Soul-charity is the highest and noblest charity, and such fruit as will much abound to your account at the day of Christ, Phil. 4.17. Hereby, like wise Merchants, you return your riches into the other world by bills of Exchange. How much are you both in debted to free Grace! Vsually the richest mines are covered with the most barren earth; and men who receive much from God very quietly (like narrow mouth'd glasses) will part with nothing with∣out much stir and reluctancy. God hath be∣stowed on you large hearts, as well as large inheritance. Many a Vessel hath been sunk
with the weight of its burthen: Some Ma∣riners out of love to their lading, have lost their lives; but God hath made you Masters of (not as many other servants to) a fair Estate.
It is also your honor, that the Ark, the wor∣ship of the blessed God, findeth entertain∣ment in your house: Your whole Familie, though large, have set-meals daily for their inward man, as well as for their outward; your children and servants are commanded by you to keep the way of the Lord, Gen. 18.19. and as if your house were built of Irish Oak, which will suffer no Spider near it, no iniquity is allow∣ed to dwell in your tabernacle. I have with mch delight observed your care and consci∣ence to have all your Family present at morning and evening duties. O 'tis a blessed and beautiful sight to behold a little Church in a great house! Many great persons think the company of the glorious God too mean for them in their houses; Religion waiteth at their doors like a Beggar, and cannot obtain the favour to be called in, when the Vermine (as in the Egyptian Palaces) of pride and drunkenness, and swearing, reside amongst them, and crawl in every room of their
dwellings. The service of the living God, which is the greatest freedom, they count their bondage and fetters; The Society of the Lord Iesus is to them, as to the Devils, a torment, Mat. 8. Alas, alas, Whether is man fallen, that the company of his Maker should be esteemed his dishonor! that the Worship of God, which is the preferment of Glorious Angels, should be judged a disparagement! Ah, how will their judgements be altered, when they come to dye, to throw their last casts for Eternity!
Steph. Gardiner. Fox. Acts and Monu. then (as that Popish Pre∣late said of justification by Faith, That it was good Supper Doctrine, though not so good to break fast on) they will confess, that it is good to dye in the Lord; they will cry out, O let me dye the death of the Righteous, and let our latter end be like theirs! how lightly soever now they think of living their lives. The Persian Messenger, though an Heathen, could not but observe the worth of Piety in such an hour of extremity:
schiles in Traged. When the Grecian forces hotly pur∣sued us (saith he) and we must needs venture over the great water Strymon frozen then, but begin∣ning to thaw, when a hundred to one we had all dyed for it, with mine eyes I saw many of those Gallants, whom I and heard before so boldly main∣tain,
There was no God, every one upon their knees, with eyes and hands lifted up, begging hard for help and mercy, and entreating that the ice might hold till they got over: Those Gallants who now proscribe godliness their hearts and houses (as if it were onely an humour taken up by some precise persons, who will needs be wiser then their neighbours, and Galba like, scorn at them who fear, or think of death) when they themselves come to enter the list with the King of Terrors, and perceive in earn∣est, that this surly Sergeant Death will not be denied, but away they must into the other world, and be saved, or tormented in flames for ever, as they have walked after the Spirit, or after the flesh here; without question they will change their note, sing another tune, and say,
Beatus es Abba Arsen, qui semper hanc horam ante ocu∣les habuisti, Bibl. Patr. as dying Theophilus did of devout Arsenius, Thou art blessed, O Arsenius, who hadst always this hour before thine eyes.
Blessed be God, ye walk not in the vicious ways of such voluptuous wretches; but to the joy of all that know and love you, sit like wise Pilots, in the hindermost part of the ship, dwell in the meditation of your deaths, and thence endeavour to steer the vessel of your conversations aright. Give me leave (Ho∣nored
Friends) out of the unfeigned respect which I bear to you both (which if I know my own heart, is not so much for the fa∣vours received from you, though I shall ever acknowledge them; but for what of God and godliness I have seen in you) to beseech you, that as ye have received, how ye ought to walk, and to please God, so ye would abound more and more, 1 Thess. 4.1. God hath done great things for you, and God expecteth great things from you: To whom much is given, of them much is required. Where the Husbandman bestow∣eth the greatest cost, there he looketh for the greatest crop: The rents which your Tenants pay, are somewhat answerable to the Farms which they enjoy. Ye have more obligati∣ons to serve God then others, and more op∣portunities for his service; and therefore having fairer gales, should sail more swiftly then others, towards the Haven of Happiness; your trading must be suitable to the talents with which ye are entrusted: Perfection will be your reward; and proficency is your work. Heavenly mindedness and Humility, which are the greatest glory of our English Gentry, are excellent helps to growth in grace. Chil∣dren that feed on ashes, cannot thrive. Silly
Pismires, that continually busie themselves about their hoards and heaps of earth, never grow bigger. Indeed great persons are liable to great temptations: Flies will strive to fasten upon the sweetest Conserves. The longest robes are aptest to contract most dirt. Satan (as some write of the Irish to take their enemies) digeth trenches in the earth (as it were) and covereth the surface of it with the green turfs of car∣nal comforts and contentments: which men treading upon, and taking to be firm ground, fall in to their ruine. But your sight of the glory to be revealed by the Prospective glass of faith, will help you to wink more on these withering vanities. Ah what a muckheap to that, is all the wealth of this lower world! Na∣turalists tell us, that the Loadstone will no draw in the presence of the Diamond. Sure am, the world, notwithstanding all its pomp and pride, glory and gallantry, hath but little influence upon Christians when they behold their undefiled inheritance. Humility is also helpful to proficiency in holiness: The lofty mountains are barren, when the low valleys a∣bound in corn; As the Spleen swelleth, the whole body consumeth: as pride groweth, the new man decayeth. This high wind raiseth
strange tempests in the soul: He giveth grace to the humble, 1 Pet. 5.6. God layeth these richest mines in ge lowest parts of the earth. Trees even in time of drought, whose roots are deep in the ground, bear fruit when corn and grass wither: Christians, like the Sun in the Zenith, must shew least, when at the highest; and as branches fully laden, bend the more downward. Why should the mud wall swell because the Sun shineth on it? We may say of every mercy and excellency we enjoy, as the Prophet of his hatchet, Alas Ma∣ster, for it is borrowed, 2 Kings 6.5.
If ye please also to peruse the ensuing Tractate, possibly it may be some small fur∣therance to you in your course of Christianity. The intent of it is to discover and direct how Religion, the great end for which we are born, and the great errand upon which we are sent into the World, may be made our principal business; and how our Natural and Civil Actions, and all or seeming diversions may be so managed, that they may (like an elegant Parenthesis) not at all spoil, but rather adorn the sense of Religion: I hope the worth of the matter handled, notwithstanding, my weak∣ness in the manner of handling it, will make
it acceptable to you. I could wish the face of the Discourse were clean, I may safely say it is far from being painted; and pardon me if I suffer the stream now to run in two Chan∣nels: Such as it is I humbly tender.
Sir, to your favour∣able eye, whose hap∣piness it is to inherit your Ancestors graces, as well as their riches. It was counted a great honor to the Family of the Curio's, that there were three excellent Orators in it one after another; and to the Family of the Fabii,
Plutarch. that there were in it three Presidents of the Senate successively: It is your glory to de∣scend not onely of a Fa∣ther who walked with God, and of a Grandfa∣ther, who (it is hoped) dyed in the faith;) but also of a great Grand∣father, who was famous for serving the will of God in his generation. The holy Apostle speak∣eth
to the glory of Ti∣mothy, concerning his un∣feigned faith which dwelt first in his Grandmother Lois, and his Mother Eunice, 2 Tim. 1.5. To the glory of free-grace I mention it, Holiness in your house did not run onely in the mascu∣line race; your tender Mother was like Dorcas, full of good works, and a dutiful Daughter to the Father of mercies; and your Honoured Grandmother yet alive, is an old Disciple of the holy Jesus: O how much are you bound to the Lord, that grace should thus run in a blood! Bo∣leslaus King of Poland, when he was to speak or do any thing of con∣cernment, would take out a little picture of his Fathers, that he car∣ried about him; and kis∣sing it would say, I wish I may speak or do nothing at this time, unworthy thy name.

Sir, it is your privi∣ledge to reap the bene∣fit of their Precious Prayers; and your pie∣ty, more and more to imitate their Gracious patterns. How exact∣ly should you walk, ha∣ving such lights (so near) to direct you? And how Accurately should you write in eve∣ry line of your life, ha∣ving such fair copies before your eyes: It is no small advantage likewise,

Daughter to the right Ho∣norable the Lord Pagit. Madam, to your fair hands, who are a branch of a Noble and Honor∣able stock; but your birth from above, is your present greatest credit, and will be your future chiefest comfort. Alex∣ander must derive his Pedigree from the gods, or else he thinketh him∣self ignobly born: To be born of God, to have heavenly blood running in your veins; to be the Spouse of the dearest Saviour, to have your name written in the Book of Life, will stand you instead, and (as ma∣ny figures) amount to millions, in an hour of death, and dreadful day of judgement, when ci∣vil and natural privi∣ledges
(though now fa∣vours) will stand for cy∣phers, and signifie no∣thing. The Jews in∣deed tell us, that women are of an inferiour crea∣tion, and therefore suffer them not to enter their Synagogues, but appoint them galleries without; but they speak more truly and wisely, who call women the second edition of the epitome of the world: Souls have no Sexes, in Christ there is neither male nor female. Persevere (honored La∣dy) in your pious course, to confute those paint∣ed carcasses, who spend all their time in priding and pleasing their brit∣tle flesh, and neglect their immortal spirits; to publish to the World, that greatness & good∣ness are not inconsistent. O 'tis a rare and lovely sight to behold Honor and Holiness matched and married, lodging
and livlng together: As a Diamond well set in a golden Ring, is most sparkling; and as light in Stars of the greatest magnitude, is most glo∣rious and shining; so Grace is often most ami∣able in persons that are most Honorable. The Exceeding Advantage your Ladyship hath (this way) of doing God much service, is an a∣wakening argument to endeavours after much sanctity: It is a farther encouragement,
that you are joyned to a loving Yoke-fel∣low, who will draw equally with you in the road to Canaan: That you may both walk in the day of your lives, like Zachariah and Eli∣zabeth (that Peerless Pair, as one calleth them) in all the Commandments of the Lord, blameless; that when the night of death shall overtake you, you may expire like the Arabian Phoe∣nix, in a bed of sweet Spices (the graces and comforts of the Spirit, leaving a sweet sa∣vour behinde you) that your children may be heirs to your Spiritual riches, and see the
eternal felicity of Gods chosen: And that your house may throughout all Generati∣ons be known by this name, Jehovah Sham∣mah, The Lord is there, is the desire, and shall be the prayer of,









