



Right Honourable,
I Know you expect not flattering Titles, for (besides the dint of Divine displeasure) this were but to despite you with seeming Ho∣nours. I desire not with airy ambages to tickle your eares, I am sure downe right truths make the deepest impression upon honest hearts; neither doe I sound the trumpet of applause; Heroicke actions, are glorious encomiums; Faithfulnesse to God, the King, and Country, are the onely diademe of true Nobility, I may lay my hand upon my mouth, your owne workes shall praise you in the gates. There be many (Right Honourable) in these times, who care not to adventure their necks to advance themselves, and matter not to hazard their soules, to ruine the Church; but as your Honours have publique spirits for the common good, so I am perswaded Gods glory is your highest aimes, and to approve your selves before
 him, in all your understandings the chiefe endeavour of your soules: Let them looke at worldly acclamati∣ons as pleasing cordialls; It is your Crowne, and will be the rejoycing of your hearts, that you keep a consci∣ence void of offence, both towards God, and towards his Saints; they are deceived who so highly estimate a little Laud, for hee onely whom God commendeth is approved; without, or against whom whosoever desires to be applauded shall not be defended when God judg∣eth him, nor delivered when God condemneth him. It is more then probable that nefarious wretches, and pro∣phane creatures, by reproachfull speeches, cast fire-brands in your Honours faces; But what though? Physi∣tians make the best Triacle of venomous Serpents, Ja∣sons impostume was opened, and so healed by his ene∣mies sword in the warrs. You are Wise Men, I hope you will make better use of your foes, then fooles of their friends: their aspersions may prove doctrinall, teaching you to keepe closer (in a holy dependency) unto your God. I confesse you might be free from these, durst you but abnegate or desert the Truth; their revilings shall be your blessings: they are nocent, you innocent; they are deceived, they take you for such as you are not; they have with the bellowes of Malignancy blowne up the coales of contention, they have enforced you (seeking by violence to depresse the power of godlinesse) to take up armes in the defence of Christ, and his indeered ser∣vants, surely it is a double injury to beate men causeles∣ly till they cry, and then to beate them for crying, by in∣jury, and oppression to kindle strife, and then to cry out against it, as Athaliah cryed out of treason: offences will come, but there is no woe denounced against the per∣sons
 offended, but against those by whom they come. Ride on Noble Lords, keepe your swords still girt a∣bout your thighs, let nothing discourage you, out-face the proud lookes of approaching adversaries, their owne sparkes shall further their owne burning, Gods wrath shall not end in your, but in their destruction. Your honours zeale for Religion, love to your Coun∣trey, courage in the publique cause, and mutuall agree∣ment in an holy Covenant, have hitherto spoke your sincerity, declar'd your piety, and made you exemplary to them that shall succeed you. O now afresh pluck up your spirits, quit your selves like Worthies in Israel, Christ like a man of warre leades out your forces, if our sins interrupt not our mercies, the bloud of your ene∣mies shall spring up to the horse bridles, and a glorious victory shall be yours. Pardon my boldnesse in speaking to your Honours, accept of my Mite though it be small; I hope when you try it, you shall not finde it reprobate silver, but currant coyne. You have entred into an Oath, it is for God, the Gospell, our Soveraigne, the Kingdome and your selves, I doubt not but you will set the Lord Jehovah in the prosecution of this sacred Covenant, continually before your eyes, and by your zeale provoke many, adding fuell to the fire, and oyle unto the flame of their endeavours. The Lord prosper you in your great affaires, cover your heads in the day of battell, and goe forth before you in all your enter∣prizes, against the Romish and Anti-christian Faction. So praies he, who remaines ever

October 16. 1643.
