



Grace and Peace, &c.
TIs not long since, I recei∣ved from your hand that Pamphlet, intituled, The Pulpit Guard Routed, inti∣mating mine intentions to write an Antidote against the poyson of it: And seeing you gave me such en∣couragement to the worke, as you well remember, I could not thinke upon a fitter Patron to commend the same unto then your selfe: which I the rather have done, that I might have an opportunity more publiquely to acknowledge how much I am bound to you, for those reall expressions of kindnesse and
love which I have ever had from you; especially since I have had some relation to you, which indeed have much transcended my deser∣vings. Tis the least I could doe to mention this, though I know tis more pleasing to you to bestow fa∣vour and respect, then to heare of the same againe to your praise.
But I must take leave to be grate∣full, which is the least you can, and, I beleeve, the most you doe, expect from any.
I need not excuse my selfe to you, for that I have trimd this Discourse no better, that it might be more worthy of your acceptance; seeing I know you judge not of things by their outside, but have respect more to their substance, then to their for∣malities. When Satan is so busie (as now) there is no time to stick at nicities.
The Lord continue to hold up your spirit in his own work. I know you have appeared for the service of your Country, in your place
(while others shifted their necks off the yoke) even to the wasting of your naturall strength: but God will make this up again to you some other way. These are times where∣in much work lies upon the hands of such as are faithfull. There is no∣thing lost by sticking close to the interest of Christ. Christians have a good Master, and (which is a choice incouragement) the work of God is such a worke, as will improve, and crowne it selfe.
I beleeve the insolency of some that pretend gifts to justle out the Ministry of Christ, yea and his truth too, doth somewhat damp your joy you take in the prosperous suc∣cesse of the affairs of this Common∣wealth: But, Dabit Deus huic quo{que}Jude 12. finem: These clouds without water will soon be blowne over: They are as bubbles that will break with a light touch. In quietus, turbulentus, unsetled, wavering. Legh. Sac. Crit. For yet a little while (sayes David, Psal. 37.10.) and the wicked [Heb: the turbulent, wavering, or unsteddy] shall not be, yea thou shalt
diligently consider his place, and it shall not be. In the interim let us fix our thoughts upon an immutable God. Let Patience have her perfect worke,Jam. 1.4. and we shall be perfect, entire, and wanting nothing. A taxie in a wise Cōmon-wealth can never be long∣liv'd. But what mean I keeping you from the Discourse ensuing? You will see there this tottering wall is falling; but two posts to keep it from the ground, Novel∣ty, and Confidence, the one rots, the other breakes suddenly of it selfe. Praevalebit veritas, Truth will out-live its enemies, though some enemies of truth may out-live us here in the flesh. Beeing eyed with a spirituall understanding we may see through all these thick Clouds, which that we may be able to doe, is the constant, and hearty pray∣er of

