



Worthy Sir,
THat which I have in my inward thoughts secretly wished for, the Divine Providence hath now (by an unexpected Act) presented to my hands; a seasonable opportunity, wherein I might make you some more than a private Testimony of my acknowledgements, for your personall regards to my selfe; and withall, as publick as might be, for your munificence to my ever honoured Mother, the Ʋniversity of Cambridge; where, for above twenty years last past (out of a pure glory to God, in the advancing the Orien∣tall Learning) you erected, and ever since continued, at your own pro∣per cost, an Arabick Lecture; the praise whereof were a task more meet (I confesse) for an elegant Orator chosen by her selfe, than for one of my so retired, and obnubilated a condition.
The much lamented decease of the learned Professor, Mr. Abrah: Wheelock, who read it, (and of whom a more full mention is made in the close) gave occasion to this sudden Sermon; which being through a vehement importunity, extorted from me, beyond all imagination of mine own, after preaching, and so put to the Press; there could be no more proper Patron for it thought upon, than your self, of whom I have many things to say, but that I am overwhelmed with copiousness of matter; there being no spirituall, or good gift wherein you are, as S. Paul said of his Converts, the Corinthians,1 Cor. 1.7 behind, yea wherein you do not excell: your very outward presence, as some rare beneficent star, appearing with a desired and pleasing influence, winneth you a venerable observance of all Orthodox Christians, and good men; who cannot depart from you but much improved, and made better by your most eximious, and transcendent example inLuk. 1.6. Act. 24.16 all piety towards God, & equity towards men: I need not mention your Ethicks or moral part, sith if the vigorous exercise of all the vertues were not interrupted only, but lost elsewhere, it might be all repaired from yourEph. 5.15. . accurate practise: in your religious part an IsraeliteJoh. 1.47 indeed, without faction, without ostentation: your soule is made the1 Cor. 3.16. Temple for the Holy
Spirit to dwell in by his graces, which are diffused in so delectable a variety; that, as those fragrant spices, upon which the South winde blew in the Garden of the spouse, theyCant. 4.16. flow out, and are become as a sweet perfume to attract Observers.
To men of learning a known Maecenas, yea, a Sanctuary; To Gods faithfull Ministers anRom. 12.13. hospitableRom. 16.23. Gaius, a bountifull, and a most encouraging Benefactor,1 Thes. 5.12, 13. 1 Tim. 5.17. esteeming them highly in love for their works sake: of all GodsPs. 122.1. publike Ordinances a due honouror, a most conscientiousAct. 26.7 frequenter: In private also the devotion of your house hath made it an house of1 Cor. 16.19. devotion, where, like the double mo∣tion of the lungs, what is drawn in by prayers, is breathed forth again inPsal. 118.15. prayses and thanksgiving: Your faith is operativeGal. 5.6. working by love, expressed1 Tim. 6.18. in rich2 Cor. 9.13. Prov. 11.25. liberality towards every good work, full of2 Cor. 9.7. cheerfullAct. 10.2. Almes-giving, theJob. 311.20. loynes of the poore and naked blesse you in the streets, and the bowels of many2 Tim. 1.16.18. refreshed by your hands, as S. Paul's were by Onesiphorus, occasion uncessant prayers for you: And that which yet adds a beauty to all the rest, and proves alwayes as the most rich, and fairest, of  a curious Knot. knot, decking the garment of other gra∣ces, is your great1 Pet. 5.5 humility, attended with all1 Pet. 3.8 courteous affability, and most2 Cor. 6.6 Col. 3.13. 2 Pet. 1.7. kindRo. 12.16. condescensions; as in whose lips is thePro. 31 26 law of kind∣ness, and in whose life aPhil. 1.15 shining exemplar of the2 Ti. 3.5. power of godliness, and all solid Christianity.
All which considered, my weak endeavours cannot but triumph in such a protection, which now they shrowd themselves under, not doubt∣ing to speed the better for the Name of the Patron: The discourse, I acknowledge, is impolite, yet Orthodox, I hope, and Thelogically substantiall, the subject matter is no less, than of a Crown of Righ∣teousness; so that however, as it comes from me, it casteth no great lustre outwardly, yet much what like to the stone Garamantides, in∣tus habet aureas guttas, it hath drops of gold within it selfe, enri∣ching the believing soule with the hopes, and assured expectation of a joyfull reward of its fidelity in Gods service by a blissful immortality.
Ʋnto the certain fruition whereof, that you, and with your selfe all yours, all your relations, yea, all GodsMat. 24. elect by Christ, nay, after you have yet continued longer toTit. 2.10: adorn the Gospel▪ be at last advanced, is, and ever shall be the most constant prayer of, Sir,

