


THEY say that its farre from their thoughts to oppose or disparage Orthodox Doctrine, a well com∣posed Liturgy, Rites for De∣cency and Order, Ordination of Ministers, Apostolical Episco∣pacy, or due rules of Discipline. All this I like well: and that they are for all these, I like much better; especially being accompanied with truth, without violation of liberty allowed by Christ. But this mistaken Liberty hath

served as an Engine to pull downe Doctrine, Liturgy Rites, Orders. Episcopacy, Discipline and all: Nothing being set up in the room thereof unlesse an Empusa, that must have but one leg to stand upon, to wt, mens owne i∣maginations and single apprehensions of things.
The thing mainly toucht in the said Epistle is Episco∣pacy, whereof they make representation not of the preten∣ded illegality onely, but of the ill effects too; as namely, how the Bishops in all ages since the Conquest have sharply persecuted all that threw off Popery, where Kings have not curbed the violence of them. An ar∣gument of that nature as strong for Episcopacy as could have been produced, if we consider what good those men would have done in the Church, had they lived under the Reformation, by reflexion▪ had upon St. Paul himselfe, who having been before his Conversion a grievous Persecu∣tor, became after it a zealous Promoter of the Gospel. And indeed 'tis to b confessed that the confusions that have ensued upon that Episcopall rigour have ren∣dred the objects thereof, (but to the great scandall of themselves and the Gospel) guilty of Rebellion against Kings, a thing often practiced, but never professed by any but the Disciples of Junius Brutus. And of this spirit were the furious Zealots in the time of Edw. 6. mentioned in the Epistle, which they pretend to have been fomented and not moderated, but countenanced by that pious King: who was so far from it, that he not onely caused one book of Common-Prayer to be composed and enjoyned instead of the severall formes secundum usum Sarum, &c. in practice before, whence men took occasion to use what formes they pleased; but also prohibited by Proclamation all preaching

whatsoever, till he and his Parliament had taken order for the settlement of Religion; and setting of bounds to all, but especially to the Anabaptistical Spirits, out of which Divine Circle they were not to pass in their praedications. And what I have spoken in defence of former Popish Bishops, the same may be said of those in Queen Maries dayes. Lastly, it's pretended that the noble King James was perswaded by the Bishops, by whom he was continually plyed, to leave the Liturgy unreformed, to compell all to sub∣scribe to the same, and to enforce the observation of Canons that were illegall: whereby some were sus∣pended, others under Canonical admonition, the next door to deprivation; and all this clean contrary to that influence which the Conference at Hampton-Court would have had upon him. But whosoever looks upon the Proclamation prefixed to the Book of Common Prayer, shall finde it de facto to be nothing so: and whosoe∣ver considers the deep Learning and profound judge∣ment of that Renowned Prince, will never believe it to be so; He being able to cope with any Prince or Prelate in the world in matters of that nature. And here one thing is not to be omitted before I put a period to my observations upon the Epistle; That they alleadge the Liturgy to have remained uureformed in greatest part, or most ma∣teriall points; notwithstanding much complained of, in the Conference at Hampton▪Court. Whence I observe that somethings, even at their owne instance, were added or amended in the Liturgy, and with those additions or emendations was it warranted by the Pro∣clamation of King JAMES. If so, why do they, of all men, except against it, as a thing not established by LAW? I intend not to contend with the punctilles

of LAW; wherein the more a man flutters, the worse he may be entangled: Onely thus much I say, that Conscience will not absolve any man who hath sub∣scribed to the observation of the same, and of the o∣ther things in Question, so long as they are either ne∣cessary or adiaphora, which we are in our ensuing work to defend.
