


AS it is no mean joy to your Countrey, to see the noble spirits of ancient prowesse, and vertue, eminent in your famous pro∣genitors, to sparkle with new vigour, in your breast; so, doth it exceedingly glad me, to view the eximious and heightned Piety of your present Parents, (the ex∣emplarie Worthies of this Age) so likely to become Heredi∣tary, and by a sacred  to be transmigrated to po∣steritie: The happy Contemplation of both which, hath anî∣mated me, (the issue of your Father's Beneficiary) to shrowd this poore peece of my Theologicall Essayes, under your pro∣tection: Not, that I, with Narcissus, can so dote upon this off-spring of my own brain, as to hold it worthy of your eyes; nor that my shallow thoughts durst swell up to so high ambi∣tion, as to think themselves competent to devise a meet pre∣sent for so high an acceptation; but for that your illustrious noblenesse, as a Jewels splendor, adding grace, and lustre to some worthlesse case, can set an estimate on the lowest gift: It comes unto you, not that you (chiefly in this surfeit of the Presse) need it, but, as that Hospitable Prelate, Alonso Cattilio, said unto his steward, (complaining to him of the
superfluous number of his Followers, whom yet he still meant to entertain) because it needs you; under the wings of whose countenance, and favour, it shall be sheltred, as Tiberius was by hisSueton. in Tiber. ca. 69. Laurell, from all the thunderbolts of envy, or malevolence; Nor am I hopelesse (Honored Worthy) that your amiable candor, and known suavitie will vail this bold∣nesse, in your humble servant; who, (as the Queen of Sheba, heretofore, did Solomon) cannot but, (besides my own pri∣vate notices) admire you, upon1 Kin. 10.1. Report; as being a known Patron of Piety, a Maecenas to Schollars, a Foe to Popery, a Champion of the Church, and a renowned Almoner to the needy: For all which, (though at so great a distance) I (how∣ever but as an Amos among theAmos 1.1. Herdmen of Tekoa) can assure you, as theMartial. l. 1. Epigr. 3. Poet did the great man of his Time; that the severall voices of ingenuous men accord in this one har∣mony; Lo, a true Patriot of his Countrey.
Vox diversa sonat, populorum est vox tamèn una,
Cùm verus patriae diceris esse pater. But the eximious eminency, in this kind, is so conspicuous to all; that I shall but darken so blazing a Topaze, by my rude polishing: All I shall adde more, is that ofPlin. in Pa∣regyr. Pliny to Trajan, Seria te carmina, honor{que} aeternus Annalium, non haec brevis, & pudenda praedicatio colet: I shall leave this piece, to be better blazoned by the Heralds of Time, and em∣bellished in the lasting Chronicles of after Ages.
What remains? but that I sollicite, earnestly, the throne of grace, for the accumulation of Heavens choicest favours, to be powred upon you; and with you, upon your vertuous Consort, and whole noble family; to which, that together with so ancient, and Honorable blood, the right Religion may become equally hereditary, even untill Time it self shall be no more, shall be the fervent prayers of him, who shall strive to approve himself,
March 2. 1641.

