


THe thought of coming into that Pulpit
was dreadfull to me, and I did un∣fainedly
decline it;1 Sam. 10. 22. as Saul, I would
willingly have hid my selfe among
the stuffe, any where rather then un∣dertake
the taske.Palluit ut  qui pressit calci∣bus anguem. Et Juvenal. Sat. 6. Lugdunensem
Rhetor dicturus ad aram, Did Ad∣vocates
change colour pleading at that Barre? And should
I have no feare being to speake in such a presence, where so
many of you were, and each one resembled the children of
a King,Judg. 8. 18. as the Kings of Midian said to Gideon, in re∣spect
of his brethren; yea upon whose votes and determina∣tions,
depends the welfare of three glorious Kingdomes? But
being summoned to the service, it was my duty to runne and
prepare my selfe, and I found presently my lot was cast upon
that very day, which the providence of heaven had designed

to fall on Christmas Day,Gentilet. Exam. p. 206. (as it is named yet) the Me∣tropolitane
of all the Festivities, so Gaspar Ferrandi
called it in the Councel of Trent; It was time for me
then by consideration, recollection, and other thoughts to
cast out feare;1 Joh. 4. 8. and for my animation, the allusion of him to
Caesar happily occurred, as they that dare confidently speake
in your judicious and formidable Assemblie, consider not
what Constellations you are, nor of what Magnitude;
so those, that despondingly be afraid, are ignorant of your
benigne Aspects, and gracious Influences. The election
of a Theme, and the manner of handling it was in my
power, and by Divine guidance I chose Moderation, not
because you wanted it, but for that some so supposed, and I
saw, even that Christian grace, well understood would ju∣stifie
your proceedings: Your eares entertained the Discourse
with spontaneous attention, with the vertue of the Text,
which Tertullus beg'd of Felix,Act. 24. 4. . you have now
required it to the other sense, to another censure, in publi∣cum
formidandumque judicium as Cassiane said upon
his like occasion;De Incarnat. praefat. and for my part,Pro captu Lectoris habent sua fata libelli. though the subject mat∣ter,
I know, will meet with fatall judgings, and my weake∣nesses
also be ever before me, yet I have obeyed your Com∣mands,
and with the exoptation of Orosius to Austin, Uti∣nam
tam efficaciter quam libenter:Praefat. Hist. for now, as Dedi∣cations
have beene made to you of Zeale, Righteousnesse,
Magnanimitie, Perseverance, &c. so the world shall see
you Patrons of Moderation also, notwithstanding the
unpolitique, Antichristian, and Tyrannicall endevours
of your Opposites, some of which laboured so much some
yeares since to embroyle the Nation against Scotland, in ir∣reconciliable
and intestine combustions, the perfect uniting
of whom to ENGLAND was the zealous industrie of the

wisest Patriots in former times, as our Chronicles re∣late,
and who now also, by supernaturall providence, in Co∣venant,
and many other obligations, are contrived into a
more firme accord then ever. Those other horrid Miscre∣ants
of Ireland have raked Hell and Rome for the inven∣tions,
and exercises of such cruel barbarities upon our mise∣rable
brethren,King Charles Declarat. with the advice of his Privie Counsell. that no Christian eare can heare with∣out
horrour, nor Story parallel, as his Majestie did
declare against those barbarous Rebels. I wish that
Remonstrance of our Clergie there were commanded to be
in every Parish of ENGLAND, and the additionall de∣positions
hastened to the Presse, that all the good people of
the Land might know their good meaning to them: And in
this Kingdome there was a generation of New Refor∣mers
that paved the way to Popery, and under the colour of
a good worke in hand,Holy Table, Name, and Thing, p. 2. p. 192. p. 204. and the pietie of the times were
busied in taking the out-workes, and that being done
they would have a bout with the Fort it selfe: It is the
language and sentence of him that here may well be credi∣ted,
and our eyes saw then, the Innovations so numerous,
that with a little time and observation it might be demon∣strated,
the lawlesse Mutation even then was greater from
the rules, and received practise, then it is like to be by the
Directory so much expected, which beside Parliament
Authoritie, will have the Scriptures, and the example of
Reformed Churches to give it countenance; I thought in
this Epistle I might make some further mentioning, but I
must remember that of Austin to Macedonius, Negotio∣sissimos
in Republica viros,Ep. 54. Init. & non suis, sed aliorum
utilitatibus attentissimos non debemus occupare pro∣oemio:
I will turne therefore my prefacing, into praying,
that our God onely wise,Rom. 16. 27. would fill every one of you with

wisedome,Jam. 3. 17. even that wisdome which is from above,
and is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, , the
grace of the Text,Ruth 4. 11. Moderate, and full of good fruits,
that gasping Ireland may be recovered by you, and as you
have done worthily for Scotland, you may be famous in
ENGLAND, and regaining the Kings royall Person and
favour, you may make him glorious also, and raise up in his
Dominions the foundations for many generations,Isa. 58. 12. and
be called the Repairers of the breaches, the Restorers
of the paths to dwell in. I shall waite the complement
of Gods good providence in you, and by you, that in his due
season every mountaine of opposition may be a plaine,Zach. 4. 7. and
these troublous times may determine in the readvance∣ment,Dan. 9. 25.
and firme establishing of Righteousnesse and Peace,
through your hands; which is, and shall be in the dayly de∣votion
of

