


Men, Brethren, and Fathers:
I Could not choose but give you notice of a Designe discovered unto mee, of no small a party which at present is conspiring, how the possessions of Bishops, Deanes and Chapters, &c. which by our Ancestors were in∣tended for publique and pious uses, may become their peculiar inheritan∣ces, and totally discourage posterity from all charitable legacies, when they shall see them alienated to such quīte contrary purposes.
I understand likewise of severall Petitions by multitudes of the most consci∣entious free-borne subjects of England, demonstrating how unjust it is, that a small number, who in complement call themselves our Ministers, should at their owne pleasure become our Masters and so contrary to the subjects liberty, force from us the fifth part of the whole Kingdome in valuation without either articles or consent, and that which is worst of all, even not to be longer endured by such as make conscience of any thing, they lay claime to it by Divine right, and for such services, as to many seem little lesse than Antichristian, or Ido∣latrous: 'Tis frivolous for you to distinguish between a conscience truly in∣formed, and contrarily; for, unlesse you will pretend your arguments to be like the peace of God which passeth all understanding, Phil. 4.7. you must unavoid∣ably permit men, even every particular man for himselfe, to resolve the whole Scripture and every part thereof into a full perswasion of his owne heart con∣cerning whatsoever he is to practise or believe, Rom. 14.5.22.23. either grant this, or burne your Bibles, how many soever differing translations, with their whole impressions, as have been brought unto you, since you doe but teach your Lay-people to suspect them all, whilst you your selves will not be ruled by any, in any mans judgement besides your owne.
A word to the wise should be enough; It is of so great interest and consequence to this whole Kingdome, for one respect or other, to demolish and root out the very memory of this Tith-Idoll, which all other Reformed Christians have long since abominated, that it concernes you to looke out some other maintenance lesse scandalous, and more Gospel-like.
But you'l say perhaps, you have maintenance allotted you by Ordinance of Parliament: what an Ordinance of Parliament?  reverence Ordinances of Parliament; but, me thinks, you should rather flye for refuge to Christs Or∣dinance;
Ordinances of Parliament are repealable, what one Parliament bestowes upon you, another Parliament may take away, but Christs Ordinances, are like him∣selfe, unchangeable; what ever you thinke of him, doubtlesse you cannot leave him for a better Master: Try then a little, compare the Ordinances together, looke be∣fore you leap, if ye be Men, if Christians, consider which may prove the surest, the better title.
Christ ordained that they which preach the Gospel should live by the Gos∣pell, 1 Cor. 9.14. that is, they should have such a livelihood as is set out, and war∣ranted by the Gospel, which is the free benevolence and bounty of their brethren, and if you will have it in Christs owne words unto the true Disciples, That into what∣soever house they enter they should remain eating and drinking such things as were set before them, Luk. 10.5.7.8. and having food and rayment they should be there with content, 1 Tim. 6.8, On the other side:
The Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, Die Veneris, 8 Novemb. 1644. Ordaine that every person or persons within the Realme of England and Dominion of Wales, shall pay all and singular tithes, offerings, oblations, obventions, rates for tithes, and all other duties commonly known by the name of tithes, unto the respective owners both Lay and Ecclesiasticall.
This is the effect of Christs Ordinance, with that of the Lords and Commons in Parliament: I shall not seek to make enmity betwixt them, and I hope every Reader, will, in time, see how far forth they will run parallel. What will you more then? Our Saviour, you see, has by an Ordinance of heaven provided for you both food and rayment, requiring you by his Apostle Paul to be therewith content.
But me thinks I heare you murmuring that this Gospel maintenance, being by the Spirit of God termed a free gift, 2 Cor. 8.4. Phil. 4.17. a matter of bounty, and not grudging, 2 Cor. 9.5. you have not the conscience, what ever your practice be, to think you may command it at your pleasure, have it whether your Parishio∣ners will or no; and 'tis irksome to your highindednesse, to suppose your selves their Almesmen, and live on their benevolence. But what advantage have you by your tithe Ordinance? how, I pray, will you get your tithes, if the people will not pay them? how can you force them to it, if the people be resolved on the contrary? Oh! I know your meaning, you'l distraine their goods, imprison their persons, and with some vexatious accursed act or other, you'l take away their lives, and all they have together: but are you so stout and sturdy (not being perhaps above one for a thou∣sand of your Lay-brethren) as to imagine that a Regiment of Blackcoats, can, with a bare humane Ordinance of tithes, defeat a whole Nation, both of their Christian and Civill priviledges? beleeve me bold Souldiers, you will finde hard service of it; the peoples eyes begin to be open, and if you discover the nakednesse of your unsa∣tiable covetousnesse a little more, they will, questionlesse, so far reflect on the ex∣presse clear words in our Saviours Commission unto his true Disciples, saying,
Freely you have received, freely give, Mat. 10.8. that your mercenary praying and preaching will grow contemptible, and our exercising Weavers, Feltmakers, Coblers, &c. be found more to resemble true Ministers of the Gospel, than your lear∣ned Doctorships. But because I see some of you are not ashamed to be thought Politi∣tians, who take for granted that you may, & ought to be provident, no lesse than your Lay-brethren, both for your selves and families; I hope I shall not prove an unwel∣come Monitor, if I be instant with you to ponder seriously, whether it be for your be∣nefit to wave Christs Ordinance, and adhere unto the Parliaments for maintenance.
'Tis true, the Lords and Commons have been bountifull unto you, most transcen∣dently bountifull, no Protestant State did ever doe the like! (I wish it were well con∣sidered) they give you tithes with an &c. offerings, oblations, &c above a tenth part, even above the fifth, in a just valuation, of all that the land produceth: But what if they should give you halfe, or three quarters of all we have? can you enjoy it longer then good people please to pay it you? I hope, it will not be impertinent, towards meaning you from a Canonicall obedience, by minding you that there have been many laws agreed on in Parliament, which never had execution afterwards, for want of a secondary, and more effectuall assenting of the people in generall, whom the Parlia∣ment does but represent. You know, likewise, much may be said, both from Laws and Custome, in behalfe of the Kings Prerogative, Revenues, and not much lesse than a boundlesse subjection, and yet you see, how little he hath of either for the pre∣sent; a Prince can reigne no longer over the persons of his subjects, than hee can master their affections; A usurped tyrannicall power is of short continuance, but the free consent and love of a people, is that only, which makes all Empire durable and happy.
Doe not then seeth your selvees up, that a Nation which has been at charge of so many millions (as some Accountants thinke the Visited Provinces never had, to spend upon all their
 years war) with the losse of so many  thousand slaine, in redeming their propriety and priviledges from the  of evill counsellours, will afterwards prostrate themselves, both soule and body,  your discretion? doe you thinke a people, which capitulates with their Master, will submit unto their Ministers? is it not a pretty mock show, a contradiction, a very lie, for Ministers to be carvers of their owne wages, whether their Masters will or no? to pay themselves out of their Masters purses, under pretence of administring to them spirituall things, and yet restraine them from participating thereof, when they see good, or but pretend to see it? it may not, it cannot, it must nt long endure.
Ponder then a litle, which may  best win upon the peoples disposition, whether your submitting unto their Christi∣an charity which to many of the Independent may proves more beneficiall then tithes, or to continue contrasting with them, as his Majestie with his evill Councellours have done, to the hazading fall
Forbeare then to take too much upon you; Encroach neither upon your Brethrens Spiritualities, nor Temporalties; Re∣nounce such power and principles, as may justly move the Civill State to be jealous of you, and  like enough (for they have both beored and been liberall to you beyond desert) they will distribute or appropriate unto your T, all the possessions, that unrighteous mammon, of Bishops, Deans and Chapters, &c.
Believe me Friends, they are worth the looking after, and if, through your owne carelessenes, or your enemies vigi∣lance you misse thereof, you may like enough be put to get a living by labouring in some honest calling, as your neighbours do: Be wse as Serpents, and (Gramercy Bishop) you may yet fare well.
