




RIght Honorable and gracious Ladies, when importunitie had so far prevailed, as to suffer this Copie to passe the Presse, my resolution was, to send it forth under the shelter of your Noble persons; my presumption herein soaring so high in the dedication, was not a little emboldned by the generall and constant Fame of your Ho∣nours Heroicall and Benigne dispositions,
 Laert. lib. 6. who (according to that of Antisthenes, that vertue and true Nobilitie go to∣gether labour to excell other in goodnesse of mind, as great∣nesse of place. Indeed I must confesse, when I duely consider the greatnesse of your excellent persons, and the sublimitie of your unspotted Honors, I much condemne my self of boldnesse; but on the other side, recounting the magnificence
of your bountie, and the humanitie of your Noble disposi∣tions, I cannot but blame my self of slownesse, in not labour∣ing sooner to expresse my thankfulnesse. I have long purpo∣sed to offer unto your Honors some poore token of that du∣tie, which that underserved favour conferd upon me by both your Noble persons (absque ullo commerito, without any de∣sert in the world) tyes me unto: the remembrance whereof cannot be buried in silence, without the just aspersion of shamefull Ingratitude; and should ere this time have been more really manifested in some present of far greater value, if mine abilities would have reacht unto it;
orat. . azianz. cra gratula∣o reprehendi n solet. . c. Epist. 7. . 2. but alas, the best requitals that we poore Ministers can make to our Noble de∣serving friends, for their undeserved favours, Sunt verba & voces, (as the Poet speaks in another sense) are our papers and our prayers, this is all we can exhibite (as Nazianzen writeth to Sophronius) and this kind of gratulation though it come somewhat late, yet I hope shall find a candid accep∣tance with your Honorable persons, according to the modell of the offerer, not the magnitude of the receiver. May it please your Honors to grace this poore piece, (such as it is) with your favourable Patronage, and to let it passe under the testimony of your pious approbation: I shall have great cause to rejoyce in your devoted eminencie, and never cease to enlarge my thoughts towards heaven, for the continuance of the welfare and felicitie of your temporall, spirituall, and eternall happinesse, together of all those flourishing branches and hopefull plants derived from both your Noble persons: And this shall be the prayer of,

