


WOrthy Sir, Besides importunitie of friends (that stale and common Apologie, which by many is made for their appearing in Stationary view) there is something else which hath cast mee on the censure of these over-criticall times, in the publi∣cation of this poore Sermon; and that is, the unjust accepti∣on (as I doubt not but the understanding Reader, will so conceive it to be) which was taken by some disaffected persons at the delivery of it, who, in o∣pen streete, (immediately) so soone as the Sermon was finished, were not a∣shamed to affirme, that I were a mainteiner of Popish Superstition, and an hatefull enemy to the Reformation; upon what ground, the Lord knowes; if there be any just cause of offence given, let them judge, who shall be pleased to take the paines to reade over this following Discourse, wherein so farre as I can remember, I have not omitted any one thing, of what was then delivered. Some few passages indeed, here and there are added, as be∣ing forc't to cut off part of what I had determined to expresse, because it was fit I should proportion my speech, as neere as I could to the houre, which notwithstanding (upon entreatie) were fully handled before another Con∣gregation in the afternoone, and so all that was at the first projected, was in either of these places (as you finde it here) at large delivered. Concern∣ing which, whatsoever the sharp and uncharitable censure of some may be; I take God to witnesse, whom I serve in my soule, that in all singlenesse of minde, out of an earnest and (as I hope) sincere desire and tender regard of the peace of the Church, and quiet prosperitie of this Common-weale,
I addressed my selfe to the worke; First invocating the great Name of God (in my private devotions) that it would please him so to sanctifie mine endeavours, that something might be spoken in season for that pur∣pose; wishing unfeinedly, that all wee, who live in the visible Communi∣on of the same body as brethren, might also as brethren (so farre as were possible)
Rom. 15.6. With one minde, and with one mouth, glorifie God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. And therefore I shall not thinke I have laboured in aine, seeing I assayed and endea voured to have profit∣t, For  it may be with mn, yet sure I am with God, it is as Cuptian spaketh, (if Cyprian) that
. Not the fruit of their Labours, but the affection of mens hearts, gets them respect with God. And yet I am not lft altogether hopelesse of any profit, that might be reaped by thse y weake endeavours, since (without any affectation of publick no∣tion or vaine glory be it spoken) that which had so unjust an aspersion cast upon it, by ill affected Spirits, with a great deale more noise (I hope) then there was cause; was yet notwithstanding, highly applauded in the judge∣ment of the best able hearers in the Congregation; whose commendation (I doube nt, but) the judicious Reader, will better
Mal me louuntur, sed mali, Movere,  me m. ite, s Lelius sapis, si duo Siones, ista Louerentur nunc malis displicere lau∣dri est, Sen. de rem. fort. approve of, then the others dispraise. Besides, the much solicitation of deserving persons, for the making of them more publicke, may give mee to thinke, that they are not (though weake and undigested yet) altogether worthlesse; whose importu∣nitie I should have easily resisted, (as being conscious of mine owne mean∣nesse, and withall the great dispariritie, twixt a
Haer nescio quid latentis  viva vox. Hier. lively voyce, and breath∣lesse lines) had not the vindication of my Religion and profession (upon so foule a scandall) cald mee to it.
Sir, J know there are a kinde of people, whom the Prophet speakes of,
Isa. 29.21. That make a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproveth in the gate; at the least
Iere. 18.18. smite him with the tongue; Some who are
1 Thes. 5.14. Inordiati ita sole Livius ho nomen usurpare, de Militihus qui stationem non servant: Eleganter id transtulit Paulus ad eos, non qui sunt in tractabiles, ut putavit Erasmus, sed qui tamen aliter quàm per infirmitatem peccant. Beza in loc.  (as the Apostle termes them) and
Titus 1.10. Of a privat. , Sonat autem quasi dis, Qui in ordinem ogi non possit. Erasm. Vulg Non subditi. , men that be
Titus 1.6. unrulie, that will not be brought into order, disobedient chil∣dren,
Deut. 13.13. Sonnes of Belial, or (as the word in the notation of it will beare)
 Beliahal deducta ex  Bel, non &  jaal, quod in Hiphil significat prodesse, ut significetur in itas as{que} pernicies. Pscat. in Psal. 18.5. Sonnes without profit, who are so perversly set upon their opinions, and so stiffned in their resolutions, (though never so erronious) that they are ready to clamor against any reason, that might reduce them into the
right way. Yet God forbid, that wee should therefore hold our peace, and refuse to preach the truth, because some will be found to carpe against it. It were an happie thing, that wee could all
Phil. 1.27. stand fast in one Spirit, and
1 Pet. 3.8. be all of one minde,
1 Cor. 1.10. all speake the same thing, that there may be no divisions amongst us, but that wee may be perfectly joyned together in the same minde and in the same judgement, that so, by our joynt conformitie, wee might all proceed in the common cause of Religion, and leade the people in the right way of the knowledge of Christ crucified, as the Israelites led David to Hebron, with a simple and a perfect heart, (My record is on high) this was the maine thing I aymed at in this ensu∣ing Sermon, wherein I have endeavoured the crying downe of such cor∣ruptions, as might alwayes oppose it, that so the anger of God, and his fear∣full punishments (for
Salvian. Missil. de gu∣bernat. Dei. Ira divinitatis est poena peccantis) that are now ready to fall upon us; may in the uniting of our affections, be both appea∣sed and prevented: The Lord make the effect answerable.
Howsoever it prove, I have made bold to assigne you a place in the De∣dication, and in the Frontispice of the worke to mention your name, together with those Honourable Ladies, as being a speciall instrument in that fa∣vour, by them bestowed upon me. Sir, I know your disposition is as free from aine-glory, as I desire mine should be from flattery, otherwise I could re insert a large discourse of your forweardnesse and impartiall execution of Justice in the place committed to your trust; but you delight not in com∣plements, else would I give them, my desire is to be reputed thankfull, and because I would (in this) follow the Philosophers rule, not to tender i
Senec. de Benific. lib. 1. cap. 23. in angulo & ad aurem; I have made choice of this opportunitie. May it finde acceptance, and in any proportion, further you in the way to Heaven; I have no more to desire, onely in the Apostles words,
Act. 20.31. I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace; which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance, among all them which are sanctified; which shall be faithfully prayed for, by

