


DEarly Beloved, ye Select Jewes, whose rising glory is as the Arorau in his-beautiest morning, to you is this Epistle Dedi∣catory, for the eye of beauty it is, in the select unity, and not to be seen but in the Evangelical Scene, which is not the cre∣ated voyce, but the Scene is in the Source or Assome bottom abbiss bottomless, which Makzims being in their full import weigh'd, it is no less then the abbss Deity.
So beloved, though I am in the body, my eye is in the Scene of the Deity; from whence, as from my Sun, I reflect upon my dead corporality; Essiam quia caelum non terra in etate.
Beloved, these confounding Makzims are let down to confound the wisdom of men in this wise, but simple age; for the world is lost, and a Law of restoration is sounded forth, for the return of the Captivity of the Jewes, and the again Building the Temple, and how so impossible it seemeth unto men, yet by him that liveth for evermore it shall be accomplish∣ed; unto which verification I subscribe my name Theauraujohn High-Priest and RECORDER to the thirteen Tribes of the Jewes.
Dearly beloved Brethren, both Jewes and Gentiles, the Assome Ab∣biss of my declarative, it reaches in its includement the celestial center, where there is no voyce but the Scene of Angels in the perfectest per∣fection in the Scene of the Deity.
O Beloved, that you were but weighed out of your ponderous earth, then you might behold my Scene; in which Phiriattical expression, I denote the illusterious beauty of the Abbiss Deitie.
O Halliluiah ori am assi selat oramus voce: The English is but dark∣ness to light in comparison of the state, but here is to what the English will bear; O praise Jehovah in the declamation of the Evangelical Oratori, in the Abbiss darkness of this earth. There is what the English will hold.
O beloved of God, my soul pants for your reducement, that is, from your dark and dead Idols of your weaved traditional Records: and that you may be inlightned to serve the true and living God, the Creator of all things, who is not tyed to your Formes of names, but he dwelleth in the truth of things, which is the living life of all things, but in man
and woman by a destributive love: for God is love, and where you see love acted, (behold all people) even there God dwelleth, and no where else, for God is love.
This state I have confirmed with an Exce, that you (the dark world) may know in what estate you stand that act not in love: woe unto you, ye are bound up in your iniquities, ye are sealed unto the day of vengeance, and ye now lye in the Bonds of iniquity, and the gall of bitterness.
Now know, I cannot charge ye sighters against God so high as ye deserve, because deceit is your Master, vanity your minde, rotteness your heart, corruption is your Doom, and there, on you, wrath shall abide and remain a time, Video exce


Thus farre is lately wrote.

