



May it please your Highness:
IT is now almost nine years, since I appeared in a Pul∣pit, except once only at Lon∣don-stone, where, I thank God, through his blessing, I did not wholy lose my labour.
I did endeavour before that to have preached at Pauls upon a Sabbath day in the afternoon, in Dr Burgess his substitutes room; but he being surprised on a sudden, with some strange relations touching me, (wherein it may please God at length to vindicate me, to the shame of all my ene∣mies,) (for I account my professed friends, by reason of their injurious actions towards
me little lesse,) on a sudden; when I came with intention to goe into the Pulpit, to deliver the substance of what is herewith printed, with some enlargements, as my af∣fections should have dictated; I was to the wonder, I think of many, I am sure of di∣vers, who came to hear me with honest af∣fections, I doubt not, denied the liberty which was very civily promised me.
May it please your Highness, I thank God I can say truly (and my heart and conscience bears me witnesse to my own in∣tegrity in saying so) that I can be content to become a spectacle to God, Angels and men, since he hath been pleased most strangely and unexpectedly, to finde out a way to shew compassion to such a sinner as I am: of which I was so hopelesse for a long time together (though I must confesse at the beginning of my despair, I received the greatest support by your Highnesse speak∣ing to me, that ever I had from any man living,) that I must needs say, that for al∣most, if not full out nine years together, I never clearly hoped for the reconciled face of a loving God againe: For this reason, I say once again, I can be content, through the goodness of God, to become a spectacle to
God, Angels and men for Jesus Christs sake, who I trust hath had mercy on my soul, and hath pardoned my transgressions, there having been never such a sinner in the world as I have been. Such a compas∣sion being shewed to such a sinner, the like I say again, was never yet in the world, it hath begotten in me a suitable, and I hope I may say, a Christianlike resolution, to passe by such wrongs and injurious transactions used towards me, as I may truly affirm, that, all circumstances considered, there were yet never the like of them in the world done to any private man, in a peaceable government: God continue this govern∣ment upon your Highness shoulders, and make them strong for their service, which is very great, nay greater then you are a∣ware of, if I know any thing of God, or of Jesus Christ aright.
The reason why I have troubled the Press with my affectionate meditations, upon the action of Christ knocking at the doores of our hearts for the entertaining of his mercies, is, because
1. By this I shall revive in my memory the many transactions which Christ in his patience hath used toward my self, and
be humbled for my own disobedience and rebellion.
2. That it might appear to all, that I am no sower of sedition, there being nothing more affectionately springing in my soul, then my longing desire to see this poor Na∣tion, wherein I was born, and have lived (I thank God honestly towards man, though sinfully towards God) the larger half of my days (in humane reason,) setled and established in truth righteousnes and peace.
I put truth first, for if our intellectuals be not better principled touching many dif∣ferences that are amongst us, I am certain we cannot be stablished in righteousnesse, and if we be not stablished in righteous∣nesse; I am as sure and certaine, that we cannot be stablished in any true and truly comfortable peace.
I am not without hope, notwithstanding all difficulties, yet to see such a peace. And indeed to speak truth, one reason of my hope is, that I see generally in all mens expecta∣tions, so little hope of it. For, do not mens hearts say within themselves, How can these things be? shall a Nation be born in a day? It may be it will; for when the Lord returns the captivity of his people, shall
they not be like them that dreame? Who knows what a day may bring forth?
We have long looked for a day generally heretofore, but of late men have laboured in the very fire, and yet expected no good, but to live, and not to be slaves. Bear up yet a little longer, O England, it may be thy Saviour will yet pity thy longings; thou seest no help, 'tis the more likely, that help is nigh at hand: me thinks I see a lit∣tle, which though appearing but like the palme of a hand, may yet increase to a great cloud, which shall overspread the heavens, and bring forth rain to refresh the earth.
In this Expectation I do with much comfort of heart assure my Soul, your Highnesse hath a great part to act, a great Stage to act upon, you know not how large: Be pleased to look to your station in Jesus Christ strongly and suddenly, if your feet shall be fixt upon that rock, and your go∣ings stablished in him, this Nation will have reason to blesse God for you, but if your Highness falter too much, if you con∣sult with flesh and bloud too long, if your affections to Jesus Christ and his poor ones cool, or grow indifferent, or that you look
too much upon principles of Policy, which are an Aegyptian Reed, and will deceive you, and all the Princes in the world. You may expect a sudden hand of Gods venge∣ance and displeasure, that shall overturn your Counsels, and bring them to foolishnes, and God shall bring deliverance another way, and restore comforts to his Mourners by another hand. I beseech your Highness pardon my plain dealing, I dare not but speak the things which in some little mea∣sure I see. I have spoken herein words of so∣bernesse and honest affection to your High∣ness, and to this Nation wherein I live; God Almighty give you understanding in all things, which concern the publike and your private peace. I am

