



Worthy Sir,
ANcient custom, and the genius of the present times admit a dedication of those works which we esteem
either profitable or pleasant to those we love or honour, this though it pretend little to profit, and as little to pleasure without your pleasing aspect, yet is intended as a demonstration of that honor and respect I bear your worth: which your favours to me have condignly merited.
And to whom indeed should I dedicate both my self and labours? but to you, who have seemed to dedicate your self wholly to my welfare? to whom should I present these effects of my leisure? but to you, by and from whom I recei∣ved so comfortable an olium? to whom should I address, or whose
protection should I crave for this work of mine? but his under whose protection I effected it?
Yet pretend I not at all by this the least requital of your unlimited favours, which have encompassed me round like an Ocean, but onely manifest to you, what I am almost con∣fident you already believe; that, were my fortunes answer∣able to my desires, though your retorted Graces might, and would still keep me out of the haven, yet should I use my utmost strength and en∣deavours to arrive at the Port of a wish'd for gratitude.

In the mean time, please Sir to accept of this poor pledge of my weak, though willing, endeavours; and in thanks for your acceptance, this I really assure you, That though your protection should not render it more acceptable to others, yet will it more and more oblige me, and like a Cypher added to a figure, double, if not treble, the score of your favours.
For the work it self, let me make this Apologie, That you know it to be the first that ever I un∣dertook: so, for those faults which you may very probably find in it, I shal only implore that wonted
Candour and Generosity where∣with you have oft been pleas'd to pass by lesse pardonable errors.
I am sorry your Commands con∣ceale your Name, and must needs herein accuse you of some Inju∣stice, both to my selfe and the World; to my selfe, in not gi∣ving my Pen the Honour to Pro∣claime, not only yours, but the Virtues of your Thrice Noble Family; And to the World, in not permitting them to be Ho∣nourers and Admirers of so rare a Pattern of Unparallel'd Freind∣ship.
To conclude. That the God of Heaven would plentifully poure
down the choisest of his blessings upon you and your Worthy Consort, and enable you to the Continuance of your favours to∣wards me; and me to some way to Merit, or meanes to Re∣quite them. Is the earnest Prayer of

