


THe Divine providence hath so orderd it, that while your Excellency hath been prosper∣ously imployed in vindicating the publick Liberty, others have been necessitated to contend for truth once delivered to the Saints. Among whom the Lord hath alotted me that part, which concerns the recovery of the prime ordi∣nance of Christianity, the Baptizing with water belie∣vers in the name of the Lord Jesus to which with faith in him the Lord himself annexed Salvation, Mar. 1. 1. which heretofore had a great tie on mens consciences, when persons made Christians by Preaching the Gospel did solemnly and understandingly bind themselves to the profession and practice of Christianity; But now in∣stead of it there is used the corrupt Innovation of In∣fant-sprinkling, a fruitless or rather pernicious rite to the souls of many, who are hardned in deadly presump∣tion, as therby sufficiently made Christians, and of ill in∣fluence on the Church of God by taking in gnorant and unclean persons, even the dregs of a Nation, to be Church members. For reforming of which those wri∣tings which I published afore my necessitated removal from the Temple in London because of them, I presumed to present to your hands in the year 1646 not only in testimony of my observance of a person so highly digni∣fied by the Lord; but also that there might appear some reason why the hard Laws and dealings against those that opposed Infant-bapism should be at least suspend∣ed
 until Truth (the daughter of Time) might be brought to light. Since which time God hath gone forth mighti∣ly with you, and I assure my self the more, because of your Excellencies most noble aim to stop the violent proceedings of those spirits, who would suppress dissen∣ters from them, without allowance of liberty for them to plead for themselves. It were too long to tell your Ex∣cellency what devices Satan hath used to hinder the re∣storing of the ordinance of Baptism, not only by those who are rigid assertors of Infant-baptism, but also by others, who of their own heads, without the least war∣rant from holy Scripture, do most presumptuously and dangerously evacuate, & many of them contemptuously deride the plain and holy institution of the Lord Jesus. The most eminent opposition to the work of restoring the right use of water-baptism necessary to an orderly forming of Christian Churches, hath been by those lear∣ned men, who maintain in still by their arguings and co∣lorable pretences the corrupt innovation of Infant-bap∣tism. The discovery of whose fallacies I have with the Lords assistance made one part of my business, as con∣ceiving my self engaged thereto both by the necessity of the thing, and the providence of God calling me to it. This part I have thought convenient to be published a∣fore the rest, being the most knotty part of the dispute, & in which my Antagonists lay out most of their strength. And forasmuch as your Excellency hath bin eminently in∣strumental in maintaining the publick liberty, through which I have had freedome to debate this point, & your relation to & care of the University of Oxford (of which I was once a member) bind me gratefully to observe you, I presume to prefix your Excellencies name to this writing, and to subscribe my self

