



Right Honorable, my singular good Lord,
IT is now more than time that these holy Sermons should come to light, into the light of this World, to be themselves a Light to the World, after so many
years since the departure of the Re∣verend and Religious Author of them into the light of God.
When they first come abroad, whom ought they earlier to greet than your noble Lordship? that his Posthume Papers might crave protection from the same Family which gave Patro∣nage to his living Person.
From the service of the Earldom, he went up to wait upon the Throne, and yet did never forget Your Ca∣stle-Ashby, after his arrive to the Kings White-Hall; though he was found to have merit enough to enti∣tle his attendance upon the two best Peers, in Chaplainry to your Grand∣father who deserved to be (in respect of the Earldom, though there was a deserv'd, and much more ancient rise of the noble name of the Comp∣tons) Ortus Domus suae (a fairer commendation than which, the quic∣kest best-tongu'd Orator could not invent for himself) and in Tutor∣age
to your Father, whose fall was so valiant, that he chose to pay a magnanimous Death, rather than to owe a bestowed Life; though from thence, the same merit carried him on to do yearly homage to the two choicest Kings, James the wise, and Charles the Religious; yet he had also humble Gratitude enough, to confesse aloud, it was Northamp∣ton's Arm, more than his own hand and Pen, that rais'd him.
My good Lord, you see already your just Title to the whole: But you have still a more peculiar Inte∣rest in these selected four. One of them was Preach'd at that Parish which was, all, your Ancestors, and the Authors; Nine parts yours, and the Tithes his; and Tither, of duty, it ought to return: Another, at your owne , the second, the Baptismall Birth of your Noble selfe: A third, at the third Birth of the most munificent, your Fathers
Father, when he had pass'd over the life of Nature, and the life of Grace, and was receiv'd up into the life of Glory. A fourth is added, to ex∣piate the delay in payment of the three former.
Nay, my most noble Lord, all this will not suffice, that you should have title to these Composures, from your Progenitors, from your selfe, from the Author, unlesse I humbly acknowledge the right you have in my Transcription too, from the claim which your Honour may lay to my very selfe also, your interest in me, your jurisdiction over me, your purchase of me.
Your Honor had interest in me, before I was so happy as to see your Lordship, or so wise as to know my felf, even whilst I was yet in Lum∣bis; for sure our Birth is not so wholly wretched, as to have nothing else entail'd upon us at our coming into the world, besides original sin:
we are even born with respects, and duties, and devotions to originall Benefactors too.
Your jurisdiction over me shall never be disown'd by me whilst I have breath, Dum spiritus hos re∣git Artus, in that, since I had breath, your Lordship was the first Master I ever had.
Master, and Father too, by your purchase of me, in that I did eat of your Lordships bread, when, by the common calamities of the Times, and the deserv'd ones of my own, I had no bread of my own to eat, but went abroad to Preach the Gospel like the Gospels first Disciples with∣out Prse or Scrip.
Luk. 22.35.
And now, my most excellently voriuous and meek Lady, is not your right the same with my Noble Lords: and has not your owne goodnesse bought a like interest in me? I have nothing to return to ei∣ther of your Honors, but my prayers
that You both may enjoy the whole benefit of this which is a dedication upon design, that as you are rege∣nerate by Baptism (the discourse of one of these Homilies,) you may so love to serve God in his own House, (the subject of another;) that when your Bodies are interr'd in the Church (the matter of a third,) your souls may be convey'd to that place which Christ is gone up to prepare for you (the subject-matter of a fourth) there to enjoy honour and bliss eternall. 'Tis really the Prayer of,
My Noble Lord, and my Religious Lady, 
