



Worthy Sir,
YOu may well wonder, not so much that I now dedicate this peece of my pains unto you, as that I did it not till now; consider∣ing how long I have known you, and how very much I am oblieged to You. The truth is this; These Notes (upon Genesis) were the first, in this kind, that ever I finished; and You were deservedly among the first that came into my thoughts, for a Patron to them. But as Pharez once made a breach upon his brother Zarah,
Gen. 38.29. and gat into the world before him, so did those other Works of mine (if at least, that name be not too good for them) deal by This, which now, with its red threed, (a sign of its intended seniority,) humbly implores Your patronage, and (if worth while) your perusal: I know you have somewhat else to do, then to read Commentaries; and yet I must needs know too, that You (that are so sedulous a searcher of the Scriptures, and so seriously in∣quisitive after the genuine sense of such and such dark Texts therein, as, in conference occasionally, You have oft proposed
unto me,) cannot but delight to be duely exercised in books of this nature.
Dr. Cumber. That Reverend Doctour of Cambridge, that (in the behalf of himself, and his whole Colledg, for a very good turn you did them,) presented You with the fairest great Bible that ever I beheld, saw something, surely, of your pious inclina∣tion to the study of that blessed Book: And, if to the better understanding thereof, this, or any thing else that I have yet written, may be any way serviceable, I have that I sought for. Alphonsus, King of Arragon, is said to have read over the Bible fourteen times,
Panormitan. with Lyra's Notes upon it. And those English Exiles for Christ at Geneva, knew they could not pre∣sent any thing more pleasing, to that Incomparable Queen Eli∣zabeth, then their new Translation of, and marginal Notes up∣pon the holy Bible; which Book of books she had received, with both her hands,
Speed. from the Londoners, soon after her Coro∣nation; and kissing it, laid it to her breast, saying, That the same had been her chiefest delight, and should be the rule whereby she meant to frame her whole deportment. Let it be still Yours, Good Sir, as hitherto it hath been; and let this poor piece of mine (if at any time you think good to consult with it) tell you, in my absence, what my sense is of such places, as wherein, with that noble Eunuch, (Act. 8.31.) You may need an Interpreter. No more,
Jam. 1.17. 2 Cor. 4.6. Sir, at present, then to pray the Father of lights (who commanded the light to shine out of darknesse,) to give You the light of the knowledge of the glory of God,
Vers. 7. in the face of Jesus Christ; That though You have this treasure presented to you in an earthen vessel,
. in a vile oyster-shell; as the Greek hath it,) yet You may partake of the excellency of the power that is of God, and not of Me,
Vers. 5. who preach not, present not, my self, but Christ Jesus the Lord; and my self

