



I Have ventured forth a tender piece, which is not likely to escape the censure of such as are guilty, whom perhaps it may make to smart; and therefore it will need the patronage of such as are very discerning, and very sincere. Such I esteem you, and from my very soule doe blesse God for you, and have hopes that God hath in it his thoughts to refresh this poore and torne nation, and the Churches, because he hath given courage to so many able and godly Divines to meet together, though threatned with Procla∣mations to the contrary, and being met, a sweet agreement in com∣mon principles and the love of the truth, though prophecied of by ungodly, wanton and prophane witts, that they would pre∣sently breake asunder through variety of opinions. Truely if you had brought with you that pride and pomp which we were wont to see in our former mock-Synods and Convocations, we might have expected that before this time you should have been the dirision and scorne of the Prelaticall and Atheisticall
party. But for ever blessed be the name of God, for that sweet condescension, for that humble and resolved subjection unto light, for that diligent and holy pursuit of truth, which all-together doe promise an happy issue of your meeting. Goe on with your prudent and holy debates, and the Lord so blesse them and crown them, that your advice being lay'd before our great and high Court, they may under God settle upon us the glory of all the Ordinances of Christ, and remove every burthen which the ty∣ranny of abused Episcopacie had layd upon us. I call their courses tyranny, and their Impositions burthens, as having had thorough the happinesse of these late times, better meanes and opportu∣nity to discerne and weigh them: for let me speake freely, and as becomes us now that the hand of God is so much out against the nation, let me speake humbly, I confesse my thoughts were heretofore more favourable, as walking according to those prin∣ciples I had received in my education. The truth is, though I never thought Episcopacie to be of Divine-right, as it was proud∣ly chalenged, yet I looked upon it as the most antient and most prudentiall way of government, and so obeyed it and spake well of it, though not its mad and furious wayes, for I ever protested against their Altars and their cringes, their suppressing of faith∣full and painfull Preachers, their discouraging and undermining of the power of godlinesse, their wanton and profane abuse of the high and dreadfull censure of excommunication; yet in a generall conformity to such things as I conceived were by law establi∣shed, I obeyed it, as thinking it to be a sin not to have done so. I will not be ashamed to put those charitable thoughts I had (for so I will call them, and so my own conscience after I examined it, doth call them) among the errata of my life. The reading of Cyprian, first made me stumble in the point of Episcopacie, but afterwards when I met with Mr Whites learned and serious Speech against it in Parliament, which was afterwards printed, to the great good I believe of the Kingdom, as no doubt inviting many to look into that point, which they had not formerly stu∣died,
I was fully convinced of the inconveniencies and mischiefes of it among us.
It may be the wisedom of this generation, will account it an unwary and imprudent part in me, to expresse my self so freely and so nakedly, in a time when all the religious endeavours of our Parliament run such a dangerous hazard, and when the vi∣olent Popish Counsels drive on with such advantage; and I con∣fesse that in such a throng of accidents and occurrances, wherein a man may easily lose himselfe and misse the times he would faine meet and comply with, it were better to stand still till the times found and came up to him: but give me leave to breath out a sad thought or two, I much doubt we shall not meet those good times we look for, for as some Declarations of Parliament, and some other Books formerly and of late, have made it manifest, that there is a designe for the readvancement of Popery, so I feare the counsells of God are that way for our tryall, I meane the word of prophecie in the eleventh chapter of the Revelation, concerning which thing I professe I have not seen Mr Mead's argument sa∣tisfied, That that slaying is yet to be expected. I should with all my heart say Amen to the contrary opinion, and should be glad to be found in an error in this thing, and I hope I am in one. How∣soever, this opinion is so far from weakening and disengaging of me, that it carries me on more effectually and resolvedly in the good liking of all the present attempts for Reformation; for by comparing the Prophecie, with the late and present motions of Ireland, of the Kings-Army, and of some Princes abroad, I have collected that whosoever runs all along to the end of the course with the Court-Counsels and Armie, must be a Papist at last what∣soever he be now, or whatsoever his thoughts be yet.
Upon these considerations, I had once resolved to have brought my Hypocrite before the Parliament-barre, and in an humble Dedication, to have Indicted it before them, the grand∣state-Hypocrisie, I had drawn up some Articles of Impeachment to that purpose, but this very weeke, while I was thinking of it,
there came abroad, besides Mr Prinnes Book, (The Favourite,) another Discourse, to my apprehension very cleare, serious and weighty, I meane, The Mysterie of Iniquity, whereby I was hap∣pily prevented.
Being hereby diverted, I have applied my self to you, Fa∣thers and Brethren, Reverend and Beloved. Much depends upon your advise for the promoting of Reformation, which notwith∣standing what I have said and feared, and for ought I know, may have an happy progresse, and oh that it might have so, with∣without interruption or prevention. To this purpose your in∣spection and care will be very needfull, that while unworthy, cor∣rupt and scandalous men be very deservedly shut out of one dore, they or as bad as they get not in again by another.
There is a necessitie of a publike and standing-Ministerie, as our Lord Jesus took care for it, Ephes. 4.11, 12. so he would not im∣mediately instruct Cornelius, but remits him to the Ecclesiasti∣call Ministery, namely to Peter, who must tell him what he was to doe, Acts 10.6. And though it pleased him extraordinarily by an heavenly vision to convert Paul, (in which regard he saith, he received not the Gospell of man) yet he so far honoured the Mi∣nisterie,
Act. 9.6. that he sent him to Ananias, to tell him also what he must doe.
There must be some, that must have power to open and shut the doore of entrance into Ecclesiasticall Ministry, else some will get in, that care no otherwise for the Priests office, then that they may eate a peece of bread
1 Sam. 2.36.: others will creepe in to corrupt and pervert the Congregation, privily bringing in damnable heresies
2 Pet. 2.1., speaking perverse things to draw away disciples after them
Act. 20.30.. For the prevention of which, as to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdome, to another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit, to another prophecie,
1 Cor. 12.10. so there is given to another discerning of spirits. This , the gift of discerning of spirits, was prin∣cipally the prerogative of the Apostolicall times, an extraordina∣ry faculty that then the Apostles, yea and some private men
had from God, to detect and convince fanaticall spirits. Some excel'd others in this. It seemes Peter was more able to discern then Philip, for Simon Magus joyning himselfe to the Church continued with Philip
Act. 8.13; but when Peter came to Samaria, he pre∣sently discerned and discovered him, that his heart was not right in the sight of God, but that he was in the gall of bitternesse and in the bond of iniquity
Act. 8.20, 21, 23.. This gift Peter also exercised ano∣ther time about Ananias, who pretended to like well of the A∣postolicall fellowship, and the Christian Communitie which was thought requisite for those times, but he lyed to the Holy Ghost, and Peter found that Satan had filled his heart
Act. 5.3.. Peter Martyr thinks the Church had then this gift, the better to suppresse he∣resies and corruption in manners, because they then wanted the helpe of the Magistrates Sword. And Musculus is of opinion that the gift was taken away againe, that the Scripture concerning Antichrists rising might be fulfilled, for had that gift remained, the Ancients would have discerned him, and he could not have stept in. I encline to it, that it was a prerogative, and a gift then peculiar; yet in some measure it still remaines, and as he that is much acquainted with Virgils stile, and hath his Genius, as it were, is reasonably able to judge of a Poem, whether it be Virgils or no; so those that maintaine much communion with the holy Spirit of God, and know much of his working, may discerne somewhat farre of others.
Theodor. Hist. l. 4 c. 19, 20. So the very private Christians of Alexandria, soone found and dis-relished the cor∣rupt Bishop, whom the Governour had substituted in the place of Orthodox Athanasius. And why else doth S. Iohn write generally for the use of the faithfull
1 Joh. 4.1; Beloved beleeve not every spirit, but try the spirits whither they are of God; because many false Prophets are gone out into the world. And S. Paul warning and advising the standing Ministry, assembled at Miletus, speaks unto them thus,
Act. 20.20, 29, 30, 31. Take heed to all the flocke, for know this, that of your owne selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, therefore watch. The Ancients since the Apostles times tooke and used this liber∣ty.
Not onely the Fathers in the Trullan Councell, judged many of the opinions of Origen, Dydimus and Evagrius to be , mentis deliria, and call'd others of them , dreams. But other Councels judg'd persons. And Athanasius in particu∣lar notably discerned Arrius. Calvin of late was singular this way, and so have been some few reverend Divines and others, whom we have knowne. Indeed it is proper and most ne∣cessarie, as Beza observes, for Rulers in Ecclesiasticall Dis∣cipline.
I only offer it, and submit it to your grave judgements, whe∣ther that place of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.29, 32. doe not in some part hold out this point unto us, where he saith, Let the Pro∣phets speake, two or three, and let the other judge. If any thing be revealed to another that sitteth by, let the first hold his peace; For yee may all prophecie one by one. And the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets. That the Apostle speaks not there of the promiscuous Assembly or whole Congregation of the godly, but on∣ly of a certaine order of them, who were called Prophets, to me appeares unquestionable,
1 Cor. 1.28, 29. seeing hee had said before, God hath set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, &c. Are all Apostles?
Socin. in Tr. de eccl. Theophyl Nico aid. in defens. Socini. Schmaltz in resut. Thes. D. Frantz. Are all Prophets? This we generally hold a∣gainst the Photinians, who deny a necessitie of calling, and make it lawfull for any Christian man to preach or prophecie. What order these Prophets were, it may be we are not certaine. Whe∣ther they were the ordinary Doctors or Teachers of the Church, such as had the gift of Prophecie, that is of interpreting the Scrip∣ture. For we may collect it from Act. 13.15. Where we reade, that after the reading of the Law and the Prophets, the Rulers of the Synagogue, sent to Paul and Barnabas, who were then present, saying, Men and Brethren, if yee have any word of exhortation for the people, say on; That the use was, that some place of Scrip∣ture being read, then one of the Doctors arose, and expoun∣ded it, and drew some Doctrines or Exhortations from it, and after him another, and so a third, or if there were more Pro∣phets
or teachers there, they spake in course. Or whether they were an office distinct from the office of ordinary teachers, namely such who opened the more hidden points, pertaining to Christian Religion; as is intimated, 1 Cor. 12.28, 29. and Eph. 4.11. where Prophets and teachers are distinguished. But whatsoever those Prophets were, this is it only that I enquire upon the place, what judging it is that is there spoken of, and what subjection of spirit. For though the learned Camera be absolute in it, that the Apostle deales not there de probatione seu discretione spirituum, but only speaks of order, that the Prophets assembled had authoritie (when it may be two or three might rise together) to appoint who should speake, and in what or∣der, and the rest to be silent. And though I grant this may be the speciall intent of the place, because of the Argument that follows, Ver. 33. For God is not the Authour of confusion (or tu∣mult) but of peace, as in all Churches of the Saints (i.) accor∣ding as it is the use and custome of the rest of the Churches, with which the Apostle would have that of Corinth (wherein haply were nourished some proud and forward wits) to agree. Yet, may not this also be comprehended, that the Prophets might and were to judge of the spirits of those Prophets, who would be forward to rise and offer to speake: Some it may be out of pride and stomacke; some out of Envie, least some o∣thers should be delivered of a choice notion before them; some it may be pretending speciall revelation and commission to speake. I doubt not, but even yet, a privater meeting of Divines in a Classis or Prophecying (as they say they were wont to call the Monethly Exercises in Cheshiere and those parts, heretofore) but much more such a godly and venerable Assemblie as yours, may judge not only of the Doctrine that is spoken, but of the spirit of him that speakes. Both indeed according to the Scrip∣ture; yet not neglecting the gift that is in you, and that abi∣lity of giving Iudgement, which God hath trusted you with, as such that have obtained mercy of the Lord to be faithfull.
1 Cor. 7.25. The due exercise of this gift and judgment, as it will be neces∣sary
in your testimony of such whom you commend unto the Parliament for the furnishing of those Congregations that are voided by the absence of such Ministers as have either shunned or justly fallen under the censure of our High Court: So especial∣ly, if ever you come to recover the possession of the antient right of Presbiters which the Bishops had so unjustly and tyrannically invaded; I meane to be estated in and entrusted with the power of ordination,
1 Tim. 5.22. it will be most necessary, to that end that you lay not hands suddenly on any man, which whether it be meant of Ordination or Absolution, I find the Antients are not agreed. But if the place be understood of Ordination, as I have applied it, It is a rock upon which many of our Bishops (I know not whether All) will be broken. How suddenly (to say the best of it) have their hands been laid upon many, witnesse the first Centurie lately published, and Mr Whites pious and learned Preface. Me∣thinks many of them upon the perusing of that Book (if it come to their hands) should say of diverse names there, which they know, as Martian Arch-bishop of Constantinople said once of Sabbatius a wretched and unworthy man whom he had ordai∣ned to be a Presbyter,
Socrat. Hist. l. 5. c. 20. We wish we had rather laid our hands on the briars, then on such heads. I have in this small Treatise, endeavou∣red some discoverie, and have judged such as serve not our Lord Iesus Christ,
Rom. 16.17, 18. but their own belly, who by good words and faire spee∣ches deceive the hearts of the simple, that we marke them which are contrary to the doctrine which we have learned. Those that I have overtaken, I have marked them nigro carbone, and have presumed to shame them before your eyes. I have done it with some li∣berty of speaking now and then more pleasantly then the ma∣jestie of preaching would allow. For I preached the substrata in∣deed some while agoe; but since furnished it with storie and ex∣periments. I had not communicated it, but upon the advice and in∣couragement of some whose judgments I highly esteeme. And indeed I had not put my last hand unto it, but some of my books being rifled, and others even all kept from me through the in∣jury
of the times, and the calamity of those parts; I have presen∣ted it to you as it is; The Lord make every path smooth unto you, and prosper you in yourway. This is the prayer of

