



Worthy Sir,
WHen I had Preacht several Sermons upon the sub∣ject of Prayer (I blesse God) they were not without some profit;
For I was earnestly desired, by a Religious Gentleman of my Parish, to give him the Heads thereof in writ∣ing; for he told me he ap∣prehended them a sufficient Rule to direct him in the whole course of his life, as touching that Duty, and resolved to make use of them for that purpose. And when in order to the satisfying of his desires, I had drawn out the Heads of those Sermons, I thought with my self, if they were represented to publick view, they might take the same effect upon some
other hearts in the read∣ing, that they did upon his in Hearing, and (I blesse God in some mea∣sure) upon my own in the Preaching. And Gods glory in the good of his Church being the main end I aimed at in being Ordained unto, and en∣tering upon the work of the Ministery: hoping this end may be promo∣ted, as by my Preaching, so by my Writing, I have ventured upon the pub∣lication of this Treatise of Prayer; and although many Learned Pens have
published several Treati∣ses on this subject; and therefore it may be count∣ed a bold presumption in me to expresse my weak∣nesse in writing. (For both my preaching and writing, may possibly be esteemed by some as fool∣lishnesse (at least) in com∣parison of those, whose Learning, and Eloquence of style is (many times) beyond the reach of or∣dinary capacities to un∣derstand them:) Yet am I not in the least discou∣raged therefrom, seeing it pleaseth God, by such
preaching as the world counts Foolishnesse,1 Cor. 1.21. to save them that beleeve. Ha∣ving upon the former grounds adventured to write: I have made bold to Dedicate these first fruits of my labours (in this kind) to your Wor∣ship; That hereby I might expresse my thankfulnesse for the many favours I have received from you from time to time. And although you cannot but discerne my weaknesse in the managing of so excel∣lent a subject, yet such is your goodnesse, as you
will not slight it, because Prayer is the duty you deerly love, and daily practice: And you cannot but like any work (though but meanly managed) that may conduce to the quick∣ning up of those to the Du∣ty that are not yet brought into love with it. Sir, I doubt not of your love, notwithstanding this bold adventure; for your Piety, Humility, and holy Zeal mixed with Christian mo∣deration, is such, as causeth you to love and respect all that love God, and respect his glory. But it is not my
designe to enter upon that labyrinth of publishing to the world your Vertues: Only this I may assert con∣cerning you, (I hope with∣out the least offence, or suspicion of flattery) That your Christian carriage is such, as it bindeth all that love God, and know you, to love and honour you, for the Vertues that shine so in you before the sonnes of men,Mat. 5.16. as that the sons of God are moved (according to divine precept) to glorifie God for you,Heb. 6.12. and to desire to Imitate you. And it is no wonder that your life is so
exemplary; for he that prayeth well, cannot chuse but live well: He that dai∣ly improves grace, by seek∣ing daily supplies of grace, shall have grace for grace,John 1.13 or grace upon grace, one grace after another, a daily in∣crease of grace, until he ar∣rive in glory.
Now I beseech you, let me have a share in your Prayers to God for me:2 Tim. 2.15. That I may approve my self to God a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth; That I may ful∣fil my Ministery,Col. 4.17. that I have
received in the Lord: That I may so live and teach, as that I may both save my self, and them that hear me.1 Tim. 4.16. Which is the continual prayer, desire, and endea∣vour of him, that doth not cease to pray for you, and who is

July 1. 1658.
