

 did their thrice-worthy Father, whom they entirely per∣sonated, and exactly resembled.
 Euseb M. Iohn Lang ley, now chief Schoolmaster of Pauls, Lon¦don. Ast. and Mon. fol. 1179. You have still at hand, my Lord, for a faithfull Remembrancer, Your once-painfull Tutour, and mine ancient friend, who hath dropt, I doubt not, into Your Lordship that divine learning, that will, by Gods grace, render You both a good man, and a good Patriot. What an honour was that to King Edward 6. and what a comfort to his Tutour St John Cheek, that Cranmer and Ridley (two such men) should assure him, upon just triall first made, that his Pupill (the King) had more Religion in his little finger, then they (both) had in all their bodies? It is Religion, my Lord, it is Religion (maugre Machivels mad Maxime to the contrary) that ennobleth indeed, that enhanceth all worth, that crowneth all commendation: As without it,
Dignitas in in∣digno est orna∣mentum in luro. Salvian. all the rest (Riches, Revenue, Retinue, &c.) are but shadows and shapes of Noblenesse. It lyes for ever as a foul stain upon the Nobles of Tekoah, Neh. 3.5. that they put not their necks unto the worke of their Lord: When the old Nobility of Israel, that made their staves (haply the Ensignes of their honour) instruments of the common good, are therefore worthily renowned, and eternalized. Numb. 21.18. Them that honour me, I will honour, is a bar∣gain of Gods own making, 1 Sam. 2.30. And Your Lord∣ship seeth it daily made good, as in sundry brave Heroes of that August Senate, that
The Parlia∣ment in the 25. of Edw 3.15. known to posterity by this name. Sir Thomas Fairfax Silius Italic. Parliamentum benedictum, whereof You are now a Member, so in our Victorious Generall, whom God hath so highly honoured in the hearts of all good people, that they are even ready to sing of him, as Silius did once of Fabius Maximus,
Hic Patria est, muri{que} urbis stant pectore in uno.
Now examples (my Lord) are the best lectures,
, Plutarch. Sicut bos ar∣menta, sic ego bonos sequar, etiamsi ruant. Cic. Ep. ad Atticum. , &c. Dio Cas∣sius. Psal. 119.63. Psal. 101.6. Psal. 16.3. and vertue the best example. It was an excellent Law of the Ephesians, Ever to bear in minde some vertuous man to
imitate, as Themistocles did Miltiades, as Alexander did Achilles, as Coesar did Alexander, as Cato Major did M: Cu∣rius, and as Tully resolved that he would follow good men, yea though he fell with them: I had rather be with Cato in the prison, then with Coesar in the palace, said M: Petronius. It shall be Your highest honour (my good Lord) and Your friends greatest joy, that You side with the better sort, that Your eyes are upon the faithfull in the land, that Your delight is, as Davids was, in those Excellent ones, the Saints, (those
Chrysost. Monachos quosdam sui temporis  vocat. Hom. 55. in Mat. Heb. 11.38. Rev. 15.3. Isa. 63.9. 1 Ioh. 2.6. earthly Angels, those Worthies of whom the world is not worthy,) the LORD CHRIST especially, that King of Saints, that Angel of Gods presence, that perfect patern of the Rule, whose Life and Death, whose Oracles and Miracles are here recorded by his beloved Disciple, and somewhat illu∣strated for Your and the Churches behoof, and benefit, by the meanest, and unworthiest of His, and Your Lord∣ships servants,

Ex museolo nostro Novemb. 12. 1645.
