



IF ever the truth of God were turned in∣to a lye,Rom. 1.25 It is by you that deny the Scriptures to be the truth of God, and pretend immediate revelations to be the rule for your actions. I shall mind you of a passage of a reverend minister now with God:Mr. Bur∣roughs on Hosea 8.12 pag. 91. he saith, There is a generation of men, rising now, if not risen, that begin to have vile thoughts of the written word of God, and think to understand the mind of God otherwise, &c. But (saith he) when they are rotten, and it may be when their souls are perished in hell, the writ∣ten word of God shall stand, and be honourable in the eies of all his Saints. You acknowledge the Scriptures to be the trnth, and yet deny them to be the
word of God. A strange paradox; As if the scrip∣tures, which are called the truth of God, And God, which is the God of truth, should not be the author of the truth:1 King. 17.24. Rom 3.7. Deut. 32.4 Psal. 31.5. Or as if man, which is vanity, yea a ly, should yet be the onely author of the truth. Upon this your error depēd your other errors of denying the scriptures to be the only ground of your faith, and the onely rule for your obedience: for did you believe the scriptures to be the word of God, they would cleerly convince you of the errors of your judgement and practice in many things. Let me reason with you a little; you acknowledge the scripture to be the truth, you must of necessity also grant that whatsoever is contrary to truth is an error: And having granted this, see what will follow upon it by way of trial of your judgement and practice. It is your judgement, that you are perfect and free from all sin: see this to be an error, contrary to the truth, in Eccle. 7.20. 1 John 1.8, 10. You deny the power of the Magistrate in the matters of God, contrary to the truth in Rom. 13.1. to 6. Joh. 31.11, 28. You not only speak evill of governers, but of government also, contrary to the truth in Tit. 3.2. 2 Pet. 2.10. Jude 8. You condemn the ministers of the Church of England, and despise them as false teachers, and say, they know nothing of the true light: although they speak nothing but what is according to the Law and testimo∣nie of God in his word, which is the rule to try all teachers by, Isa. 8.20. This your judgement is an error, it being contrary to Tit. 2.15. and
know, that in thus doing, ye doe not onely despise man, but God. I shall not foul paper,1 Thes. 4.8. Luk. 10.16. in mentioning your judging, censuring, and con∣demning, of both Magistrates and Ministers; onely see how contrary this your practice is to truth, Mat. 7.1, 2. Rom. 14.10, 13. Jam. 4.11. You condemn rhe ministers of the Church of England for preaching for hire; whereas ye do not know their ends in preaching; and thus you are become judges of evill thoughts;Jam. 2.4. Contrary to the truth in 1 Cor. 4.5.—Judge nothing before the time. And you deny that ministers should take any wages for their work: But your error herein you may easily perceive, If you consider that Christ and the Apostle give strong reasons for their maintenance, Mat. 10.10. Luk. 10.7. 1 Tim. 5.18. 1 Cor. 9.13, 14. note it. Likewise the Apostle himselfe took wages of the Churches, to do service in the ministerie, 2 Cor. 11.8. and laid an injun∣ction upon the people to give him wages, Gal. 6.6. Let him that is taught in the word communicate unto him that teacheth, in all good things. Mark, he doth not say, let him con∣tribute (as an almes) but communicate, as a right, as wages: And in the next verse,Gal. 6.7. he intimates, that God is mocked, when his Mi∣nisters are not maintained. But God will not be mocked, neither will he be robbed, but they shall hear ye are Cursed.Mal. 3.8.9 Jer. 12.13 I shall menti∣on no more of your errors, My designe (ac∣cording to promise) is, To prove the Scrip∣tures to be the word of God; the onely ground
of faith, and rule for our obedience: which I have here presented you with. Read it, ex∣amine it: if it be not truth, witnesse by truth against it. If it be truth (as undoubtedly you will find it so) then submit to it, be ruled by it; And doubtlesse your bodies shall be freed from your deserved imprisonment, and your souls from the threatned damnation against false Prophets,2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3. 1 Tim. 5:12. and such as cast off their first faith. I rest an enemie to error, and

From my studie January 29. 1654/5
