



AS it is a certaine truth, that no events
happen without God, so it is most
certaine that all events are ordered
by Gods wisedome to excellent
purposes. The utmost and meet end
of all Gods actions is himselfe, that
as all things are of him, and through him, so all
things may bee to him, Rom. 11. 36. The subordi∣nate
and nearer ends are many and various as
the Almighty sees conducible to his glory which is
the utmost. And thus are wee to conceive that in
the ordering of the present commotions of this
Land the Lord hath sundry ends, whereby he will
in fine shew himselfe great in counsell, though as yet
we can hardly discerne whereto they tend. Among

many other ends he hath, these two seeme most ap∣parent,
the discovery of men, and the discovery of
himselfe. For whereas on the one side the bloody
minded Papists, the proud sensuall Libertines, the
jugling deceitfull Priests and Prelats had gotten the
reputation of honest men, and on the other side the
sincere, zealous and faithfull Christian suffered all in∣dignities
under the imputations of hypocrisie, cove∣tousnesse,
faction and such like calumnies; now by
these present tryalls the integrity, faithfulnesse and
courage of the one, the hypocrisie, falsehood, and
wickednesse of the other are made manifest. And
whereas the frequency of prophane oathes, and A∣theisticall
perjuries, the scorne of Religion, derision
of Piety, and contempt of holinesse had worne out
the apprehensions of God, and imboldned men to
play with him as a contemptible name, God hath
begun to discover himselfe, and yet further will in
time appeare to be the great Lord of Hoasts, and
the protector of his despised, and oppressed people.
In reference to the later of these forenamed ends
God hath vouchsafed to discover many Plots, to
give many deliverances, to doe great things in these
few yeares last past for the vindicating of his owne
Name, the worth and innocency of his people▪ and
declaration of the malignitie of ungodly spirits.
Among which that which he did in preserving of

this city in the late deliverance hereof is not the least,
being in the apprehension of those that know all the
circumstances and the concurrence of Gods provi∣dence
therein, a very remarkable & memorable thing.
In the commemoration and acclamation thereof
it pleased God that by the appointment of one of you
I should have a part, having by Gods providence bin
driven hither for shelter against the unreasonable &
impetuous violence of superstitious people enraged
by the instigations of bloody minded Papists, cor∣rupt
Priests, and loose Libertines. Since which time
I have been sollicited to publish these subitany Me∣ditations:
though the matter deserves a more full
discovery and an exacter commentary. Neverthe∣lesse
that the remembrance hereof might not die,
and that some light might bee added to them that
seeke out Gods workes as having pleasure therein,
I have yeelded to their request. And forasmuch as
the deliverance in the first place belonged to your
selves as first destinated to slaughter, and my worke
in the Tanksgiving proceeded from you, I have
conceived it meetest to tender these Sermons to you
for your acceptance and use, praying the Almighty
still to preserve your persons and to direct your
wayes for the publike good and your own salvation.
In both which to serve you continueth

