



BELOVED,
IT was not a little refreshing to mee after
my frequent flittings, and much toyle,
through which my bodily strength and
outward estate were impaired, that be∣ing
hindred from returning to my for∣mer
station, I was invited to sit down in the place of
my nativity, and to imploy my talent among my kin∣dred
and acquaintance, who have known mee from
my Child-hood, with hope to be there gathered to
my Fathers, where they yielded their spirits to God.
Nor was it a little content to mee, that J should
speak to so well affected an Auditory, and enjoy the
neighbourhood and assistance in the Lords work of so
precious a man as Mr. Baxter was, and is still ac∣counted
by mee. Jt is therefore a grievance to mee
that I remove from you and that jarres have happen∣ed
between me and Mr. Baxter, the occasion where∣of
was this, Mr. Baxters dissent from mee
about infant-Baptisme being known, there was an
endeavour to gaine his arguments in writing, which
he declining and provoking me to a publique dispute,
notwithstanding many reasons given of the inconve∣niences
thereof, yet it beeing deemed my declining
of it to have comen from distrust of my cause, after an
answer made to the arguments, I knew urged by any
for infant baptisme in certaine Sermons, I yeelded to
the dispute with him Ian. 1. A fortnight after or lesse,
even while I earnestly sollicited him to let mee have

his arguments in writing, that I might examin them,
he writes the Epistle, in which the passage is, to which
I here answer. It's told me he intends a larger Trea∣tise
of this matter, though before and since the dis∣pute
he seemed to be very averse from writing. I con∣ceive
by his dispute, that he averres a visible Church-member-ship
in infants of godly parents before circumcision
was instituted, and from thence he would inferre infant bap∣tisme.
What is visible is discernible by some note;
a purpose or promise of God makes not a visible
Church-member, if it did many infidels elect should
be visible members, while infidels: the birth and
actings of believers infants is like to other infants;
what then should make or shew them visible members
circumcision set apart, I know not. If it be only to
live in a holy family, this visibility (if it may be so cal∣led)
may be granted to remaine, yet as no initial seale
(as it's called) did belong to them till Abrahams time,
so neither doth it now by vertue of such visibility
without institution. If baptisme be a new Testament
Ordinance and a mere positive rite no good proofe
can be made for it, but from precept or practise in
the New Testament, positive rites having no reason,
but the appointers will, as a rule to us. And for the
institution of Christ Math. 28. 19. Mr. Baxter in his
Treatise of the Saints rest pag. 222. 549. paraphraseth
Christs words as J do, and in his Appendix. pag. 104.
he speaks thus, Doth not the Scripture bid us repent, be∣lieve
and be baptized for the remission of sinnes? The
institution then is plaine according to my judgement,
and so is the practise, yea Mr. Baxter in his Appendix
pag. 32. speaks as if he disliked it, that Persons are bap∣tized
into they know not what; which must needs be true

of infants when baptized, and pag. 56. he hath these
words; neither are the seales usefull till the accepting, and
entring of the Covenant, how then can they be usefull to
infants? One thing more J desire you to take notice
of, that in his Treatiss of the Saints rest pag. 651. He
hath these words. And their being baptized persons, or
members of the universall visible Church (into which it is
that they are baptized) is sufficient evidence of their inte∣rest
to the supper, till they by Heresie or scandal blot that evi∣dence.
J assume by Mr. Baxters Doctrine, Infants are
rightly baptized and are visible members of the universall
Church, therefore by his Doctrine there is sufficient evidence
of their interest to the supper. Besides if these reasons be
good, infants of believers are in the Covenant, they are
federally holy, therefore are to have the seale of the Covenant,
it will follow they are to have the Communion as wel
as baptisme. And if it be good arguing infants were
circumcised, our Children ae to have no lesse priviledge then
the Jewes Children, baptisme comes in the roome of circum∣cition,
the Lords Supper of the Passeover, it being certaine
that little ones among the Jewes had the passover, it
will follow according to these suppositions of pae∣dobaptists,
little ones of Christians must have the
Lords Supper, as they had in former ages for 600.
years together from Cyprians time to Charles the Great
For denying which Mr. Baxter others may as wel be
termed unthankfull, as Anabaptists so called are by him
inconsideratly styled in his Treatise of the saints rest,
pag. 534. As for him and others of his judgement, I
pray the Lord to open their eyes to see how they have
profaned and perverted holy Baptisme, by changing
it into sprinkling contrary to the use in Scripture, and
ages after, and administring it to infants, whereby is

occasioned abundance of ignorance and carnall pre∣sumption
in the generality of reputed Christians, and
is more necessarily to be reformed then Episcopall
Ceremonies, against which though much more excu∣sable
there have been so great contendings. As for
your selves, my love to you continues the same in my
absence as in my presence, and my jealousie over you
is, least your aversenesse from the Doctrine, J taught
you occasion your adhering to meer formall teachers,
who may extinguish that power of godlinesse that is
among you. I never moved you to entertaine my te∣net
for my sake: but if it be according to Christs insti∣tution,
and the Apostles practise (as if I understand a¦ny
thing it is) beware, that disobedience to Christ the
great Prophet you be not cut off from his people.
Now the God of peace, who brought from the dead
the Lord Christ, the great Shepheerd of the sheep, by
the blood of the everlasting Covenant, make you per∣fect
to do his will, and stablish and comfort you
therein. Thus prayeth

London May 22. 1650.
