



AFter other meanes duly but without successe
tried, for the publique good, to wit the vin∣dicating
of truth, and consequently for the
preventing of the establishment of an errour
and corruption of the most solemn sacred
rite of the Christian profession, and the op∣pression
of them that oppose it, I consented to
the publishing of two treatises in December
last about Infant-baptisme. It seemed good to sundry persons of note
presently to cry downe my assertions, and to load me with unjust ac∣cusations,
which I take to be rather a baffeling of the Author, then an
answering of his writing. Yet the truth hath gotten so much ground
(however some eminent men pretend otherwise) that the Doctrine
of the Directory is disavowed by two of the most eminent of my An∣tagonists,
as is shewed § 9. pag. 40. 41. 42. 43. 44. of this Apology,
the chiefe argument of my prime Antagonist, is proved to be either
nugatory or fallacious, §. 10. pag. 44. 45 46. 47. 48. of this Apolo∣gy,
sundry confessions are drawne from my Antagonists, which in my
judgement, and I thinke in the judgement of any that knowes what
belongs to disputes, do yeeld the cause, as those that I mention §. 18.
pag 97. 98. 100. 101. 102. & §. 5. page 28. of this Apology. And
as for the accusations against my selfe, I should sleight them, were
it not they had a great influence upon the cause, and therefore have
been necessitated to vindicate my selfe; and therewith the truth in

some measure by this Apology. The great prejudice against me in
Point of antiquity, I have also in this Apology endeavoured to dis∣pell,
specially that from the testimony of Augustin, Serm. 10. de ver∣bis
Apostoli, tom. 10. which upon examination I find not to be an
historicall narration from good records, but a meer hyperbolicall
speech, Rhetorically asserting a thing by conjecture from present use
in a Sermon to the people, §. 15. pag. 81. 82. 83. 84. of this Apo∣logy.
And for the testimony of Tertullian concerning federall holi∣nesse,
it is shewed to be impertinent, §. 15. pag. 84. 85. That the
present Synod or reformed Churches are against me should be no
more prejudice against me, then it is against the Synod, and refor∣med
Churches that they oppose the Doctrine of Infant-baptisme, as
it was taught by Cyprian, and his councill of 66. Bishops, Augustin,
and many Synods, and Churches all along till the fifteenth century,
and the Augustan confession art 9.
The danger of troubles upon a reformation of this corruption
should make men wary how they introduce them; I thinke they
that are bound by Covenant to reforme, yet are not bound to do it
with procipitation, and without prudence. But however men must
take heed how they establish an errour and corruption by a Law, and
oppresse men for holding a truth, lest they kicke against the Pricke.
As for my owne particular, the hard dealing I have fond doth
not alienate me from my brethren, nor I hope shall make a schism be∣tween
us; if it must happen, my indeavour is, that it may be neces∣sary,
not voluntary on my part. What hath happened I looke upon it,
however meant by men, yet as ordered by God for good, to wit the
clearing of the truth, the trying and humbling of my selfe. That I
suffer in the repute of men, or my outward peace moves me not. It's
not to be expected children should be born without travail, nor truth
without suffering; yet to leave so intelligent an Auditory, with so
much advantage of the fruite of my labours, is no small grievance.
However I have chosen you for depositaries, in whose hands I may
leave this Apology; that you may not be strangers to this businesse,
nor forget him who is

From my study at the Temple
in London, August 20. 1646.
