



Worthy Gentlemen,
WHEN one came to Alex∣ander,V. Libanii exempla. Pogymnas. Chria. 1. and desired him that he might see his Treasure, he bid one of his servants take him, and shew him, not , his money, but , his friends. It seems he put a higher value upon them, than he did upon all the wealth which he
had.Dilectio Christiani nominis the∣saurus Tert. de patient. c. 12. Good friends are an unvalu∣able treasure, and the rarity of them, doth much inhaunce the price of them. The love & friendship which I have found from you, hath stampt in my affections a very high valuati∣on of you; and among other friends which God hath given me, I must ever reckon you among those of the first magnitude. The confidence I have in you, in your love to those truths, which this sermon holds forth, hath imboldned me to make it pub∣lique under your names; J shall not much trouble my thoughts with what censures others may pass upon it, so it carries the mark of your ac∣ceptance: I will say of that, as Li∣banius did of the Commendati∣on, which Basil gave him, ,
if you (and such as you are) shall like well of it,Liban. in Epist ad Basilium. it will over-master the opinions of other men. For my own part, I never preached it, neither do I now print it with any hopes or de∣sires to please all:Salv. ad Eccles. Cath. li. 4. Mirum esset si hominibus loquentia de Deo verba non placeant, quibus ipse forsitan Deus non placet; 'Twere very strange, if I should please a world of men, when God himselfe doth not give every one content; and if I should but of∣fer to please Men,1 Gal. 10. my Master would quickly discard me, and I should be no longer the servant of Christ.
I know St. Paul else-where strikes in with his ,1 Cor. 10.33 I please all men in all things, but then we must take
him, Cum grano salis, his all things must come under omnia licent, All lawfull things, or (which is more genuine to the Text) All indiffe∣rent things,Mr. Barys Serm. in loc. where God hath left us in Bivio, without expresse, or impli∣cite command. But I can no where find that ever St. Paul did forbeare to speak necessary truths (though it were oftentimes to his own preju∣dice) or else speak them coldly and faintly,1 Titus 13. . Tre∣mel. durè. Beza praetise in Annotat. Rigide q∣rasm. seve∣rter, & in Anotat. ad vivum. & severe Gen. note, rough¦ly & plain¦ly, and goe not about the Bush with them. for fear of angring or displea∣sing men. I am sure he gives it in charge to Titus, when hee had to deale with those peccant Cretians, that he should rebuke thē sharply, cuttingly, do it to the quick; for look as Oyle feeds the fire which is quen∣ched by other liquors, so many times a sweet oyly loving Reproofe, makes
some men the more cholerick, and the gentlier they be handled, (like Nettles) the worse they sting. It wil therefore ill-beseem any Minister of Christ, to let flattery take the wall and inside of plain-dealing, or make the truth of God to Lacquie up and down after the humors of men. For my own part I am yet to learn that piece of parasitical Divinity, & in this ignorance I hope both to live and die.
I have no more to say, but to desire the God of heaven, stil to supply you with all those graces wch may conti∣nue you serviceable instruments of his glory, that you may stil do wor∣thily in Ephratah, and be famous in Bethlehem,4 Ruth 11  which shall be the day∣ly Paryer of him, who is,

