



IT was a double priviledge that God be∣stowed upon David, that hee should fight the Lords battels, and make large prepa∣rations for the Lords Temple. But the honour to injoy a peaceable Government, and to finish the Temple, God reserved for Solomon his son. God hath honou∣red you with Davids portion, Honourable Senatours, and worthy Patriots. Yee have fought the Lords battells with good successe, and made great preparations for the building of Gods Temple. The Lord adde Solomons part un∣to you, that yee may have the comfort to establish a firm peace in the Civill State, and the honour to settle due order in the Lords House. The forwardnesse of the Work should fill you with courage against all discouragements. The Talmudists have a Proverb,
 Jalkut. in Leg. fol. 279 col. 1. When your shooes are on, tread down the Thorns. Go on with valour, I beseech you, to pull down all im∣pediments that hinder true Religion or a solid peace. To incou∣rage your Honours to so great a Work, was the scope of these
Meditations; Which, as in the delivery they seemed not dis∣pleasing to you, so under the shadow of your Order, they doe now present themselves to the publick view.
 Taanith. fol. 4. col. 1. The rain that fals softly, say the Rabbins, moistens the Corn under the clods. Whereby they intimate unto us that good dispositions are easily wrought upon by a modest and moderate way of teaching. I did indevour to avoid all things that might offend so great and grave an audience. Yet not to neglect the duty of a Minister, to speak those things that I conceived to bee most usefull for you to hear, and most needfull for mee to deliver. If any good come by my paines to Gods Church, have a sufficient reward. In the mean while, I humbly desire, that the Presse may bee your remembrancer, and bring that often to your memories, which the Pulpit presented to your eares. I shall no further make bold to interrupt your weighty indevours, but begging a singular bles∣sing from God upon your Persons, and publick imployments, I conclude and remain

