




Honorable Gentlemen,
WHat the Sun is to the world, that the Scripture is to the Church. No man can see the Sun it selfe, nor any thing in the world, but by the light of the Sun. No man can know God, nor any of his creatures, aright, but by the Scripture. The Rabbins tell us, . There is no glory but the Law. Aboth. cap. 4. And Rab. Chija in the Jerusalem Talmud in Peah, tells us, that in his account, 
All the world wholly is not of equall value with one word out of the Law. The labour then of those men of God, whom God hath fitted for interpretation of Scripture, is not lightly to be esteemed. The rather, be∣cause of the difficulty and profitablenesse of the work. The difficulty Augustin sets out well, Lib. 11. super Gen. ad literam. Major est hujus Scripturae autoritas, quàm omnis humani ingenii perspicacitas. Greater is the uthority of this Scripture, then the perspica∣city of all humane wit. The profit of it is as well set out by Hierom. ad Eph. lib. 1. Non putemus in verbis Scripturarum esse Evangelium, sed in sensu; non in superficie, sed in medulla; non in sermonum foliis, sed in radice rationis: Let us not think the Gospel is in the words of the Scriptures, but in the sense; not in the outside, but in the marrow; not in the leaves of words, but in the root of reason. Among many other Books of the Scripture, this of the Proverbs excels in height of matter and expressions. It needs therefore a carefull Interpreter. The method used by me is new, and never formerly exactly followed in every Verse, by any Writer, Protestant or Papist, that ever I read.
1. Ye have the Grammatical sense in the various signi∣fications of every Hebrew word throughout the Old Testa∣ment, which gives light to many other texts.
2. Ye have the Rhetoricall sense, in the Tropes and Figures.
3. The Logicall, in the severall arguments.
4. The Theologicall, in divine observations.
If it be objected, that there are many Comments already on other Books of Scripture, and on this in particular; I confesse it is a truth. I my self have made use of forty Writers on this Book of the Proverbs, as will
appear by the Catalogue of Authors added. Yet every one sees not so many, nor cannot understand them all; nor have means to buy them, or time to read them. Will it hurt any man to have the marrow of them all in one Book? Will it not save him much time, money, labour? Besides, the Reader will find something new, that is not in any of them. Gods hand is not shortened. He can as well manifest his truth by us, as by former Writers. And the rather, because we have their help. A dwarf standing on a gaints shoul∣ders, may see further then the giant. I have made choyce of you (Worthy Gentlemen) for Patrons of this Work, not doubting, but if any shall oppose the truth manifested in it, ye will stand up with me for the defence of it. A more particular engagement to prefix your honorable names, is that great trust the State hath put in you, to take care of the maintenance of many godly Ministers, upon whom ma∣ny thousand souls depend in this Nation. I have found you faithfull and carefull. So have many other godly Ministers. The great God that hath laid great a charge upon you, make you still faithfull dischargers, that so your names may be honorable to posterity, and your souls saved eternally. So I shall never cease to pray, and ever remain

