



SIR,
THat I print this Sermon, is not out of any compliance with the scribling humour of these times, or from the least thought, that by it I shall adde any thing to the Argument it treats of, which from other abler mens labours may not be had with better ad∣vantage: But only from the importu∣nity of some friends, whom I could not well deny, and whose aim in it was the glory of God, and the keeping alive the memory of That his faithful servant at whose Funerals it was preach'd.
But seeing that, such as it is, it must be Printed, That I dedicate it to your self, I have many great causes, which al∣though you be not, yet I am desirous that others may take notice of: Amongst them, I may not, without ingratitude, o∣mit your undeserved respects to my self.

But I must especially reckon your plain and single-hearted Candor and Inte∣grity, which the painted Pageants of many others now a dayes set off with a greater luster.
Your cordial love of Gods truth, and of that good old Doctrine according un∣to godliness, which those Worthies of God, under whom you and I have been trained up, preached, and lived, and died in the belief, practice, and comfort of, to which you do well firmly to ad∣here, whilst too many in this giddy Age are turned aside to vain janglings, and1 Tim. 1. 6 2 Pet. 2. . pernicious errours;
Your fervent zeal for Christs Mi∣nistry and Ministers, so that whom o∣thers despise, you honour; and whom the foot of pride, even of the basest, is ready to tread down and trample upon, your humility and love endevour to up∣hold: Witnesse that your great, and for many years rarely parallel'd bounty, in giving (and that in your life time) the large sum of very nigh three hun∣dred pounds per annum, to most pious uses, viz. towards the maintenance
Of poor Ministers Widdows.
Of a Lecture in London, the place of your longest abode.
Of two Schools, the one in the place
 of your Birth, and the other of yourDarby, asby de l Zouch. Education.
And especially of that happy Society of Emmanuel Colledge in this Ʋni∣versity, on which you have been pleased to confer the greatest share of it.
That this plentiful showre of your bounty should be directed to fall on that fruitful Field, which God all a∣long hath so abundantly blessed, was his good hand guiding yours to lay it on the head of that fruitful Ephraim.
That your favour to my self should in any measure incline your heart to that Colledge of which I was then an unworthy Member, was your goodnesse so much to honour me. But that which rendeth both your self, and your gift more highly valued and honoured by All, is
1. The greatness of it making you a second Founder, at least (after their most pious Founder) the greatest Bene∣factor that ever that Colledge had. Like Solomons Clouds, which when fullEccl. 1.  of rain, empty themselves abundantly upon the earth; herein you have obeyed Gods command, in opening your handDeut. 1 11. 1 Tim. 6 17. 1. wide. Followed his example, who gi∣veth to all richly. Answered has ex∣pectation, who requireth much where
 he hath given much. Ten talents,Luk. 12. 48. Matth. 25. 20. Deut. 26. 10. & Prov. 3. 9, 10. Math. 25. 24, 25, 26, 27. &c. where he hath given five.
As Soveraign Lord he will be ac∣knowledged by all. Something he ex∣pecteth from them on whom he hath bestowed least; but much, on whom more. So that he who in this or the like kind doth nothing, is an evil servant, a practical Atheist, thereby in true inter∣pretation saying, that he hath received nothing: and he who having received much, giveth but little, doth but tell over again Saphira's lye in saying, yea, so much, when it was much more, thatActs 5. 8, 9, 10. made her doom very heavy; whilest you, whose pound hath gain'd ten pounds may comfortably expect to hear that blessed Euge, Well done good andLk. 19. 16, 17. faithful servant. And whatever others may think and say, yet if Scripture may be Judge, you have herein done the part of a good husband: hereby ma∣king God your debtor, who being e∣ternal,Prov. 19. 17. will have time enough to shew himself a true paymaster, and a most plentiful rewarder of your bounty with his. The prudent husbandman, whatever else he is sparing of, will not scant his seed-corn; it seemeth you in∣tend2 Cor. 9. 6. Prov. 11. 7. by sowing liberally to reap libe∣rally; thus you have done good to
 your self, whilest you have withal ho∣nouredProv. 3. 9. God, our Nation, and the whole Reformed Religion. Papists boast much of their great good works; but some of our Divines have trulyDr. Willet, made it out by Induction of particu∣lars, that (for their time and ability) Protestants have equall'd and exceed∣ed them; and let your happy name be added, and in fair letters written in that lovely Catalogue.
2. The pious and religious Grounds and ends of giving it; it was not in way of any Popish penance to expiate the guilt of some fouler crime, which in those blind times built many of their Churches and Monasteries, nor a Legacy bequeathed by the will of some cruel oppressor, who after that in his life time by his exactions he had made many poor, on his death-bed from sting of conscience is enforced to take care for the maintaining of some of them, this was no such trucking either with God or man, with the Papist to merit at Gods hands, or with the vain-glorious Pharisee to blow a Trumpet to gainMath. 6. 2. Hos. 12. 7. Joh. 2. 14. applause with men, which is but to play the Merchant and money-changer in the Temple, and in making up their last accounts to close up all former op∣pressions
 with a new kinde of usury; your eye was more single, did not look so a∣squint, when it looked so favourably upon that Colledge, but as you were pleased to build upon their honourable Founders religious foundation, so you both had the very same pious intenti∣on. He expresseth his in the Preface to his statutes in those words, Pro mea facultate Religionis, & vitae purita∣tem ad posteros nostros propagare, that according to his ability he might propagate purity of life and doctrine to posterity; from whence some great men, and their small friends then at the very first thought they smelt a Puritan: you as clearly manifest yours in the words of your Donation to be, For and towards the furtherance of godliness and learning, that so the Church of God may be thereby the better pro∣vided of godly, learned, and Ortho∣dox Ministers. Blessed be God, that both of you so happily meet in the same work, with the same heart, and as He in the view of all, hath manifest∣ly obtained his end, whilest that little younger sister hath been as fruitful as any; so may you also yours, in her continuance and encrease of yet more fruitfulnesse answerable to Gods wider
 opening his hand to her, in his and your bounty.
3. The time and season in which it was given. This, as it rendreth every thing beautiful, so it presentsEccl. 3. 11 Prov. 2. 5. 11. your rich gift, as apples of Gold in pictures of Silver: as a smile from heaven, when earth frowned; a Cor∣dial in a fainting fit. When our Al∣manack Diviners could read in the Heavens our Ministry and Ʋniversities to be falling Stars; and our ABC Di∣vines, pretending to more divine inspi∣rations both in Pulpit and Pamphlet, could foretell the sudden ruine of both, and then like a Jonah return to their boo to see what would become ofJonah 4. 5. them; When Ignorance driveled, and madnesse foam'd and rav'd with di∣stracted non-sense, and malice plotted our overthrow, and all (Edom-like) cryed Rase it, rase it to the founda∣tion, then , or rather inPsal. 137. 7. Psal. 46. 1. Scripture-expression  Then our God from on high looked through the pil∣lar of fire upon the host of those E∣gyptians,Exod. 14. 24, 25. and took off their Chari∣ot-wheels when they drave so furi∣ously. And then also it was that you in your place and rank reached out
 your able and friendly band to hold and lift us up, when others would have cast us down; and if he who helpeth to up∣hold the weak man at any time doth a friendly office, he who beareth him up when he is now stumbling and ready toJob 12. 5. slip, and so is as a despised lamp, sub∣ject to be trod out as a snuffe, doth him a double courtesie: by this God him∣self commendeth his love to his people, in that he is a Strength, but that to the poor and needy, and that in his di∣stress,Isa. 25. 4. a refuge from the Tempest, when the blast of the terrible ones is as a storm against the wall: such blasts we have felt; but blessed be God, and those his servants, who have been asIsa. 32. 2. an hiding place from the winde, and a covert from such Tempests; and blessed be you also who durst set your shoulder to uphold a falling wall, and then to appear for us, when so many so violently opposed us; and others who wished us well, could better pitty then help us: a piece not so much of Roman gallantry, which adventured upon theFlorus l. 2 purchase of that field in which Anni∣bal had pitched his camp, as of true Christian magnanimity, like Joseph of Arimathea, who in that houre and pow∣er of darkness in extrema desperatio∣ne
 intrepidè in lucem prodiit, andCalvin in Joh. 19. 38. Mark. 15. 43. boldly appeared for a crucified Saviour. Let others admire the gay Tulip, which will close up when night or a cold blast comes; in my eye that is a pleasant plant that will bloom and blossome in an hard Frost; and that a stately bird which will swim up against the stream, while light straws and such trash are carried down with it.
In this you have proved your self a true friend, to love thus at all times,Prov. 17.  17. and more then a brother that is born for adversity. Constancy in such times when the generality of the world ran a contrary course, made Athanasius inOrnt. 21. in Laudem Athanasii. Nazianzens esteem both Adamas and Magnes; and you in this have proved both; the Adamant in your invincible resolution, notwithstanding all discou∣ragements; and thereby must needs prove the Loadstone to draw both ours and all good mens hearts to you. Although therefore they were too bold to tell our Saviour that the Centurion was wor∣thy to be gratified by him, because he loved their Nation, and built them aLuk. 7. 4. Synagogue; Yet you who plead no merit with God, are deservedly worthy to be honoured by men, and shall ever be by me, for the like love and bounty. This
 hath begot you the trouble of this Dedi∣cation; and may your perusal of the book conduce any thing to the guidance of your life, or the comfort of your death, I shall account my self to have received a rich reward of this poor labour.
You read of Isaac's going out into the field to meditate in the evening;Gen. 24. 63. Sir, it is about that time of the day with you; shall you therefore please in this your evening-walk and meditation, that it may sometimes bear you company, I hope you and I shall have the more cause to rejoyce at our last most comfortable meeting. Now that God and Father who hath bin the guide of your youth, be the staffe of your age, that you may be so planted in his house, and flourishPsal. 92. 13, 14. in his Courts, that you may still bring forth more fruit in your old age, and your fruit may remain and perpetuateJoh. 15. 16. Isa. 56. 5. you a name better then of sons and daughters, which (God enabling me) shall be the constant and instant prayer of
SIR,

Cambridge, March 27 1654
