



WHat Your Religious attention welcomed from the Pulpit, by your command is now come to the Presse; where it hum∣bly craveth your Patronage, as it there enjoyed your acceptance: A plaine piece it is, but mourning Suits use to bee plaine, and so should mourning Fast Sermons bee also: Fidling Jigges are now out of tune, when God hath turned our Harp into mourning, and our Organ into the voice Iob 30. 31. of them that weep. May it therefore be but any help this way, that the mourning Turtles voice may bee yet more heard in our Land, I should even in these Cant. 2. 11. 12. sad times of our heavinesse rejoyce in hope, that the
 Winter were already well-nigh past, and the raine blown over and gone: meane while your faithfull continued endevours, that the Sun of Righteousnesse may yet draw nearer to us in brighter and warmer beames of his truth and grace, will much encourage our hearts after all winter stormes, comfortably to expect a Summers flourish, and Harvests joy: You have indeed hitherto had a wet Seed-time of it, whilst you have for so long a time been sowing in teares; but bee pleased to goe on still in Gods work and strength, though it should be yet weeping, if withall it be but bearing of precious seed, for then doubtlesse at last you shall come againe with rejoycing, and bring your Psal. 126. 5. 6. sheaves with you. Great is the Work whereunto the Lord of the Harvest hath called you, in which the eyes of God, Angels, and men are upon you; so that if you should now faint and quaile, it would be with a wit∣nesse. O quit your selves like men, and be strong.
God by your hand hath begun to thrust his sharp 1 Cor. 16. 13. sickle into the Romish tares, the time is come for you to reap, for the Harvest of the Earth is ripe; let not God therefore now want work-men, nor they courage and strength to beare the heat and burthen of the day, you will so at length come to a more comfortable eve∣nings reckoning, a more quiet nights rest in death, and a most blessed up-rising at the last great day, in that Harvest of the end of the World (and wee hope before) you and yours, will reap the fruit of all your labours, then it will be no griefe of heart to you, that you have been constant and unmoveable, abounding
 alwayes in the work of the Lord, when you shall finde that your labour hath not been in vaine in the Lord; then whilest you shall heare your Masters Euge's, and be in the midst of Angels Hallelujahs, we with all the Host of Heaven will joyne with you, and help you to shout aloud for joy: He that shall then beyour Iudge, be now your Counseller and Protector; both now, and then, and ever your Saviour. So prayeth

