



THe deep sense, as well of my own proper, as of the common obligations of my poore friends unto your Ladi∣ships charitable Bounty, hath moved me to addresse this little Treatise of Christian Doctrine to your perusall and Patronage; partly for a Pledge of our re∣spectfull gratitude; and partly for a testimony of your exem∣plar & excelling vertues, which never have appeared more con∣spicuous, then in this dark and
 ftormy time of Persecution, in which they alwayes yeelded to your selfe, a plentifull light to see and discerne the Vta Lactea, or white way of Heaven, and the revealed verities of Christ, from the black way which lead∣eth unto Hell, and the fictirious Novelties of Antichrist, shining like a bright and stedfast land∣mark to all your wavering and weather-beaten Neighbours, to guide them to the haven of Se∣curity.
Nor can I doubt of your ac∣ceptance of it, who have so chearfully exhibited your selfe not onely a religious Professor, but also an indefatigable Sufferer for all the Articles conteined in it. Witnesse the many Robberies
 and plunders acted against you under that onely notion since the late unnatur all war. Witnesse your own captivity at Cannon-Froome, a cruelty not usuall to your sexe. Witnesse the arbitra∣ry and most illegall Sequestration of your whole estate. Witnesse your long deprivement and se∣paration from your beloved Hus∣band and deare Children; whose sole Malignity is Christianity; whose delinquency is nothing else but loyalty. All which not∣withstanding have beene by you imbraced and susteined with such a Masculine Cou∣rage and Christian confidence; that you have caused much con∣fusion to your enemies, and singu∣lar consolation to your friends, by
 turning that which was inten∣ded for your temporall depressi∣on, into the greatest improve∣ment of. your Soule, and high∣est pitch of spirituall advance∣ment both to your Name and Family.
What shall I say of these your gallant trialls? of these your stigma's received for the Faith? I will say onely what S. Paul said in a like case, That in the same measure you are parta∣ker of the passions, you shall be also of the consolations of Christ, 2 Cor ch. 1. v. 7.
I will give onely this Elogi∣um to the whole catalogue of your pressures & perfections, That you are now truly a Christian, one that may worthily say with
 the Apostle, I am fastened with Christ unto the crosse. One who have written on your life and actions in lively characters of self-denying patience, that holy Doctrine, which I here present you impressed in characters of ink and paper.
Accept it therefore as your owne Epitome, that as the world hath seen your sufferings, so it may see in this for what you suffer.
Do but deigne it the protecti∣on of your Piety, and it will yeeld you the protection of its Sanctity.
Doe but persevere in the pra∣ctice of it unto the end in the same measure that you have be∣gun, and it will bring you safe
 to the fruition of the first Ma∣ster and Teacher of it, JESUS; which is the constant wish, and daily Prayer, of
Madam, 
 Aprill 1. 1648.
