



Right Reverend Father,
I Am against my Resolution and proper disposi∣tion by the over-ruling power of the divine providence which wisely disposes all things, accidentally engaged in the Question of Transubstantiation, which hath already so many times passed by the Fire and under the Saw of Contention: that it might seem, nothing could re∣main which had not been already considered, and sifted to the bran. I had been by chance ingaged in a conference with a person of another perswasion, the man not unlearned nor un∣wary, but much more confident then I perceived the strength of his argument could warrant; and yet he had some few of the best which their Schools did furnish out and ordinarily minister to their , their Emissaries and mi∣nisters of temptation to our people. I then began to consider whether there we not much more in the secret of the Question which might not have perswaded him more fiercely then I could then see cause for, or others at least, from whom upon the strength of education he might have derived his confidence; and searching into all the secrets of it, I found infinite reason to reprove the boldnesse of those men, who in the sum of af∣fairs
and upon examination will be found to think men damn∣ed, if they will not speak non-sense, and disbelieve their eyes and ears, and defie their own reason, and recede from anti∣quity, and believe them in whatsoever they dream, or list to obtrude upon the world who hath been too long credulous, or it could never have suffered such a proposition to be be∣lieved by so many men against all the demonstration in the world. And certainly, it is no small matter of wonder, that those men of the Roman Church should pretend learning, and yet rest their new articles of faith upon propositions against all learning; that they should ingage their scholars to read and believe Aristotle, and yet destroy his philosophy, and reason by their article; that they should think all the world fools but themselves, and yet talk and preach such things which if men had spoken before this new device arose, they would have been thought mad. But if these men had by chance or interest fallen upon the other opinion which we maintain against them, they would have filled the world with declamations a∣gainst the impossible propositions and the  of their adversaries; They would have called us dunces, idi∣ots, men without souls, without philosophy, without Sense, without Reason, without Logick, destroyers of the very first notions of mankind. But now that they are ingaged upon the impossible side, they proceed with a prodigious boldnesse, and seem to wonder that mankind does not receive from them all their first principles and credit the wildnesse and new notions of their Cataphysicks (for Metaphysicks it is not) their affirmatives and negatives are neither natural, nor above, nor besides nature, but against it in those first principles which are primely credible. For that I may use S. Austins words: Nemo enim huic evidentiae contradicet, nisi quem plus defensare de∣lectat quod sentit, quàm quid sentiendum sit invenìre. But I see it is possible for a man to believe any thing that he hath a mind to; and this to me seems to have been permitted to re∣prove the vanity of mans imagination, and the confidence of
opinion, to make us humble, apt to learn, inquisitive, and charitable: for if it be possible for so great a company of men of all sorts and capacities to believe such impossible things and to wonder that others do not eandem insaniam insanire, it will concern the wisest man alive, to be inquisitive in the articles of his fierce perswasion, to be diligent in his search, modest in his sentences, to prejudge no man, to reprove the adversaries with meeknesse, and a spirit conscious of humane weaknesse and aptnesse to be abused. But if we remember that Pere Coton Confessor to Henry the IV. of France was wont to say, that he could do any thing when he had his God in his hand and his King at his feet, meaning him at confession, and the other in effigie of the Crucifix or in the Host, we may well perceive that they are not such fools but they will consider the advantages that come to their persons and calling, if they can be supposed to make, with pronouncing four words, bread to become God. Upon the reputation of this great thing the Priests were exempt from from secular Jurisdiction, and vio∣lence, in the Councel in Dalmatia held by the Legats of Pope Innocent the third A. D. 1199. Can. 5. upon this account Pope Ʋrban the second in a Councel which he held at Rome (1097) against the Emperour Henry the fourth, took from secular Princes the investiture of Benefices, and advanced the Clergy above Kings, because their hands create God their Creatour, as Simeon Dunelmensis reports Lib. 2. Chron. apud Vigner. Hist. Eccles. And the same horrible words are used in the famous book called Stella Clericorum: where the Priest is called the creator of his Creator; and thence also in∣fers his privilege and immunity from being condemned. I will not with any envy and reproach object to them that say∣ing of a Bohemian Priest against which John Hus wrote a book on purpose, that before the Priest said his first Mass, he was but the son of God, but afterward he was the Father of God, and the Creator of his body; It was a rude kind of blasphemy, but not much more then that which their severest
men do say, and were never corrected by their expurgatory indices, and is to be seen in Biel on Canon of the Masse, Le∣ction. 4. and Pere dè Bessè in his Royal Priesthood; l. 1. c. 3. where the Priest upon the stock of his power is advanced a∣bove Angels, and the blessed Virgin her self; which is the big∣gest expression which they can devise, unlesse they advance him above God himself. The consequent of this is a double honour, that is, an honour and maintenance in such a manner as may serve the designe of ambition, and fill the belly of covetousnesse.
This was enough to make them willing to introduce it, and (as to them) the wonder ceases, but it is strange the world could receive it; For though men might be willing to believe a thing that would make for their profit and reputation, yet that they should entertain it to their prejudice, as the other part must do, that at so great a price, and with so great a di∣minution of their rights, they should suffer themselves to be cousen'd of their reason, is the stranger thing of the two. But to this also, there were many concurrent causes; For, 1. This doctrine entred upon the world in the most barbarous, most ignorant, and most vitious ages of the world; for we know when it began, by what steps and progressions it pre∣vail'd, and by what instruments. It began in the ninth age, and in the tenth was suckled with little arguments and imperfect pleadings, in the eleventh it grew up with illusions and pre∣tence of miracles, and was christened and confirmed in the twelfth, and afterwards lived upon bloud, and craft, and vio∣lence; But when it was disputed by Paschasius Ratbert the Deacon in the 9th Century, the first collateral device by which they attempted to set up their fancy was to devise mi∣racles, which we find done accordingly in the same Paschasius telling a tale of Plegilus seeing upon the altar a babe like that which was pictured in the arms of Simeon: in Joannes Diaco∣nus telling a story of something in the dayes of S. Gregory the great, but never told by any before him, viz. in the year
873, that is 270 years after the death of S. Gregory; and ex∣tracted from the Archives of Rome or Italy out of England, where it seems they could better tell what so long before done at Rome, by Damianus in the year 1060 who tells two more; by Guitmond writing against Berengarius out of the Vitae P P. by Lanfranck, who served his end upon the report of strange apparitions, and from him Alexander of Hales also tells a pretty tale. For they then observed that the common people did not only then believe all reports of miracles, but desired them passionately, and with them would swallow any thing; But how vainly and falsly the world was then abused, we need no greater witnesse then the learned bishop of the Canaries, Melchier Canus. And yet even one of these au∣thors, though possible apt enough to credit or report any such fine device, for the promotion of his new opinion, yet it is vehemently suspected, that even the tale which was reported out of Paschasius, was a long time after his death thrust in by some Monk in a place to which it relates not, and which without that tale would be more united and more coherent: and yet if this and the other miracles pretended, had not been illusions or directly fabulous, it had made very much against the present doctrine of the Roman Church, for they represent the body in such manner as by their explications it is not, and it cannot be: they represent it broken, a finger or a piece of flesh or bloudy or bleeding, or in the form of an infant; and then when it is in the species of bread; for if as they say Christs body is present no longer then the form of bread re∣mained, how can it be Christs body in the miracle, when the species being gone it is no longer a Sacrament? But the dull inventors of miracles in those ages, considered nothing of this; the article it self was then grosse and rude, and so were the instruments of probation. I noted this, not only to shew at what door so incredible a perswasion entred, but that the zeal of prevailing in it hath so blinded the refiners of it in this age, that they still urge these miracles for proof, when if
they do any thing at all, they reprove the present doctrine.
But besides this device, they inticed the people forward by institution of the solemn feast of Corpus Christi day, enter∣tain'd their fancies by solemn and pompous processions and rewarded their worshippings and attendances on the blessed Sacrament with indulgences granted by Pope Ʋrban the 4th inserted in the Clementines and enlarged by John the 22d and Martin the 5th, and for their worshipping of the consecrated water they had authentick precedents, even the example of Bonaventure's Lamb, S. Francis his Mule, S. Anthony of Padoa's Asse; and if these things were not enough to perswade the People to all this matter, they must needs have weak hearts, and hard heads; and because they met with oppo∣nents at all hands, they proceeded to a more vigorous way of arguing: they armed legions against their adversaries, they confuted at one time in the Town of Beziers 60000 persons, and in one battel disputed so prosperously and acutely, that they kill'd about 10000 men that were Sacramentaries: and this Bellarmine gives as an instance of the marks of his Church; This way of arguing was used in almost all the countries of Christendome, till by Crusado's massacres and battels, burnings and the constant Carnificia, and butchery of the inquisition, which is the main prop of the Papacy, and does more then Tues Petrus, they prevail'd far and neer; and men durst not oppose the evidence whereby they fought. And now the wonder is out, it is not strange that the article hath been so readily entertained. But in the Greek Churches it could not prevaile, as appears not onely in Cyrils book of late, dogmatically affirming the article in our sense, but in the answer of Cardinal Humbert to Nicetas who maintained the receiving the holy Sacrament does break the fast, which it could not do if it were not, when it seems, bread and wine, as well as what we believe it to be, the body and bloud of Christ.
And now in prosecution of their strange improbable success
they proceed to perswade all People that they are fools, and do not know the measures of sense, nor understand the words of Scripture, nor can tell when any of the Fathers speak af∣firmatively or negatively; and after many attempts made by diverse unprosperously enough (as the thing did constrain and urge them) a great wit Cardinal Perron hath undertaken the Qu. and hath spun his thread so fine and twisted it so intricate∣ly, and adorned it so sprucely with language and sophismes, that although he connot resist the evidence of truth, yet he is too subtle for most mens discerning; and though he hath been contested by potent adversaries, and wise men, in a bet∣ter cause then his own, yet he will alwayes make his reader believe that he prevails; which puts me in mind of what Thucydides told Archidamus the King of Sparta as king him whether he or Pericles were the better wrastler? he told him that when he threw Pericles on his back he would with fine words perswade the people that he was not down at all, and so he got the better. So does he; and is to all considering men a great argument of the danger that articles of religion are in, and consequently mens perswasions, and final interest, when they fall into the hands of a witty man and a sophister, and one who is resolved to prevail by all means. But truth is stronger then wit, and can endure when the other cannot, and I hope, it will appear so in this Qu. which although it is managed by weak hands, that is, by mine, yet to all im∣partial persons it must be certain and prevailing upon the stock of his own sincerity and derivation from God.
And now (R. R.) though this Qu. hath so often been disputed and some things so often said, yet I was willing to bring it once more upon the stage, hoping to add some clear∣nesse to it, and by fitting it with a good instrument, and clear conveyance, and representment, by saying something new, and very many which are not generally known, and lesse generally noted; and I thought there was a present necessity of it, be∣cause the Emissaries of the Church of Rome are busie now
to disturb the peace of consciences by troubling the persecu∣ted, and injecting scruples into the infortunate, who suspect every thing, and being weary of all, are most ready to change from the present. They have got a trick to ask, where is our Church now! what is become of your articles, of your re∣ligion? We cannot answer them as they can be answered; for nothing satisfies them, but being prosperous, and that we cannot pretend to, but upon the accounts of the Crosse, and so we may indeed rejoyce and be exceeding glad, because we hope that great is our reward in heaven. But although they are pleased to use an argument that like Jonas Gourd or Spa∣ragus is in season only at some times, yet we according to the nature of truth, inquire after the truth of their religion upon the account of proper and theological objections; Our Church may be a beloved Church and dear to God though she be persecuted when theirs is in an evil condition by obtruding upon the Christian world articles of religion against all that which ought to be the instruments of credibility and perswa∣sion, by distorting and abusing the Sacraments, by making er∣ror to be an art, and that a man must be witty to make him∣self capable of being abused, by out-facing all sense and rea∣son, by damning their brethren for not making their under∣standing servile and sottish, by burning them they can get, and cursing them that they cannot get, by doing so much vi∣olence to their own reasons, and forcing themselves to believe that no man ever spake against their new device, by making a prodigious error to be necessary to salvation, as if they were Lords of the Faith of Christendome.
But these men are grown to that strange triumphal gayety upon their joy that the Church of England as they think is destroyed, that they tread upon her grave which themselves have digged for her who lives and pities them; and they wonder that any man should speak in her behalf, and sup∣pose men doe it out of spight and indignation, and call the duty of her sons who are by persecution made more confi∣dent,
pious, and zealous in defending those truths for which she suffers on all hands, by the name of anger, and suspect it of malicious, vile purposes, I wondred when I saw some∣thing of this folly in one that was her son once, but is run away from her sorrow, and disinherited himself because she was not able to give him a temporal portion, and thinks he hath found out reasons enough to depart from the miserable. I will not trouble him or so much as name him, because if his words are as noted as they are publick every good man will scorn them, if they be private I am not willing to pub∣lish his shame, but leave him to consideration and repentance; But for our dear afflicted Mother she is under the portion of a child, in the state of discipline, her government indeed hindered, but her worshippings the same, the articles as true and those of the Church of Rome as false as ever, of which I hope the following book will be one great in∣stance. But I wish that all tempted persons would con∣sider the illogical deductions by which these men would im∣pose upon their consciences; If the Church of England be destroyed, then Transubstantiation is true; which indeed had concluded well if that article had been only pretended false, because the Church of England was prosperous. But put case the Turke should invade Italy, and set up the Alcoran in S. Peters Church, would it be endured that we should conclude, that Rome was Antichristian because her temporal glory is defaced? The Apostle in this case argued otherwise; The Church of the Jewes was cut off for their sinnes; be not highminded ô ye Gentiles, but fear lest he also cut thee off; it was counsel given to the Romans. But though (blessed be God) our afflictions are great, yet we can, and doe enjoy the same religion as the good Christians in the first three hundred years did theirs; we can serve God in our houses, and sometimes in Churches; and our faith which was not built upon temporal foundations, cannot be shaken by the convulsions of warre and the changes of state. But
they who make our afflictions an objection against us, unlesse they have a promise that they shall never be afflicted, might doe weil to remember, that if they ever fall into trouble they have nothing left to represent or make their condition tolerable; for by pretending, religion is destroyed when it is persecuted they take away all that which can support their own Spirits and sweeten persecution: However, let our Church be where it pleases God it shall, it is certain that Transubstantiation is an evil doctrine, false and dangerous and I know not any Church in Christendome which hath any article more impossible or apt to render the Communion dangerous, then this in the Church of Rome: and since they command us to believe all or will accept none, I hope the just reproof of this one will establish the minds of those who can be tempted to communicate with them in others. I have now given account of the reasons of my present engagement; and though it may be enquired also why I presented it to you, I fear I shall not give so perfect an account of it; because those excellent reasons which invited me to this signification of my gratitude, are such which although they ought to be made publick, yet I know not whether your humility will permit it: for you had rather oblige others then be no∣ted by them. Your predecessor in the See of Rochester, who was almost a Cardinal when he was almost dead, did publickly in those evil times appear against the truth defended in this book, and yet he was more moderate and better tempered then the rest: but because God hath put the truth into the hearts and mouths of his successors, it is not impro∣per that to you should be offered the opportunities of own∣ing that which is the belief and honor of that See, since the religion was reformed. But lest it be thought that this is an excuse, rather then a reason of my addresse to you, I must crave pardon of your humility, and serve the end of glorification of God in it, by acknowledging publick∣ly that you have assisted my condition by the emanations
of that grace which is the Crown of Marytyrdome: expend∣ing the remains of your lessened fortunes, and encreasing cha∣rity, upon your brethren who are dear to you not only by the band of the same Ministry, but the fellowship of the same sufferings. But indeed the cause in which these papers are ingaged, is such that it ought to be owned by them that can best defend it; and since the defence is not with secular arts and aids, but by Spiritual; the diminution of your out∣ward circumstances cannot render you a person unfit to pa∣tronize this Book, because where I fail, your wisdome learning, and experience can supply, and therefore if you will pardon my drawing your name from the privacy of your retirement into a publick view: you will singularly oblige and increase those favours by which you have already endeared the thank∣fulnesse and service of
R. R.

