



MY LORD,
THe duty of Repentance is of so great and universal concernment, a Ca∣tholicon to the evils of the Soul of every man, that if there be any par∣ticular in which it is worthy the labours of the whole Ecclesiastical Calling, to be instant in season and out of season, it is in this duty; and therefore I hope I shall be excused, if my Dis∣courses of Repentance, like the duty it self, be per∣petually increasing; and I may, like the Widow in the Gospel to the unjust Judge, at least hope to prevail with some men by my importunity. Men have found out so many devices and arts to cousen themselves, that they will rather admit any weak
discourses and images of Reason, then think it necessary to repent speedily, severely and effe∣ctively. Wee finde that sinners are prosperous, and God is long before he strikes; and it is al∣wayes another mans case, when we see a judge∣ment happen upon a sinner, we feel it not our selves, for when we doe, it is commonly past re∣medy. Indeed it was to be pitied in the Heathen, that many of them were tempted to take the thriving side, when Religion it self was unprospe∣rous. When Jupiter suffered his golden Scepter to be stole, and the Image never frown'd; and a bold fellow would scrape the Ivory thigh of Hercules, and go away without a broken pate, for all the Club that was in his hand; they thought they had reason to think there was no more sacred∣ness in the Images of their gods, then in the sta∣tues of Vigellus: and because the event of all regular actions was not regular and equal, but Catiline was hewn down by the Consuls sword for his Rebellion, and for the same thing Caesar became a Prince, they believed that the Powers that govern'd these extregular events, must it self be various and changeable, and they call'd it Fortune. But (My Lord) that Christians
should thus dote upon temporal events, and the little baits of fishes and the meat of dogs, adoring every thing that is prosperous, and hating that condition of things that brings trouble, is not to be pardon'd to them who profess themselves Ser∣vants and Disciples of a Crucified Lord and Master. But it is upon the same account that men are so hardly brought to repent, or to believe that Repentance hath in it so many parts, and requires so much labour, and exacts such caution, and cannot be performed without the best assistan∣ces, or the greatest skill in spiritual notices. They finde sin pleasant and prosperous, gay and in the fashion: And though wise men know it is better to be pleas'd then to be merry to have rest and sa∣tisfaction in wisdom and perfective notices of things, then to laugh loud, and fright sobriety away with noises, and dissolution, and forgetfulness: yet this severer pleasure seems dull and flat, and men ge∣nerally betake themselves to the wildnesses of sin, and hate to have it interrupted by the intervening of the sullen grace of Repentance. It was a sprightly saying of him in the Comedy,

Ego vitam Deorum proptereà sempi∣ternam esse arbitròr,
Quòd voluptates eorum propriae sunt. Nam mihi immortalitas
Parta est, si huic nulla aegritudo gaudio intercesserit. Our immortality is to be reckoned by the continuance of our pleasure. My life is then perpetual, when my delights are not interrupted. And this is the immortality that too many men look after by incompetent means. But to be called upon to Repentance, and when men inquire what that is, to be told it is all the duty of a returning man; the extermination of sin, the mortification of all our irregular appe∣tites, and all that perfection of righteousness which can consist with our state of imperfection; and that in order to these purposes, we must not refuse the sharpest instruments, that they may be even cut off which trouble us, but that we suffer all the severity of voluntary or imposed discipline, according as it shall be judged necessa∣ry, this is it which will trouble men: such, I mean,
who love a beggerly ease before a laborious thri∣ving trade (a foul stable to some beasts is better then a fair way) and therefore it is, that since all Christians are convinced of the necessity, the indispensable necessity of Repentance, they have resolved to admit it, but they also resolve they will not understand what it is. Una herclè falsa lachrymula; one or two forc'd tears against a good time: and (believe it) that's a great matter too, that is not ordinary. But if men lose an estate,
—Nemo dolorem
Fingit in hoc casu, vestē diducere summam
Contentus, vexare oculos humore coacto. Men need not to dissemble tears or sorrow in that case: but as if men were in no danger when they are enemies to God, and as if to lose heaven were no great matter, and to be cast into hell were a very tolerable condition, and such as a man might very well undergo, and laugh heartily for all that; they seem so unconcerned in the actions of Reli∣gion, and in their obedience to the severe laws of Repentance, that it looks as if men had no de∣signe in the world, but to be suffered to die qui∣etly
to perish tamely, without being troubled with the angry arguments of Churchmen, who by all means desire they should live and recover, and dwell with God for ever. Or if they can be forc'd to the further entertainments of Repentance, it is nothing but a calling for mercy, an ineffective prayer, a moist cloud, a resolution for to day, and a solemn shower at the most.
Mens immota manet, lachrymae vol∣vuntur inanes.
The minde is not chang'd, though the face be: for Repentance is thought to be just as other Gra∣ces, fit for their proper season, like fruits in their own moneth; but then every thing else must have its day too: we shall sin, and we must repent; but sin will come again, and so may repentance: For there is a time for every thing under the Sun; and the time for Repentance is when we can sin no more, when every objection is answe∣red, when we can have no more excuse; and they who go upon that principle will never doe it, till it be too late: For every age hath temptations of its own, and they that have been us'd to the yoke all
their life time, will obey their sin when it comes in any shape in which they can take any pleasure. But men are infinitely abus'd, and by themselves most of all. For Repentance is not like the Sum∣mer fruits, fit to be taken a little, and in their own time; it is like bread, the provisions and sup∣port of our life, the entertainment of every day, but it is the bread of affliction to some, and the bread of carefulness to all: and he that preaches this with the greatest zeal, and the grea∣test severity, it may be he takes the liberty of an enemy, but he gives the counsel and the assistance of a friend.
My Lord, I have been so long acquainted with the secrets of your Spirit and Religion, that I know I need not make an apology for dedicating this se∣vere Book to you. You know, according to the prudence which God hath given you, that he that flatters you is your enemy, and you need not be flattered; for he that desires passionately to be a good man and a religious, to be the servant of God and be sav'd, will not be fond of any vanity, and nothing else can need to be flattered; but I have presented to your Lordship this Discourse, not onely to be a testimony to the world, how great a
love, and how great an honour I have for you, but even by ascribing you into this relation, to endear you the rather every day more and more to the severest Doctrines and Practises of Holiness. I was invited to make something of this by an Ho∣nourable Person who is now with God, and who de∣sir'd his needs should be serv'd by my Ministery. But when I had entred upon it, I found it neces∣sary to do it in order to more purposes, and in prose∣cution of the method of my other Studies. All which as they are designed to Gods glory and the Ministery of Souls, so if by them I can signifie my obligations to your Lordship, which by your great Nobleness do still increase, I shall not esteem them wholly ineffective even of some of those purposes whither they are intended; for truly my Lord, in whatsoever I am or can do, I desire to appear,
My Noblest Lord, 
