



NOthing, I think, but necessity and sense of duty could have made my thoughts on this theme, publick at this time: I am sensible how critical both are and how apt, as he that did the wrong was to ask Moses, Who made thee a judg?Exod. 2.13, 14. such will be to demand, Who made me a Re∣prover? and to say (though personally unknown to, or unthought of by me) as the Lawyers did to Christ, when he re∣proved the Pharisees, Master,Luke 11.44, 45. thus say∣ing thou reproachest us also. Yet finding Ireland replete with angry humors, and distempered with tongue-dysenteries, ha∣ving licence here for some time ad practi∣candum, I have reckoned my self obliged
 (especially considering that to that grand text against Tale-bearing, is immediately added,Lev. 19.16, 17. Thou shalt not hate thy Brother in thine heart, thou shalt in any wise re∣buke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him) to offer something to the cure; though expecting little thanks from the Patient, through the frowardness of his disease, and necessary harshness of this physick; for when a Titus hath to deal with ill-tongu'd Cretians,Tit. 1.12, 13. he must be sharp, that they may be sound.
Now the reasons that induced me to present this to your view, are
1. Because there are temptations pe∣culiar to several conditions and sorts of men, and to whom those of this kind are especially incident, you may gather from John Baptist,Luk. 3.14. . when the Souldiers ask'd him, And what shall we do? He said unto them, Do violence to no man, neither ac∣cuse any falsly, or get nothing by syco∣phancie. What that is, and the evil of it, is here discoursed.
2 Because the grand accuser (to whom all false and malitious Informers are so nearly related) hath the name , which signifies most properly such an Accuser, as calumniates others before
 great Persons,Rev. 12.10. as Satan the Accuser be∣fore the Lord. And so the greater any of you are, the more in danger of being haunted by such evil spirits, if they may have but your ear.
3.Psal. 82.1, 6 Because the Congregation of the mighty, may be read, the Assembly of the Gods, for God hath said, You are Gods.Prov. 6.16, 17, 18, 19. Now there are six things that God hats, yea seven that are an abomination to him: and three at least of those seven do but make up the one thing that I plead a∣gainst, A lying tongue, a false witness that speaketh lies, and one that soweth discord among Brethren
Lastly, You all say you are for the hea∣ling of our breaches, and if truth may di∣rect the way to peace, take away the Tale-bearer and the strife will cease.Pro. 26.20
I love not to run Division, or to men∣tion the usual tricotomy, yet must say, Had the most passionate of one sort been but more Independent on misreports con∣cerning their dissenting brethren: and the most violent of another sort as careful to keep off from the Backbiter, as to stand off from the Presbyter; and all of a third sort as great adversaries to aspersing as they are to sprinkling, our disease had not come
 to such a dangerous Crisis as our wisest Physicians both in Church and State take it now to be at.
Therefore whatever construction this little Treatise do meet with abroad a∣mong men, my conscience, I hope, will comfort me in this, that I designed it for the quenching our furious flames, though in medling therewith I should burn my fingers. I would not aim to grate here or gratify there, I have not wittingly offered injury or abuse to any text through the Treatise, nor I hope to any person. I would not rob Statesmen of just and ne∣cessary intelligence, for the due tutelage of the publick weal; or make a sport of hac∣king at the evil of Talebearing or hearing, a root of bitterness which I find too apt to spring up in my self as in others;Heb. 12.15. nor yet would I feed a discontented humor in any that look upon themselves as injur'd, and perhaps are so, by this evil: I know men may go wrong by not right suffering, as others may by wrong doing. I hope Pre∣face and Postscript will (to all that are candid though concerned) clear the chari∣table intent of him whose prayer for you is, That while many bend their tongues like their bows for lies,Ier. 10.3. you may be Valiant only for the Truth.
