



Right Worshipfull,
THere is no condition whatsoever, can priviledge a fold∣ed
Arme: For if Idlenesse had beene better then La∣bour,
our first Parents had never beene put into the
Garden to dresse it: but they must labour then in their
innocent estate, because they were happy: and so
much more must every one of us in his sinfull conditi∣on;
get up and be doing, that he may be so. The Church of God is a
Garden enclosed, so Cant. 4. 12. otherwise called, the vineyard of the Lord
of Hosts, Isaiah 5. 7. Now, Laberandum in vinea, Labourers are for this
vineyard, where they shall ever finde, never want worke: they there∣fore
which dare be idle and loyter heere, are worthy to be cast out. The
Apostle compares the Church of God to a building, Ep. 2. 20. the beau∣ty
whereof hath ever beene such a great eye-sore to all ungodly men,
that their mouthes of wickednesse have still extended themselves wide
against it, crying of it, as they of Jerusalem, Psa. 137. 7. Rase it, rase it;
and their hands of violence lifted up, to downe with it, downe with it, even
to the foundation thereof. The case being thus, he is not worthy to be e∣steemed
a member of the Church of God, who labours not with the
very utmost of his endevours, one way or other, to uphold, defend, main∣taine,
enlarge this building, to keepe this vineyard from waste, this Fa∣bricke
from ruine, which could not possibly continue, were it in the po∣wer
of men or divels to destroy it.
And if ever Distractions, Dissentions, Divisions, threatned the wel-be∣ing
of a Church and State (as they alwayes doe) the Church of God in
this Kingdome, at this time, is in very much danger; wherein a generall
liberty is taken, in matters which concerne Religion, by people (of
what spirit I know not) to doe what they please, not what they should.
Our malady we see, and cannot chuse but complaine of; and if there be
not a speedy cure thought on to apply unto our hurt, the whole King∣dome
may shortly take up that saying, and make particular application
of it, prudens, sciens, vivus, videns{que} pereo.
For my selfe being lately called to that publicke place where this Ser∣mon

was delivered, I thought it my duty to fall upon some subject that
might have relation to our present times and distempers. In which
you may please cleerely to behold the necessity of Government, as well in
Church as State, Then, how generally it is disaffected, and by whom: esteem∣ed
the heaviest of all burthens: who therefore doe what they can to throw it off:
which meditations, as they then passed through the eares (as I feare) of
many who then heard them: (for this I am sure of, that abundance of
this spirituall seed every where miscarries) so they now most humbly
desire leave to take the boldnes, that through Yours, they may passe in∣to
the hands of others, that may consider them at leysure and upon bet∣ter
advantage.
Vox audita perit, litera scripta manet. That which we only hear may
easily slip from us; when as that we read, & may read againe, in proba∣bility
may stick by us. And the Lord in mercy make this thus successeful.
For surely there were never any people under heaven that enjoyed
and wanted more instruction then we doe: when we seriously consider
how that Almighty God hath laid wide open before us the Books of his
revealed will, of his mercies, of his judgements: yet though we have been
taught abundantly by precepts, we have not learned: been prest upon
by mercies, we have not regarded: and chastned too by the keenest, the
sharpest of all temporall judgements, we have not been taught▪ Doubt∣lesse,
the body of this Kingdome was exceedingly corrupted, when it
could not live, unlesse it bled, as it hath abundantly done, and yet the
cure is not perfect, nor ever shalbe, till Reformation make up that breach,
which ungodlinesse hath troden downe. Now there is no Reformation
to be hoped for, without Religion: and no life, no power of Religion,
without Government, to order it, guard it, encourage it. Which Church-Government,
that Great Councell (of whom your very worthy Selves
are a part) have resolved speedily to establish. The City of London are
ready to taste, and like, and entertaine it. We in the Country do excee∣dingly
want it, and the present want of that most desired issue of your
great labours, is ready to fill us with as much impatiency, as poore Ra∣chel
expressed for want of children, Gen. 30. 1.
Now the Lord send it, and settle it throughout the whole King∣dome,
and make all those that shalbe called, to act in this great work,
like Joshua, who when he was appointed to be a Leader and a Gover∣nour
of the people, Deut. 34. 9. was full of the spirit of wisedome: And fill
them full of the spirit of zeale too, for the house of God, that Gods glo∣ry

in the increase of his Church, may be ever before their eies, ever in
their aime. And the Lord make us who are Ministers of the Word, in
a speciall maner to apply our selves unto all those, with whom wee
shall have to deale in all love, and meekenesse, and tendernesse, and pru∣dence,
that so good and so great a worke, be not quite mar'd by an un∣godly,
indiscreet or carelesse handling. And the Lord give us argu∣ments
to perswade those that have long continued in blindnesse, and
consequently have beene ignorant of the necessary truths of God,
now to encline their eares unto wisdome, and to apply their hearts
unto understanding, Pr. 2. 2. that they may be while they are in a ca∣pacity
of helpe, entreated to suffer God through Jesus Christ, to save
their soules: and let God arise and have mercy in building up his Sion
amongst us, that after our Eclipse, he may appeare unto us in glory.
There was never yet any good and great worke carried on
without much opposition. From which, if that worke of Church-Go∣vernment,
so seriously and long debated by You, had beene exempt∣ed,
I should have joyned with those that had most questioned it. But
now a great and effectuall dore is opened unto you; God having so blessed
the way you have resolved to goe, that he hath given it a free en∣trance
into the hearts of many of his people; And you have many adver∣saries;
and it cannot be otherwise, so long as there are such a number
amongst us, who are like bad Wares, which are for Darke shops, or
like unto Bleare-eyes, that cannot endure the Light.
Most worthy Sirs, I dare not flatter you, and I shall not, if I tell you
that it hath been ever my thoughts, as the thoughts of very many more,
who have best meanes to know you, that you have done your parts in
this great worke. The advantage of whose prayers, you shall never
want to carry you on, in it, through it: and then whatsoever the suc∣cesse
be, you may wash your Hands. The Lord who only can, most gra∣ciously
assist, and abundantly recompence the unwearied paines of you
All. I have this only to adde, in relation to your particular Selves, that
if my deare and tender respects unto you, cannot, your pardon may ex∣cuse
him for this boldnesse, who is,

