


THough the Intricacy of the Text, the Importance of the Subject, with the sense of mine Insufficiency for these things, have sometimes overcast mee with a Cloud of Discouragement, yet durst I not but follow that bright Pillar of truth, which (like their Starre in the East) passed on before mee. I have beleeved and therefore have I spoken; knowing that Gods Truth never needed my Lye (and from whom should I look for thanks, should I lye for God?) I can say in simplicity, so farre as I have known my wretched heart, that I have feared to strain, but hated to pervert the ho∣ly Scriptures, whereof I reckon the CANTICLES a portion so transcendently spiritual, that I accord with those that judge it to be understood most rightly (if the sense be fair and scriptural) when most spiritually.
I know the difficulty of demonstrating, that one, and not another, is the sense of the abstruse passages thereof, hath occasioned the giving and taking of much Liberty (that I say not latitude) by Interpreters; whereby Satan hath gotten advantage of us, who as hee is a known enemy to the Scriptures in general, so hath ever been a professed Adversary to this Book in particular (which con∣firms
 mee the more, that the weapons thereof are not carnal but spiritual; and mighty through God to the pulling down his strong holds, and therefore to be made use of by every good souldier of Jesus Christ) I am not ignorant of his old Device, which pre∣vailed on the people to whom this scripture first came, and by whom it was taken to be an Oracle of God, who excluded all under 30 years of Age, from the reading thereof, so favouring shamefaced∣nesse, but not fearing sacrilege: At this day hee shews his invete∣rate hatred, by a new wile, viz. whilest one understands it grosly and carnally, another Historically, a third Prophetically, though the most and Best understand it Mystically of Christ and his people. Saith Satan, you cannot demonstrate, adventure not to interpret; and so should it lye by as a Book that is sealed: And as for mee, my feet were almost gone, and my steps had wel nigh slipped whilst. I was thus tempted, untill I went into the Sanctuary, then understood I that this Scripture was profitable for Doctrin, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in righteousnesse; being led of the Lord (as I hop∣ed, and you beleeved) to understand by being in [the Wilder∣nesse] the lost estate of sinners, by [comming up] Conversion, by [leaning] saving faith, by the [Beloved] the only Lord Redeem∣er Jesus Christ.
Yet little thought I of divulging my thoughts on this Text further then your Pulpit would carry them; There is nothing that more nauseats my Natural genius than to see a surfit-sick press disgorging crudities into the lap of a nice and criticall Generation; But and if I had judged my clusters to be ripe for the presse, (who on the contrary am very conscious to their immaturity) it would have been small inducement to mee to appear in Print at such a time when one may easily discern the evill of the Age, by the Ap∣petite of the Presse, which (almost professedly disgusting the sim∣plicity of the Gospell of peace) craveth only what is curious or con∣tentious; to the former, all may see that I am a stranger; and (if I mistake not in my self) I am more than so to the later.
Yet have I chosen to displease, if not to disadvantage, my self, and to incur the censure of strangers in the impression, rather than to grieve some poor hearts of you, in the suppression of the follow∣ing discourse; wherefore whilest I do what I durst not deny, I
 would have all men know, that though I ever thought obscurest Oblivion a winding sheet good enough for the best of my papers, yet I never judged any Age or Eye too good to view the plainest of Gods Truths.
And now I come at your call, in my plain Pulpit-dress, upon your Affections the second time, with those truths that were right wel∣come to them at the first; wherefore, as I had great joy, to find many of you out in the Wildernesse of your sins, (who can easily remember the wormwood and gall, the thorns, and the stings, the brui∣ses, the runing sores of your destitute, disconsolate, and desolate souls in that day when the chief Shepheard both searched you and sought you out) I shall now have no greater (when ever I leave you) than to leave you walking in the faith, and such as I found lost, to leave leaning; and such of you as I found scattering your waies unto strangers, to leave you espoused to one husband, even Christ. And now blessed be God who hath so prospered my journey to you whilst I came to wooe a wife for the son of my Lord.
My speech hath indeed been as rude as my person contemptible, but my errand into this Wildernesse was to look for lost sheep, not to loyter about flowers; and 'twas my happinesse to meet with such Travailers as craved plain guidance rather than quaint elo∣quence, and would willingly stoop for their manna to the plain ground, being long lost, and throughly hunger-bitten in this spi∣ritual Wildernesse.
Yet knowing that I have prophecied but in part, I would willing∣ly lead you through this plain Porch of the sinners Wildernesse, to that excellent Discourse of Mr. Richard Baxters of the Saints Rest. It is most certain wee are all Pilgrims (as were our Fathers) and have begunne our Travailes in the SINNERS WILDER∣NESSE, oh! that our end after all may bee THE SAINTS EVERLASTING REST.
In order whereunto, I beseech you suffer a word of EXHORTATION.
First, As for the publick and precious interest, spiritual and civil, let my Text teach you to cease from (Mere) Man whose breath is in his nostrils, for wherein is hee to be accounted of? It cannot bee that God should do much by any of us for one another, whilst wee
 make Idols one of another, the Lord is God, and it is his glory to have all your dependencies upon himself, and hee will not give his glo∣ry to another. There is not one way for a soul, and another way for the Church, or for a people, but one way for both to come up from their Wildernesse; and that one and only way is by leaning upon the Beloved.
Secondly, Unto you as living in this quarter of the Country, I have more to say than unto others. I seriously tell you, the Lord look∣eth, and they that labour for the Lord among you, and the holy Angels of God that have pitched their Tents about you, and all the Saints that have heard of you, and of the way of the Holy one in the midst of you, may justly expect from you, that you should become a peculiar people, excelling in holinesse the Attainments of others, being much more zealous of good works. The Lord hath ex∣pressed more favour upon you, than upon most of your Neigh∣bours. 1 In your Immunity from the sword of your Adversaries. 2 The Community of the word of his grace. O the many Chariots and horsemen of Israel, faithfull, skilfull and powerfull even unto e∣minency, burning and shining lights (with whom I professe my self unworthy to be numbred) Messengers of Peace sent unto you, from time to time by the God of Peace! The same is the Lord of Hosts, who gave you a protection, and made you (as Salem) a peaceable habitation in times of Warre; you have been as a Goshen of light, when the Day of the Lord hath been darknesse round about. Light hath been in your Houses even from the dawning of the day, after the dark night of National Popery, when Darknesse hath continued in some Neighbouring places: But fire hath been on your Neighbours houses on each side of you, both Norfolk and Essex, and when it was making towards, yea and in the very sight of Sudbury, your selves are my witnesses, your selves have told me (and to write the same thing to mee is not grievous, but for you it is profitable,) The wind, that bloweth where it listeth, blew those flames to your Neighbouring-County and town of Colchester, so that the goodnesse of the Lord to you-ward, and severity to them, may be read in black letters in that poor place even to this day. I will not say that the Lord hath dealt thus by you, rather than others, because you are, but that you might bee, better than others, even as
 hee dealt by Israel of old: and therefore if hee should now find you, like them, a stiffnecked and gainsaying people, running from the Shepheard that hath so followed you with care, and watched over you for Your good; if you should yet make warre with the Lamb, who hath been so studious of your Peace, and unwilling to fight with you when hee smote your neighbours round about you, if you should bee so foolish a people and unwise, as thus to requite the Lord; O Suffolk! O Sudbury! what should hee then do unto you? Where∣fore be you not unwise, but understanding what the will of the Lord is concerning you, that you may bee blamelesse and harmelesse, the sons of God, without rebuke in the midst of a crooked and perverse Nation, among whom, the Lord looks, you should shine as lights in the world; Holding forth the word of life, that wee may rejoyce in the day of Christ that we have not run in vain, neither laboured in vain. For so is the will of God, if any speak evil of you in the things they know not, that with wel doing you put to silence the ignorance of foolish men. Finally my Brethren, bee perfect, bee of one mind, live in peace, hold∣ing fast the form of sound words, and the profession of the faith without wavering, considering one another to provoke unto love and good works. Not forsaking the assembling of your selves together as the manner of some is: But rather, Brethren, warn them that are unruly, comfort the feeble-minded, support the weak, bee patient towards all men: Pray without ceasing, in every thing, Give thanks. Brethren pray for us: And the very God of Pace sanctify you wholly: and I pray God, your whole spirit and soul and body bee preserved blamelesse unto the com∣ming of our Lord Jesus Christ, So Prayeth

