



SIR,
THis small Treatise properly belongeth to Your Honour, who are Son and Heir (tam corporis, quam heroicae virtutis) to this eminent and Honourable Person, whose decease gave occasion to the preaching of this Sermon at as great and solemn a Meeting, as I have seen in Ireland. It was at the first intended for the Presse, as well as the Pulpit, but till this day hath lain dormant, not in observance of the learnedHor. Arte Poeticâ. Nonum prema∣tur in annum, siquid olim scripseris. Poets advice, who counselleth that a Poem should be kept in under nine years private correction, before it be admitted to publick view; but here was something spoken against the cessation, which was then so vigorously prosecuted, that it might not be further contradicted, whereof I have written more in anotherIn the Epi∣stle Dedicato∣ry of my True Israelite. Trea∣tise formerly published.
And indeed had not Your Honour revived it, by giving an invi∣tation to the publication of it now at last, it had never appeared in this dresse; but being called, it readily obeyed, upon these following accounts.
First, That the righteousnesse and truth of the Lord might be ma∣nifested
 to the world, in accomplishing the predictions here ensuing, both against our open enemies, as also against such as secretly opposed, and subtilly retarded this work of God, which they then pretended to mannage and maintain; who, of all others, have been reputed among wise men in all ages, the worst enemies: For 1. Their sin is double, hypocrisie being joined unto their hatred, and herein they are egregious fools, as Solomon termeth them, Prov. 10.18. He that hideth ha∣tred with lying lips, is a fool. 2. Of all others they do the most mischief, having more opportunities then enemies without, and being for a time least suspected, asBoet. l. 3. de consol. Nulla pestis est efficacior ad nocendum, quàm familia∣rs inimicus. Boetius rightly observeth. 3. But in the end, God hath threatned to discover them, Prov. 26.26. Whose hatred is covered by deceit, his wickednesse shall be shewed be∣fore the whole Congregation; and then shall they be punished an∣swerably to their demerits, as Judas was, who perfidiously betraied his Master with a kisse. This have many in our daies experimented, and we have seen the issue: as wave followeth wave, so one curse hath pur∣sued them after another.
Secondly, That the tender mercies and great kindnesse of our God towards us may be magnified, in fulfilling the desires of his servants, when we called upon him in our distresse. For though he deprived us of this great, magnanimous and successfull Commander, and divers others, upon whom, our eyes (it may be) were too much fixed; to teach us, not to trust in the arm of flesh, but in him, who alone doth all: yet hath he answered our prayers, in raising up continually in times of need, other valiant, vigilant, and victorious Leaders to carry on his own work to a blessed period, which seemed sometimes to cease, like the building of the Temple in Ezra's daies.Ezra 4.13. Time was when these Moabites insultingly cried out unto us, Where is your English God? But now may we triumphantly answer, You may see, if you shut not your eyes wilfully against the light, that our God is in the heavens, and hath done whatsoever he pleased in the earth. Now may we truly say, by our own experience, Happy is he that hath the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God, which made heaven and earth, and keepeth truth for ever, which executeth judge∣ment for the oppressed; but the way of the wicked he turneth upside down. And now may we demand of you, Shall not the righteous God avenge his elect, which cry unto him night and day? Surely he will avenge them speedily, though he seem to forbear long. What say you? we have found it so, Can you de∣ny it?

Thirdly, That the outgoings of our God in the dawning of our de∣iverances may not be forgotten in the midst of our daily Trophies for victories since acquired; but the whole series of his wonderfull preser∣vations of a small remnant of us, may be thankefully recorded by us, and our children after us; for this doth the Lord expect from us, as may appear by his strait charge given to the children of Israel, when he had brought them into the land of Canaan, not to forget, how he had wrought for them in the land of Egypt, Deut. 6.10, 11.
Lastly, That hereby (as much as lieth in a paper Monument) the blessed memory of this renowned Patriot, after his death, may be preserved, who, under God, was instrumental to preserve many lives, by the hazard and losse of his own.Prov. 22.1. Ovid. l. 2. Fastorum. Me∣morem famam qui bene gessit, habet. A good Name (saith Solomon) is rather to be chosen then great riches; for this followeth a worthy person, when riches forsake him. And this is one of the rewards which God hath promised to conferre upon his faithfull servants, Psal. 112.6. The righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance. Besides this, it affordeth lasting comfort to surviving friends, and is profitable to others, who thereby are taught to imitate their good examples, whose Praises are celebrated long after their Funerals are finished; where∣upon holyDe bono vi∣duitatis. Nobis necessaria est vita nostra, aliis fama nostra. Augustin said, As a good life is necessary for our selves, so our good name is necessary for others.
These (Right Honourable) be the reasons of this late publication of these ensuing lines; Now humbly desiring Your favourable acceptance of my endeavours therein, I commit Your Honour to the protection and direction of him who is stiled a Man of War, and the God of Peace, in whom, I remain▪

From my Study in East-Greenwich.
1657.
