


Beloved,
THese are the last and perillous times which the Apostle speaks of, where∣in 2 Tim. 3. 1 2, 3. men do abound in all cloked corruptions, having a form and shew of godlinesse, but denying the truth and power of it: many give Christ but Iudas kisse, saying, Hall Gospel, but doe betray it. There is a Scylla and Charibdis, two guls that are almost full to the brim of the bloud of souls: On one hand ignorance, impiety, pro∣phanesse, drunkennesse, chambering and wantonnesse, strife and envy, &c. These open vices (like a floud) carry down to hell multitudes of souls: on the other hand there is a more subtle device of Satan, whereby many thousands are destroi∣ed, heresies, errours, blasphemies, schisms, under the colour of truth and more then ordinary devotion, eat like a gangreen and canker, and run like a plague from city to city, town to town, family to family, person to person, to the overspreading of the 2 Tim.  whole land, and that without any remedy. Now the losse of so many thousand souls, which prophanesse and errours do daily destroy, will cry for judgement to heaven against those who use not all their endeavours to stop these mischiefs, and to apply what remedy lies in them to these heavy evils: Those in the state that regard it not, may in due time finde the civill inconvenience of the toleration of, or conniving at these things: But the Lord forbid that any of the Lords Watchmen should be Gallios in this, to care for none of these things, that the losse of souls and the flourishing of Satans king∣dome should not touch their hearts. For my own part I must seriously confesse, I am so conscious to my self of my many wants and infirmities, that I was very willing to content myself to approve my doctrine to God, and the consciences of my dar people committed to me (for whom I daily bege of the Lord that he would preserve them, as (blest be his holy Name) he hath done hitherto from the infection of these times:) But being invited by your pious, painfull, worthy and faithfull Minister, and by many of you to bestow my pains sometimes amongst you on your lecture day, I could not re∣fuse. And being very sensible and apprehensive of your perill, by reason of some that
 are crept in amongst you, and have already drawn away some of your town from your Minister, and indeed (as appears in their following paper which you may hereafter reade) from Ministry and publike Ordinances, I could not but doe what did lie in the fathom of my power, to prevent the imminent danger of your souls, by endeavouring to discover some of their deceits. I endeavoured (with what clearnesse I was able) to speak a word in season to every soul, and to hold forth to you from the Lamps of the Word, some ries of divine light for your direction in these dark and misty daies, wherein 'tis as hard for many poor souls to finde out duty as to vanquish difficulty. You were my witnesses (with God) that I delivered rothing but the words of truth and sobernesse: but 'tis hard for whosome doctrines and seasonable reproofs to finde an open and obedient eat in these daies, wherein there are so many itching ears abroad, for you may reade in the following paper sent to me, how many have charged me, which rayling, faction, sedition, &c. (and yet I am confident most of them never heard me in those Sermons:) But had the paper charged or aspered me only, I should have endeavoured with patience and silence, to have put up any thing, but finding the truth so charged as you shall finde it in their paper by them, I thought it might be my sinne to be silent, and to sit down and not contend for that. Therefore I was willing to set pen to paper, and to take a little pains to vindicate and clear both the truth and my self, from those false aspersions and scandals cast upon it and me: I was resolved to have sent them in my answer in writing only privately, and the Lord knows how un∣willing I was to appear in publick: but being overperswaded by many godly judici∣ous friends and brethren (who had the perusall both of their paper and my answer) that the publishing of it might conduce much to the clearing of the truth to many poor sons, who are in these daies miserably pusled by seducers in the things herein objected against us and answered, to the glory of God, and the good of the Church of Christ, in directing and informing some, convincing others, and pulling others out of the snares of Satan, in which they lay captive, being (I say) upon these ground impor∣tuned by them, I could not deny the printing of it; And if it may (by Gods blessing) have any of these effcts upon any (though some may scoff and scorn) yet I shall not repent the publishing. Now because the occasion of this work was given amongst you because the gainsayers herein answered, do live among you, and are your neighbours, with whom you have daily converse, and hereby your souls are in much danger of being . infected with the same errours with which they are carried away so hedlong. In compassion to your souls, I desire to dedicate this my answer and labour to you, for the preserving of you from further infection, and enabling you to resist those tempters you may meet with among you. Your loving acceptance of my former pains and labours in preaching amongst you, assures me that this also will with the same love be accepted and received by you, as 'tis in love presented to you from me. I shall speak no more to you at present, but the rest I shall speak to God for you, that he would sanctifie all means both preaching and printing, for the converting of those that are unconverted amongst you, for the preserving those that are yet sound, for the recalling and reste∣ring those that are gone astray, and are seduced to live in errour, and for the perform∣ing of that good work which is begun in any of you, that the God of all grace would make you perfect, stablish, strengthen and settle you, and preserve you by his own Pet. 5. 10. power, through faith unto salvation: If your souls reap any benefit by any of my poor endeavours, let the Lord alone receive all the glory and praise: all that I shall desire of you is that which Paul so earnestly desired of the Romans, I beseech you, Brethren, . 15. 30. for the Lord Jesus Christ his sake, and for the love of the Spirit, that ye strive together
 with me in your praiers to God for me. And let me be known to you, as one whose desires, praiers and endeavouss have been, are, and (by Gods grace) shall be, to the the utmost in my sphaear, for the making up of the divisions that are amongst you, and the building up of your souls in your most holy faith, Ever resting

