



THis will come too late to tell you how Acceptable this Infant Maioralty was in its very Em∣brio to the Author himself. How much also he shared with you in the Common Entertainments (before it saw the Light) hath been known to many, but best Un∣derstood (certainly most sensibly felt) by himself. But notwithstanding Envy and Might the Top-stone of the Structure is brought forth, let it be attended with Shoutings, and Cry, Grace, Grace, unto it, I mean, Thanks to God and the King.

There are yet Malevolents (like the Old Tobies) in a corner, Cursing, Deprecating and Scoffing in the Antient Dialect. If a Fox goe up, he shall even break down their Strong Wall.
Neke. 4.3. Let these both Talk and Doe as they list. You may destroy it your selves: Your Enemies cannot injure it. So long as ye follow the Undoubted Rules and Dictates of Justice ye are safe, and this you have on the Word of God and Caesar both.
Had the Prize now in yours been lodged in the Hands of our Ancestors but a Centurie of Years agone, How glorious a Town, how happy a People had we been? The Government now obtained and possessed by you; by them, could only be wisht and long'd for. It was too great a Boon for them to expect, or their Sultans to allow. But what then seem'd im∣possible, is now effected, by the Benignity of a Gracious Prince, and the Indefatigable Industry of a Noble Friend. God forbid, so great a Blessing in it self should become by Sinister Administrations an Evil to the place. That Justice should be turned into Wormwood. It's what your Enemies Maliciously expect, and your Friends as passionately pray against.
Nature (Gent.) hath done its part, and been not a little propitious to our Clyme, Cull'd it out as a Sub∣ject, upon which she hath peculiarly doted beyond all places of this Western spot of Brittain: Blest us in the Transcendent Excellencies of all the Elements, aptly situated us for Trade: Inspir'd our Natives with such Mercurial Soules as have rendered them ca∣pable of serving Princes in the very highest Capacities
of Church and State, at Sea and Land, in War and Peace. What remains but that ye also in your Spheres should Worthyly Act your parts, and become the fairest Pattern in your Administrations for Posterity to Ob∣serve and Imitate? If you fail in this, The World will swear, your Extraction is Forreign, and that you bear the Name only, not the Nature of the Antient TAVISTOKIANS.
Gent. I heartily wish your Prosperity, and on that account (having no better) have presented you with this Dialogue, not Sawcily to direct, but hum∣bly to mind you. May it in the Initiation of your set∣ting forth into a Turbulent Ocean prove a Lanthern to precaution you against the Rocks and Shelves that have been fatal to too many. And why should not this Infant-Muse and our Infant-Maioralty be good Company? Being born in the same place, Why may they not Breath together in the same Air, especially at Tavistock, where they speak Poesy as Naturally as they spit? Heavens Bless you all, and make you as good as your Government, So Prays

Tavist. Sep. 3d, 1682.
