



SIRS,
SƲpposing that possibly your heads have been so taken up for a long time with these Questions, How shall we keep the Power in our own hands? And, What is the end of Government? (For you answer that last Question very well in your late Plea) that you have not seriously viewed the complexions and spirits of people in the glasse of such Books as are daily di∣spersed all the Lands over. And therefore sith you are uppermost, and under God may do much good or harm, as his grnce shall incline you, or leave you. I thought good to dedi∣cate this small Piece to you, that you may see what Spirit they are of that are the enemies of the Ministry, and our Christian Religion, and Assemblies, who if you nurse, encourage and protect in their un∣godliness and blasphemy, it will be under the notion of Godliness, reckoning them Godly, and so you'l be like them in calling evil good. And will not you thereby in Gods just account be reckoned among them, and judged with them? And how can you possibly please Gods enemies, and not dsplease both God, and his servants? Gentlemen, be serious, God will not be mocked: If you are not as bad as Infidels, who are resol∣ved to play with Religion, you will bear with me, if I tell you, That though you seem to be much doubting, what sort of people are good Christians, [and therefore you include all that do but say they are such, to the apparent ruine of all true Religion and piety, if God
prevent it not, by you or some other way:] Yet you do know, That the Scripture is Gods written Word, and a holy perfect Rule of faith and practice That this Scripture holds forth an Infinite God in three Persons, A Mediator, who is true God, and true man, that gave his bloud as a price for mans Redemption, who was buried, Rose again, Ascended, and now is in his humane glorified body in Heaven: That there is an everlasting state of misery and happinesse. A Gospel-Ministry to be continued by a mediate Call to the end of the world. That the Ministers of Christ must be entertained honourably, as his Embassadours. And you know, that he that believes in Christ shall be saved, and that he who obeys not his commands shall be damned. That the objects of Saving Faith and Obedience are without us, though the capacitated faculties by which we act Faith and Obedience are within us, and a part of us. That Faith, Repentance, New-Obedience are the free-gifts and Graces of God, which he works in those whom he will save by his holy Spirit, and that the Spirit works and increaseth them in a man by the Ordinances of the Gospel. That it is most equitable and well-pleasing to God, that one day in seven should be set apart for Rational Souls to mind the things of eternity, and have more intimate communion with God, by hearing his Word, and calling upon his Name. That Uniformity and Unity in what is good, is well-pleasing to God, and beautifull, and profita∣ble unto men. That it is well done in any Governour of a Family to ordain Ʋniformity in his Family, as to what is good: both in re∣ference to Duties, and the time of performing them, and therefore no lesse well done in the Magistrate effectually to appoint the same to his Subjects, I mean in things absolutely necessary to the salvation of souls, and the well-being of the publick. That it is the duty of Parents both Natural and Political to cause all their children and Subjects to learn the will of God. I say most certain it is that we may presume that you that make such a great profession of Religion do know and believe these things. If you do not, you are no Christians, and we shall have cause to mourn that ever we had such Rulers, were it not for our hopes, that God will sanctifie unto us the worst that you can do unto us. If you do so know and believe, as no doubt but you'll say you do, then let it appear by your practice, by your love to, and care of Gods truths, Ministers and Ordinan∣ces; otherwise there are many thousands of the Children of the most high God, who are the excellent upon the Earth, that will not believe you, and you will prove that your Knowledge and Faith are but Hi∣storical
at the best; And how then can you scape the wrath to come? Unfeignedly I dare foretell, that if God will make you instrumental, for the setling of us upon a holy and righteous foundation, he will in∣cline your hearts to be nursing Fathers unto his Church, and enemies to the enemies thereof, especially Blasphemy and Blasphemers: And the more good you do, the more you shall be loved and honoured, and the more God shall be praised for you by all his people, and in particu∣lar by him that desires your everlasting happiness, and is

