


SIR,
WHen the Command of the Power of this County, both Civill and Military, was committed to your care and ma∣nagement; you were pleased to ex∣ercise a little of that power you had over me, in desiring me (and your desires are commands) accor∣ding to my Function, to attend upon the Judges.
You cannot but say, you found
 me both willing & obedient. And I undertook the work, upon a threefold encouragement.

First, as it was a Service to your Selfe.
Secondly, as it was a Service to my Country.
Thirdly, as it was a Service to the Lord.

For your selfe; I am glad that I have occasion to make this pub∣like profession, that I am very sen∣sible of those great Civilities, I have received from you. I know, that, by the laws of Friendship, where there are receits, there should be returnes; which though they do not answer in proportion, are yet compleated by their inten∣tion.
I have alwayes thought, That to be the truest love, which projects
 and works to the good of Souls. It is strange, that men should de∣light in the society, and neigh∣bourhood of each other in this; and not desire to meet, and live together, in Another world: That they should study the Comfort, and Welfare of each other, in respect of their Persons and Estates, and not bestow a thought on their Sal∣vation.
Devout Bernard complain'd of old; Omnes amici, et omnes inimici: omnes necessarii, et omnes adversarii; pax à pa∣ganis, sed non à filiis: and we are fallen into such times. There is a generall pretence of amity, yet a generall emnity: we are all neigh∣bours, yet all adversaries; we have peace with the heathen, and we Christians differ among our
 selves: Our divisions are the sparks of that fire, which our blessed Saviour came to kindle, namely about the purity and pow∣er of Evangelicall doctrines and ordinances. We agree about the substance of divine worship, and contest about the circumstances.
It is our sinne, and our shame, that we out-doe the Jewes in our malice against Christ: They cruci∣fied his body, but kept his gar∣ment whole: we teare both his bo∣dy and his garment. We dispute, and wrangle about those reverend solemnities, wherewith the Chri∣stian religion in all ages, and a∣mong all nations, hath bin appa∣relled and adorned.
But we should all sit downe, and consider, what St. James sayes; The wrath of man worketh
 not the righteousnesse of God, Jam. 1. 20. When all's done, when all is written and spoken that can be, on either side; The work of righteousnesse must be minded and regarded. That's soul-work. That will be the businesse of inqeust at the last day: The question then will not be, Who hath bin the best Souldier, nor who the best Scholler, but who hath bin the best Chri∣stian.
Sir, Upon this meditation, I thought no argument more proper for such a solemne Convention, than this of Righteousnesse. It is a doctrine of universall concern∣ment, and since you were pleased to call me to preach these two Ser∣mons, I conceived it the best ex∣pression of a reall affection, to present them to You, as a testi∣mony,
 that I am an hearty wisher both of your present and future happinesse: That as you have bin a man of Warre, so by the study and acquest of that righ∣teousnesse which is taught and re∣commended in these discourses, your end may be Peace.
The second encouragement was the Service of my Country: for which (though not my native) I have a great observance and re∣spect. I came a poor stranger in∣to it, yet have received many, and great favours from some eminent members of it; and no small ones, from the generality. Their candid censures, and acceptance of my weake labours in this kind, was not the least motive to undertake this service. And they are able to testifie for me, that so often as I
 have appear'd in it, my discourse hath had a tendency this way, to instruct in some point of righte∣ousnesse, that, through the blessing of God upon his Ordinance, I might redeem the reputation of this County from an unhappy obloquie it lay under.
The Third Encouragement, which was the highest and the greatest, was the Service of the Lord; whose honour and glory we should all study and endeavour to promote and advance, and which we can do in no better, or more ac∣ceptable way, than by speaking and doing righteousnesse.
Sir, I humbly present these plain Discourses to your, and my Countrie's; service but more espe∣cially I devote them to the Glory of our God, whose unprofitable
 servant I am, but desire to im∣prove.
And as I have cast forth this holy seed of righteousnesse into the world, so I shall not cease to be∣seech the Lord to water it with the dew of his grace, that it may bring forth the wished fruits of it: Peace and quietnesse and assurance for ever.
This is the desire, and shall be the prayer of
Sir,

