



Right Honorable:
WHen I was called to Preach before Your Lord∣ships, there was not in our view either Adver∣sary, or evill occurrent; we thought we had Peace in our hands, and that all was well: but since that time our Distractions did on the sudden grow great and dangerous. We stand in need of the goodnesse of God to come in seasonablie to our Rescue, and it will require the wisdom and diligence of your Lordships, and all others to compose these Differences, that they rise no higher, nor end ill. We may look upon them with sadnesse, and sorrow of heart, and fear lest Gods anger is not turned away from us; We have need to second our Fasts with doing all things an∣swerable, lest if we contradict our prayers by loosenesse of life, God give us an Answer contrary to our expectation. It is high time to lay down our provocations against God, and bitternesse of spirit one against another; our contenti∣ons have been so hot, that we have departed one from ano∣ther; let us take heed of endeavouring to root out one ano∣ther, and to avoid rancor and virulencie of spirit. Next to the directions and examples of Scripture, I could wish we had cast our eyes upon some part of the Carthaginian Story, and see what was the issue of the dissention between
 them and the Romanes;Amilchar used to say his 4. sons that he did Alere quatuor catulos leoni nos in perni∣ciem & exter∣minium Ro∣mani imperii, but it proved contrary.
Hannibal pri∣mogenitus ejus aetatis cto annorum acce∣dens ad sacri∣ficium juravit quod quum primum esset adultae aeta∣tis foret a∣trocissimus hostis Roma∣norum qui dum excitasset pul∣veres cum pe∣dibus, ait, tunc erit pax inter Carthaginen∣ses & Romanos quando altera istarum civita∣tum erit in pulverem re∣dacta. the Carthaginians could never be perswaded to have any peace with Rome, though some of their Nobility much endeavoured it. Amilcar when he went out in an expedition did offer sacrifice, and Hanni∣ball the great, his eldest Son, being present at the solemnity with his Father when he was but young, had received in such principles of War and opposition, that he vowed to se∣cond his Fathers designes, and said there should be peace beween Carthage and Rome, when one of those Cities should be as that dust which he then spurned up with his foot; it proved fatall to that side which was resolved to de∣stroy the other. For though Hanniball was the bravest Commander that ever Carthage bred, and had many Vi∣ctories, and great successe, for sixteen yeers together, yet shortly after Carthage was fiered by the Romanes, and was upon a flame 17. dayes together, and consumed into dust and ashes. Let there be no such spirit in the parties that oppose one another; let all sides-taking be layed aside and the names that intimate division be extinguished: let there be a calm temper, and a wise Accommodation, lest both sides be pulled down one after the other: that Your Lordships may be the happie Instruments to prevent so great an evill, and effect so great a good, is the Prayer of him who rests,

