



WHat you are, I need not tell you: what I am, you know already. Our Ac∣quaintance began with my Child-hood, and now you see what a Peere you have purchased. I can partly refer my inclinations to your self, and those onely which I derive from the contemplative Or∣der, for the rest are besides your in∣fluence. I here present you with the fruits of them, that you may see my Light hath Water to play withall. Hence it is, that I move in
the Sphaere of Generation, and fall short of that Test of Heraclitus, Lu∣men Siccum optima Anima. I need not expound this to you, for you are in the Center, and see it. How so∣ever you may excuse me, if I pre∣fer Conceptions to Fancies; I could never affect any thing that was Bar∣ren; for Sterility and Love are in∣consistent. Give me a knowledge that's fertile in performances, for Theories without their effects, are but Nothings in the dress of things. How true this is, you can tell me; and if I but recite what is your owne, you must not therefore un∣dervalue it, it being in some sense a Sacrifice; for Men have nothing to give, but what they receive Suf∣fer me then at the present to stand your Censer, and exhale that incense
which your owne Hands have put in I dare not say here is Revelati∣on, nor can I boast with the prodi∣gious Artist you read of, that I have lived three yeares in Regione Lucis. It is enough that I have light, as the King of Persia had his Sponsa Solis; and truly I thinke a happi∣nesse to have seene that Candle lodg'd, which our Fathers judg'd to be Lux errans, quaerens Habita∣culum. But I grow absurd, I speake as if I would instruct you; and now me thinks you aske me,
Quis Legit Haec?
It is I Sir that read the Tactics here to Hannibal, and teach him to break Rocks with Vinacre. I am indeed somewhat Pedantic in this, but the libertie you are still pleased to allow me, hath carried me be∣yond
my Cue. It is a trespasse you know, that's very ordinary with me, and some junior Collegues: nor can I omit these Verses which you have been sometimes pleased to apply to this forwardnesse of mine.
Talis Amyclaei domitus Pollucis habenis
Cyllarus, & quorum Graij meminere poetae,
Martis equi bijuges, & magni eurrus Achillis
It is my opinion Sir, that truth cannot be urg'd with too much spirit, so that I have not sinned here as to the thing it selfe, for the dangers onely in your Person. I am affraid my boldnesse hath been such, I may be thought to fall short of that Reverence I owe you. This is it indeed which I dare call a Sin, and I am so farre from it, that it is my private wonder, how I came
to thinke it. Suffer me then to be impertinent for once; and give me leave to repent of an humour, which I am confident you place not a∣mongst my faults, but amongst your owne Indulgences.

From Heliopolis 1651.
