



My ever Honored Patrons.
I Have more then once made my addresses to your worthy Soci∣ety, by way of Petition, and never departed from you with∣out satisfaction to my requests. Give me leave now to make my address to you by way of gratitude. In te∣stimony whereof I make bold to present you with some fruit of my Studies.

Having observed, in search of Divines, An∣cient and Modern, many comparisons be∣tween our dear Saviour and the Types, by which he was fore-signified to the Church of the old Testament, and the cleering also of other resemblances, by which in the old or new Testament he is set forth, it came into my mind, to make them Publick: And, ac∣quainting some of my Brethren with my thoughts in this kinde, I was much encou∣raged by them in this my purpose; They judging it of singular use, both to Demon∣strate against the Jewes, Jesus of Nazareth to be the true Messias foretold by the Prophets, and also to set forth the usefulness of Christ, and so to stirre up men, both earnestly to de∣sire him, and to be seriously thankful for him: Besides the help that it might afford to younger Preachers, which (in their appre∣hensions) would be much: Upon this en∣couragement I resolved to set my self to the business. And this was my first intention: yet, Christ being the Head and Husband of the Church, and the Church the Body and Spouse of Christ, I thought it fit in the Third Book to acquaint the World with the Comparisons, which in reading I had observed between the
 Church and the Types of it, and other resem∣blances, by which it is set forth in Scrip∣ture, which also, I hope, that by reading, ye shall finde not unuseful. But there was yet one rub in my way, and that is the com∣plaint of Saint Paul,Phil. 2. that all men seek their own, and not the things, that are Jesus Christs: And even those also, that should be, as Mid∣wives, to help forward such Births, even these, among the rest, I finde sick of this dis∣ease, in which respect They will not under∣take the Publishing of any mans Labours, though never so useful, except They may be sure to be great gainers by it; whence it is, that the World is deprived of many Monuments of Learning and Piety, which otherwise we might have. But this difficulty I was wil∣ling to leap over, chusing rather to Publish it (at least for so many Copies, as I desired to have Printed) upon my own account, and at my own charge, rather then to deprive any of any help (how little soever it might be) which (at least in the apprehension of some of my Brethren) this Treatise might afford unto them: especially having withal this advan∣tage by it, namely, an opportunity to leave a Publick Record, both of your Love to me,
 and of my Thankfulness to you. One thing I shall desire of you, that if in reading, you shall finde any fault by which the sence may be obscured, you would be pleased to look to the end of the Treatise, where you shall find the faults Corrected. I have no more to say, but onely to desire your favourable acceptance of my weak indeavours, and to believe, that I am, (as indeed I am)
From my Study, March, 1658/9.

