


Right Honorable,
DId you but hear the utterings of every private breast that is well-affected to you (of others I speak not) certainly you would be sensible of much hard and grating language against some of you at least, if not against most of you; how just their cry is, your selves are best able to judge, and I most incompetent. That you, and all your subordinate Magistrates in the Land, might be Peace and Righteousness to the Nation, is the prayer of them that truly wish your and its welfare. Among the rest, it is the earnest desire of him that addresses these Proposals to you, that you might not onely be a blessing to this Land, but to the Na∣tions round about you; yea, Benefactors indeed to the world; not (as one saith) like water-pots, that refresh your own plot of ground; but like showers, that water and make fruitful the whole earth. The Proposer humbly prayes, That when the intentness of your thoughts is unbent from the consideration of more pub∣lique affairs, you would please to consider what is herein pro∣posed to you. Some things therein (because of long contrary practise and custom) may seem novel or difficult at best; yet if you please to consider and examine them, you will finde they have more of custom and use, then Reason or Justice, against them; and it will be your greater honor, to reform early and rooted evils, then those that are of a late and junior rise; by how much great difficulties are the more adaequate objects of the grap∣lings and encounters of great spirits, especially such as are backed with wisdom and strength. I could have labored more to please then to profit (as too many do now adays) for profits sake; but I hope to have learned better things, then to follow the Parlia∣ment (or own the cause they have undertaken, which indeed I have) for loaves, but for a good conscience, which is a continual feast to a plain-dealing man, though (as the Proverb saith) He may dye a beggar. Sed timida probitas non prodest reipub.
Grays Inn, this 16. Nov. 1652.

