



My Dearest Sister,
SInce God would so have it that I should partake with you of the goods of Nature, and that our common Birth per∣mits us not to have any thing of Particular in the advantages of the World; I hope he will please to accept the desire I have to ex∣tend this right to the Goods of
Grace, and that he will approve∣of my making you partaker of what I could gather in the Books of the Church, whereby I have reserved nothing from a person whom he hath rendred so dear unto me.
Nor can I believe that the World it self, notwithstanding that it is accustomed to disapprove the doings of them who have abandoned it, can condemn this. For if people take it not amiss, that such as love one another by motives of Interest, and for the Goods of this life, should make use of these Goods to give pledges of their love to one another: why should it be any wonder, that they who are linked together by
a friendship which is totally disen∣gaged from the Senses, should employ Spiritual things to testify reciprocally to each other their true affection.
Imagine not therefore, my Sister, that this Book is the effect barely of a natural Love, which gives me entrance into all your Interests. I am excited to write unto you by more holy and more powerful motives: it is no longer lawful for me to act meerly by them of Nature. And having drained all that this Work in∣cludes from the Well of the Sa∣cred Scripture, and from the Wri∣tings of the Fathers of the Church, I may assure you that I have the least share therein.

You therefore are not to make any Reflection upon him who presents it unto you; but apply it to your self singly for the enrich∣ing of your Soul with the Virtues which are here discovered unto you, and which God demands of a Christian Mother.
Consider, that you can give him no greater proofs of your Love and of your Fidelity, than to bring up your Children accor∣ding to the Laws of the Gospel and the Counsels of the Fathers of the Church; and that you cannot offer to him a sacrifice which will better please him, than to conse∣crate them to him by a holy Edu∣cation, since they are the better part of your self: nor is there any
thing which can more move him to pour forth upon you and upon them his blessings, than the care you shall take to instruct them in his Fear and in his Love, and to let all the World see, by engaging them to imitate their Heavenly Father, that you look upon them as his Children.
'Tis to help you in this laudable designe, that I have begged of our Lord Jesus Christ so much light as was necessary for me, to observe in the sacred Scriptures and in the Volumes of the Fathers of the Church, those Maxims which ought to be followed in the Edu∣cation of children: that I have in∣stantly besought him to inspire me with such choice Advices as he
would have me draw from thence to propose them to you, if he would please to make use of me, altogether unworthy as I am, to give you the knowledge of what your children stand in need of, and of his designs upon you and up∣on them.
Consider then, if you please, this little Work, as a Collection of what is most holy and most pure in the Doctrine of the Church, touching the Subject it treats on. I have done no more than joyn the passages to one an∣other, And if there are some Pro∣positions the Authours whereof are not cited, it is because they were included in the Principles which I have established upon the
authorities of these great Saints.
Nothing now remains, but to send up to God my Prayers, that what I have done to discharge my Conscience, may not make yours criminal: but rather that he will effect by his Grace, that by put∣ting in practise these wholsome Maxims and Advices which I of∣fer you, you may happily experi∣ence that which St. Jerome avers, That the health and happiness of Children turns to the Glory and to the Advantage of their Fathers and Mothers.
