



Most Noble Sir,
THere is no mortal man but is subject to sor∣row, which so disorde∣reth the sweetnesse of his life, if it hath any, that it turnes it altogether into bitternesse, and wearisomnesse. It spares none, neither Kings, nor Princes, nor such as are placed in high∣er and more eminent auhority;
 yea, the higher in dignity they bee, the more violently it sets upon them; like waves, which dash against the highest rocks in the sea with most ve∣hement motion. The weapons which this most prevalent mischiefe useth against us, are as manifold as the afflictions themselves, whereunto we are exposed in this life, wherein are all manner of molestations and miseries, some more grie∣vous than others, not unlike to greater and lesser living Crea∣tures that are found in the vast Ocean, and to divers and in∣numerable creeping things on the earth; for one while one sorroweth, as feeling some spi∣rituall evill, and assaulted by
 some grievous and stinging temptation, which gives him most vehement blowes and shakes him, insomuch, as it hurles him well-nigh into hell, that is desperation; otherwhile some temporall miseries as∣sault him, in regard whereof hee is of a heavy drooping countenance, his sounder senses disordred, and his whole per∣son depressed and cast downe. And what Christian is there, whom the miserable and cala∣mitous face of the Church af∣flicts not? what house holder is there, that is not afflicted with the afflictions accompa∣nying marriage? Look how holier the state is, and the more excellent be the blessings ther∣of,
 the more grievous afflicti∣ons it sustaines. It happens, that desparity in nature be∣twixt man and wife afflicts the mind, as when an Abigail is married to Baball, or a Moses is conjoyned with Zephorah, that is so contrary to him. A bar∣ren bed afflicts others, unto∣ward disposition of children torment others, which at last brings them to a tragicall end: others lament the untimely death of their children, who for the present were their joy and comfort, and hopefull for the time to come; and their cutting off by some strange and extraordinary mischace heigh∣tens their griefe. Hither may be referred the death of one
 of the married persons, and decease of our beneficiall kins∣folke and allies. Neither is the state of single life free, di∣vers, nay, innumerable mole∣stations attend it, to wit, per∣fidiousnesse, crafty wiles of e∣nemies, dishonesty, ignominy, contempt, poverty, losse of goods, imprisonment, banish∣ment, imperfections both in body and soule, diseases, and at last after the chaine of so many evils death it selfe, which either feare preconceived, or present invasion presents to his view. Moreover, neither doth that which is really cala∣mitous only breed in us sorrow, but even joy it selfe carries with it this inseparable com∣panion,
 as the body the sha∣dow, either in respect those things which thou wishest fall not out so, as thou desirest they should, or because all manner of joy is as it were a certaine forerunner of sorrow, wherein it ends. To say nothing here, that in that very time that prosperity on the one side cheers up thy spirit, some si∣nister thing on the other side is annexed, moving thee to be sorrowfull; and as there is none that is not subject to this passion, so none can be found that is so bluntish, that wi∣sheth not to bee discharged therefrom. To which end di∣vers use divers meanes; for there be some that use meanes
 altogether unlawfull to be rid thereof, but are successelesse; and more than that, are often∣times worser than the disease; as Ahab did, following his wife Iezabells counsell, whom when she saw so heavy that he would eat no bread, shee came unto him, and said unto him, why is thy spirit so sad, that thou eatest no bread? let thy heart be merry, and I will give thee the vineyard of Naboth, 1 K. 21.5.7. for wch purpose she subornes false witnesse against the innocent, and with the wine and blood of Naboth makes the King merry and joy∣full; others think to withstand this evil by other means, which are indeed in themselves indif∣ferent;
 the use whereof is not able to drive it away, and the abuse ignominious and op∣probrious unto him that ap∣plieth them, to wit, when strong drink is given to him who is ready to perish, and wine to those that be of heavy hearts, that hee may drink and forget his poverty, and remem∣ber his miserie no more, Pro. 3.6,7. There are great many drinkers, an unhappy crue, who would suffocate and drown their sorrowes in wine, which will at last bite like a serpent, and sting like an ad∣der, and cause thee to crie out, woe is me, woe is mee, Prov. 23.29,32. Meat and musick are of like nature, being abu∣sed
 and turned into carnall pleasure, whereby many doe endeavour to put farre from them the day of calamity, as the Holy Ghost speaks, Am. 4.5,6,7. Hither may be re∣ferred those speeches and dis∣courses which are framed by humane reason, to expell it, and to minister comfort to the af∣flicted, but they cannot doe him any good; for they leave him at last in perplexity of mind: discourses I say, which are not onely able to drive away this evill, but are sometimes frivolous, idle, foolish, yea, evill and pernicious. Such con∣solation did Absalon suggest sometimes to his sister Tha∣mar, who fell into desperation
 by reason of the violent incest wherewith Amon deflowred her. Hath Amon thy brother, said hee, been with thee, but hold now thy peace, my sister, hee is thy brother, regard not this thing, 2 Sam. 13.19. A fair spoken speech, if credible, and good comfort forsooth, which was, that she should pa∣tiently beare with that igno∣minious and execrable infa∣my, for that she was deflowred not by any other but by her owne brother: But his words wrought nothing upon misera∣ble Thamar; for the Holy Ghost saith, that she remained desolate in her brother Absa∣lons house. Further, those books which are forced, I know
 not with what fables; trifles; toies, or other narratives, whether true or feigned, are of the same bran, wherewith sor∣rowfull men use to drive away the time and melancholy. Hi∣ther may be referred the exer∣cises of the body, as hunting, and the like lawful recreations, whereby the sorrowfull man strives to rid his mind of cares, wherein there is not only that defect found comon with other insufficient meanes, in that when these recreations are fi∣nished heavinesse waxeth fresh againe; but there is also this discommodity therein, that they are not answerable to the nature of his disease, as being ill applied; these excercises
 working directly upon the bo∣dy, but upon the mind indi∣rectly and accidentally onely; now sorrow is inherent in the mind, and not in the body, the plaster therefore is to be ap∣plied to the part ill affected, and where the enemy lurkes, there hee is to bee sought for. Hee that doth otherwise, goes about with desperate Absalons servants, who pursuing Iona∣than and Ahimaaz, instead of searching for them in the place where they had hid themselves, gave credence to the lying speech of a certaine woman, and returned, not finding them, to the place whence they came at first. But sith sorrow lieth hid in the mind, it is necessary
 with Ioshua to enter into the cave where the enemy lies hid, to draw him out thence to trample upon him, and cut him off presently. Thus much of those which use these indif∣ferent meanes. There are o∣thers which imploy themselves in the laudable businesse of this life, even those which each mans vocation exacteth of him, that thereby they may dispossesse themselves thereof, and troublesome cogitations; which though they seem more available, and are more becom∣ming than those which we have before touched, yet though se∣rious and honest in themselves, are not of any validity to drive away this evil now in question.
 All the benefit that one can procure thereby, is, that for a time they make him forget his misery, but they can in no wise conferre upon him such goodnesse as will rejoyce him. The best and most soveraigne remedy then is that, which will not onely chase away the ap∣prehension of the present evil, but will exhibit that goodnesse that will produce gladnesse as soone as conceived in the mind, whence before it was either through ignorance or forgetfulnesse expelled and banished. In a word, the sor∣rowfull man recovers of his disease, when the peccant hu∣mour is driven out by its con∣trary gladnesse of mind, which
 as it is sought for by few, by reason of mens naturall blind∣nesse, so it is very requisite to every one that wisheth well to himselfe; whosoever will ap∣plie this remedy shall by expe∣rience find that other remedies in respect therof, are but as the Holy Ghost speaks, songs to a heavy heart, and as vinegar up∣on Nitre, which remedy wee shall handle in this treatise, by Gods assistance, and as farre as our weaknesse will give us leave, performe that office gi∣ven to Saint Paul by the Holy Ghost; we exhort, comfort the feeble minded, 1 Thess. 5.14. And here first of all, I protest, that while I exhort the faithful man to chase it away, and pro∣pose
 the grounds or reasons hereof, my intent is not to di∣vest him of all sense of affli∣ctions, and that hee should not be sorrowfull at any time; this were to lay aside all humanity and christianity, there being a kind of sorrow, which is ne∣cessary and becomes every man: but my purpose is to dis∣pose him as farre as I am able, so as he may beware as much as in him lieth beforehand of the assaults of it, or if it sets upon him, not to suffer him∣selfe to be foiled, and vanqui∣shed, neither so to possesse him, as it doth the perverse and wicked man, concerning whom Iob speaks; trouble and anguish shall make him afraid;
 they shall prevaile against him as a King ready to battell, Iob 15.24. In short, my purpose is to afford him meanes, if hee be affected therewith as he is a man, wherewith hee may sub∣due it as a Christian, and bee sensible that as he is not a man that never feeles the brunt of it, so hee is not a Christian, which will not couragiously drive it away when it sets upon him; the spirit of man, saith the Holy Ghost, will sustaine his infirmity, but a wounded spirit who can beare, Prov. 18.14. And in another place, if thou faint in the day of adver∣sity thy strength is small, Pro. 24.10. By which words the spirit of God declares, that
 that man is quite undone that is familiar therewith. It stands therefore upon the children of God in afflictions to be vali∣antly spirited, and heroicall, that not yeelding thereto, they may become victorious and triumph cheerfully, being la∣den with rich spoiles; this is our drift. Secondly, I protest my scope is not to drive the faithfull man to all manner of joyes, not such joyes where¦with the wicked are possessed, who rejoyce to doe evill, and delight in the frowardnesse of the wicked, Prov. 2.14. nei¦ther levels my discourse a wordly mirth, grounded upon heaps of riches, pleasures, commodities, and honours o
 this world: Gods children should herein so behave them∣selves, as to observe continu∣ally that of Saint Paul, that they rejoyce as though they re∣joyced not, 1 Cor. 7.30. That therefore should not be estee∣med for reall mirth, which is attributed to fooles. The heart of fooles, saith Solomon, is in the house of mirth, Eccl. 7.4. and is nothing else, but the va∣nity of such as have not their right wits about them, which is also altogether unprofitable, as he saith in another place; I said in my heart go to now, I will prove thee with mirth, and therefore enjoy pleasure, and behold this is also vanity: I have said of laughter, it is mad, and
 of mirth what doth it. And in another place hee saith, it is momentany, and soone peri∣sheth; for as the crackling of thornes under a pot, so is the laughter of a foole; this is al∣so vanity. Adde hereunto that sorrow attends that mirth, or followeth it close at the heeles; even in laughter the heart is sorrowfull and the end of that mirth is heavinesse, Prov. 14.13. for these causes the Holy Ghost preferreth by many de∣grees sorrow before this kind of mirth. It is better to go to the house of mourning, than the house of feasting, for that is the end of all men, and the living will lay it to heart; sor∣row is better than laughter; for
 by the sadnesse of the counte∣nance the heart is made better, Eccl. 7.2,3. wee exhibit not here then this kind of mirth, but sanctified joy, whereunto Saint Paul exhorteth us, Re∣joyce in the Lord alwayes, and againe I say rejoyce, Phil. 4.4. that joy, I say, that is grounded upon Gods grace and benevo∣lence towards us, and is the ef∣fect and testimony of ouradop∣tion; that joy wch is a concomi∣tant of Gods children, & espe∣cially when they are most of al smitten with the stroaks of af∣flictions, and gives us a brigh∣ter lustre in the houre of death, which is so terrible to the chil∣dren of this world; that joy which is begun in this world,
 and perfected in that which is to come, and endureth for e∣ver; for your joy, saith our Saviour Christ, no man ta∣keth from you, Ioh. 16.22. That joy, I say, whereby wee sayle with a prosperous gale the sea of this life, possessing tranquility of mind in the midst of the most grievous ca∣lamities wherewith it is tos∣sed, enjoying these temporall goods, which God hath con∣ferred upon us; as also joy∣fully finishing the course of our life and spirituall calling, being not unmindfull of that speech of Solomon; There is no good among men, but for every man to rejoyce, and to doe good in his life; as also, that
 every man should eat & drink, and enjoy the good of his la∣bour; it is the gift of God, Eccl. 3.12,13. Thirdly, I have not laboured herein for them that live without the fear of God, persisting in their ungodlinesse and heart-hard∣nesse; In so doing, I should but write upon the sand; yea, I should bee set naught by them, as the Holy Ghost wit∣nesseth, he that reproveth a scor∣ner getteth to himself shame, hee that rebuketh a wicked man getteth to himselfe a blot, Prov. 9.7. wherefore wee ex∣hort them in no wise, but sum∣mon we them with St. Iames, to be afflicted, to mourne and weep, and to turne their laugh∣ter
 to mourning, and their joy to heavinesse, Ia. 4.9. But we labour herein for those soules that are desolate, and overwhel∣med with sorrow, for oppres∣sed consciences; in a word, for the children of God, that are in afflictions, and temptati∣ons. Fourthly, it is manifest, I give way to Godly sorrow, which worketh repentance not to be repented of, as St. Paul saith, 2 Cor. 7.10. for sith my intent in this small treatise is to edifie Gods children, it is evident that wee allow them that sorrow which is linked with repentance, and hath no other originall than it, and cannot be in any progresse without it; but being posses∣sed
 therewith, wee must be∣ware from falling into despe∣ration, and attributing that efficacy thereunto, which be∣longs onely to Gods mercy. But hereof, by Gods assistance, in another place, that wee may handle all things decently, and in order, wee will propose the grounds or reasons, which should move the faithfull to bid adieu to sorrow, and con∣trarily to rejoyce. The rea∣sons are of two sorts, whereof some are drawne from the na∣ture thereof, which we exhibit in two tables, that every man perceiving the nature of his disease may look for a remedy, and so bruise the scorpion up∣on his wound, that so hee may
 be healed and recovered. The first table presents us with the deformity of this Monster; The second with the hurtfull effects thereof. In the second sort, of the grounds of sancti∣fied mirth, the spirituall goods which God communicates with the faithfull, shall be in the first place declared. In the second place, the temporall goods which the faithfull for the present enjoyes by Gods grace and goodnesse shall bee treated of. In the third place, wee will speak of Gods provi∣dence, and those temporall be∣nefits which the faithfull should expect to receive for the future at his liberality. In the fourth place wee will de∣monstrate,
 that not onely the benefits, but even the miseries of this life yeeld matter of joy. Lastly, wee teach that the godly man, in respect of his condition, as being a traveller in this world, ought to re∣nounce sorrow, and go on cou∣ragiously. Behold, most honou∣rable Sir, the matter, end, and order, of this treatise which I present unto your Honour, in regard I think my selfe enga∣ged to offer unto you privat∣ly a token, and to erect pub∣liquely a monument of our an∣cient friendship; which as it hath sprouted about thirteene yeares since, so it grew toge∣ther in good studies and lear∣ning, the nourishment and
 knot of our conversation. Your honour, I perswade my selfe, hath experience of the vertue and efficacy of the re∣medies which this little trea∣tise holds forth: for if there be any living that can use, and apply them when need re∣quires, Your Honour abounds therewith, for you have recei∣ved at Gods hands many excel∣lent benefits, aswell temporall as spirituall; the enjoyment whereof should provoke you to rejoyce in God, and arme your selfe against temptations, for which every faithfull man should prepare himselfe; for God hath, not without cause, conferred upon you so many benefits, since for the most
 part the bountiful grace which God powrs upon his children, is as it were an harbinger of the subsequent assaults which a∣bide in this life. The great Emperour and Commander, under whose banner all the faithfull warre and fight, armes not his soldiers with weapons, to the end they may lie dor∣mant before their enemies sight; which weapons are those benefits, which flow from his grace in Christ Jesus, which he presents us with in his word, instructing us thereby how to wrastle with all adversi∣ties, and giving us means to be made more than conquerours in all temptations. Blessed is the man that can turne the
 signes of Gods grace into wea∣pons, the badges of peace into warlike instruments, the plow∣shares into swords, and pru∣ning hooks into speares, Ioel 3.10. so that hee may say, when need requires, I am strong. Sir, you haue a Magazine of these weapons, and can with dexteri∣ty handle them, and know withall how to manage them skilfully, against heavinesse, and sorrow, wherein you are involved, by reason of the im∣mature death of Mark Michely your brothers sonne, some three dayes since. Now if this treatise can mitigate your griefe, and in due time abolish it, I shall as heartily rejoyce, as I do now condole and grieve;
 and alwayes honour his emi∣nent vertue and piety, whereof hee gave proofe in this City. I doubt not but you will ap∣prove the remedies which I doe here propose, the efficacy whereof I would have you at∣tribute unto me, who am no body but unto Gods word, whence I have drawne the in∣gredients of this Antidote. I wish that you, most Noble Sir, and all your Fami∣ly, (which had rather forsake the pleasures of Italy, and trea∣sures of that spirituall Egypt, than escape the reproach of the crosse of Christ Jesus) where∣in such splendor of zeale, con∣stancy and piety derived from the patents to the off spring,
 doth as yet shine in the eyes of all men, may reap most joyful∣ly the fruit of divine reverence, which dwelleth in your hearts aswell in this life, as in that which is to come. This I hear∣tily wish from Geneva, 1630.

