



Honourable and Honoured,
THat I print this Sermon, and that I print it more largely then I preach't it, is in obe∣dience to your Order, which (having resolved a former scruple of mine,) will warrant me for so doing, without
making any further Apologie; though I hope that the Readers advantage also will be the more. That my preaching then was not, and that my speech now is not, with the enticing words of mans wisdom, but I hope in the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit and Power. The reason is, that your faith should not stand in the wis∣dome of words, but in the words of wis∣dome, or, as the Apostle phraseth it, not in the wisdom of men, but in the Power of God: and that the heavenly treasure might not taste of the earthen vessel.
Certainly there was never more need then in our dayes of preaching and pres∣sing that of our blessed Saviour, Labour not, or work not for the meat which pe∣risheth, but for that which endureth to e∣verlasting life and if any say to me as they to him, What shall we do that we
may work the Work of God? I refer them to the ensuing Discourse for their An∣swer. Concerning which I only de∣sire that the Scriptures may be search't which do abundantly witnesse thereunto: To the Law and to the Testimony, if it speak not according to that rule, there is no light in it; but if it appear, (as I be∣leeve it will) to be the voice of God, and not of man; I hope none will quarrel with it, lest they be found fighters a∣gainst God, and why should we provoke the Lord to jealousie? unlesse we were stronger then he.
Solomon tells us that of making and reading many books there is no end, and when we have read, if at least we could read, all that are made, this will be the Conclusion of the whole matter, Feare God, and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole (we reade it duty, the
meaning is the whole) content and Hap∣pinesse of man, this is all that's profit∣able to man, it being opposed to all the rest under the Sun, which is but vanity and vexation of spirit; and verily, we may as well finde ease in hell, as finde Happinesse any other way; and that we shall know, (however we judge now) when (as he saith) God shall bring eve∣ry work into judgement, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.
How much then doth it concern us to look about us, and to work out our salvation with feare and trembling here, lest then we feare and tremble, because we had not done it? Knowing therefore the terrour of the Lord we perswade men; as they love their salvation, and as they will answer it at the great and terrible day of the righteous judgement of God,
that they abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against their soules; that they leane not to their own understanding, nor walk in the wayes of their heart, and in the desire of their eyes, but that they consider to know and do, what is the good and acceptable Will of God, that they may be found without blame, and that when he shall appear, ye may have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming.
Watch therefore, for you know not what houre your Lord doth come; but if any servant say in his heart, My Lord delayeth his coming, and shall beat the servants, and eat and drink with the drunken, the Lord of that servant will come in a day when he looks not for him, and at an houre when he is not a∣ware, and will cut him in sunder, he will cut him off, and appoint him his portion
with unbelievers; and that servant which knew his Lords Will, and pre∣pared not, neither did according to his Will, shall be beaten with many stripes.
I hope none will say as he that had a book brought him, which treated of Happinesse, I am not at leisure; What? not at leisure to minde thy soule and thy Happinesse? are the world and sin such excellent pieces? are they so lovely that thou shouldest set thine heart upon them? Oh why wilt thou set thine eyes up∣on that which is not? 'tis not what it seems to be, 'tis not that which thou lackest, nay, 'tis not that which thou thinkest 'tis; 'twill prove the greatest cheat that can be, and though thou gain the whole world, what will it profit if thou lose thy soul?
Well, you see the world tottering and tumbling about your eares, the fashion
of it, the lustre thereof doth,) And Oh that therefore the lust thereof did passe a∣way! We are also making haste to our grave; if they be not taken from us, yet we shall be taken from them, and who knows, only God knows hovv soon; To day then let us hear and obey the voice of God, that vvhen the Lord cometh, he may finde us so doing, as to say unto us, Well done, good and faithful servants, enter ye into your Masters joy; Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdome.
That this may be your portion, and the portion of them that heard it, and of them that read it, is the hearty Prayer of him, who is
12th. Moneth, or Febr. 20. 1654.

