





Honourable and Honoured,
WHen I had received your Order for the Prin∣ting of this Sermon, I procured the best Copy I could, by which and the best me∣mory I had of what I delivered, I have en∣deavoured to present it to your view; not without a little addition to some heads, which then I could not enlarge.
The rest of this addresse My Lord and Gentlemen, is not to complement and flatter you, but earnestly yet humbly to beseech you that you would (as Mordecai said to Hester) seriously and studiously consider, wherefore God hath brought you to this high estate, hear the place and (as the Prophet said of the rod) him that hath
appointed it; Be pleased to Know and account that the doing your duty in your Place is the greatest ho∣nour of your place; whereas else it will be said that your Places honoured you, but you honoured not your Places.
Indeed 't is the fashion of this World to seek great things for themselves, 'tis their devotion to sacrifice to their own nets, 'tis their ambition to Lord it; they are passionately enamoured with the Delights and Delicacies of this life, which the heavenly St. John calls the lust of the eye, the lust of the flesh and the pride of life; 'Tis all but lust, and the lust of the World, which World and which lust (saith he) passeth away: and which the Wise Solomon on sad and dear bought experience, calls vanity of vanities and vexation of spirit; yet after all these things do the Gentiles seek. But saith our blessed Lord and Saviour, it shall not be so with you, you are not your own, and therefore shall not seek your own, but are Christ's; and therefore seek the things of Christ, and endeavour to doe great things for God: Oh be not led away with the error and example of this World's admirers, to be fond of a poor and miserable because but temporary and perishing greatness. 'Tis a meer Pageant which is but a shew, and a shew that passeth away, as you know.
'Twas David's praise, and 'twill be yours if you tread in his steps, that he served not onely his generation, but the will of God in his generation, or his genera∣tion according to the will of God: Consider then what is the good and perfect and acceptable will of God, that you may be in readinesse to every good
word and work, walking worthy of God to all well∣pleasing.
Indeed (to speak as the thing is) you have none to please, none to serve but God; you may not be the servants of Men, and you must not be the servants of Sin; onely sanctifie the Lord in your hearts, love him, serve him, let him be your fear, and your dread; Fear to displease the God you love, and love to please the God you fear; lest you be found (which God forbid) among them that had a name to live, but were dead; that had been pro∣fessors of Christ, but practitioners for selfe, and for the World.
If the World frown and accuse you for non-confor∣mity, let it be to you a small thing (as it was to the good as well as great Apostle) to be judged by mans day, seeing your judgement is with the Lord; and give me leave to tell you, let the World look as big and as sowre as it can, you may safely and honourably avow it; that the best way to please all, or displease any with least dan∣ger, is to please him who is all in all.
Remember with all that you must one day give an ac∣count of your Stewardship, to the great God of Heaven and Earth, who will not judge according to appearance, but he (searching hearts) will judge righteous judge∣ment, and give to every man according to his works: Now I wish with my soul, that you may doe so well in this your day, as that in that great and terrible day of the Lord, you may hear the joyful sound, of Well done good and faithful servants, enter ye into your ma∣sters joy.
I shall add no more but my desire to God for a blessing
on this Sermon, that as your ears by what you heard, so your eyes by what you see, may affect your heart to live, for that is, to give thanks to God in your high estate, who remembred us in our low estate.

Decemb. 1656.
