


Right Honourable,
YOur owne singular, and even Connative
Candor, piety, and courtesie to All; and
many and most immerited favours, deepely
and duely ingaging Me to both your Ho∣nours,
have induced, yea compelled me to
be ever most studious of bounden Grati∣tude.
I therefore (with that honest poore
Countrey man, of whom I have read, who
seeing many Princes and Nobles presenting
to their Emperour very rich and rare Presents; He also to shew his
love, brought onely his owne Picture painted, and holding forth in
his hand the figure of a faire and rich Iewell, with this Motto over
it, Et hoc vellem: That is, And I would give such a Iewell as this is,
were I able. So I (I say) having no better a present (as yet) to pre∣sent

to your Honours, have most humbly made bold to dedicate to
both your Honours (together with my devoted selfe) this plaine
yet usefull Looking-glasse. VVhich though it be but of a homely
dresse, yet will represent to your Honours variety of remarkable
objects, touching the miserable Malignants and Anti-Parliamen∣tarians
of these our times; most worthy (I beleeve) your Honours
serious view and favourable acceptance. And to whom, indeed,
may I more fitly tender such a tender and fragil piece or utensill,
as a Looking-Glasse is, then to your good Honours, whom both I
and this whole City, yea I may say, the whole Kingdome doe
know by most happy experience (witnesse your good Lordships
most pious, prudent, and vertuous Government of this famous City,
and witnesse also your good Ladyships Masculine vertues, as so
many precious Pearles treasured up in a Feminine Cabinet, I meane
a most heroicall holy Heart, together with the constancie and loy∣alty
of both your Honours to God and Goodnesse in the Parliaments
Cause; and whom therefore (I say) I know most willing to enter∣taine
and use this my Looking-Glasse, Candidâ manu, with candid
and courteous Acceptation, and also most able to patronage and
protect it, A rapacibus & furiosis malignantium unguibus, from the
uncivill and defiling fingers of any of all our unreasonable male∣volent
Malignants. Goe on therefore, my good Lord (as most
honourably you do, guarded and guided by the wisdom and power
of Gods holy Spirit, and supported by the daily prayers of Gods
Saints and Servants) to countenance and encourage Goodnesse, and
to discountenance and keepe under the enemies of Godlinesse, Peace
and Truth, even as your Honours late most worthy Predecessour
did, to Gods glory and his everlasting honour; ever setting before
your Honours eyes, and having in your blessed Brest that heart-for∣tifying-promise
and admirable incouragement given by God himself
to his faithfull servant Josuah,Josuah 1. 5, 6. As I was with my servant Moses, so
will I be with thee,Heb. 13 5. I will not faile thee nor forsake thee. Be strong
therefore and of a good courage. VVhich that your good Lordship most
holily and happily may be, is and ever shall be the dayly prayer of

