




Most illustrious Lords, and godly Ministers of Christs Church.
HEE was not a foole who first affirmed, that there was nothing more prevalent than superstition to rule the multitude: for Christ most divinely foretold us, that the children of darknesse were wiser then the sonnes of light, so that oftentimes not onely the force of deceivers is great, but also the perversenesse of the multitude is such, that they will rather bee deluded, than listen to the Truth. Though God hath recom∣mended his true worship to us, yet Satan hath prevail∣ed more by superstition, then the Spirit of God by true Religion. All Ages can beare witnesse to this truth. When God imployed the divine Prophet Moses in a message to Pharaoh he armed him with the power of Miracles, but Jannes and Jambres resisted him, and that with such eagernesse, that for a while, they prevailed more with their false exorcismes, than hee did with his true Miracles. Solomon built and dedicated the Tmple, as it were to the perpetuall preser∣vation of the true worship: scarce were forty years expired, whn Jeroboam a private man set up his Idols in Dan and Bethel, with such successe, that hee withdrew ten Tribes to his Idolatry. How violent was Jezabel, Ahabs wife, in the superstitious maintaining of Paal, that not onely did she extinguish both the people and worship of God, but also so terrified Elijah, who could procure fire from heaven, that he was forced to leave his station, and in his exile to wish
for death, whom notwithstanding God had purposed to honour, by carrying him up to heaven in a fiery chariot. There is nothing more plaine, then that they who wickedly in ice men to superstition, are for the most part, more active and successefull then those who are the builders up of true Reli∣gion.
This bad successe in Religion proceeds from the multitude themselves, whose property it is to be led rather by opinion, then by knowledge, and to give their assent before they make triall, although envious men dia not sow tares in the night, yet the earth would produce thornes by reason of the ancient curse: al∣though there were no inventers or teachers of superstition, yet the vaine multi∣tude would devise to it selfe some superstitious worship. This calamity proceeds not from the want of truth, but from Gods just judgements: For as Adams sinne hath made the earth more apt to produce of its own accord tares, then all the industry of man can, to bring forth good fruite: Even so the old Serpent is more prevalent in bewitching mens mindes with superstition, then the fellow labourers of the Holy Ghost, in propagating the true Religion.
There was never any Age or Country of the world, which hath not had some time experience of this. Yet this was never more plainly seen then under the great Antichrist whom Paul foretold should bee armed with all deceiveablenesse,
2 Thess. 2. that he might intice such to beleeve lies, that were carelesse to beleeve the truth. Never was there any since the creation more guilty of this then the Bi∣shop of Rome, who whilst hee obtrudes upon the people a hodge-podge of super∣stition, prevailes more with them then the Prophets and Apostles, by their true Religion, and Miracles. For these (even Peter himselfe
And the rest of the Apo∣stles.) could doe no more but undergoe torments and ignominy, and at last lay down their tortured lives, but he on the other side, being armed with superstition, and pretending Peters name and chaire, mounted up to such a height, that being honoured with three Crownes, two swords, and the spoyles of all Princes, he exalts himselfe above all worldly Potentates, and all such as are called Gods, sitting in the Temple of God, and pretending the Church, doth so bewitch men, that hee whom they see, call, and cry out, to bee wicked, a lyar, a falsifyer, doe notwithstanding be∣leeve him to hee the patron and judge of Religion. Such is the force of per∣swasion, arising from superstition, that men see not what they see, and beleeve they see what they see not, as if they were inchanted. Hence it is not to bee wondred at that the whole company of such cheaters, arme themselves with their own superstition, when they have a minde to deceive; which like poyson as easi∣ly invades mens mindes, and taints them, as a tauny colour doth those who re∣maine a while in the Sunne, which insensibly and suddenly comes upon them, be∣fore they knew it came.
This corruption is not to be found, onely in popery, but among Protestants al∣so,
whose mindes being puffed up with the desire of ruling, and counting the sim∣plicity of the Apostolicall Church sordid, they will rather rule then obey: So that they place the sanctity of Religion not in Gods Word, not in Faith, nor in the profession thereof, nor in any other reall worship, but in the right and mini∣stry of handling these things, so that not onely in their Theses, but in full Vo∣lumnes they declaime for the sanctity of government, perswading the people with all the might they can, that the whole dressing of Church government at this day, is of such spiritualitie, that the politicall Magistrate, as being carnall, must bee totally separated from it. Hence may Ministers with ease hereafter withdraw their necks in Church-affaires from the power of the Magistrate, and then in∣directly insult over, and prescribe Laws to the secular powers.
This new guise of Popery our famous Vaedelius foreseeing, did publish a Book concerning The Episcopacy of Constantine the Great, in which hee hath written of the right of Magistrates in Church-affaires at this day, but with such circumspection, that no moderate man can be moved, much lesse angred thereat, for hee feared (as he intimated in his Preface) lest the restlesse minds of con∣tentious Church-men should be incensed, and now it was supposed that he had in∣curred their displeasure, but the book being in every mans hand, and approved by the testimony of D. Macovius and Rivet, it seemed to bee out of all danger of malice.
But the case was suddenly altered; and our Vedelius was molested, not by neighbours, but by transmarin strangers from Zeland. For one William Apol∣lonius did not onely spit in his face, but also pisse in his ashes. This man being led by the Genius of that wicked Destroyer,
. hath offered violence to the Ghost of our Vedelius not without indangering the peace both of Church and State, for not onely doth he rage against Vedelius, but also against all Christian Ma∣gistrates, in a large Booke, and that so lavishly, that he seemes to challenge to himselfe alone, not onely the Dictatorship of ruling, but of railing too: he doth in generall speak evill of Magistrates, but (as it is thought) tacitly flings all his darts against the Magistrates of Midleburgh, but hee hath so cunningly con∣trived the matter, as if hee had first casually found out the Errors and blasphe∣mies of Vedelius, which afterward bee presented to the Consistory of Midle∣burgh, and then to the Classes of Walachria, by whose intreaty, hee undertook this taske, forsooth, unwillingly.
Hee hath adorned his work with a specious title, to wit, The Right of Ma∣gistrates in holy things: as if hee were about to fight for the honour of Ma∣gistrates, whereas he upbraides them every where inuricusly with carnall vio∣lence, with nullity, and servility in Church-affaires. So that oftentimes hee makes secular powers, guilty of sacriledge, and of trampling upon the blood of Christ, if they offer to meddle with Ecclesiastick affaires, besides what hee hath
prescribed. Now least this Walachrian should without controle write what hee pleaseth,
Philarchiae pruriginem. against our famous Vedelius, and all godly Magistrates: I thought good to scratch with my pen, his itching desire of ruling: It is the part of your Highnesse to suppresse by your Authority this scab, that it may not spread too farre. I confesse I have in some places pulled him by the eares, somewhat roughly, but yet more modestly then hee deserved; being no wayes desirous to wrestle with the shaddow of learning, but as they are wont to doe, who have the keeping of Lions, they beat a Dogge, that the Lion may be afraid; so I thought good to beat this curre, that I might keep the Lions whelps within their dens, or grates. Who would roare aloud other wayes, but now whisper onely in cor∣ners. As sure as the Sun shines, this Walachrian device is borrowed from Popery, and Printed to this intent, that in Walachria, or at least in Midle∣burgh, Apollonius alone, with a few Classick Elders and assistants, might rule the rost. I speak not heare out of partiality; for this VVilliam Apollo∣nius is not known to mee, either by benefits or injuries, let every man beleeve or not beleeve as hee pleaseth; my purpose is no other, then to make the device of this Apollonian Church sanctity, absurd and ridiculous, for it is not onely as like Popery as a Doves egge is like a Hens egg, but also it intendeth the same end, so that what the Pope doth openly and directly in challenging power over all secular Princes, this man by an indirect way, and cunning circuition, doth ob∣tain over his Magistrates, and would make tryall of it, if occasion served; the truth of both which, if I should in a short abridgement set down, I hope it shal not trouble you to run over, though perhaps your more serious imployments may deny you leasure to read the rest.
That old leven of Popery concerning the wonderfull sanctity and spirituality of the externall Ministery of the visible Church, hath been trampled upon by all Orthodox men. This the Pope, the fatall enemy of Christ, and the very An∣tichrist hath so dressed and polished, that hee hath perswaded the world to be∣leeve, that all Clergie-imployment is sacred and spirituall, and that the Clergie themselves, are all spirituall and holy, Whence men were possessed with a su∣perstitious conceit, that it was neither lawfull nor possible for Lay-men to inter∣meddle with Ecclesastick affaires, that this charge belonged by divine and in∣violable right, to the Clergie, or spirituall men onely: That this was the fruite or effect of their Vocation, and confirmation (which imprints a spirituall and indelible character, upon the soule and body of Clergie men) by the pri∣viledge of which, they are preferred in holinesse to all other Christians, as be∣ing but Lay-men. That this game was borrowed from the ceremonies of the Jewish Synagogue, and Gentilisme, is apparent even to Papists themselves, if they are not blinde, but whosoever are conversant among the Romish Clergie, will finde that this (spirituall character) is of such efficacy, that for it a cer∣taine
honour of holinesse is ascribed, not onely to the persons themselves, though never so loud, but even to their vestments, and I doubt mee, to their very ex∣crements.
Ordination. Which priviledge because it ariseth from their Calling and Confir∣mation, hence it is, that from the first originall of Antichristianisme, sharpe disputations have been had concerning the right of Vocation, and its dignity, so that every one studyed how to snatch from each other the right and prerogative of conferring this sanctity. This is most clearely seen in the election and cal∣ling of the Popes. For not without divine appointment, did the Pope preferre himselfe to all Monarchs by this pretext of spirituality. Hence arose the fatall pride
Typhus. of that seat and Bishop, in preferring himselfe, and his chaire in holi∣nesse before all others, and chiefly in substracting from the Civill Magistrate, and arrogating to himselfe the right of his Vocation, as it were by an uncon∣trouled and divine priviledge. This arrogancy was foreseen by those excellent Emperours, Justinian, Mauritius, Lodovicus Pius, the Otho's,
See Plati a in the lives of the Popes. and chiefly by Henry the third, who curbed it by divers Laws, and Penalties, reserving to themselves the right of election of Popes, untill Pope Hildebrand thrust Hen∣ry the fourth from this right asserting it to the Church, as her sacred property; and so having undergone this
Apotelesma. perfect work of Antichrist, and willing to shew his universall dominion, he compelled this Emperour to come in an humble man∣ner to him, (being then at Carnossa) through ice and snow, these are Plati∣na's owne words. The superstitious perswasion then of spirituality where∣with men were seasoned, was the first rise of Antichristian pride;
In vita Greg. 7 from this proceeded afterward the separation of Church-men from other Chri∣stians as Laicks, which exempted them at first from the power and com∣mand of the Civill Magistrate, in Ecclesiasticall businesse. Hence pro∣ceeded Ecclesiastick Courts of Justice, which being one Empire within another; and a Kingdome within a Kingdome, it could not bee avoyd∣ed, but that these two powers and jurisdictions must needs dash one a∣gainst the other, to wit, the Ecclesiastick and Civill, and this fell out ma∣ny times with such eager contention, that the Christian world trembled at it, but by Antichrists fatall obstinacy, the Ecclesiastick Government in this strugling, obtained the Victory. That now the Pope being advan∣ced by his two swords, and three Crownes, he sleights the Scepters of all Emperours and Kings.
This is the type of Popery, to which as an antitype answers Apollonius his Walachrian government, for with him nothing is more ancient, then to extoll the outward businesse of the Ecclesiastick Ministery, for holy, spirituall, and di∣vine among men.
Part 1, p. 116 & p. 119. So that every where hee cries out, these affaires do belong to heaven, not to earth, and that the externall things of the Church, reach un∣to the soule; and lastly, to bee of such a sublime nature, that it is impossible the
art of Ecclesiastick jurisdiction should be exercised by the authority of the Ma∣gistrate) so that as often as mention is made of the
Choragium. Ampullantur dressing of Church mat∣ters, they in proud and haughty words affirme, that sacred things are not to bee touched: Of which notwithstanding there is nothing so high and difficult, which is not easie enough to him, that is but indifferently exercised. For these are preaching, and publick Prayer, the outward administration of the Sa∣craments, the making of Laws, for the outward order of the Church; the greater and lesser censure, whereof this is, by suspending from the Lords Supper, that by separation from the whole body of the Church, by the uttering of certain words: Lastly, Election, and confirmation to Ecclesiastick Offices.
All which affaires at this day are known, to be performed by ordinary gifts, oftentimes in a humane and perverse way, even by such who being void of all Christian vertues, are laden with nothing else, but wickednesse: that Apollo∣nius may obtrude superstition after a Popish manner, when hee searcheth after such abstruce mysteries of spirituality, in the outward works of Ecclesiastick dressing, that hee might make men think that what is performed by the Mini∣steriall function of the Church, is of a higher nature then mans capacity can reach unto, Whereas the whole dignity of these things (as they are perform∣ed at this day) depends from Christs generall institution, and from the com∣mon Law of Order.
Out of these lurking places, being driven after the Popish manner he flies to Ecclesiastick Vocation, and chiefly to confirmation by imposing of hands, which though at this day it be defiled and variously spotted, shewing no effects of spirituallity in those on whom it is conferred. Yet hee would faine perswade us that it is of wonderfull efficacy, for conferring of spirituall right, and spiri∣tuall prerogative, to performe the sacred Offices of the Church, that it hath such a speciall prerogative, so that hee accounts him
Part 1. p. 87. & p. 71. sacrilegious, whosoever being destitute of the rights of Vocation, and Ecclesiastick Confirmation, will offer to put his hand to those internally externall, affaires of the Church; which hee illustrates by the example of King Uzziah struck with Leprosie.
Out of which principles at last springs up the speciall Church-Government, which though every man may see it to bee in the world, and to bee exercised by too worldly meanes, and that by them who after confirmation, are oftentimes more carnall, than any Lay-men, yet hee will have us beleeve, that this Go∣vernment is not o this world; not earthly, but heavenly, spirituall, holy, independent from any worldly power, in it selfe absolute, and as it were, of its own
. power, by reason of the inseparable subjection of Church∣men to Christ, as his Legates: Whence belongs to them this right to hee Governours, Captaines, Pastors, Fathers; under which titles it is lawfull
onely for them to proceed, to Governe, to feed, to give laws, to punish, and that imperiously with power, and authority,
Part. 2. p 323. in the formalities of the Church. Whence hee makes a rupture irreparable between the power or go∣vernment of Magistrates, and of the Church,
Part. 1. p. 91. 93. & p. 9. Because they are so different in the subject, end, and meanes, that he thinks heaven and earth will be confounded if the Magistrate should offer to touch the internall things of the Church, For hee will not allow the secular power to bee in, but onely about the Church, which medleth with the circumstantialls, of the Church, onely as a separable accident, which the Church may easily want, and did want un∣der the Apostles, and time of the first Reformation. So that as hee assevers, the Christian and godly Magistrate, hath no more to doe with Church-affaires, then the wicked hath, in respect of right, except in cases extraordinary, when the whole Clergie wants reformation, but yet on this condition too, that the judgement of this matter bee left to the Church-men: But if the Magistrate should meddle with any thing which hee calls formally Ecclesiastick, besides these cases, hee cryes out openly, that sacriledge and robbery is committed; that the rights of Christs Spouse are violated, for which Christ shed his blood; yea that the state of the Church was happier under the crosse, because of her free jurisdiction which then shee used, then now if the Magistrate offer to inter∣meddle with the Church-affaires, so that indeed hee counts, no better then Gibeonites, the religious Magistrates, who were not to serve in, but about the Sanctuary, and were not to meddle with, or touch any holy thing, but be∣ing tide to servile obedience in furnishing necessaries, were bound perpetually to acknowledge their fraud and prophanenesse.
Out of so many naughty rootes of Popery, it is no wonder if in Apollonius, and some of his followers; this fruite proceed, not onely in speaking evill of se∣cular Rulers, as often as they seeme to Clergie-men, to stumble upon the rights of the Church, but contrarily, they dare in secular affaires, prescribe to, and command the Magistrate, by their Pastorall authority; so that no Catechisme seemes to them more holy, than that they assure one another, that the secular Magistrate, is simply to bee debarred from all things which they account Eccle∣siasticall, and that they are not to be admitted into the meanest part of their modern Ecclesiastick spirituality, (so faire as they performe the Office of a Magistrate) the top of which spirituallity, if elsewhere they seem to touch, that they must bee resisted with might and maine, as profane men, either di∣rectly, or, if strength bee wanting, indirectly, and cunningly,
Per cuniculos. in their private or publick declamations to the people. Sure Apollonius seemes in this work to sound the Alarum, and by his example to stirre up turbulent Ministers, to bee bold upon the Magistrate, when opportunity serves, and to shake off one time or other, their vile and violent, yoke. I doubt not but such kinde of vermine
lurke else-where, but dull, and as it were sticking fast in their shell, of which notwithstanding none doth cherish such dastardly spirits,
Puliatus. but that if this Black coat, and rude Wallachrian, shall finde good successe, in a short time great store of such Zelots will every where appeare.
I will no more prophesie, but now will produce the acts of Apollonius, and his fellow Walachrians, set out not a few years since; which will teach us, that long agoe they were resolved, and purposed first to prescribe a Law to the Civill Magistrate in Ecclesiastick businesse, and then afterward in secular, and to leave no stone unmoved for weakning and shaking of their authority.
Not long since,
1 Example. when the King of England and his Parliament were warring, the Vicinity of places, and the Commerce of Religion, from that disturbed State, spread complaints among the people, which indirectly (as usually) seem∣ed to require pity and helpe.
Apollonius with his fellows now a long time desirous of innovation, and whilest other Churches were quiet, did study to interpose himselfe in these trou∣bles, that hee might bee known to the English, and prevailed so much by his ac∣customed Arts with the Walachrians, that among others he obtained the charge of comforting the Church there by Letters, and offering to them verball conso∣lation.
This being known, the States of Zeland thinking with themselves, how dan∣gerous it might bee, if the Ministers of Zeland, should intermeddle with the affaires of England without their advice, considering that not onely the diffe∣rences waxed hot between the King and Parliament, but between the Parlia∣ment-men themselves, so that some affected this, others, that kinde of Church-Government. The States Ordered, that the Letter which was conceived and written by the Classick Ministers, should not bee sent to England, till first they had read and examined it. But when (which is worth the noting) the Mini∣sters were warned in the name of the States, to deliver the Copy of their Let∣ters, that they might peruse them, they presently and boldly refused, affirming, that in this matter they could not obey the State, untill first they had acquaint∣ed their Principalls, or Classiaries, by which answer they did plainly intimate that they acknowledged in Zeland other Principalls, besides the States, as not long after they made it really appeare. For whereas their minds now did swell with the
Orgasm. eager desire of ruling, which not long since they had contracted, out of Apollonius his writings, concerning the Right of Majesty: Having ex∣amined the States Mandat, they resolved not to obey it, but tacitly upbraiding them with hard-heartednesse, and pusillanimity, they involved themselves in the differences of England, having written Letters, in the Churches name to the Britaines, and against the States will, conveyed them thither, which that they might not seeme to have done under-hand, the same Apollonius by the
Orgasm. eager desire of ruling, which not long since they had contracted, out of Apollonius his writings, concerning the Right of Majesty: Having ex∣amined the States Mandat, they resolved not to obey it, but tacitly upbraiding them with hard-heartednesse, and pusillanimity, they involved themselves in the differences of England, having written Letters, in the Churches name to the Britaines, and against the States will, conveyed them thither, which that they might not seeme to have done under-hand, the same Apollonius by the
command of the Walachrians, Printed afterward a Book of Considerations to the English, plainely intimating that by the right of their Hierarchie, they had so much resolution and power, that they might despise and reject the Orders and Councells of the Supreme Magistrate, not onely in Ecclesiasticall, but also in Secular Affaires, which concerned the state of the Common-wealth.
Ʋpon this Triall which they made of their Ecclesiastick jurisdiction,
2 Example. there fell out another not unlike this: The continuance of the unhappy Warre cau∣sed a great famine amongst the Irish, that not onely by report, but also by inti∣mation from the Parliament, it was divulged that thousands of Irish were like to be starved, if they were not releeved the sooner, this matter being first brought to the States Generall in the name of the Parliament, and by them re∣commended to their Provinces: by the States of Zeland, Order was also taken in their publick meetings, that releefe should bee raised in all the Townes and Villages, within their precincts; adding an expresse command, that the mo∣ney should bee brought to the Table of Middleburgh, as to the common Exche∣quer, that with more certainty and expedition, aide might bee sent from the States Commissioners, to those miserable and panting people. Here Apollo∣nius with his Complices, perceiving that by this meanes the distribution of the Money should bee taken away from the Churches jurisdiction and his power, they did not now tacitly whisper, but openly cry out, that they would not obey the States Order, but the Magistrates of Middleburgh being unwilling to give way to this disobedience and rebellion of Apollonius, and being also mind∣full of the quarrell raised afore by him and his fellows, about the collection and distribution of the money of Sweibrugh, where they challenged all that right as sacred, and proper onely to the Church: Fearing also lest by these and such like Remora's, the ready and needfull benevolence that was raised, should bee retarded; they no lesse piously then prudently, ordered to gather from house to house, neither was this a thing unusuall in that City; where foure times in the yeare, certain deputed Magistrates together with the Deacons, use to gather mens benevolence from house to house, for the releefe of the poore. Here A∣pollonius with his Church-men made opposition, plainly threatning, that bee would not recommend the distressed: state of the Irish for any releefe from the members of the Church, as the custome was: whispering that it were better, there never were any Almes gathered, than that so holy a work of mercy should in such an unlawfull way be profained by the Magistrate. Willing also to shew his boldnesse in maintaining the sanctity of his jurisdiction, the matter being agitate in the Consistory, he drew it to the Walachrian Classis, by whose suffra∣ges being assisted, by a large writing, hee signified to the Magistrates of Mid∣dleburgh, they should doe against the Scriptures, the custome of the Apo∣stles, the modern right of the Church, against the confessions, and as it
were the very Nationall Oath, and consequently to the prejudice of the whole Religion. If they presumed to touch with their secular and prophane hands, so sacred a businesse, as the collecting and distributing of Almes. Af∣firming that this holy work was injoyned by holy men, that is, by the Church, for holy men, and therefore could not bee lawfully exercised but by holy Church∣men.
Which childish songs, though elsewhere. I did sleight with laughter, yet Apollonius made such account of them, that hee plainely affirmed in the fourth Article of his paper, which hee exhibited, that the ordering and disposing of collections or almes, appertain to the Church, and that they depend upon no power out of the Church, if this bee so, then the secular Magistrate hath now no more right to appoint Collections, among his subjects, whereof the grea∣test part are the Churches within their jurisdictions. For because the power of the Magistrate is not in, but (about) the Church (as Apollonius finely sings elsewhere) by this supposition, the Magistrate hath no power to impose any tax upon the holy people of the Church, for an holy use, for this were prophanation: but this right belongs to the Church onely, that is, to the Ministers, and Pres∣bytery. And so if Apollonius by his divinity can make this good, it will follow that no member of the Church can bee sure what is his own, and that the Prince hath no more power over his Subjects, then the Ministers of the Church, over the Members of Christ: the chiefe power of the Civill Magistrate consisteth in imposing of Taxes on his Subjects; but if Preachers may in the Church have such Arbitrary power, as hath no dependence on the Civill Magistate; who doth not see a gate opened for Church-Governours not onely of absolute Ruling, but also of inriching themselves, after the manner of the Popes; for whatsoever they by meanes of long gentlenesse of Princes, have scraped together, by their indulgences, donations, reservations, annates, and such like inventions, all these at this day must the Ministers obtain, under pretence of spirituall almes. Apollonius was not content to declare this in words, but hee must also in the triall thereof in deeds, For the Walachrian Classes, confiding to Apollonius his seeming reasons, did signifie to the Deacons according to their Authority, that they should not afford their help to the Magistrate, nor any way serve them in these kindes of collections) neither did they this in private, but openly by their Letters, they signified so much to the Magistrates of Mid∣dleburgh, 24 of Decemb. 1643. which were subscribed in the name of the Consistory, by Jacob Anselaer, William Apollonius, Peter Velde, Antho∣ny Bakelier. The roome of the Classes was filled up by S. Van Denyse, Isaac Horenbek, J. Vanden Brande, Minister of Ulyssing, who by this a∣lone did shew, that hee had yeelded blinde obedience to Apollonius; because hee made no scruple to give this Law to the Magistrate of Middleburgh (and
that in Christs right) from which hee knew the Magistrates of his own Town were free, the Magistrates of Ulyssing collected from doore to doore, the Mi∣nisters of his own Town being neither consulted with, nor making resistance, so it appeares that by the sole instigation of Apollonius,
Cusa est faba. because of his hatred a∣gainst the Magistrates, this trouble was laid upon the Governours of Mid∣dleburgh: The event of this sedition was, that the prudent Magistrates of Middleburgh willing to yeeld to those times, suppressing their anger, gave way that the Ministers should make their Collections in the Church: but first swearing that all the money collected, should according to the States order, be brought to the Table. Howsoever this was done by Apollonius, yet it is most certain, that multitudes of Irish, were undone and perished, by reason of the hinderance caused by this contention. For although it was in every mans mouth, and oftentimes inculcated by the Ministers themselves, that many Irish would bee ruined and starved, if they were not the sooner supplyed, yet with A∣pollonius and the new Zelots, a needlesse strife about a small point of Ecclesi∣astick Right, did more prevaile, then the ruine and death of so many good men for want of necessaries.
Out of this fruitefull Garden of contentions about Apollonius his spirituali∣ty,
3 Example. much such like fruite of peevish and stubborne disobedience did grow up.
Now for a long time the Magistrate had permitted the use of Organs in the Church, to regulate the incomposed and confused singing of Psalmes; being an ancient institution, and never disliked by the Ministers that were Apolloni∣us his predecessors.
The secular Magistrates at that time did waver, for diverse causes, namely the close plottings of Apollonius, and his complices, striving what they could to remove from the helme of Government, all such as did not flatter Apolloni∣us in his pride; and that they onely should sit at the stern, whom either neere acquaintance, or their secret favour to Ecclesiasticall jurisdiction, had indeered to Apollonius but this combination and specious conspiracy was happily and pru∣dently broke, by those who were then the chiefe Governours, in removing from publick employment some, upon just grounds, and placeing others in their roome; yet doing nothing that might infringe their Priviledges.
The Magistrates being then wholly taken up with suites, agitate in the Courts of Justice, and not able to put an end to so many suites in Law. They according to their own desire, and of those who had suites depending, taking a pattern from Amsterdam, and other Townes, that they might bee eased of the trouble of small suites, appointed a Court of small businesse, as they call it, where every man may plead in his own case, without the helpe of Lawyers. When the Consulls did oftentimes in private consult (as the custome is there) about these matters,
and not calling into their consultations those prime men of the Town, whom A∣pollonus favoured, be being incensed, that Civill affaires were not carryed, as hee would have them, did utter invectives daily out of his Pulpit against the Town Governours: whose violent carriage, when hee saw was stoutly slighted by them, hee drew all his colleagues to joyne with him in his boldnesse, these having got opportunity to speak with the Town Governours, hee did to their face grievously reprove them, objecting divers things, and sawcily carping at them, that the poynts of their accusation increased to the number of foureteen, some of which are these:
1. That being so often warned of removing the Organs out of the Church, they had not hitherto obeyed.
2. That they used private Conventicles in their consultations.
3, That they had removed from the Helme of Government, able men, placing unfit men in their toome.
4. That they had erected New Tribunalls to the end that having found out wayes of profit, by their new Offices, they should ingratiate to them some Townesmen, to the violation of their Oath.
Lastly, That they were enemies to the Church, and by their actions shewed, they favoured Papists.
Of which fault, I thinke the Magistrates of that Town, are as free as any else-where. For it is known that not once, the Consulls themselves mistrusting the gentlenesse of the Sheriffe, or Chiefe Justice, have entred into Popish assemblies, and carryed away all their Masse furniture, or trumpery: teaching by their example, all other Magistrates, to suppresse these superstitious kinde of people. These and other things, which the Ministers by Apollonius, his insti∣gation upbraided the Magistrates with, to their faces, were by them born with, as was fitting, gravely and wisely. Yet having taken notes of the chiefe heads of their accusation, by their pensionary, they exhorted the Ministers to peace and moderation, using then onely verball reproofe, although they knew Apollo∣nius and some others to be bold incendiaries. But they reserved sharper repre∣hensions till occasion should serve: Many things might bee said of this nature: but Apollonius never left off to hunt after some high preferment in Holland or England, which at home amongst the Middleburgians hee could not procure that might give him content, by reason the Magistrates did so crosse him: to whom when he knew that all his mischievous plots were manifest, and despairing of Victory, yet hee gave not off with old dying Priamus, to fling weake darts that could not hurt, catching at every opportunity, which hee thought might ei∣ther directly or indirectly hinder the Churches Peace, or the Magistrates esteem, and that not privately but openly, entertaining and hugging such occasions, as I will shew by one example more.

Leonard Cepesteyn, one of the dregges of Lawyers,
5 Example. did for a long time gape at the Government of that Common-wealth; but being still frustrated, and irritated with vaine and long expectation, hee was observed for a great while, to beare no good will to the Magistrates, it fell out that one Lumirius a Knave was found guilty of Treason, who having counterfeit himself a foole, did first escape the rack, and afterward chaines, and death.
Leonard undertook (as they say) the defence of this fellow, partly in hope of booty, partly, out of desire to raile; which hee did so impudently, that in open Court hee upbraided the Magistrate with ignorance and injustice, so bold∣ly, as if hee would have stirred up the multitude (which then had filled the Town-Hall, to heare this new pleading) against the Magistrate. The Se∣nate of Middleburgh being moved at this bold and impudent act, did a long time resolve to banish this seditious man. Yet their revenge went not farther then this; to wit, that by their Order this Leonard was forbid to meddle with pleading of any more Causes, either by word or writ; being desirous rather to give, then to cut off an occasion of repentance. Yet notwithstanding hee being helped by the cunning of Apollonius his spirituality, ceased not to search out all the occasions hee could to bee revenged on the Magistrates, at last hee found out a notable one, by Apollonius his helpe, who was able to shake it out of his private Divinity budgets, to wit, that this turbulent man, being debarred from publick pleading, or sitting among the Lawyers, in open Courts, for his se∣dition, and wrongs offered by him to the Magistrate, from which publick scan∣dall hee was not cleared, might bee admitted among the Elders. And truely so farre did this Cepesteyn prevaile by Apollonius his tricks, and favour, that hee was chosen an Elder of the Church;
He was so bad that he was not fit to be em∣ployed in the State, yet good enough to be employed in the Church, &c. not that hee might by any good∣nesse in him, be usefull to the Church, but that Apollonius his Presbytery might upbraid the Magistrate with injustice, for stopping his mouth from pleading, whom they thought fit should bee an Elder.
But chiefly that the Lawyer might take an occasion to revenge himselfe, and wrong all secular Magistrates, at least indirectly, from the Ecclesiastick tribu∣nall.
I confesse, I write this onely by relation, but I doubt not the truth of it. For hee that will search the States Ordinances there, and the Records or Register of the Magistrates of Middleburgh, will finde, that I am not further off from Truth, then from Reason, which doth manifestly shew, that Apollonius for a long time with his Walachrians, have been striving, in thought, word, and deed, by their example, to teach other spirituall men of the like stamp, to resist Magistrates and Princes; and that Pope-like under pretence of the Church-Hierarchie, they would dissolve, and subject to themselves, the carnall authori∣ty of secular powers. So that now I may seeme to performe funerall obsequies
both to the Ghosts of Vedelius, as also to keep off, the death and buriall both of the ivill Government, and of the whole Church. For experience of all Ages have taught, that no sooner hath your authority been rejected, but presently these Church-Prelates have ruined and destroyed one another;
. whence nothing can be expected but miserable Anarchy, except there should arise another Pope and Antichrist in the Reformed Church.
This Apollonius is very lavish in railing against you; and takes no small delight in presaging, that you will prove secular Popes, and consequently Anti∣christs, if you but offer formally to meddle with, or touch the Modern Church-affaires (which hee challengeth to him and his alone) with that supreme au∣thority which is given you from God. But sure hee was never more mistaken then in this: For the Pope is in this very regard the Antichrist, because hee challengeth to himself, the Supreme and Monarchicall power, which is proper alone to You; and which against the command of Christ, hee abuseth to the de∣struction of the Kingdome of Christ. If Apollonius had weighed S. Pauls prophesie of Antichrist, hee might have seen, that it is impossible for a secular Prince to bee Pope, or Antichrist; for hee most divinely foretold that he should sit in the Temple, but You Princes sit not in the Temple, You alone sit by Gods appointment in the chiefe Throne of the World: from whence if you dart the beames of Your Majesty upon the Church of Christ, You doe but what by daily experience wee finde in the Sun, whose beames, though placed in Heaven, yet make the Earth fruitfull.
Hee also tells us, that this will bee his property, to elevate and extoll him∣selfe above all worldly powers,
 which is the Popes work, and Apollonius his desire, but when You come to handle Church-matters, You doe not exalt Your authority, but submit both Your selves to Christ, and Your authority also, with which God hath solely intrusted You.
Lastly, Hee sitting in the Church of God, must extoll himselfe above all that is called God, or Monarch; but You Your selves are called Gods and Mo∣narchs; You must needs bee exalted above Your selves, if You bee Popes and Antichrists. However then You may swell with unseemely pride, yet if You meddle with Church-matters, (which Apollonius feareth) You shall not bee like Antichrist, to whom it is essentiall, to bee proud, and to exalt himselfe, but rather despising the pride and glory of the world; You will kisse the Sun, and submit your Scepters to him: yet not basely and contemptibly, as the Pope doth require of Monarchs, and Apollonius would faine procure in Middle∣burgh: Which Plague, that God may deliver us from, I thought fit to write what You see, upon his patcht pieces, the sum of which I have set out by this Preface, so that now I should end this Proem with a wish.

Feare not the superstitious paintings of Church-holinesse: as if some world∣ly carnality, had made you unfit to manage the moderne businesses of the Church, as our new Papists prate. To you God hath given the spirit of Adoption, that You may beleeve, and consecrate your bodies, and all yours for a holy sacrifice to him; to You by speciall warrant hath God given His word, that it might ne∣ver depart from your mouth. To you God hath given chiefe power, to propagate honesty, the Worship of God, and Piety; cannot You then direct or performe holy things appointed by God, without sacriledge of which at this day there is nothing of such consequence which may not be performed by some prophane im∣postor, or young Schollar, scarse yet free from the lash of the rod.
They commonly answer that these things may bee done by you, but must not, because you are not called thereto.
Biotica. Whereas you are to meddle onely with the things of this life, and such as may bee committed to the basest members of the Church: Yea, if you will beleeve Apollonius, you are but separable accidents of the Church, having for the end or finall cause of your Office, onely the peace of your people; but Religion, honesty, and piety, onely remotely and impro∣perly; which are so many blasphemies, by which they speak evill of the Rulers of the people. For you are the Keepers of the Church, Fathers, Governours, Captaines, and Heads of the People. God himselfe stiles You Gods. Who seeth not that these Apollonian whirle-windes resist the Ordinance of God? who prescribe bounds to Your knowledge, and because of some petty worldly circumstances, would exclude Your care about Church-matters. God himselfe bids You Kisse the Sonne: Isaiah foretels that You shall bee Nursing Fathers to the Church; the Apostle tels us, that the end and effect of your function, is the preservation, as well of Religion and Honesty, as of publick tranquillity, without any difference: Beleeve not therefore Apollonius and his followers; for if once they cheat you with these Canvase wares,
Saccaria. that you may commit the whole businesse of Religion to them, they will leave off to take care of the Church, and will care for the things that belong to You; They will leape from the Pulpit to the Throne: This the Pope hath done a great while; whom John Becholti∣us of Munster did imitate: This doth Apollonius with his fellows, carnest∣ly hunt after in Middleburgh. Despise the vaine buzzings of contentious men, they are Aesops Wolves, who desire that they alone may keep the sheepe, that the dogges may bee removed from the flock. Imitate rather godly Kings and Princes, who by their examples have shined before You; and chiefely Moses, who being set over Aaron, and the whole Priesthood, not as a Priest, or Prophet, but as God, or a Prince: hee had no lesse care of Aarons Priesthood, and of Re∣ligion, then Aaron himselfe; not that hee did execute that by himselfe, which by divine and speciall priviledge was assigned to Aaron and his Priests, but he di∣rected the whole worship as it was instituted by God; and did moderate it by that
eminent power, by which alone bee excelled Aaron and his Priests, as their God and Prince. Whose footsteps afterward Joshuah followed, who was Prince over the Israelites, and Moses his juccessour. So likewise David, Solomon, and other pious Kings, of whom Solomon by vertue of his regall authority a∣lone, deposed Abiathar the High Priest, that hee might inflict upon him an Ec∣clesiasticall punishment, that is, that hee might not bee any longer the Lords Priest, by which right, hee placed Sadoc in his stead. Godly Jehosaphat, who was neither Priest nor Prophet, appointed Ecclesiastick Judicatures, as well as Civill, and in them, Judges and Presidents, no Priest gainsaying him. Yea, in the third yeare of his Reigne, hee sent from Town to Town, not onely Priests, but Civill Princes also with the Book of the Law, to teach and Preach, who truely (although the worship of God was then decayed) had been notwith∣standing guilty of Sacriledge, if hee had attempted either to offer Sacrifice, or carry the Arke, or enter into the Sanctuary, or execute any of those things which God by speciall priviledge had granted to the Priests, and denyed to all others. Therefore sleight the Impostures of Apollonius, and such as hee, who alleadge to you the exemples of King Uzziah, and Uzzah. These are chil∣drens rattles, which hitherto wicked Antichrist hath used to affright fearfull superstitious people.
. These are empty tryes, which experience and reason may teach you to despise. For if to Pray publickly, to Preach Gods Word, to send Preachers, to chuse Ecclesiastick Judges, to remove a Priest from his Mini∣stery, to place another in his stead, are matters of such speciall right, as the going into the Sanctuary, the burning of Incense and other things, which God specially allotted to the Levites, Uzzah alone had not falne down dead, nor Uz∣ziah been struck with Leprose, nor the Philistimes troubled with the Hemor∣rods, but innumerable pious Kings and Princes had been lyable to Gods wrath. For although by the Law they abstained carefully from all Leviticall employ∣ments: Yet if the Levites under this pretence had debarred them from every work of Divine Worship, they had been laughed at as grosse Impostors. They contained themselves within the prescript of the Law, nor could these things bee thrust upon them as sacred, and not to bee touched, which God had not by an expresse Law separated. The old Leviticall and templar separation is now a∣bolished, and yet this new Walachrian Levite, perversely imitating the Jews, challengeth in his Church-dressings, that for holy and untangible, which the old Levites themselves, if they were alive, would not debarre you from. For it had been a most unworthy act to keepe off the High-Priest from medling else-where with holy things, who might lawfully enter into the Holy of Holies; this pri∣viledge being granted, there could bee nothing so sacred, which bee might not touch: How great then is the wrong which these new Priests offer to you, un∣der pretence of holinesse, when they would affright You from medling with the
Modern outward affaires of the Church, Who have received from God a spe∣ciall power to enter every day into the now Christian Holy of Holyes, There is now nothing in the Church, nor in the whole world, so sacred and infallible as the holy Scripture. This is our Holy of Holies, this is our Propitiatory, Arke, and Cherubim; this is our Brest-plate, shining with farre more brighter jew∣els, then that of the Jews; This is our Ʋrim and Thummim: and whatsoever of old was venerable amongst the Jewes, but now lost, comes farre short of this which shall never perish, though Heaven it selfe should fall. In this concer∣ning matter of salvation, God doth answer You as well as the Priests, whose an∣swer is still certain and infallible: Now whereas God himselfe by speciall war∣rant permits, nay commands You to enter into this; what madnesse is it, that from the petty sacred things of this Church-furniture, You should bee kept off, from touching them, under pretence of sanctity: This is our Christian Liberty and felicity, that wee are all now under Christ, Kings, Priests, and Prophets. That the generall priviledge of Christians is so large, that no man is excluded from the administration of sacred things at this day, if hee bee gifted.
I confesse it stands not with decency and Order, that any man without calling should put his hand to the Modern Ministery, yet the holinesse of the function is not hereby violated, the Calling is at this day humane, and oftentimes corrupt∣ed, it serves for Order, but conferres nothing to speciall sanctity. Our Mo∣dern imposition of hands, doth imitate the fact, not the effect of the Apostles: so that hee who is ordained and confirmed, is the same after, that he was before imposition of hands.
But the Apollonians bragge, that they are Christs Embassadors. This is an arrogant untruth, for they have not obtained the gift of teaching in the Church, after that divine and spirituall manner, that Christs Legates did of old; but by humane gifts, and humane calling, which according to Gods and Christs generall institution, serve the now decayed Church, that wants these gifts in which shee excelled under the Apostles.
You are Gods Embassadors, and the Churches Patrons, to whom for ever by speciall command the care of the Church under Christ is committed. Which not to undertake is hainous impiety, and to take it from you is sacriledge, and now what I have said to the secular Nobility, I also say to you that are Religious Ministers. Contemne the boldnesse of Apollonius and his fellows; for they are seditious and desire innovation. They goe about to raise among themselves the Papall Hierarchy, to the overthrow of your Honour: they hunt after world∣ly glory, and would have you lose the true honour of Christ: All honour is due properly to Gods Word, not to you. Your Calling should put you in minde of your Ministery and burthen, not of command and ruling. Which of you will bee so proud with Apollonius, as to bragge of an inseparable subjection under
Christ, so that hee truely heares Christ, that heares you? Let Apollonius be ashamed, to bee so often convicted of falsehood, that hee is so infabibly subordi∣nate to Christ, as if his authority with Christs were the same.
Lisien rather to Christ the Lord of the whole Church, who by command and examples hath taught you not to seek after the Kingdomes of this world, much lesse by the Church. Apollonius seeks both, to wit, dominion in the Church, and by the Church, over Magistrates and the world too.
Christ said that Kings and Lords were to beare rule, but not you. Yet hee hath not driven out of the Church the higher power which is exercised with au∣thority, but hath forbid you to meddle with that, which God hath granted to Magistrates. The Pope hath so corrupted this command of Christ, that by wrest∣ing of it, hee first stript Princes of their authority in the Church, and then from their temporall Dominions, and so procured to himself the dominion of the Church, then of the whole World: This is it which Apollonius borrows of him. Hee debarres Princes from having any authority in the Church, from which Christ never debarred them. On the contrary, hee affects dominion and power over the Church and State, which Christ never gave him; but plainly forbid him; Bee not therefore followers of Apollonius and his Disciples.
Christ and his Apostles were indued with supreme authority, and what the Magistrate doth now by the Sword, that could they doe by words and threatning, that is to say, kill and punish corporally. They had power and aptitude to com∣mand all in the Church, but not to obey, notwithstanding, they so ruled the Church, that they both governed, and were governed, they taught, and were taught; they ordered, and were ordered; they sent, and were sent. Finally, there was none of these things they did much affect, for which these proud and contentious spirits strive, as it were for Religion it selfe: Stephanas and her family served the Church with their goods, these were but vulgar people, and (as they called them) Laicks, yet Paul wills the whole Church, which excelled in so many spirituall gifts, to bee subject to them, and such as they were, for that work: How farre was that government from this of Apollonius? on whom the Christian Magistrate had beaped all sorts of benefits, yet teacheth that hee must not bee subject to them, but they to him, that hee must not honour but contemne them;
ar. 1. p. 30.31. for bee accounts him wicked, and a Simonaick out of his Cal∣derwood, that shall adscribe any power over the Church to any man, for his bounty and charges on the Church. Which is a manifest blasphemy both against the Apostle and the Magistrate: which neverthelesse these Walachrians esteem as a fine and choise sentence. But they say that Christs Kingdome is not of this World:
Luk. 17.21. I grant it, if they mean his internall Kingdome, which Christ saith, is within us. But for externall things which serve for the building up of that Kingdome, Christ never taught they were not of this world, and surely hee had
done that which was far from the nature of his Kingdome, when making a whip of coards, hee vindicated the purity of Divine worship. Yea, that Coun∣sell which is given to Kings and Princes of the New Testament to Kisse the Sonne, had been in vain, but that I may not use my own words longer,
In comment. Deut. 13.5. Let Cal∣vin speak, who thus writes: God can be without the help of the Sword, for the defence of Religion: hee wills it not: but what wonder is it if God commands the Magistrate to bee the revenger of his glory, who will not have thefts, whoredomes, drunkennesse, exempted from pu∣nishment, nor suffer them? In lesser faults, it shall not bee lawfull for the Judge to cease: when the worship of God is overthrown, and all Reli∣gion; shall so great a sin be cherished by connivence, &c? Besides, what can bee more prodigeous? but its in vain to contend by reasoning, when God hath once pronounced what hee will have done: Wee must necessarily yeeld to his inviolable decree. Yet it is questioned whether or not this Law belongs to Christs Kingdome, which is spirituall and farre different from earthly Empires: And indeed there be some, otherwise good men, who think that our condition un∣der the Gospel, is not like that of the ancients under the Law: Not onely be∣cause the Kingdome of Christ is not of this world, but also because Christ would not have his Church in the beginning to bee established by the Sword, but whilst Kings in promoting of Christs Kingdome, doe consecrate their owne work; I deny that therefore the nature of it is changed. And although maugre all world∣ly power, Christ would have his Gospell to be proclaimed by his Disciples, whem hee exposed as sheepe among Wolves, having no other Armour but his Word: yet hee did not tye himselfe to an eternall Law, but that hee might force even Kings to his obedience, and tame their violence, and of bloody persecutors, make them Patrons and Guardians of his Church. In the beginning Magistrates exercised their tyranny against the Church, because the time was not yet come, that they should Kisse the Sonne, and laying aside their violence, should become Nursing Fathers to that same Church which they persecutediaccording to Isaiahs Prophesie: which doubtlesse hath reference to Christs coming. Nor is it to no purpose that Paul bids us pray for Kings, and all that bee in authority, hee gives a cause, to wit, That under them wee may live quietly, in all godlinesse and honesty. As Christ is meek, so hee will have his Disciples to follow him in meeknesse; but this is no hinderance to Magistrates, why they may not have care of the Churches safety and tranquillity, in the defence of religion: for to neglect this duty, were extreame perfidiousnesse, and cruelty. These things had that great man learned to bee most dangerous by his own example, namely, not to give due honour to the Magistrate, with whom hee had eager contentions in Geneva, at first, about the circumstance of using leavened bread in the Sup∣per, so that he suffered himself and his colleagues to bee thrust cut of the City,
before hee would submit to them in a thing Adiaphorus or indifferent: yet after∣ward hee plainly confessed his errour, when hee advertied the Genevians and others by his Letters, that hereafter hee would not contend about such small cir∣cumstances as this was, There was nothing pleased him better, then to bee con∣stant even to death, in things that were truely holy and necessary: as for things not necessary, hee yeelded himselfe an easie Judge. But Apollonius breaths quite contrary: hee corrupts and neglects as bare accidents, these things of Re∣ligion that are truely formall, and essentiall, but extolls for matters substantiall, petty circumstances and sleight accidents of Church-Government, which hee e∣steemes as the very forme of Religion: I have exploded his fictions in the pro∣gresse of this booke, and have laid open his disposition and intentions, and my study shall be (if God prolong my life) to discourse hereafter more largely, of the best kinde of Church-Government. I desire no other reward for my paines, but that you will think well of my good intentions, give eare to my wholesome admonitions, and afford your favour to mee as the enemy of all superstition, and the friend of true Religion.
Farewell.
