



Right Honourable:
IT was the sad and unhappy complaint of the
Prophet Jeremy in his dayes, and in that un∣gracious
and ungratefull City, Jerusalem;
That no man among them was valiant for the
Truth. Jer. 9. 3. Nay, the Lord himselfe, by the same
Prophet, seeming to be, as it were, transported with holy
indignation and just jealousie of neglect of his honour,
and worship, bids them Run to and fro through the streets of
Jerusalem, to see and seek if they could find any one man that
loved the Truth. Jer. 5. 1. Yea, this penury of pious men
was not only among the poor and mean men, Ver. 4. But
even among the Great Men and Rulers of Jerusalem, ver. 5
But, ô the honour and happinesse of this most famous,
faithfull and ever renowned City of London! This City
of our God, of which (most justly) so many glorious Things
are, and may, and must be spoken, to the Glory of God,
and honour thereof! Over which, such a renowned and
religious, such a valiant and vertuous Governour is set (ve∣rifying

that of the Prophet, Nah. 2. 3. (though there, Icon∣fess,
spoken in another sense:) That our valiant men are in
Scarlet, even your good Lordship, who have bin, as it were,
purposely placed and appointed by God himselfe for
these times; and who are so valiant and couragious for the
Truth of your God, and the glorious work of Gospell Re∣formation,
as cannot be dampt or daunted with any vapo∣rous
and seeming Eclipsing Clouds of unworthy Disgusts
raised by the selfish and elfish Envy of Schismaticall spi∣rits,
which of late have, only, passed over the faire face and
cleer Sun-shine of your Honours Piety and Integrity; For
with unvanquishable Valour and Vigour of Zeal for God
and his Truth, (like a pious Patriot, indeed) your Honour
hath most gravely and graciously dispell'd them all, stan∣ding
still, like an immoveable, invincible, and impregna∣ble
Rock; or rather running on, like the active Sun in the
Firmament with so much the more resplendent Beauty,
and radiant Lustre, in a sweet and swift course of Constant
Piety and Magnanimity, for the advancement of the imma∣culate
Cause of your God, and the Common-wealth, to the
high honour of God, and singular joy and comfort of all
the true Presbyterian Saints and Sons of our English Sion,
both in City and Country. Ride on prosperously, then,
(my most honourable good Lord,) in the Cause of Truth and
Righteousnesse, backt with the sacred Suffrages and faith∣full
Affections of very many thousands of most peaceable
honest-hearted and God-honouring Covenanters, both in Ci∣ty
and Country, yea, even of a whole Nation of loyall
and loving Scottish-Brethren, who, with us, most justly
look for and long for the happy and holy consummating
of a glorious Reformation of the Kingdoms Grievances,
and establishment of a blessed Church-Discipline, accord∣ing
to the Minde of our great Master Christ Jesus, and

the plain literal meaning of our sacred solemne Covenant.
And hence (my honourable good Lord) I have bin hum∣bly
bold (emboldened by your Honours much experien∣ced
candor and courtesie toward me, the meanest and most
unworthy of all your Lordships Votaries) to dedicate this
little, but, I hope, very necessary and usefull Treatise (con∣sidering
these seducing staggering and unstable-times) as
a small Symbol, and though poore and plain, yet true
Tessera of my bounden Gratitude, to your Honours pious
Patronage: Thus, I say, both, to take fit occasion to ma∣nifest
my obliged hearts Thankfulnesse for your Lordships
many most free and friendly favours; As also, by this,
though succinct, yet sincere discovery of the sly and sub∣tile
Dissemblers and Deceivers of our dayes, and conse∣quently
the mayn molesters and disturbers of the happy
settlement of a godly Church-Government among us; As
also thus to adde, at least, one small stick to encrease the
flame (though I am confident I need not) of your good
Lordships godly zeale in this glorious work, so much and
so maliciously opposed by the impious and impudent Se∣ctaries
of these most sadly distracted Times. Which,
humbly hoping your Honour will with accustomed Chri∣stian
candor, and exuberant friendly favour, candidly ac∣cept;
The continued, yea perpetuated Encrease of all Ho∣nour
and Happinesse to your good Lordship, in this your
renowned Majoralty, and to the period of your pious
Pilgrimage, shall be the daily devoted prayers of

