



Much Honoured Madam,
WHen I had the happi∣ness to belong unto your Noble Family; the Favours I recei∣ved were Weighty ones, and have left too deep an impression upon me ever to be
 worn off. I never lived more free from Care & Trouble, then when I lived with your Ladyship. Your Civility, your Bounty, your being so much concerned when I went away, I must Remember, while I have Memory.
'Tis very pleasing to me to re∣flect upon the Opportunities I had when I lived at Tittenhanger, your Stately House; not only of studying, but of performing those Secret duties of Prayer and Me∣ditation; wherein Communion with God is so exceeding sweet, that all sensual delights and plea∣sures are contemptible in compa∣rison. At that time the World was presented to me in the Gayest dress: Your House Large, and bravely Furnished; your Gar∣dens
 Delighful; your Park and Walks hardly to be Matched; your Table abundantly & sump∣tuously Furnished. Yet I must needs tell You, That God was ten Thousand times more to me than all this. When I sought him with my whole Heart, and found him; when I begg'd his Grace, and had the Grace I begg'd for. This, This was it, which made my life happy; This made me Cheerful indeed, onely I was sorry to see others take up, and be so much trans∣ported with lower Pleasures.
Believe me Madam, nay, be∣lieve the Lord himself, Religion and Joy are not inconsistent. The wayes of Wisdom, are wayes of Pleasantness; and all the paths thereof, are paths of Peace.
 Though David had a Crown of pure Gold on his Head, though he was Lord of such a Country which was then the glory of all Lands, yet we find that God was his Joy; and that was his Lan∣guage; Whom have I Heaven but Thee, and there is none on Earth that I desire besides Thee. Where∣as Solomon his son, indulging his Flsh, and too much forgetting God, did but hereby contribute to his own disquiet. He made him great Works, he built Houses, and planted Vineyards; he made Gar∣dens and Orchards, and planted Trees in them of all sorts of Fruit; he made Pools of Water, that the Trees might be the more Flourish∣ing. He had Servants & Maidens, Possessions of great and small Cat∣tel,
 above all that were before him in Jerusalem. He gathered Silver and Gold, and the peculiar Trea∣sure of Kings, and of the Provin∣ces. He had Men-singers, and Wo∣men-singers▪ and the Delights of the Sons of Men; and Musical Instru∣ments of all sorts. Nay, whatsoever his Eyes desired, he kept not from them; neither did he withold from his Heart, any Joy. How large an Inventory is here of what is gra∣tifying to the Senses? Yet in the midst of all, he cryes out, Behold, all is Vanity and Vexation of Spi∣rit, and there is no Profit under the Sun, Eccles. 2. 4, 11.
Madam, I earnestly desire your Eternal welfare; and also your present Joy: And truly, there must be Godliness not in the
 Form only, but in the Power also; or else you will be a Stranger to the pleasure of Christianity. God is the Souls centre. Rest is else∣where in vain expected. The more you acquaint your self with Him, the more perfect your peace will be; & thereby good will come unto you.
These ensuing Sermons con∣cerning Prayer, I hope, through the blessing of God, may be a means to make Devotion much more servent. And 'tis not in vain to seek Him that is so wil∣ling to be sound, and whose Suf∣ficiency is such, that he can sa∣tisfie your desires when they are most Enlarged.
That the Lord of Heaven would bless You, and all the Branches of your Illustious Fa∣mily,
 and make all eminent for Piety and Holiness, which will be your truest Honour, and greatest Dignity, is the Prayer of
Madam, 
