


Honorable Gentlemen!
THese Papers are most of them recommended to your care by order of the Council of State, to take them into your con∣sideration. Indeed, many of them were drawn by mee a∣bout five years ago in the Tower, afore I ever thought of a Council of Trade. But seeing it is the hap of these unpolished Papers to bee recommended to your care, I am verie glad of it, and most humbly give the Council of State thanks for recommending them to your judicious examination; making no question of their sowing in a fertile ground, seeing som of these Propositions are already com to the perfections of Acts of Parlament. May it
 pleas your Honors, I am no other then the day∣laboring man; I have brought you Marble from the Mine, felled you Trees, and brought them to you, and at your feet laie them all, to bee hewn and squared by your judicious and pro∣found Wisdoms; You are the Master-work∣men, who are now to take your Instruments to hew & square them for the building of the trade of this Common-wealth. And I shall presume to wait on you those daies you sit, to see how your Building goe's forward; and when that you give a dispatch of the Materials in these Propositions, it shall not repent mee of what I have don. And I shall with all humilitie and chearfulness furnish you with som other Propositions for the service of this Common∣wealth. To so great and grave Judgments, I know multiplicitie of words need not; the great God of Heaven and Earth bee in the midst of your Counsels, and bee Counsellor to you all, and put that into your hearts, that you may bee enabled for so great a work, as the State hath laid on you, and to bee careful of the maintenance of the Trade that concern's the poor of this Nation in general, that they may have a livelihood as well as the rich. And thus much in all humilitie, let mee tell you, if ever any men in this Nation had need to make use of Christ's rule, of beeing as innocent as Doves
 and as wise as Serpents, it is your Honors in this emploiment you have for regulating of Trade. The infinite subtilties, frauds and abuses in se∣veral Trades, are so many, that the hundredth part of the cheats used to get monie, cannot bee imagined by any other persons but your selvs, that daily hear the abuses practised on many Manufactures made in this Nation. And som men by these cheats, have gotten wealth and dignitie; for in London formerly, many times they chose Aldermen most an end for their wealth, not for their wit or honestie, and that hath made such a hole in the Cham∣ber of London's Treasure, & the poor Orphans portions, when such Kites as got their Estates indirectly came to bee Magistrates. Other Trades there are, whose povertie beeing pe∣stered with more multitudes in the Trade then it will bear, make's many people in several Trades, fall a making the Manufacture indi∣rectly, falsly, and slightly, to the great abuse of the Nation, and all the wearers; and this more particularly I know is don, in the making of Gold and Silver-Thread, as was justified to your Honors by hundreds of the women-spin∣ners in London, upon their Petition against the Wheel-spinners, and their humble desires to your Honors for a Regulation for the future: So that what between the covetousness of the
 rich, and the necessitie of the poor, all the abu∣ses in Trade is committed; and these weeds will everie daie increas in the Garden of this Common-wealth, if the Parlament make not strict and sharp Laws against these offences, and offendors, that make the Manufactures of the Nation slight and base. And not onely to make Laws, but appoint such persons as shall see those Laws put in execution, that Ju∣stice bee don; and these men would bee the pruning knives to rectifie the Garden of Trade: and till it bee don, the abuses in Trade and Manufacture will not bee prevented. I have humbly and plainly told you what I think is to bee don for the best improvement of the Trade of this Nation, and leav what I have said to your Honor's grave considerati∣on; and shall ever praie for the prosperitie of your Honors:

