



THese few sheets were chiefly intended for you; and therefore I thought fit in a few lines to dedicate them un∣to you. Some Benefactors give you Food, others give you Raiment, others give you Money; all which gifts are for the relief of your temporal ne∣cessities, and of concernment only to your bodies. Here you have a gift in order to the relief of your Spiritual necessities, a Soul-gift, which doth concern your salva∣tion. And as the Soul is more excellent than the Bo∣dy, and the Salvation here treated of, is of ten thou∣sand times more value than all earthly Riches: So in some measure of proportion you should prize such gifts chiefly as are for the good of your Souls, and may be (through Gods blessing) a help to you in the attaining of Salvation. Your souls are as precious as the souls of the most honourable; and your souls whilest in a state of nature, are in as great danger of ruine, as the souls of the most sinfull; and though you should be as yet out of a state of Salvation, you are as capable of obtaining sal∣vation as the most holy before Conversion. And for your further encouragement I may tell you, that you may get to Heaven without so great difficulties as the Rich: See Matth. 19. 24. and Jam. 2. 5. you have not those snares and temptations in your way as the Rich have; which as it should quicken your endeavours after, so it will aggra∣vate your sin if you should neglect your salvation.

Wicked rich men have their good things here, some kinde of Portion in this life, and their evil things are chiefly reserved untill hereafter; But you which are Poor have little portion of good things in this life, and if you do not obtain salvation, you will have no good things reserved for you in the other World, nothing but treasures of wrath according to your treasures of sin; and so besides the miseries you undergo here, you will be miserable hereafter, and miserable for ever. My hearts desire and prayer for you is, That you may be saved; therefore have I written these things. You have this little Book freely given unto you by some Worthy Persons, who hope for a fuller reward than the price of any Books can amount unto; especially if this Book be made use of by the Lord as a means for the con∣version and salvation of any of your souls, their reward will be the greater that have been instrumental here∣in; therefore accept of this Gift, read it in your Fa∣milies, or get it read to you where you cannot read your selves. But chiefly accept of the Salvation this Book speaketh of, which, however dearly purchased by the blood of Christ, is freely tendered unto you. Salva∣tion is a Gift, and the greatest, most excellent, and most necessary Gift; to move and guide you in the obtaining of which, is the design of these sheets; which that they may be successfull, is the Prayer of a dear Lover of, and Well-wisher to the Poor.

