



Dear Friends!
I Here present you with the Sum of two Sermons, not long since preached, and delivered by word of mouth to you of my own charge. If anie enquire what put mee upon this subject, the entrance of these Sermons will resolv you in that particular. If anie ask, what moved mee to put it to the Press, take my answer now: It's not anie by end, it's not anie high thought of anie thing that is my own in this discours: But I consider,
1. The Truths are Divine and Sound.
2. The handling of them is seasonable in these daies, wherein there is so much miscarriage of youth, and (I would I had not need to saie it) so much neglect in them that have the oversight of Youth. In these Sermons both are concern∣ed; Youth at the first hand, and others by necessarie con∣sequence.
3. I know that words have wings, and flie away, almost assoon as they are uttered; but it's true, Litera scripta ma∣net.
 If anie forget what was spoken, by repareing to the Book their memories will bee holpen.
4. I have also manie Friends that heard not these Ser∣mons preached, whose spiritual good yet I desire also to fur∣ther: and to transscribe so manie copies, it would bee tedious. I thought it therfore the more compendious waie (though more costlie) to put it to the Press upon mine own charge, and so to have the whole Impression at my own dispose, by means whereof I may give copies abroad as I shall see caus.
And so yee have the clear reason of what is don: it's in∣tended out of love to you, and your good my aim in it.
Concerning the Sermons themselvs I will not saie anie thing; onely,
1. If anie bee less acquainted with business of this naeture, I give them to understand, that what I saie to Young Men, I mean it also to Young Women and Maidens, following therein the custom of the Scripture, which ordinarily, (espe∣cially in things which equally concern both) comprehend's both sexes under the Male, as I might shew you in manie ex∣amples, if it were needful.
2. These Sermons contein matter sutable to old and young, I desire you, each of you to take your proper portions, and not (as it's too frequent in the world) everie man to get insight into other men's duties, while they neglect to know their own.
To conclude, if yee will accept, read, applie, and make use of what is here presented to you, and the God of heaven shal bee pleas'd to make it profitable by his blessing, I have my aim and end: And so (committing you, your souls and bodies, and your waies to the protection and guidance of the Almightie and onely wise God) I rest ever,

From my Studie Dec. 20. 1649.
