


RIGHT HONORABLE!
WHen God, by his Provi∣dence, had dissolved the late Parlament and Coun∣cil of State, the 20 of April, 1653; and most of those Honorable Mem∣bers of the Council, and Parlament (to whom I made formerly my humble Ad∣dresses in the behalf of the State, against several Prize-ships and Silver, depending the 20 December, 1652, in the Court of Admiraltie) ceasing from their pub∣lick emploiments, and reduced into the condition of private persons; It pleased
 God to put it into my heart, to make my addresses to Col. Weeton, and Lievtenant Col. Joice, whom I had observed in all their actions to bee publick spirited men, and such as daily sought the honor and welfare of the Common-wealth.
When I had acquainted them with my business, and how far I had proceeded in the Court of Admiraltie, and the present condition and posture of the Common-wealth's Silver-prises, and other affairs in that Court: They were pleased, when they understood my desires, freely to present the state of this weightie affair unto your Honors, desiring your care of the business, even so far as your Honors saw it did conduce to the profit, safetie, and honor of the Common-wealth: there∣upon I made my humble addresses to your Honors; Major General Harrison beeing pleased to give mee thanks for my pains and care I had taken about the staying the Prize-Silver and Ships; and Collonel Bennet and Col. Jones sending for mee, upon the Lievtenant of the Tower's in∣formation to them about mee, They de∣sired mee to give them informations for the carrying on the business of the Silver Prizes, and that I should set down seve∣ral rules for the managing the Coining
 of the silver for the State's profit, and for keeping an account of all the particular parcels, which I did, and delivered it to Col. Jones, and Col. Bennet.
Major General Desborow procured mee a new Warrant from the Council of State: these great favors of your Honors, for giving mee encouragement to proceed in this business of the Prize-ships and Sil∣ver, I humbly conceiv, was onely in re∣lation to the service and prosperitie of the Common-wealth, and your love to Justice, that every one should have his right.
May it pleas your Honors! The Court of Admiraltie, in time of VVar, is like a private Postern to a strong Castle that is besieged; the passage is narrow, you can com in but one by one; but if the Gar∣rison neglect to put a Sentinel at that door, that little Postern shall, in short time, through the vigilancie of the Adversaries, let in so many enemies, that the Castle will bee taken.
Your Court of Admiraltie is a dange∣rous Back-door of the Common-wealth; if the State watch not carefully, to see what goe's, and to have a good account of what Prizes com in, either for the State, or for private men of VVar.
May it pleas your Honors! there is
 a great deal of difference between the judgment of any Court of Justice in Westminster, which are between man and man, and the Judgments and Acts of a Court of Admiraltie for maritime causes; for if an error in judgment, or any undue practices in the proceedings of the Chancerie, Upper-Beuch, Common-Pleas, and Checquer doth fall out; if it bee for the State, the Common-wealth may have a review, and trie their Title again: and the like it is between partie and partie, if they pleas: the Lands re∣main, the people are here to give a re∣spons to any such actions. But your Court of Admiraltie hath such a Postern door, called, the Sea, that an error in judg∣ment there, is a damage irreparable, in this conjuncture of time; for the Ships and Merchandize may bee, and have been, in your enemie's power, to bee imploied against you in 40 hours after, as in case of several Ships discharged the Court of Admiraltie.
This Postern of your Court of Admiral∣tie was made so wide, by the industrie of several Merchants: and no doubt but it was by means of monie, that will cut through the Pirenean mountains, that twelv Ships passed out of the Court of Admi∣raltie
 at one time, the 17 of November, 1652; and seven Ships the 19 Nov. and five the 16 Dec. 1652. & 4 Ships 18 Dec. 1652: quick judgments in such weightie businesses; whereas the safetie of the Common-wealth, and every particular person, was concern∣ed to have every Prize-ship strictly exa∣mined before their Discharge; and this was don after they were brought as Prize, at a vast charge of your Fleet and loss of blood; a sad thing to think, that the State's business should bee so managed.
May it pleas your Honors! about the 16 December, 1652, seventeen Ships were to bee discharged by the Court of Admi∣raltie, conteining 3400 Tuns; all laden with rich Commodities, and silver, had not I com into the Court of Admiraltie, and protested against the Deliverie of them: as appear's on Record in the said Court; for my doing thereof I had a verbal VVarrant from the Committee of For∣reign Affairs. If you will bee pleased to enquire what became of many of these Ships so discharged, this Narrative fol∣lowing will acquaint you: Som of them went to Holland, Captain Bishop's Letters from Holland will tell you the same of many of these Ships.
May it pleas your Honors! The Court
 of Admiraltie was, about Christ-tide last, ruled by three men, of different affecti∣ons: One, that knew much of the Law, and the practice of that Court, which hee did daily shew openly; but it was in that waie of bitterness against the State's In∣terest in their several Prizes, that no Coun∣sel at the Bar said half so much for their Clients, as hee, beeing a Judg, declared against the Common-wealth's Title about som of the Prizes, and Silver. The Other just, and would have been glad to have don the Common-wealth's business, but that hee was not grounded in the Pro∣ceeding of that Court. A Third grown suddenly rich, by the common rule that all Judges that grow suddenly rich, must walk by.
May it pleas your Honors! When I was first commanded by the Council of State to attend this business, about the Prize-silver, I saw so much in these per∣sons & their practice, and som of the Pro∣ctors of that Court, at the first entrance into the Court about this business of my Protest, that I was startled and troubled to consider, what a business I had under∣taken to the Committee of Forreign Af∣fairs.
But I put on a Resolution, by God's Assi∣stance,
 not to bee worded out of this bu∣siness, but to wade through it; for that the safetie of the whole Nation was at the Stake, in that conjuncture of time, the Hollanders beeing at that time in the Downs. And to terrifie mee, and to de∣ter mee from proceeding to do you this service; when I seriously considered of the business, I had first the Merchants ready to load mee with actions, if I could not have proved my Allegations. Secondly I had publick Ministers, that would have taken away my life as an Incendiarie, if I could not have proved, there was Silver belonging to the Hollanders, in the Ships, Sampson, Salvador, and George, which I staied. And thirdly, had these Prizes been cleared, I had many of the Coun∣cil of State would have sent mee back to my Old Lodging in the Tower. Fourth∣ly I had an enraged companie of Do∣ctors and Proctors, and such things, whose Trade I discovered, and was resolved, by God's assistance, to spoil for the time to com; and indeed I had so many obstacles to contest with, as would have startled a thousand men.
Against this, I set the Safetie of the Na∣tion, and restoring mee to my Estate: and that I should convince mine enemies that they
 had don ill in oppressing mee, when they see both what I could and would venture to do for my Countrie's service; and the world should see, that I would not fear the face of any to unmask these frauds: And I hope the Justice and VVisdom of Parlament, will make strict laws and rules for the future, to prevent such abuses as have been notoriously practised by many in that Court; and that the State will keep good Sentinels and watchmen for the future, both to examine all papers, Bills of Lading, and the Registers and all the Examiners, and other proceedings in that Court.
It is not one or two of the ablest men that can bee found in this Nation can do this business in the Admiraltie duly as it should bee don: If I bee commanded, and have a moderate allowance, I will give the State a good account for the time to com.
And at this present time the Prizes are many, and somtimes a man may light on a Letter, a Paper, or sheet of Account, that may bee worth to the State a hun∣dred thousand pounds: and there are se∣crets in the expounding of Merchant's Letters, (that are not easily discovered) Accounts, and Bills of Lading, Purser's
 Books; and will take up several knowing men's time to understand: a strict eie will improve the State's Interest much; and if the State will have this business well don, it must bee well paid for; for small fees and pensions, where great trusts are, make's the Divel suggest invitations to take Bribes; and where a man must laie out two or three hundred pounds, or more, for his intelli∣gence, boat-hire, and messengers, (and without this your business cannot bee well don) and if your Officer shall not have much more a year from the State for his yearly Fees in this business; this, I believ, hath made som to take up the temptation, and to make them finde out waies to help themselvs, seeing the State will not paie them well for their pains, get∣ting more in an hour by delivering a pa∣per, or concealing it, than the State will allow them for seven years Salarie. If I would have driven this Trade to have be∣traied my trust, I needed not have asked the State a pennie: I could have had my eleven thousand pound, without Petitioning for it. I have good reason to believ this is, and hath been acted by som: I would wish to mend it for the future, least this fire burst out, and consume them before
 they bee aware of it: I have given som notice of it, if God give them grace to prevent it for the future; for els at one time or other it will burst out. If I have proof of it, I shall not spare him or them, when I am emploied by the State.
May it pleas your Honors! I disco∣vered the frauds of the Merchants, and others, in laboring to deceiv the State of their Prize-silver. But it was my Lord Bradshaw, who, by his power, interest, and influence in the late Council of State, and his profound experience and judg∣ment that caused the imbargo of the Sil∣ver to bee made: and what benefit and Treasure doth com into the Common-wealth by the Silver-prizes. The Com∣mon-wealth, I humbly say, ow's the pri∣marie Remembrance thereof to his judg∣ment and vigilancie in this weightie bu∣siness: For when I brought him first my Papers, those of the 8th December, 1652. And after other Papers, hee presently up∣on his diligent reading of them, found out the fraud, as to his particular judgment, and asked mee many other Questions then I had writen; which satisfied him, and that made his Honor press so hard in this business against those that opposed mee at
 the Council of State for my prosecution thereof; and to see that I should not bee oppressed for doing the State this ser∣vice.
For at one time in the Council of State, it was at a standing-water, whether I should shoot Bridg, and so go back to the Tower, where I had been formerly laid up, by the power of malitious and sub∣til men, who made many of the late Par∣lament-men their instruments to keep mee in the Tower, upon pretence that I was a malignant, that so I should not discover the nest of Transporters of Gold and Sil∣ver; which I then was Ordered by the Parlament to do: and there is about twen∣tie Orders of Parlament and Committees, for the bringing in the Act for the discoverie of the same, and the Act twice read in the late Parlament; and an Or∣der for the finishing the Act against the Transporters of Gold, about 14 April last, was appointed in the Parlament.
May it pleas your Honors! my Lord Bradshaw told mee; about Christ-tide last, before Tho. Westroop Esquire, that there was som of the Council would, if they could, hang mee for staying this Silver; which doing of mine, as hee conceived,
 was a great and good service to the Common-wealth; but to the uttermost of his power hee would see they should not oppress mee: So that the State ow's his Lordship for that benefit they receiv by the Prize-silver, and I ow my liber∣tie to his justice and goodness, that would engage himself in this business, to see I should not bee oppressed for my doing this service for the Common-wealth. I humbly wish, for the safetie of the Com∣mon-wealth, wee had more States-men of his profound judgment, vigilancie and courage.
The God of heaven prosper your Ho∣nors in all you take in hand; that so you may bee a blessing to this Nation in ge∣neral; that as God hath chosen you from thousands of your Brethren to do mightie things, and wonderful in the eies of this Generation, both at home and abroad; so hee would out of his infinite mercies keep your hearts upright, that no world∣ly prosperitie make you forget God's infi∣nite mercies to you and yours; but that you may, all the daies of your life remem∣ber your deliverances in the daies of bat∣tle, when you jeoparded your lives for the freedom of this Nation: no doubt God
 heard your vows, and exspect's your per∣formances for the good of this Nation.
May it pleas your Honors! This Nar∣rative I humbly present you, is the un∣masking of a cunning and dangerous plot against the Parlament, tending to the ruine and destruction of every par∣ticular Member of this Nation.
When I was first engaged in making my discoverie, I met with many Wasps that did sting mee, and venemous Ad∣ders; but by the good guidance of God, the State hath plucked out som of their teeth; others will storm to see these Truths discovered and laid open to your Honors. I am a most humble suiter to the Parlament and your Ho∣nors for your protection and countenance in the doing this service to the Nati∣on.
God bless and prosper all the coun∣sels and undertakings of Your Honors, and every particular Member of this pre∣sent Parlament; that no force or com∣bination of forreign or home-born Trai∣tors may undermine them; that they beeing delivered from their enemies both at home and abroad, may never forget God's great mercies, that they may bee nursing fathers of this Nation, that they may bee tender
 and merciful to the poor and distressed, that they bee builders up of our breaches, and that they carefully cherish Arts and Manufactures for the setting all the poor of this Nation a Work, that all the bles∣sings of this life may bee bestowed on them. And as God hath raised them a∣bove their brethren, so that hee would bee pleased to rais them all to reign with his Son for ever; it beeing that which is promised those that rule well here, shall reign with him eternally in the heavens: and this shall bee the praier of

Aug. 3. 1653.

