



Right Honorable,
THe serious considerati∣on of that old Rule in Cicero, Non nobis nati sumus, sed partim pro patria, partim pro A∣micis, prompts my de∣fires to publike good, and summons me un∣der your honourable Protection to expose to View this small Epi∣tome or perspicuous Compendium of Irregularities in the present practice of the Laws of England, which are rudely and briefly propounded as an Essay to which men of greater Abilities and Experience, may facilely adde that which may make the Laws of England,
What the Law is. under which (notwithstanding the Abuses interlo∣ped) this Nation hath flourished in peace and hap∣piness
so many ages, the most honorable and happy Nation under Heaven.
Lex est commu∣ne praeceptum, virorum pru∣dentium consul∣tum, &c. Bract. lib. 1. f. 2. Lex est radius Divini Lumini, & Recta Ratio summi Iovis. Cicero in lib. de legibus. Summa Ratio Cook Inst. part. 1. The Law it self in its purity is nothing less then the Perfection of Reason (Responsa pru∣dentium) and consonant to the Law of God, grounded upon long experience, and so brought to perfection; per varies casus artem experientia fecit, and as Glanvile and Britton agree, Experience and many trials of what was best for the common good, did make the Common Law.
The Laws of England now consist of three parts; 1. The Common Law, 2. Customary Law, and that diverse. 3. Statute Law, or Parliamentary Law; the scope of all (as Bracton saith) ut sopiantur Jurgia; & vitia propulsentur, & ut in regno conservetur Pax & Ju∣stitia.
The most principal Precepts of the Law of God and of Nature, are Maxims and Topicks of the Laws of England; I shall touch but a few: 1. Deum Venerari. 2. Honeste vivere. 3. Patriae, Magistratibus & Paren∣tibus obedire. 4. Alteri ne facias quod tibi non vis fieri. 5. Tollere nocentes emdio propter servandum publicam salutem. 6. Suum cui{que} tribuere. 7. Proprietates possessio∣nes rerum & usum distinguere.
And for the Rules of certainty, which makes every Science more honorable, the neerer to perfection; No humane learning subjected to argument hath more infallibilities in its Rules, more
Vide Glanvil, Britton, Cook, Lord Ch. Just. St. Iohns Speech in Parl. agree it. coherence in its Mem∣brana, or more Harmonical Reason within its self, & is so Connatural and essential to the Genius and innate dispo∣sition of this Nation (being formed silk-worm like) as no other Law can possibly regulate it. En populus sa∣piens, & intelligens magna! Deut. 4.

 This sacred Law is our best birth-right,
Sir Iohn Davis Reports, and Finch Law. Cooks Preface to Part 5. Rep. a Rich Lega∣cy to every English man, an invaluable jewel descend∣ent from the bowels of Antiquity, bequeathed us by our Ancestors, and hath still been so entertained and em∣braced.
Some Writers affirm that our Laws had their Progeny from William the Conqueror and some before him, from Alured, Alfred, Canatus and Edward the Confessor: True it is, those were the Promulgators of several good Laws for the present Government of the people, introduced part of their Languages, & made some substantial alterations in Fundamentals (but more in Formulis Juris) as Insignia of their Conquests; but certainly our Law in its primitive institution is be∣yond the Envy of time or the Pen of man to assert, un∣less deduced from Moses the first Law-giver; but I shall decline this controversie, my age and time may ex∣cuse me; onely give me leave to assume the person of our Common Law, and as Cicero in Lib. de Legibus derives the Roman Laws from the great God Jupiter, to say (as one who writ an Encomion of her Praises) When the Laws of God and Reason first came in, then came I in.
The Law is the Palladium of security, peace,
Author Iustitiae est Deus secun∣dum quod justi∣tia est in Crea∣tore, Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 3. plenty and opulency, and they the fountain of sublunary feli∣city, the Rule of Justice; she's the Queen of all Mo∣ral Vertues, and Soul of the Common-wealth; with∣out her silver-glyding streams, who knows how to Rule? or the people to obey? If her splendent Rayes be once eclipsed, we may mournfully condole with the Poet, and say, Terras Astraea reliquit.
Without her support where are our Heroes and Nobles Honors? our common Subjects and free∣born
English Liberties? Without her protection the Rich man cannot be exempted from spoil, nor the innocent Doves from oppression; neither Religious nor Moral, Vertuous or Vicious can enjoy his life or any thing to him dear or delightful; not the Usurer his Bags or Obligations, nor the Sensualist his pleasures but under her shade; without this Law and the due administration of Justice, there can be no commerce or Conversation amongst men, neither the Merchant can pass the Seas, nor the traveller the land, the Sol∣dier be assured his acquired Possessions though with blood, nor transmit them to posterity, were not the Law his Sanctuary.
That Government which is hinged upon her Mar∣ble Pillars is only happy; this Fortress protects the Widdow, the Fatherlesse, the Orphan, the Stranger, Religion, and Religion her: In a word, Major haere∣ditas venit unicui{que} nostrum à jure & Legibus quam à parentibus.
Bracton in lib. 1 stiles the Laws of England the Judgments of the just. Levellers first sprung up in the Pontificate of Gregory the 7th the Vice-God of Rome, & were then great disturbers of the Govern∣ment, vid. Coun∣cil of Trent. Erroris & falsi∣tatis ea est natu∣ra ut nemine re∣pugnante sensim per se ditabantur & evanescant, Cook 5 cap.
Though this Law be so ancient, so just, so honora∣ble, so certain, & the Government thereby so absolute necessary, as without it all would return into a Cha∣os of confusion, yet it hath some Enemies whose ha∣tred is as ancient as their Names, as beings, as the dregs of the basest of the people, neither considerable for number nor worth, but of restless spirits, willing to imbroyle every where, dissatisfied with any form of Government, with any Laws, delight only in Novelties, pleased all in chan∣ges, affected with no tenure but Gavel-kinde, yet bring many plausible and flashie Arguments (not worth confutation) to maintain their erroneous principle, not in the least convincing to any solid Rationalist,
but are like yong sophisters, who are wont to rail, and by that means to keep themselves from a Non-plus when they are not able to answer the Arguments for∣ced against them.
We are all Judges of our own inconstancy, and have had sad experiences in our dayes, how often we disagree with our selves; what Repugnancies within us; how hurried and disprincipled with any thing that is new, and seldome without repentance, though of∣ten too late: Every one becomes his own Phaëton: passion and affection so disorders and deprives Rea∣son, that they rather seem Chimera's then Men; sure∣ly then it's safer to trust laws then men. I cannot but conceive that he who would shake off the laws, will hardly be obliged by conscience.
I shall not proceed further to vindicate the Com∣mon Law, or add to her Encomions, its Mysteries are not now lock'd up in Hierogliphicks in Saxon and Nor∣man language, most of it by the prudence of our Grandees displayed significantly in our Native lan∣guage, & is sufficiently able to plead for it self (if per∣mitted.) I need not mention the wisdom and care our Parliaments in all ages have had to preserve its honor and innocencie; nor the indefatigable pains and vigi∣lant care taken for its due preservation and reformati∣on by his imperial Highness the Lord Protector, from whose Fountain of Justice all streams are conveyed to the subject, like the Sun who spreads light and ver∣tue to all the creatures.
If I should endeavor to minde your Lordship the reverend Estimation Acts of Justice have always had, how preserved to posterity in his Highness treasury as royal Jewels, & stil reputed no small part of Princely
treasure, I must exceed the limits of an Epistle; the porch would be bigger then the house; and therefore must conclude, but yet cannot without ingratitude forget your Lordships care and vigilancie on all occa∣sions of the publike good and welfare of the Com∣monwealth, and therein of your own Countrey; how highly is that person to be honored whose true merits hath advanced him to transcendent places of honor? the greatest honor is due to the greatest Vertues; your prudence and abilities in Councels, your valour and magnanimity in the Field, and that which crowns all, your piety and zeal for the Gospels honor, hath just∣ly instamped an Honorarium on your person, with an augmentation to your posterity; I humbly beg your honors pardon for my prolixity in detaining you from the publique, & beseech your patronage for this small Treatise being the first Fruits of my labor, and there∣fore in duty a proper Oblation to your Lordship, which being cherished by your favor, may find recep∣tion from others, and be some wayes useful in this Juncture of Affairs, to the great & honorable Senate in the present great VVork of Reformation; which is the hearty desires of him that is ambitious of nothing more then to be his Highness and your Honors in the service of the Common-wealth

From my Chamber in the Mid∣dle Temple, Nov. 3. 2656.
