



Right Honorable,
THE many civilities and fa∣vors, received from your Ho∣nours, have laid no small obli∣gations upon me; and I knew not wherein I might better testifie my gra∣titude to you both, than by presenting

you with something of this kinde, as a specimen of that solemne respect and service which I owe to you. My Lord, the soul being a blossome of eternity, what should so preponderate, and bear sway with us as those things which help to raise the soul to its full  of hap∣pinesse, and set it off in its orient splen∣dor! Blood may enoble, learning may adorn, but Religion puts the Garland of salvation upon a man. In this con∣sists true Wisdom. — My Lord, the study of this subject which I here offer to your view, will with the blessing of God much expe∣dite and help forward the true progress of Religion. For the Author of this Sermon on the Mount, behold, a great∣er than Solomon is here; Christ himself is the Preacher; as his lips did ever drop like an hony-comb, so most eminent∣ly,

in these Divine Aphorismes. The duties here enjoyned are weighty; the rewards annexed, glorious. Here we may see a Christian clothed in his white linnen of purity, and scarlet-robe of Blessednesse. Here we may see grace and glory meeting together, and kissing each other. Let no man ever think to get heaven, who doth not ascend this Jacobs ladder.Gratia di∣vina necessa∣rio requiri∣tur ad beati∣tudinem con∣sequendam, Aquin. Would he be rich, he must be poor in spirit; would he enjoy happinesse, he must espouse holinesse; My Lord, I could not be so exact as I desired in discussing this subject, ha∣ving much other work lying on my hands; but I know, such is your no∣ble candour, that you will rather co∣ver than censure what you see amisse. I will not farther Preface it, but craving your Lordships patrociny, and favourable acceptance of these impo∣lite

labours of mine, I shall con∣tinue an earnest Oratour at the throne of grace, for the distillation of all hea∣venly benedictions upon you, and your nobly descended family, and remaine

From my Study at Steph. Walbrook. July 6. 1660.

