



Deare Friends,
IT was for your sakes that the good pleasure of the Heavenly Father, (who maketh all things work to∣gether for the benefit of those that love him,Rom. 8.28. who are called according to his purpose) carried me forth and made use of me, who am less then a worm, and most weak in my selfe; yet strengthened through his Almighty power, to manifest these things unto you. And it was for your sakes, that the goodnesse of that Father of all mercies,2 Cor. 1.3. and God of all consolation kept me so long to sojourn amongst you, for I can truly say,
that what I am or have been unto you in the way of Christ, it was his good pleasure and grace that made me so; for the mutual comfort both of you and me, for I cannot do any thing against the truth but for the truth; for I am not able to think or say any thing as of my self,2. Cor. 3.5 but my sufficiency is of God, and I am able to do all things, yet no other∣wise, but through Christ who strengthens me.Phil. 4.13.
And therefore it is unto you, that I di∣rect and be queath these insuing Discourses, who have been, Ear-witnesses unto what God gave me a door of utterance to deliver amongst you. And I hope in the Lord Je∣sus Christ, that they are not onely written in your papers or table-books, but in the fleshly Tables of your Hearts;2 Cor. 3.3 not with the hand of man, but with the finger of God. And being requested that they might be made publick; the Lord led me unto a willingnesse thereunto, for these Reasons I shall now declare.
1. That you, whom God (in some mea∣sure) hath endued with the spirit of discer∣ning,
and made you to heare the voice of Christ, and not the voice of strangers,Joh. 10.3, 4.5. may judge and beare witness out of what princi∣ple these things are spoken, whether they proceed from that wisdom which is from a∣bove,Jam. 3.15.17. that is first pure, then peaceable; or from that which is from beneath, which is earthly, sensual, and devilish;Mat. 11.19 for wise∣dome is only justified of her Children, and of no others, for it is Christ in you the hope of glorie; who is that quickning spirit,Col. 1.27. or spi∣ritual man that judgeth all things,1 Cor. 2.15. yet he himself is judged of none.
2. That those, who are alienated from the life of Christ,Eph. 4.18. through that ignorance that is in them, and are The JEW in the My∣sterie, that alwaies resists the Holy Ghost, and as their Fathers did so do they,Act. 8.54, 55, 56, 57. may know that though they gnash upon the Saints of God with their teeth, cry out with a loud voice, stop their ears, run upon them with one accord, cast them out of the City and stone them, yet do those holy ones of God look up steadfastly into Heaven, and see, and behold the glory of God, the Heavens
opened, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God, and do freely cry aloud unto the Lord, that he may not lay this sin to their charge.
3. That those poor creatures who are wise in their own eyes, and think they know someting,Pro. 3.7. when they know nothing as they ought to know; may behold and see, that the stone which is rejected and set at naught, by those who think, and call themselves Ma∣ster-builders, and would have others to think also so of them,Mat. 21.42 is becom'd the head stone in the corner, and it is the Lords doing, though wonderful in the eyes of men.
4. That those who have spoken evil of these Truths, accounting them as blaspe∣mous, erroneous, and heretical, may know that according to that way which they call Heresie,Act. 24.14 I worship the God of my Fathers: And if there be any thing in these Discour∣ses that the wisdom, learning, or reason of men, can overthrow, then it is not of God; for,Mat. 15.13. every plant that the Heavenly Father hath not planted, shall be rooted out; but what is of him must stand. And therefore, if the
wisdom of the Serpent hath any thing to say against any thing herein conteined, let it be brought forth; for I hope and know that the Lord in me, and in all his, will de∣fend his own truth, so that the gates of Hell shall not be able to prevaile against it,Mat. 16.16 and I can truly say, the Lord is on my side, I will not feare what man can do unto me.
5. That the Lord alone may be magnifi∣ed who hath carried forth my spirit, to bear witnesse against all unrighteousnesse of men, who withhold the truth of God in unrighte∣ousness,Rom. 1.18 and that without respect of persons; and especially against all those Churches, Worships, Professions, Confessions, Opinions, Covenants, Gatherings, Traditions of men, observations of Times, Idol-Pastors, Hire∣lings, false Teachers, Forms, and such like, which are made, appointed, constituted, or∣dained, set up, and practiced by men; by the carnal wisdom, learning, wit, reason, and po∣licy of the world.Eph. 4.4, 5, 6. For I witness One body and One spirit, even as I am called in one hope of my calling, one Lord, One Faith, one Bap∣tisme,Heb 8.7. one God and Father of all, who is a∣bove
all, and through all, and in all: And this is the Tabernacle that God hath pitched, and not man, in which Temple all the Saints are living stones,1 Cor. 3.9 are Gods building, Gods work∣manship, and are all gathered into this body by the spirit and power of God, and not by man, for by one spirit they are all baptized into one body,1 Cor. 12.13. whether they be Jews or Gen∣tiles, and have been all made to drink into one spirit. I also bear witness to One Ordi∣nance, and One Administrator, Mediator, Redeemer, and Intercessor, which is the Lord Jesus Christ blessed for ever:Joh. 14.6. who is the way, the truth, and the life, and no man comes to the Father but by him, and it is HE that is ordained,Acts 10.42. to be Judge of quick and dead by the Father, and there is no name given under Heaven,Acts 4.12. by which men can be saved, but the name of Jesus; neither is there sal∣vation in any other; for there are diversities of gifts but the same spirit, and there are dif∣ferences of Administrations,1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6. but the same Lord: and there are diversities of Operations, but it is the same God, which worketh all in all. And I witness that it is Jesus Christ only, by his
spirit that makes men Able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the Letter,2 Cor 3.6 but of the Spirit. And do all teach and speak in, and from the power of that spirit, as IT is pleas∣ed to give them utterance. And therfore, all those that claim an Ordination by man, or from man, that speak from the spirit of the world, from wit, learning, and humane rea∣son, who preach for hire,Jer. 23.1. Ezek. 34.2. Zach 11.17 Joh. 10.1. and make mer∣chandise of the souls of men; I witness they are all Baals Priests, and Idol-Shepherds, who destroy the Sheep, and are Theeves and Robbers, who came not in by the door of the Sheepfold, but climbed up another way, And are the Magitians, Sorcerers, Inchanters,Micah. 5.12. Soothsayers, Necromancers, and Consul∣ters with familiar spirits, which the Lord will cut off out of the land,2 Tim. 3.8, 9. so that his people shall have no more Soothsayers; And as Jan∣nes and Jambres resisted Moses, so doe these resist the Truth: men of corrupt minds, re∣probate concerning the faith: but they shall proceed no farther, for their folly shall be ma∣nifest to all men, as theirs also was: woe un∣to them; for they have gone in the way of Cain, and ran greedily after the errors of Balaam
for reward, and perished in the gainsaying of Core.Jud. 11.12, 13. These are spots in your feasts of chari∣ty, when they feast with you; feeding themselvs without fear: Clouds they are without water, carried about of winds: Trees, whose fruit withereth, without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots: Raging waves of the Sea, foaming out their own shame, wandring Stars, to whom is reserved the blackness of Dark∣ness for ever.
And now Brethren, I commend you to God and to the word of his grace,Act. 20.32 which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them that are sanctified. Mind and give heed to that meek, stil, quiet, and silent spirit of the Lord Jesus that is in you, which is Pure, Holy, Innocent, Underfiled, and Righteous, teaching, and leading into all truth, righteousness, and purity like it selfe, unto which if you give heed as unto a light shining in a dark place, it will preserve and present you spotless and without blame before him whose eys behold no iniquity; which that the Lord may fulfil in his due time in you, is the Continual prayer of him who is

