



Honoured, and Beloved,
MY hearts desire for you is, that you may be saved. It hath been a long time in my thoughts after the many sig∣nal demonstrations of your love
to me, to shew my gratefulnesse in a way of retaliation; Such as I have, give I you
Gratius venit quod facili quam quod plena manu datur Seneca. I do here Dedicate this Manual to you, as a standing Testimonial of that real respect, and zea∣lous affection which I bear to∣wards you. The subject of it you will finde to be a Christians delight
Nec sine delectu nec intellectu Costerus in Psal. 1. and meditation in Gods Law. I have purposely for your sakes laid down sever∣al heads, or particulars for your meditations to dilate and runne upon, as the attributes, the promises, the love of Christ, &c. If he who by often looking on a Ring with a deaths head, at last grew sober, who knows
but by often meditating on these things your hearts may be brought into a more serious and heavenly frame? Meditation is a holy kinde of usury, it is put∣ting out Sermons to use, which brings in no small profit at the yeares end. Meditation is a duty which carries meat in the mouth of it; My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatnesse, while I meditate on thee, Psalme 63.4, 5. There is little written (so farre as I know) upon this subject. Most Discourses of this nature di∣gresse into ejaculations. I have with the help of God cut out my way thorough the rock, not
finding any path that others had gone in before me; so that I have not offered that to you which cost me nothing; for the stile of it, it is plaine; but truth, when it is in the plainest dresse, is most comely. The star shines brightest in its native lustre. Divinity hath so much intrinsecal beauty, that it needs no art of wit or fan∣cy to set it off. Who goes to em∣broyder a pearl? or paint over gold? this would but imbase and eclipse it; It is a signe of a wanton Christian to look most at the fringing and garnishing of a Truth. I wish it be not the sin of many in this City, they like the dressing, but loath the food. The
blew flowers which grow among the corn, make a fine shew, and are pleasing to the eye, yet are prejudicial to the Harvest. Rhe∣torical flourishes may please the fancies of men, but I much que∣stion whether they will not lessen Christs spiritual barvest at the end of the world. When men preach rather words than mat∣ter; they catch peoples ears, not their soules; they do but court, not convert. If the patients wound bleeds, nay rankles, it is better for him to have a deep in∣cision made in the flesh, than to binde it about with silk, or dress it with aromatick oyntments. True it is, Ministers ought to
cloath the truths they preach in decent expressions to preserve them from contempt; (though they must come in plainnesse of speech, not in rudenesse of speech.) But, let them take heed, lest with their affected new∣coynd phrases, (unsutable to that gravity the Apostle speaks of
Tit. 2.7) they adulterate and corrupt the simplicity of the Word, like some kind of sauces and compounds which take away the natural taste, and savour of the meat. As for you (my friends) I hope the Lord hath given, (at least some of you) a spiritual pallate to rel∣lish and thirst after, , the sincere milk of the Word,
1 Pet. 2.2. A savoury heart is for wholsome doctrine: How glad should I be (dear friends) if I might either by preaching, or writing become savingly instru∣mental for your good, and before I die, might help to make up an happy match between Christ and you
2 Cor. 11.2.: I blesse God that I see some of you walking in the truth;
2 John 4. when so many in the world are marching apace towards hell. But O that I might see an en∣crease of holinesse among you, that more converts might be brought in, and as so many jewels make the Crown of Christ shine the brighter; do not hearken to the Syrene songs of the world;
the sins you commit in hast, you will repent at leasure; sugred poisons go down pleasantly, but afterwards they wring and tor∣ment the bowels. Let me earnest∣ly beseech you to put a bill of di∣vorce into the hand of your sins; let not Error gangrene, lust burn, malice boyle, pride swell, intem∣perance overflow, covetousnesse root in any of your souls. Purge out the old leaven; and as e∣ver you expect to go to the new Jerusalem, when you die, become new creatures while you live; Rest not in baptismal priviled∣ges: all are not Israel which are of Israel
Rom. 9.6; what is a man the better to have Christs Name
upon him, and Satans image? What is he advantaged to have the Oracles of God, and want the Spirit of God? Think not that an empty profession will save; millions will be sent to hell in Christs livery
Mat. 7.22, Matth. 8.12. Oh labour to know the grace of God in truth
Col. 1.6. The Lord hath been at much cost and char∣ges with you to bring you near to himself; let not God be a looser by you. Pindar saith, it was an opi∣nion of the people in ancient times, that Jupiter rain'd down gold upon the City of Rhodes: Give me leave to apply it to you, God hath rain'd down golden showers upon you. What mercies hath he enrich'd you with? what
talents hath he entrusted you with? your estate is a talent, your health (in these sickly times espe∣cially) is a talent, your Sanctua∣ry-blessings are talents, every motion of the Spirit, every opportunity for heaven is a ta∣lent, and nothing more sure than that you will be called to an ac∣count shortly
Marth. 25 19, 20; now if you have let your talents lie rusting, and done no good with them, the hi∣ding your talents will not hide your sin, expect an heavy doome. Think not these things imperti∣nencies. Be not so evil, as to be too good to be advised. I confesse my felf with Ignatius, the least of all that labour in Gods vine∣yard,
but though I am with you in weaknesse, yet as the Apostle saith, in much trembling
1 Cor. 2.3. I tremble to think how sad it will be, if any of you shall perish in these dayes of the Gospel, though you have been plac'd under a trumpet, lesse shrill and powerful. It shall be my prayer for you all, that you may be fruit-bearing trees, that when the great Vine∣dresser shall remove you hence by death, he may transplant you in∣to the coelestial Paradise.
Be pleased to accept of these few notes which (some years since) you did seeme to hear with much affection: I shall only desire two things of you, that you would
thoroughly peruse them, and then copy them out in your daily pra∣ctise. Get up into your Tower of Meditation, and look often with Moses upon him, who is in∣visible
Heb. 11.27. But I will not hold you any longer; I remember Saint Paul in the close of his Epistle, craves the Thessalonians pray∣ers
1 Thes. 5.25, and so shall I end my Epistle begging a contribution of your prayers for me, that the Lord would give me the strength of heaven to do the work of hea∣ven
. Ignat. Epist.; that he would help me to take heed to my self and my doctrine, that he would make me, not only faithful, but suc∣cesseful in my Ministry among
you: that so, when the chiefe Shepheard shall appear, I may receive a Crown of glory which fadeth not away
1 Pet. 5.4.: I shall not further enlarge, unlesse in my affections towards you.
Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus that great Shep∣herd of the sheep through the blood of the everlasting Co∣venant, make you perfect in e∣very good work, to do his wil, working in you that which is wel-pleasing in his sight,
Heb. 13.20, 21. which shall be the earnest prayer of him who is,

