



Right Honourable and Right Worshipful,
MY own indexterity and unfitnesse to appear thus Publickly, needs some Apology; But your ac∣ceptation is my encou∣ragement; and the order from your Honourable Court, Carries so much

Authority with it, as to add some weight to that which dares not plead worth. I was the more inclinable to publish this Discourse, because though the theam be common, yet the practice of it is rare and unusual. Con∣tentions never more hot, Charity ne∣ver more cold, a signe Iniquity a∣bounds. The zeale of our forefa∣thers condemnes us, we with Rachel have better eyes, but they with Leah were more fruitful. We are so far (at least the generality of men) from building Churches and Almes-houses, that we are more ready to pull them down. How is TRUTH in these dayes forsaken, and CHARITY for∣gotten! We may say of many they are miserable rich, their affections towards publick advancements and dis∣bursements, are like the scales of the Leviathan, shut up together, as with a close seal, Job. 41. 15. Saint Ambrose saith that when we

relieve not one, whom we see ready to perish with hunger, we are the cause of his death. Pasce fa∣me mori∣entem fi non pave∣ris occi∣disti. Ambr If this rule hold true, there are more guilty of the breach of the sixth Command∣ment than we are aware of. When shall we see a resurrection of Chari∣ty, which seemes to lye dead and bu∣ried? Sure, it will not be, unless God work a miracle upon mens hearts. The good Lord by his Spirit cleave the rocks in our bosomes, that the water of repentance, and the wine of Charity may flow forth! O that Eng∣land might have that encomium as once Athens, to be the Nursery of Humanity; beleeve it, Charity is the best policy; by helping others we heal our selves, Job 29. 13. The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me. As the poor had Jobs almes, so he had their prayers, and he fared the better. Christs poor are Favourites of the

Court of heaven, and you that give them of your gold, they can unlock heaven by the golden key of prayer, and set God a work on your behalf. The merciful man hath many intercessours, which made Hierom to say, that it is almost impossible that God should not hear the prayers of so many. ene im∣possibile multorum preces non exaudiri. Why should there be the least regret, or re∣coyling in our hearts, why should Cha∣rity stick in the birth? It would be our glory, if it might be said of us, as St. Paul speaks of those Evangelical, or rather Angelical Christians, 1 Thes. 3. 9. As touching brotherly love, ye need not that I write unto you. O how forgetful are we of that breast of mercy which feeds us, those golden wings which cover us! Surely did we keep a  or register of Gods fa∣vours to us, we would as Clemens A∣lexandrinusClem. A∣lex. Strom. 7. saith, give Almes to te∣stifie our gratitude. But I shall avoid Prolixnes; this Sermon which you did

heare with seriousnesse and affection, craves now your candour, and comes un∣der your Patrociny. What was once said to Aegidius of Norinberg concerning Davids words in the 118 Psal. They are verba vivenda non legenda. The same may I say concerning these few no∣tions, they are not so much to be read over, as to be lived over. Your libe∣rality to them that are in want, will give the best glosse upon the Text. The Lord hath set you in publick places, and that you may become publick blessings in your generation, walking in the fear of God, and shining forth in a bible-conversati∣on, shall be the prayer of him who is,

From my Stu∣dy at Stephens Walbrook. Ju∣ly 7. 1658.
