


Right Honourable:
IT is now more then five yeares, since I first Complained of the sluggish and unserviceable condition of Eng∣lands Navie. In which Time there hath been wasted (by Mr. Greenes Accompt) to guard the Seas, (as he calls it) Seventeen hundred seventy five Thousand, 600 and 10 Pounds, or thereabouts. But the Seas are not Guarded, and which is worse, the Honour of the Seas is lost and shamefully lost. The truth is for want of Victuall and o∣ther due Incouragements (that is, for want of their Thirds, 

This Journall shewes You, how those great Ships were In∣countred, dissipated, and destroyed by the Hollanders, though Englands Royall Navie endeavoured seriously to protect and defend them.
With these Spectacles you may see cleerly, that Great slug∣gish Ships, mann'd with Land-men, are not serviceable for this State.
That fleet of Spanish Ships, was much greater in Number, Tonnes, Men and Ordnance, then Englands Navie is, or ever was, but Maugre their Greatnesse, and Number. That Fleet was Incountred, and in a few houres, scattered and Con∣founded by the Hollanders, in their small Ships; for excepting some few, which of late yeares they have fondly framed in Imitation of the English Navie, (that is, for Countenance) All their Men of war, are small Ships, and doe carry but one Tyre of Ordnance.
I say in a few houres, they so confounded the Great Spa∣nish Ships, that scarce one of ten Returned into Spayne.
In this Great and memorable Fight, some of the Spanish Ships were Burnt, some were Sunck, and some were taken. The rest runne a-shore, or runne away; This Ship wa not much lest in burthen th the Royall So versigne. and in their flight the great Great Admirall of Portugall, having 1100 Men, and 70 Pieces of Ordnance, was in part Blowne up, and her remaines burnt to Ashes; shee was not able to defend her selfe, much lesse to offend others.
If you compare the Spanish Armado, which came into England, in the yeare 1639. To that which came against Eng∣land, in the yeare 1588. Your Honours, will find many Ships in Oquendoes fleet, of farre Greater force, then any of the Galeons, or Galleasses, which were so much admired by the Spanyards, (and by some fooles in England) when their In∣vincible Armado was Honourably Incountred, and put to flight.

Here followeth a Comparison by an (Antiparalell) discovering the difference of Two famous Sea-fights &c. Viz.


VVHen the English Navie first encountred the Spa∣nish Armado in the yeare 1588. The English Navic consisted of 23 great Ships, and 37 small Ships.
When Van Tromp first encoun∣tred Dn Antonio de Oquendo, in the yeare 16 9. His Fleet consisted of 17 Ships and Frigats, and there was but 3 of the 17 which carried two Tyres of Ordnance, all the rest were Ships of the fourth ranke in Englands Navie, or Ships of lesse force.
VVHen the Spanish Armado first encountred Eng∣lands Navie in the yeare 1588. The Spanish Armado consisted of 91 great Ships. 4 Galleasses, and 59 small Ships.
When Don Antonie de Oquendo first encountred Van Tromp, His Fleet consisted of 66 great Ships, fortified with One thousand, nine hundred twenty and foure Pieces of Ordnance. And besides his Sea∣men, hee had Ten thousand Land∣men in his Fleet.


Here note, That when Van Tromp did first fight with the Spanyards, it was upon a Retreat (as J may call it) which hee durst not attempt untill he had tryed what his Ships would doe for him; That is, hee durst not fight with them untill he knew by experience, that his Ships were nim∣bler then the Spanish Ships; So that if hee were worsted, he might run from them, as indeed hee did, when he stayed for the 9. Ships which were at Dunkirk, which Ships soone after came to him in the Night, as you have it in the 5. page of this Journall.
Here you see, that nimble Ships are the Ships which must performe the desired service.


In the last and greatest Fight which was in the yeare 1588. The Spanish Armado consisted of One hundred 48 Ships.
In the last and greatest Fight which was in the yeare 1588. Eng∣lands two Fleets being met, consi∣sted of One hundred and 30 Ships.



In the story of 88. The foure Galleasses are much admired, be∣cause each of them carryed fifty Pieces of Ordnance.
In Oquendoes Fleet, two of the five Admiralls, carried 136 Pie∣ces of Ordnance, which according to Proportion did much exceed the Galleasses.


In 88. There was but 64 Galle∣ons, 4 Galleasses, and 23 great Hulkes; all the rest were Peta∣ches, Carrovels, and Victuallers, which were of so small force, that in the Story there is no mention of any service done by them.
In 88. There was but one Gal∣leasse, and one other Ship fired a shore in all the Fight.
In 39. There was Sixty sixe great Ships, fortefied with Ninety five Pieces of Ordnance, more then all the Galleons did carry in 1588. and they were the strength of that Armado.
In 39. There was 26 great Ships forc't a-shore, whereof the Vice-Admirall of Spaine, with 56 Pieces of Ordnance was one.


In 88. There was but 6. consi∣derable Ships taken.
In 39. There was 12 conside∣rable Ships taken.


In 88. There was not one Ship burnt.
In 39. There was eight great Ships burnt.


In 88. There was not one Ship blowne up.
In 39. The great Admirall of Portugall with a 1100 Men and seventy Picces of Ordnance was blowne up.


In 88. There was not one English ship lost.
In 39. Van Tromp did loose one of his greatest Ships.


In 88. The English and Hollan∣ders fought against the Spanyards.
In 39. The English and Span∣yards fought against Van Tromp.


This memerable Service was performed by MARTIN VAN TROMP, Admirall for the States of Holland, in the yeare 1639. The Fight was maintained valiantly by the Dutch, and give the Divell his due; some of the Spanyards deserved no lesse Commendation.

This memorable Service was performed by MARTIN VAN TROMP, Admirall for the States of Holland, in the yeare 1639. The Fight was maintained valiantly by the Dutch, and give the Divell his due; some of the Spanyards deserved no lesse Commendation.
It had been good sport to have seene the Scuffle; But Neptune with a Myst so blinded them, That the Affront which was then cast upon the English Nation, was therein, not only hid, but Buryed, and is no farther mentioned, by

