



Great Senatours:
GOD hath called you to action. Your time to hear is little, to read is lesse, therefore there is need that your own prayers be more fervent: and that the supplications of others for you be the more frequent, and they that have the honour and trust to preach before you, have the greater cause to deal uprightly, not as men-pleasers, nor handling the word of God deceitfully: but that your hearts may be affected, that the word may come not in the letter only but in the power, and by the manifestation of the truth,2 Cor, 4 2. they may commend themselves (not to the eare or phansie) but to every mans conscience in the sight of God.
It is your wisdome and safety to abhor to be flattered, to love to be searched, Hezekiah like, to speak comfort∣ably
to all that teach the good knowledge of the Lord.2 Chro. 30 22. David,1 Sam. 24 5. a Prince both pious and prudent, a man after Gods own heart, yet felt something in himself for which his heart smote him, and feared many other things, for which he cries to God, Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a kindenesse.—
It is the usuall prudence of States, to be jealous, to fore-see every plot, to have an open ear to any that can discover the least probability of danger: and though this often raiseth needlesse fears, yet its safer to fear danger where it is not, then not to fore-see and prevent danger where it is.—God hath set watch men upon the walls of Jerusalem, and hath enjoyned them upon pain of death, that if they apprehend any danger coming, to blow the trumpet, and to give warning; and if any die for want of warning,Ezech 33.3, 6 he is taken away in his iniquity, yet his bloud will I require at the watchmans hand.
You are not ignorant of Satans devices, his many plots against you, be never ceaseth to be a tempter to all, but against you (mighty Worthies) his malice is most em∣bittered and enraged: by you he hath been disposessed and drivan into the wildernesse:Mat 1.43. he hath been wandring in dry places, seeking rest, but findes none,—till he can re∣enter. His desire is to winnow you; if he can ruin you be knows he ruins the Kingdom, and all the Protestant party in Christendom with you: he that durst set on
Christ in the dayes of his flesh, his malice is not now lesse to attempt, nor is your power greater to resist: he hath been hitherto tempting to overwhelme you with despair, to make your difficulty so great that your hands might be weakned from the worke,Neh. 6 9. but your God hath strength∣ened you to admiration, God hath made you a wall of brasse: he hath thrust sore at you that yee might fall, but the Lord hath been your helper, & hath scattered all temptations of this kinde as the chaffe upon the mount∣ains. Now he hath no way left but to alter his tempta∣tions, to transforme himself into an Angel of light: he sees he cannot affright you, he will try to flatter you in∣to self-admiration and self-confidence, and doubtlesse will do his utmost, since if he cannot scatter you by de∣jection, to exalt you through abundance of revelations, and so secretly worke your ruin by presumption. To dis∣cover and prevent this stratagem, was the earnest de∣sire and endeavour of your humble servant in this Text and Sermon,Prv. 1.17. knowing that in vain is the net spread in the sight of any bird. Now the great God of Heaven, and the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, that hath cho∣sen you, and ever helped you hitherto, rebuke Satan, pluck you as precious brands out of this fire also, and tread Satan and all temptations under your feet, and put this double honour upon you in the sight of this Na∣tion, and all the Kingdoms round about you, that the
whole earth may break forth into singing and say, Here is that Parliament which adversity could not sinke and prosperity cannot swell: who are taught of their God, to be low in their own eyes, when God hath made them high in the eyes of others; who whiles they rule over others, are most exact and exemplary in bearing rule over their own selves, and whiles they rule over men, desire nothing more then to be just, ruling in the fear of God. This will be the crown of your triumphs, and will stop the mouths of all gainsayers, and set you upon that rock of eternity, that the gates of hell shall not prevail against you, and so confirm and establish you, that this Parliament shall be called the repairer of the breach, the restorer of paths to dwell in, the joy of ma∣ny generations; which is the earnest prayer of him, who desires daily to be your remembrancer at the throne of grace, and who is

