



HOw unwillingly I am drawns to expose these my homely thoughts to publike view, my former silence in this kinde, (ever till now) may beare some testimony unto others. And certainly had not an higher Power over-swaid my naturall inclination, I had chosen rather to have buried them in silence, then run such an hazard of proclayming mine own weakness.
But your Commonds (Honourable and Worthy Sena∣tors) the Desire of Friends and Hopes of doing some good, by pressing a Subject so necessary and so much wan∣ting in these sad and secure days of ours, have perswaded me to cast in my Mite (such as it is) God's blessing upon it I know can make it usefull to some, which is all the Aime I have, or am Ambitious of.
It has often troubled me (notwithstanding all your pious In∣junctions, and frequent Exhortations, both by former and late Orders, Notwithstanding all the Judgements of God daily growing upon the Land) to see the most, every where, so little moved, so little humbled as they are. And (I confess) there's nothing sads my heart more, and makes mee feare an heavier Judgment towards, then this, to think how little men are moved, how little bettered by all that hitherto has befalne us,a Gerson Pa∣risiensis part. 1. de signis Ruinae Eccle∣siae.
It is one of the Symptomes (among divers others) that great Chancellour a of Paris makes, of the ensuing downfall of a Church, Fastus & superbia Ecclesiasticorum, and it holds as
true likewise of a declining State, the want of Humility, and being sensible of the Rod of God upon it. To be sick and not perceive it, to be wounded and not feel it, to be in imminent Danger, and not to heed it, is the next step to Ruine and De∣struction.
Oh that I could say this distempered Nation of ours, were not so sick, not so in danger, as (God knows) it is! or if it be, (as it's too manifest it is) at least it were more apprehen∣sive of its Malady, and more deeply affected with its own misery.
I must acknowledge your care (Honourable and Beloved) in prescribing many wholsome Remedies for our Cure, and Re∣covery: but I can never cleer our negligence and stupiditie, in not using those good means both God and You have prescri∣bed as we should.
I thought it therefore my Duty (by your example in your publike places, so I in mine, (especially being Call'd thereunto) as a poore Watchman of Israell, to give warning, and in this Sermon, to tell England what I see: namely this, That the Reason Why it is not delivered is, because it is not sufficient∣ly humbled, Why God does not shew Mercy, and put an end to our wofull distractions is, because we are not yet fit enough to receive it.
I have prest the Duty with as moving an Argument as can be, viz. the Manner of God's dealing with us, and because he himself requires, and calls for it. What I preached to you that were present, I have faithfully beer published for the use of those, that (upon emergent and waighty Occasions) were absent, not altering any thing, the better to silence all mistakes.
What ever it be, it is your own, the fruit and issue of your own Commands: the Lord blesse it to you all, and You in all your great endeavours for the Publick, that if it be his blessed will, Truth and Peace may at last, by your means accrew to this unthankefull,Esay 49.5. unworthy Nation: However, though Israel be not gathered, yet that you may be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and your God may be your strength.

