



Right Honourable,
ATheisme is the great sin of the world, dogma∣ticall among the Pagans, and practicall a∣mong those Christians,Tit. 1.16. who professe they know God, and yet in works deny him. Satan cares not much what is our profession, so be may rule in our conversation; he knows where opinions have not strength to better practice; there ill fractice, by de∣grees,Quid prodesse nebis praerog a∣riva Christiani nominis potest, quod nos fideles esse jactamus, quod Gothos ac Uvandalos hareticos despi∣cimus, cum ipsi eretica pra∣vitate viva∣mur? Salv. de Gub. l 7. will weaken the best opinions; and what advan∣tage is it for us to have the face of Christians, and the hearts and heads of Pagans? that our rule is straight, and our lives crooked?Lex bona, mu∣neris est Chri∣sti: vita autem non bona, crimi∣nis nostri. Salv l. 4. That God hath made our light clear∣er, tis Gods free goodnesse: that our lives are darker, tis our own vilenesse.
It was his sad complaint, that lived in such dole∣full dayes as these, when the Goths, Hunns and Van∣dalls over ran the world, and all Christendome put in∣to a burning flame, that the lives of Christians fell short of the Romans, and did equall the worst of the Barba∣rians.
It is no wonder, that when our unbeleife que∣stions the deity of Christ, the verity of Scriptures, the mortality of the soule, and so shakes the pillars of Hea∣ven, that the Lord hath a strong controversy with the world, and causeth all the foundations of the earth to shake, and to be out of order.
The way to cure the bleeding distempers of Christen∣dome, is for all men to endeavour to get inward perswa∣sions answerable to their outward professions; for as these main principles are more or lesse beleeved; so is the heart and life of man better, or worse ordered. When the soul is once fully perswaded, that Christ is God, that he is the true Messiah, that there is another life besides this, that the Lord Christ is ready to come to judgement, and his reward is with him; then the soul begins to seek and beg an interest in Christ, to flee from wrath to come, to as∣sure the hopes of Heaven, whilst we are on earth: and this hope, when once truly attained, carries the soul farre above the comforts of life, and beyond the fears of death, and makes men see no life to be so comfortable, as that life which is most serviceable.
Your birth (Right Honourable) hath made you above other men, this hope will make you above your selves, and this communion with the great God will make daily additions to your greatnesse. Then are men high-born indeed, when they are born again of the most high God: and then are the sons of Nobles truly great, when there
are added inward supernaturall principles of spirituall greatnesse. Its the observation of one (Chrysost. in Epist. ad 1. Cor. c. 1. Hom 1. . &c. no mean man) That some naturally are of a high stature; others, that are low, have shoes and pantables, to heighten them to a seem∣ing greatnesse; which of these will you call truly high or great? He that is so by an adventitiall separable additi∣on, or he that is so by a growth thats naturall? It is one thing to be highly esteem'd of others, another to have a minde worthy of esteem in it self. One man thinks clay to be clay, and despiseth it; another thinks clay to be gold, and admires it: which of these two is high? Is it not he that despiseth a peece of earth? and who is vile and ab∣ject, but he that adores a peece of earth, and spends his soul to load himself with thick clay?Hab. 2.6. that man who in the height of outward greatnesse accounts himself but dust and ashes; his minde is full of inward excellency: he that admires and adores himself, will not look upon him∣self as gilded clay, is of an abject minde, and much delu∣ded in the midst of all outward eminency: to have high thoughts of things most mean, and mean thoughts of things most high, infallibly argues the minde to be full of weaknesse, others say, to be full of basenesse.Chrys. ibid. He spake like a Noble man indeed, that said, Let their honour and wealth perish, that thinke all greatnesse in the world like one daies communion with the great God.
To clear up these great principles hath been the aime of
these weak endeavours. Tis the arm of the mighty God that alone can rebuke the spirit of unbelief: therefore that the great God,Gen. 9.27. who perswades Japhet to dwell in the tents of Shem may imprint these eternall characters up∣on your hearts, and lift you up to sit in heavenly places with Jesus Christ,Ephes. 1 6. Luk. 10.20. that your names may be written in heaven,1 Sam. 2.8. and that you may for ever inherit the thrones of glory, is the earnest prayer of

