




NO Present too great for so worthy Patrons, (and in particular to my own, and that Loyal one, where it was first Preacht) yet, such as I have, with all heartiness I humbly present to you, you who experimentally know how far easier it is to obey, than command. Tho it be a Parents Prerogative to command his Children, yet it is duty in him to obey a Father or a Magistrate, place't in Authority over him, tho it be a Magistrates Pri∣viledge to controul, and call to account, all under his Jurisdiction, yet it is his bounden Duty to obey Sove∣raignty, and Kingly Government; and tho it be the bst Jewel, and the very Diadem of a Crowned King to
command his Subjects, yet it is his Interest, and grea∣test Happiness to obey his Maker and Creator, that most glorious Majesty of Earth and HeavenProv. 8.15., that you may easily observe, that no Mortal, no not the greatest Grandee, but a Deity himself21.1. that is ex∣empted (one time or other) from obeying and serving as well as commanding and ruling; Therefore what's offered you in these following sheets, 'tis to pleasure (Friends) the befrienders of Godliness and Chri∣stianity, of Protestantism and ƲnityPhil. 2., and not at all to pretend to inform the Nation of any thing that it knows not, but to remember them that are in it, that they do what they know. It is true, the Land abounds in Knowledge, I wish I could say the same, for the honour of it, that it did so too in practice, then we should be as happyJoh. 13.17., and as flourishing as now we begin to be declining, and contemptible, but that poor England may redeem its lost Reputation, let each of us discharge those particular Duties that are incumbent on us; and every single person take their own parts that are allotted them; and that their own Consciences carve out for them, and not to in∣trench upon anothers right, that all of us may act and do like Rational men that have Immortal Souls to save, like the true Professors of Christianity, like those that do heartily protest against Rebellion and Popery, Faction and Phanaticism, Enthusiasm and Atheism; nay, against Irreligion, and all manner of Prophaneness whatsoever, and not to look one way, and with all might and main to row another; for we had not been hitherto spared, if kind Providence had not stept in between, and watcht over us for good, safeguarded us one time after another, from
those apparent dangers wherewith we were compassed, that we our selves do now plain enough see; we had ere now been engag'd, imbroil'd in another Civil War, our Hands and Garments by this time, to have been dyed in each others Blood, which would have been small Credit to Christians, or to our English Nation *.
But if after all, there be only a shew of Sanctity, a meer shadow and Mock-pageantry of Piety, and that the Substance and Glory is wanting, viz. (the practice) have we not still great cause greatly to fear (that under the colour of Religion, which it utterly disowns) of having the old abhorr'd Tragedy sham'd upon us afresh, if it were not for the prudent Conduct and Mercifulness of one of the most indulgent Princes that did ever sway a Royal Sceptor, that I hope will yet vanquish the bitterest of his Enemies, by the wonders of his kindness and for∣bearanceProv. 19.11, 12., that ha been hitherto already stretcht out to a miracle, that if we at any time miscarry, it will soon be found, detected, to be our disservice, untowardness, disobedience, ingratitude to Powers. Ordained of GodRom. 13.1., (to God-like Clemency and Authority) there∣fore if we still persist in our disingenuity, inhumanity, to put him upon any thing which his Kingly Consci∣ence cannot yield toRom. 14.23.; and for all that, what do we do more by our Jealousies and WhispersProv. 16.28, 29, 30., but still con∣tinue to trespass, dun and harrass the Lords Anointed1 Sam. 24.6.? and then what do we do less but dare Majesty it self at length to punish us, and provoke him to that which he is loth to undertake, viz. (our Ruine) yet if we perish, (if we perishEsther 4.) whom have we to blame but our selves?
And to me 'tis as clear as noon-day Light, that the wickedness, ungovernableness, hate and haughtiness of the Peoples Spirits does strangely portend, if not
timely prevented, our misery and downfall, which that so dreadful a stormJonah 1. may be diverted, and rather lighten on the Protestant Foes, I am not shy in own∣ing my self one of that Loyal Praying number3.10 (thô Prayers and Tears, by some, are made light of al∣ready;) That is, an humble Petitioner at the Footstool of Heaven, where it is no crime to be a Supplicant, tho one of the meanest, yet willingly would be one of the Humblest, Truest Servants

