





SIR,
THE experience that I have had of your former many favours, makes me bold to Ask, and confident to Ob∣taine, this one more from you, viz. To shelter this poor following Sermon under your Name.
I have not so high an esteem of it, as to think it worthy your Acceptance (if so, I should have presented it to you as a Gift) but so mean, as that it needs your Countenance.
It was the advice of St. Augustine, that
 in places where, and times when Errours do abound, all men should write, that had any (though but the least) faculty (which makes some Apology for me) that so a∣mongst many Books all sorts of people might meet with some, to convince them of their Errours, and establish them in the Truth. Humanum est errare. And these evil times in which we have lately lived, involved many into Errours: Some with reference to the Word of God; some with respect to the Works (if I may so say) of God. 'Tis to the latter of these that I direct this Discourse, to perswade them, that Gods works of Mercy, are Works of Mercy, how∣ever they are mis∣construed, and mis-judg∣ed by some, who measure Gods feet of pro∣vidence, by the last of their own Interests.
By the experience Sir, in this latter and evill Age, we have all found this to be a Truth, that let Times be never so bad, some will account them good, and cry them up for Glorious Times. And be times never so good, some will account them evil, and suf∣fering times. Some will account Mercies
 Miseries, and Miseries Mercies.
Every man, and party, judges Gods dis∣pensations according as they do favour his, or their own private interests. There is ('tis known) a sort of people amongst us, that never would, nor never will be contented. No, not with any Government in Church or State.
The Reason is, because they are so addict∣ed to Changes, and affected with Novelties. As if nothing could be true, if not new: no∣thing good, and the right, but that which sutes with their Humours. Et hinc illae la∣chrymae, &c. From this root of bitternesse, have sprung up many things that have trou∣bled us. Hence first sprung those many Dislikes of Disputes, and Contentions about Formes of Church and State Go∣vernment: Which Contentions, though they were but as Sparkes at first, yet in a little while, after they had sulterd in Contentious Brests, grew to Flames, and at last Flam'd high.
. And fired the Church and State; And what followed?

—Discordia demens Intravit coelos, superosque ad bella coegit. Who were the Incendiaries, Isidore will tell us, Qui dissentionem animarum fecerunt. Isidor. lib. Etimol. And what followed, we can tell by wofull ex∣perience. Nostine igitur quod omne quod Boetius de Philosoph. consolatione. lib. 4. est, tamdiu manere, & subsistere, quam∣diu sit unum: sed interire, atque dissolvi pariter, quam de unum esse desierit. For, as another sayes, Nulla quantumvis mini∣ma natio, potest ab adversariis per deleri, Veget. lib. 3. c. 10. nisi propriis discordiis seipsa consumpse∣rit. And therefore Tyresius, when he was asked by Scipio why Numantia aut pri∣us invicta, aut postea evicta: Answered, Concordia victoriam, discordia exitium Paulus Dia∣con. Hist. lib. 4. adfert. Many will colour their Seditions with this, and that; and most times, In Nomine Domini incipit hoc malum. But Aristotle will tell us the True Reason of it, Minores ut fiant aequales seditionem Arist. lib. po∣lit. 5. faciunt: aequales ut fiant majores sedi∣tionem faciunt & ipsi.
We have all of us, or at least may see the evill of these things. The issue of them was
 almost Destruction, and would have been no∣thing less.
—In foelix pereat: 
Nihil relinquent bella tum vastis ager
Squalebat arvis, subditatectis face
Altus sepultas obruet gentes cinis.Senec. in Her∣cule furente Traged. 1.
Had not God in mercy done great things for us. Yet many can scarce account this a mercy, cannot be satisfied, contented, nor quiet; the same Humours do work again. But for my part, I am of Cassiodorus his Principle, Cogi debet ut sit quietus, qui Cassiod. lib. 1. Epist. 1. suo vitio renuit esse pacificus. Least such Sanballats and Tobiahs, discontented Spi∣rits, Enemies to the Peace of Jerusalem, should revive our old miseries, and renew our former Griefes, and turn our Singing, into Sighing, our Mirth, into Mourning, our Rejoycings, into Lamentations.
But methinks tis high time for wise men (at least such as would be accounted honest men) though formerly they had unavisedly given their helping hands to make them∣selves, and the Nation miserable, to be far
 from favouring the least thought of so do∣ing any more: And to begin to see the fol∣ly of their actings, and seriously to lay to heart the sad Consequences that followed thereupon, as Anarchy in State, Heresy in Church, nay brought Destruction it selfe e∣ven to our very doores, which they, when they would with all their hearts, could not with all their might, prevent. And to own and to acknowledge Gods mercy, who did prevent our utter destruction, and set us in Statu quo Prius; gave us our Judges as at first, and our Councellors as at the beginning. Restored us our Ancient Rights, Liberties, Laws and Religion: Our former Peace, Prosperity, Honour, &c.
And laying aside their own private in∣terests, should have respect to the publick. And should endeavour to quiet; and satisfie themselves and others; blesse God for this Mercy: and live together in Love, Ʋnity and Concord. This will conduce both to our Peace and Prosperity. For, Si mem∣bra regni partesque inter se consentiunt, P. Ae. mil. lib. 3. & constabunt, corpus universum salubre
 erit—Concordia enim aureum & ada∣mantinum vitae vinculum est.—Omnia in pace, vita & festivitate tenet: And to our profit too; for as Micipsa, a dying King, said to his Sons, Concordia res par∣vae crescunt. And as the Poet sayes, Velle Sal. de Bello. Jugurth. & nolle ambobus idem sociataque lato mens aevo, ac parvis dives concordia re∣bus. As for others, who are neither wise, honest, nor peaceable, my Tongue hath not, my Pen shall not, have any thing to do with.
I cannot, nor care not, to please the hu∣mours of all men, nor do I expect to do it. Veritas odium parit.
I expect a multiplicity of censures, But I am assured of this, that Ʋnprejudiced persons will not censure evil of me; as for others, I may say, Mala de me judicant sed mali. I cannot see wherein I have given just occasion of offence to any Man, or Party. They cannot (nay the most Dis∣contented amongst us) but confess, that Gods works (yea, now let us call them Miracles) wrought amongst us of late, are Miracles of Mercy.

Is not that a mercy that bushes all wars, turns our swords into plough-shares; & our spears into pruning-hooks: Yea, a Mira∣racle of Mercy, that in a moment almost brings peace into a Land without blood∣shed, when we were all ready to sheath the sword in one anothers bowels? That brought order out of a Chaos, confusion it self; that baffled all the sophistical Argu∣ments of subtill obstinate Schismaticks and Hereticks amongst us in a moment; and makes them begin to look towards Repen∣tance; that established the Magistrate on the Throne, the Minister in the Pulpit; freed us from Tyranny and Oppression, and that by no Wisdome, Strength, or Valour of our own. As for the manner of handling of this Subject, I speak it, Bona fide, I do it with∣out any prejudice to any person or party; medling with no persons, nor parties, any farther then necessity enforced: that we might see the depth of our miseries, and so the greatness of Gods mercy in delivering of us.
But, whatever others censure of me, may
 be this is it that I passe upon my selfe, that I have acted presumptuously, in answering the requests of some worthy friends in reference to the publishing of this Sermon: yet Chri∣stianly, in giving so publick Thanks for so publick a Mercy, in which I had my share.
And now, into your hands, Honoured Sir, (whose affectionate Loyalty to the Kings Majesty, and entire love to your Country, I have had assurance of some years past, partly by your frequent condoling, and bewailing the Afflictions of the ONE, and Confusi∣ons of the OTHER: And partly by your earnest and unwearied expectations, to see the things that are (through mercy) come to passe amongst us in these dayes;) I do com∣mit this ensuing Sermon: Not doubting but that you do thankfully embrace, and heartily acknowledge the mercy it preaches: and in your dayly prayers do blesse God for it.
And thus hoping that you will passe an Act of Grace on my presumption to appear in publick, under the shelter of your Name: And praying for the continuance of the Peace and Prosperity of these Nations: And for
 your Worship, that God would make you an eminently blessed Instrument in his, and your Countries service whilest you live: and when you die, that you may die in the Lord, rest from your Labours, and have your Workes to follow you; I shall ever re∣main.
Right Worshipfull,

