



SIR,
YOur desires intimated by your Proxy, and iterated by your Selfe, were as they seemed very reasonable, so that an utter denyall of them must needs have beene, and seemed, most unreasonable; Indeed they were so just, that my devoire could not but be just according to them. This Sermon, which ere while, (such as it is) was publickly presented to your eares, is now (such as it was) represented privately unto your eyes. And surely these are the Organs of a Doctrinall sense as well as those. And your Piety, I hope, will im∣ploy them onely as such, whilest that my Pen does thus repeate this Sermon to them. My Charity com∣pells mee to believe so of them, or otherwise my Pen should never have preached to them; For I confesse ingenuously, that I please my selfe but onely in pleasuring you by penning of this uncouth Sermon.
 Many things delivered vivâ voce, and passing by theHabet nescio quid leutis energiae vox viva. S. Hieron. Epist. 36. Eares but once, may passe for tolerable, yea and may be deemed acceptable: But if once they be turned into Dead Letters, and laid forth in Sheetes, their life is gone, and it were well for them, if they mightSolet acceptior esse Sermo vivus quàm scriptus. S. Bernar. be buryed. But alas! then they lie open to more exceptions under a sense more curious, and more cri∣ticall then that of Hearing, having an advantage to view, and review its object as often as it pleaseth, and, S. Chrysost. Hom. 9. as long at once. It is therefore the Care, and Policy of many, that they may keepe the credit which they get amongst their Auditours by Preaching, to keepe themselves from penning of their Sermons, lest they lose it by criticall Readers. But for my part I Preach∣ed this Sermon to many others with your selfe, that you, and they might have an higher estimate of the Matter of it then you had, and have now Penned it that you may have a lower estimate of the Manner of it then you have. Indeed I ever intended  in composing of this Sermon for the Pulpit, but , I never studyed, never intended, and there∣fore cannot but admire, that any in that Auditory should admire it for Technologie. Surely the com∣mon abuses of the Pulpit in these Times beneath the Majesty of it, have caused those Sermons to bee Christened Neate, which are not too too slovenly. With mee to Preach honestly is to Preach elegant∣ly; Yet , &  differ as much in sense as sound. But call it now even what you please, it is now yours a second time, and by a second way. Denomination is one Priviledge belonging to Do∣minion.S. Chrysost. In cap. 2. Genes. Hom. 14. It was yours when desired by you, being made yours when first delivered over the Cushen to
 you. There could be no injustice then in your Wor∣ship in demanding of your owne, but in mee there would, had I persisted longer to deny the private use of that unto you, which I so publickly deliverd to you to make use of. I could have wished that it might, like the , have dyed that very day that it came up, and dyed mine; But seeing it must be transplant∣edPlin. Nat. Hist. l. 25. 13. that it may live, I am very glad that it shall live yours, and shall be more glad if this performance proves not so unacceptable, but that some further imployment may be commanded him, that by his second endeavours would most willingly prove him∣selfe,
Sir,

