


BEloved Brethern and Sisters in our only Lord and Sa∣viour Jesus Christ: This little Treatise being composed by one of my ancient Brethren depar∣ted in the Faith, was left in my cust∣die for the publicke good: and ther∣fore considering how needfull it would be to be published rather then bscured, I thought none was more
 fit to have the speciall use thereof then those who have the spirit of discerning, through the knowledge of the Word of Truth, whereby to perceive the manifest difference be∣tween Babels Brats, and SIONS Babes; for the which respect I have presented it chiefly unto you, intreat∣ing you to peruse it with under∣standing, and weigh it with discre∣tion; and as the Noble Men of Berea did, so doe yee, search and examine whether the scope there∣of be agreeable to the Scriptures or no.
There are many which strive to en∣ter into the Kingdome of heaven, but are not able, Luke 13, 24. because they want Faith Heb, 18, 9. which is the gift of GOD Ephe, 2, 8. GOD can give his guifts to whom he pleaseth, Luk, 12, 2. but he will not doe all which he can doe Exo, 19, 19 though he can doe all that he will doe. Mat, 19, 6 To thinke
 it any deficiencie in GOD, because he doth not, or unbountifullnesse, be∣cause he will not, argues a carnall and sensuall disposition. GOD could have spared the infants of the floud from drwning, Gen, 7, 4. and Sodoms seed from burning. Gen. 18. 24, He could have spared the first borne of the Aegyp∣tians, Ex, 12, 29 and might have left out that Commandement where the Chil∣dren of Idolaters were commanded to be slain with their Idolatrous Pa∣rents: 1 Sam. 1 3. but he would not, because it stood not with his Justice; it was his will and pleasure so to doe, who doth what he will in heaven and in earth, &c. and who dare controle him? Dan. 4, Psal, 135, GOD is as good as his word, who hath in all ages from the be∣ginning visited the sinnes of the Fa∣thers upon the Children, unto the third and fourth generation, and will doe so to the end, Exo, 10 GODS two wit∣nesses Isa, 29, Psal, 119 105,
 can produce many examples hereof: we have the Law Prophe∣sies and Gospel, whose testimony none ought to refuse under paine of dam∣nation.
But it is the property of those who are unlearned (in God's Law) and unstable (in their wayes Iam. 1. 8) to wrest the Scripture to their own destru∣ction: 2 Pet, 3, 6 or else seek to restraine the power and efficacie thereof, much like to the foure Angels which John saw stand upon the foure corners of the Earth to hold the foure winds of the Earth that they should not blow, Rev. 7. 1. Of this sort are those which would seek to withold the Covenant of the Gospel from Ezra 9, 2. Psal, 128, holy Infants, o the young live plants * of beleeving Parents; it is apparent that to plucke up these plants is to plucke up the plants which the right hand of our heavenly Father hath
 planted, Mat 19, 13, 14, 15. which are the Children of those Parents upon whom GOD hath promised to write his owne name, and the name of his holy Citty.
That just God which did break off the naturall branches, the Iewes for unbeliefes sake, together with Exod, 15, 25, their seed, the same God hath by his own right hand graffed us in their stead, Rom, 11, 19, 20, and shall we presume to imagine that he forgot our seed? Mose's who was guided by the Spi∣rit of God forgot not the seed of the faithfull: Deut, 32, sure I am (Christ being more faithfull in his House then ever Moses was, Heb, 3, 2, 3. hath not made a separation between the faithfull and their seed: but remembreth his Covenant (saying) I will be a GOD unto thee, and unto thy Seed, &c. Gen, 17, 7 seeing that God is their God, they are his People; and such are visi∣ble
 members of Christs Church, which is his Body, and Mount Sion, in which place GOD hath promised the blessing, even life unto eternity Psa, 133, 3.
Therefore in what a wofull condition are those who say all In∣fants are in one Ia, 2, 13, condition, and that no Infants are under the Covenant of Grace: herein they seek to bind that which God never bound, and to loose that which God never loo∣sed: v He, 13, 8, for Jesus Christ is yesterday, to day, and the same for ever. Thus when they have brought forth in outward action, that which they had in conception, it tends to the destruction of the Covenant of the Lord of glory, which is the bond of all Christian communion and fel∣lowship.
And those which say that the Infants of Beleevers have no part in
 this Covenant, let them tell us in what estate they be; if they say they are to be accounted in the state of salvation, then they must needs grant that they are to be accounted within the Covenant of grace, to whom the outward priviledges of the Covenant doe belong Rev, 22, 14. If they say they are in the state of damnati∣on; and have no promise at all; but are as the Children whom GOD 2 Pet, 3, 20, 21, Isa, 34, 9, 10. destroyed with their wicked Parents, some with water, others with fire and brimstone, &c. I say and will affirme, that this their Doctrine hath sprung from a bitter root: it tends to make the lives of all In∣fants bitter, because thereby they make bitter meanes of the pre∣servation of the life of their soules.
In this they are like to the fallen Starre whose name was wormwood, which fell into the third part of the
 Rivers and Fountaines of waters, and made them bitter. Rev, 8, 10 11, But there is a River (which alwayes runneth, and a Fountaine which alwayes floweth) the streames therof maketh glad the City of GOD, Psal, 46, 5 by watering the Olive trees, upon which doe grow the Olive branches, which branches are the Infants of Beleevers, in whose life the Parents have joy, in whose death they have comfort; because their mourning for them is mixed with hope, 1 Thes, 4, 13, and this their hope is grounded upon Gods everlasting and unchangable promises Acts 2, 39 made unto them in Christ, which is a motive to move them to love their heavenly Father, because as he hath made them holy, so also hath he made their Children holy 1 Cor, 7, 14, which are reconciled to God with their Parents: who are by the will of our heavenly Father sancti∣fied
 in their life, blessed in their death, and shall also be glorified at their resurrection: for the second death shal have no power over them, Deut, 33, 29 because they are blessed, and holy, Rev. 20, 6 having part in Christ who is the resurrection and the life, Iohn 11, 25, to whom with the Father and the blessed Spirit be all glory, throughout all generations. Amen.

