


GLORIOUS GOD, This poor thing, which thy unworthy servant hath finish't in thy strength, is now prest for thy ser∣vice. And behold I have here brought it before thy Majesty, that it may receive thy Blessing. Thou, who art the great God, delightest to do great things by weak Means, that thy Power may appear, and thy Name may have the Glory. O that it would please thee to make use of this poor thing, as an Instrument in thine own hand, for the Glory of thy great Name, and the good of thy People, in this sinful Nation! Oh let not the Weaknesses and Infirmities of thy servant, that herein disclose themselves, hinder the success of this small service, which he desires hereby to do thy distracted
 Church. Lord, own and accept what is Good in it, for it is thine own: but what is Evil, pardon and cover, as proceeding from the weaknesse of a poor Creature, that would willingly do thee much better service, and yet is willing to submit to thy Will, though Thou shouldest subject him to the meanest employment. And give, O Lord, so much Charity to his dear Bre∣thren, that they may cover the Infirmi∣ties of their poor weak Brother in Love; and not seek to hurt him, by that whereby he desires to do others Good. Oh that thou wouldest be pleased to put it into their Hearts, from the dis∣coveries of thy poor servants Weak∣nesses, to take an occasion to adore the Riches of thy free Grace, and to exalt thy Name with Praises, for that thou hast been pleased to intrust them with more excellent Abilities for thy service! So shall thy servant have cause to glory in his Infirmities, when thereby some Glory shall redound to thy Name.
But as for the Proud, who make it their Glory to oppresse the Poor,
 keep thy servant ever in that Reso∣lution, to which by thy grace thou hast raised his heart, rather to pe∣rish by their Power, then by any un∣worthy Compliance, to seek his own Pre∣servation or Advantage, to thy Dis∣honour. Fill his Heart, and the Hearts of all thy faithful servants, with a holy Contempt and Scorne of their Favour, whose Friendship is flat Enmity with God. Make thy servant one of them, in whose Eyes a vile Person is contemned, how Great or Glorious soever he be in the World's eye; but let him e∣ver honour them that feare the LORD. Let not thy servant think it strange if he suffer Reproach from them, that cast Dishonour upon Thee; but rather rejoyce in their Reproaches, as the Badges of his Faithfulnesse, and weare them as his Crown and Glory. Let him not study to please men, lest he loose the Honour of being the servant of Christ. Oh let thy servant behold Smiles in thy pleased Face, and tast the sweetnesse of thy precious Pro∣mises, and so shall he not fear the Frownes, nor regard the Threats of
 Proud, Perfidious, and Presumptuous sinners. Let him never desire to have them for his Friends, who by their horrid Enormities have made God their Enemy. Let him never seek to be esteemed by them, whose Insolencies proclaime to the world that they contemne God. Yet, Oh that thou wouldest open their Eyes to see their sins, before thou tumble them from their Earthly Glory into Hell! Oh that in stead of accounting thy ser∣vant their Enemy for telling them the Truth, they might see and consider that it is the highest act of Friend∣ship to shew them their Danger before it be too late. Oh that it would please thee by thy Spirit, to convince them of those sins, and fearful abo∣minations, which thy servant hath endeavour'd herein to represent, as in a Glasse, before their faces! Oh give them to repent of their wicked Deeds, and to humble themselves for their insolent Actings. However, Lord, by thy powerful Providence restrain them in their wayes of wickednesse, whose Ambitious and aspiring spirits prompt
 them to the most Audacious and ille∣gal Actings, for the securing of their own Interests, and the Establishment of their own Glory and Greatnesse upon the Ruines of the Church and Com∣mon-wealth; restrain them, O Lord, lost they pluck down Judgements not onely upon their own heads, but also on the too guilty Nation.
And vouchsafe, O God, to look down from thy high and holy habi∣tation, upon this sinful Land; but not with an Eye of Fury and Revenge, but with an Eye of Mercy and Love. Thou seest what fearful Abominations are committed amongst us: Thou knowest what perillous Times are come upon us. Thou seest how cruel enemies do rend the body of thy dear sonne, the CHURCH, which he hath re∣deemed with his own blood. Thou hearest with what hellish Oaths and Blasphemies vile Creatures daily teare thy sacred and glorious Name. Oh! If thou wast not infinite in Mercy and Patience, thou hadst long ago rain'd down Fire and Brimstone upon our heads, or involv'd the whole
 Land in Confusion and Blood. It is of the Lords mercies we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not.
But now, O Lord, hear; O Lord, have Mercy; O Lord, forgive the ma∣ny and great sins and Provocations of this Land, and do not forsake us utterly, nor irresistibly destroy us, as we have deserved. We must needs confesse that we and our Princes have greatly sinned against thee, and fearfully pro∣voked the pure Eyes of thy Glory. Lord humble us from the highest to the lowest; give us a true Repentance for all our sins, and Grace to turne to thee our God with our whole hearts, and so spare us, and heale our Land. Oh stirre thy people up to those special Duties, which are at this Time in a special manner incumbent on them. Let this Warning and Call which thou givest them by the hand of thy ser∣vant, become, through thy Blessing, effectual for the Awakening of thy servants out of their Security, and the Engaging of them to those Duties, whereby thy Wrath and Judgements may be prevented, and a wide Door may
 be opened, whereby thy Blessings may flow in abundantly upon us. O Good God, punish not this Land with a Fa∣mine of thy VVord. Oh take not thy Gospel & Ordinances from us; Remove not thy golden Candlestick. Oh never let it be said, The Glory is departed from England! It were better for us to see our streets runne downe with the Blood of the slaine, and to behold the Bodies of thy Saints burnt in flames, then to live in peace, and grow cold in our love to thy Truth, till we have utterly lost the Gos∣pel. Prayers put up in Flames and Blood might recall it againe, when a general sloth and security in sinne, may forfeit it for ever. But, O Lord, continue thy Gospel, preserve thy People, and blesse thine Inhe∣ritance in the Land. But if for our sinnes, thou shalt suffer those stormes to arise, whereby thy Church shall suffer Shipwrack, Oh let this poor Plank cast out by the hand of thy un∣worthy servant, be a Meanes to save some Soules. Oh let this small Light direct some soules in
 the right Path, for their eternal Salvation, to the Glory of thy free Grace, through the Lord Jesus, our onely Mediator and Redeemer. Amen.
FINIS.
