




Sir,
THat I may not Live and Dye Ʋngrate∣ful, I presume to prefix Your Name to these Ensuing Treatises, as a Testimony of my Grateful Acknowledgment
 of those many Signal Fa∣vours, which you have con∣ferr'd upon Mee.
The First Treatise opens and applyes the Doctrine of God's All-Sufficiency. The deliberate Meditation and Ap∣plication thereof, amidst vari∣ous Dispensations, and Vicissi∣tudes of Providence, will be a Divine Cordial to Relieve a fainting Spirit; and will swallow up, and overcome all Outward Troubles, as Aaron's Rod swallow'd up all the Rods of the Aegyptian Magi∣cians.
That Pious Aphorisme, which the Noble, and truly
 religious Lady Vere, chose for her Motto, namely, GOD WILL PROVIDE, doth the Faith of every true Belie∣ver fully assent unto; by which he is enabled to Rely upon the All-Sufficiency of a Faithful God, both for a Supply of what∣ever he wants, and for a San∣ctifyed Improvement of all that he enjoys.
The other Treatise endea∣voureth to unfold the Precious Excellency of Christ, in or∣der to the rendring of him the most Desirable Object to the Believers Faith.
As all Light at God's Com∣mand, in the First Creation,
 did fix, and terminate in the Body of the Sun; so it hath pleased the Father, that thereCol. 1. 19. should be a Perfect and Com∣pleat Fullness of all Divine and Heavenly Graces, dwelling in the Person, as well as in the Doctrine of the Blessed Jesus; and He it is, in whom all Ex∣cellencies do Concenter: In Him, there is a Fulness of Me∣rit to Justify and Save us, a Fulness of Grace to Sanctify and Cleanse us, a Fulness of Wisdom to Guide and Direct us, a Fulness of Power to Su∣stain and Ʋphold us; and, in a word, a Fulness of Mercy, Pity, and Compassion to Relieve and Succour us. How truly
 then did the Spouse call her Beloved, The Chiefest amongCant. 5. 10. Ten Thousand?
I have taken Liberty to be∣come Your Remembrancer of these Things, though You know them already, and have been fully Instructed in them.
My daily Prayer to God for You is, and shall be, That Your Last Dayes may be Your Best Dayes; Your Last Fruit, Your Fullest and Fairest Fruit: That, as a Plant of Righteousness in God's Garden, (which hath no Wi∣thered Trees, Over-grown, andPsal. 92. 13. 4. past Bearing) You may bring forth more Fruit in Old Age; and, like the Almond-Tree,
 Tree, be even Blossoming, and always Flourishing. So pray∣eth,
Cornard-Magna, near Sudbury in Suffolk, Nov. 2. 1680.
Honoured Sir, 
