


My very good Lord,
IT is commonly charged upon these Times, that they are Times of many Evills; And it is a maine Evill wherewith the Times are char∣ged, that the many Charges of the Times doe hinder Men from pay∣ing of Debts. I dare not call that Evill, that hath hindred mee from




 paying mine. But sure I am, thatOccupationes quibus indies distincor maxi∣mae, aliquid Ex∣cusationis ab ae∣quis, ut spero, rerum aestima∣toribus impetra∣bunt. Armacha. in Praef. ad Britan. Eccl. Antiquitat. the constant Charges, and frequent Discharges of many Dues unto the People from the Pulpit, have hin∣dred mee from paying any Dues unto your Honour from the Presse; And forced mee, as you may see, to borrow backe those driblet Debts, here tendred unto other Friends, for the making up of one small Sum, for my chiefest Creditor.
There were many Marii in oneSueton. in vita Jul. Caes. Caesar; And many VVorshipfulls, and Right VVorshipfulls may be in one Right Honorable: Yet many and many Respects are due from me unto those worthy Names perfixed to these Sermons; But your Lord∣ships due is all, yea more then all that I am, and more then all that I am able to doe. All this that I
 have done, is but the least part of that all, which I should have done. I cannot doe all that I would, but I will doe all that I can to attest my desires to doe all; The very seemes of Negligence in other Pens are even shamed by seeing the Diligence of your Lorships.
I know not whether there be such a thing as Scandalum Magnatum in these Times; But this I know, that ignobile vulgus hath commonly ac∣cused Nobility of Idlenesse; And sure I am, that the many Reames of Paper, which your happiest Pen hath filled, and fitted for the Presse, are enough to stuffe their Throates, and to stop their Mouthes, that have been opened to speake evill of such Dignities. IJude 8. confesse, I should have wondred at the Excellent and Abundant fruit of
 your Labours more then now I neede, (though still I cannot but admire them) had I not known your constant course of watering them, by your kneeling down, and praying in yourBene precasse est bene studuisse. M. Luther. Closset before your putting of Pen to Paper. The Power of Godlinesse in that your Honours Example did even in∣forceAs there is Treason, and Petty-Treason; So there is Sa∣crilege and Petty-Sacri∣lege; and Petty Sacri∣lege is to rob Princes, and great Persons of their due Praises. Dr. Donne Serm. 27. me to imitation in my adjacent Lodging at More-Park, and ever since hath engaged mee to pray dayly for your Honor, for my very good Lady, for all the younger Ladyes, and for all belonging to your Noble Family, as the bounden Duty of

