



Most Mighty LORD,
WHereas it hath pleased thy glorious Majesty, out of the exceeding riches of thy Free Grace, and thy tender
 compassions in Jesus Christ, to call us thy poore unworthy Ser∣vants out of the World, to the Profession of thy truth and Gos∣spel, and the Participation of thy saving Grace, when out of thy infinite Sovereignty and Justice, thou hast past by Millions of men, and left them to perish everlasting∣ly in their sinnes, we humbly de∣sire in a deep sense of our own utter Unworthiness, to express our free and hearty Acknowledge∣ment of that infinite Obligation which thou hast hereby laid upon our soules to perpetual Gratitude, Love, Honour, and Obedience to thy Glorious Majesty for so in∣valuable a Mercy. And we cannot but with sorrow of Heart confesse, that we have by our un∣suitable Walkings, shew'd our
 selves very Unworthy of such rich Discoveries of thy Love un∣to us. But we humbly implore thy Mercy in the forgiveness of our many Miscarriages, and be∣seech thee to give us Leave, with all Humility, to present thy Ma∣jesty with these few Petitions, to which we earnestly beg a Graci∣ous Answer.
That it will please thee to  grant, preserve, and establish a Righteous and Religious Magi∣stracy, a Faithful and painful Ministry in the Land, with that Blessed GOVERNMENT which is most agreeable to thy holy Word and Will, both in Church and State.
That it will please thee who  hast the Hearts of all men in thy Hands, to put it into the Hearts
 of our Counsellors and Gover∣nors to study and endeavour the Advancement of thy Glory, and thy Churches Good, by the sup∣pression of Errour and Profane∣nesse, and the Promotion of Truth and Holinesse in the Land.
 That where thou seest those Persons in Places of Power and Trust, who by their pernicious Principles and Practises make the Times Perillous, thou wilt Graci∣ously be pleased by thy Hand of Power to remove them, and to set in their room men truly fearing Thee, and hating Covetousness, who may cordially seek and endea∣vour the Peace and Welfare of thine English Zion.
 That thou wilt pour down on thy Servants a Spirit of Hu∣miliation for the sins of the Land,
 that thou wilt graciously pardon the Transgressions of thy People, and purge the Land from its A∣bominations, that thou mayest dwell amongst us.
That thou wilt break the  wicked Designes, and dissolve the cursed Conspiracies of those that under Pretences of thy Name, Cause and Glory, violently prose∣cute their Pernicious Purposes for the satisfaction of their Ambition and Covetousness, and the Intro∣duction of Errours, Heresies, and all manner of Licentiousness into the Land, to the Hazard of many thousand souls, and the dis∣honour of thy Glorious Name.
That it will please Thee to heal  the Breaches of thy own People, and to establish these three Nations, England, Scotland and Ireland,
 in Peace and Love upon the sure Foundations of Religion and Righteousness, and crown them all with thy Loving-kindnesse, and tender Mercies. And to this End that thou wilt awaken the spi∣rits of thy Saints from their securi∣ty in an unsettled and distracted condition, to a serious minding of the great Concernments of thy Church and People, their own Souls, and this sinful Nation.
 That thou wilt be graciously pleased speedily to change the Pe∣rillous Times, that are or may come upon thy people, according to the Predictions of thy holy Pro∣phets, into those Glorious Times, which thou hast raised the hearts of many of thy Saints in Expectations of, by thy Precious Promises. However be pleased to preserve
 thy People in times of Peril and Persecution, and to carry them (as on Eagles Wings) by thy Spirit of Grace, through all Dif∣ficulties and Dangers, till thou shalt receive them up into thy Kingdome of Glory.
So shall we thy poore unworthy Subjects and Suppliants, as in Duty bound, ce∣lebrate thy Glorious Name with ever∣lasting Praises.
The Names of the Petitioners are written in Heaven.
