



Gentlemen,
THis Sermon was appointed for the Crosse; But I hope, there is no crosse appointed for this Sermon. It came not at the Crosse when it was preached; And I hope, no crosse shall come at that when it is printed. It took sanctuary in the Quire, and so was delivered to an extraodinary multitude of Hearers. But i now requires another kinde of sanctuary, to be delivered from the multitude of ordinary Censurers. Your kinder countenances may prove such a sanctuary to it.
It is a Sermon of Merchant-Adventurers; and it hath made me a Venturer, though no Merchant. And in this Paper-bottome I have made a twofold Adventure. The first is of this Tendry of Respect and Service to your Worships, for the gaining of your fa∣vours, for the Protection of the other. And that other is not an ad∣venture of a Soule for the gaining of the World; but of a Sermon, about the World and the Soule, (into the World,) for the gaining of Soules.
And your joynt favours (as I conjecture) may prove a very safe Convoy to it thorow the World. Caeptis aspirate.

It was the one of your good Worships which called it then unto the Pulpit, or caused it to be called thither: And it is the other that hath now called it unto the Presse, or occasioned the Printing of it. And now, whose shall I call it? It might sometimes have been called mine: But it hath been miscalled, I know not whose. I remember well, I heard the Character of a Sermon (from a young Practitioner) so like unto it, that I might justly challenge it. I must confesse the Title to it is not worth a quarrel; yet there may be right in a Penny as well as in a Pound. And the Poet Virgil would not lose his Title to a Distichon, by his perpetual silence. His Distichon was such as he might very well own: And therefore, when he saw that Augu∣stus did approve it, and that Bathyllus (tacentibus aliis) did asselfe the praises of it, he did inscribe his lines againe, which were these,

Nocte pluit tota, redeunt spectacula mane:Ti. Claud. Do∣at. de vita. P. Virgilii Ma∣ronis.
Divisum imperium cum Jove Caesar habet.

And then subscribed this claim unto them:

Hos ego versiculos feci: tulit alter honores.
Sic vos non vobis nidificat is aves.
Sic vos non vobis vellera fertis oves.
Sic vos non vobis mellificat is apes.
Sic vos non vobis fertis aratra boves.

I shall spare the Young-mans name: I would not have him to be as Bathyllus was, Romae fabula. But I have presumed to set both your Names before my Sermon, because I know it hath been had be∣fore both your Worships. Be pleased with it from the Presse, as well as from the Pulpit; And let me call it Yours: And call me,

