



Honoured Sir, Madam;
GOD's making, and entring into Cove∣nant with Man, I look upon as the most Condescending act of Grace, that ever was passed to∣wards the Sons of Men. That the Almighty God should form a Man out of the Clay, or Dust, and then take him into Covenant with himself; It
was so high a Dignity vouch∣safed, and Conferred, that can hardly enter into our thoughts with sufficient ad∣miration: but that when the first Covenant was bro∣ken, God should make a new Covenant, and not take the forseiture of the first, to his utter undoing, how much more great is his kindness! It shews the matchless and unconceiveable love and re∣spect that God had to the Sons of men. Methinks the hearts of men should not (I bless God I hope I can say in the simplicity of my heart, that I cannot) but, not onely with joy, but exultation humbly adore this his dispensation towards us. What, that we should be in such a Covenant? which is established upon bet∣ter Promises, laid on a better
Foundation, yea the best Pro∣mises, and the best Founda∣tion: not only with man, but with him upon the account of the Mediator, a Covenant that shall never be broken; For God will never break it on his part, and he hath un∣dertaken that we shall never fin ally fall from it, yea that hee'l pardon all the falls that are out of infirmity from it, that do thereby violate it. Cer∣tainly these expressions of taking hold of God's Covenant, and joyning our selves to the Lord in Covenant, are to my Soul, such things as are better than a thousand Cordials, to any sinking, fainting heart, and through grace do, and shall Experimentally find more solid Satisfactory Comfort in, than in all things in the World; That such as we are,
should be so highly favoured, and befriended by the Great and Glorious God. Sir, the vindication of the lawfulness, and expediency of every Chri∣stians particular Transacting with God in this way, is the sum of all the middle part, which occasioned the prefix∣ing this foregoing, and the ad∣dition of the last part of this short Treatise. To your self and your good Lady do I de∣dicate this small piece, as knowing that you have a through experience of the Truth which is contained in the following sheets: And therefore not only upon the account of the honour, I ow you for the Multitude of kindnesses, and tokens of faithful love which since I knew you, I and my whole family have received from
your self, your gracious Lady, yea your whole family; which I shall forbear here to menti∣on further, as knowing, that you desire not any one should (as you your self do not) blow a Trumpet before you; But for Religion's sake, and that Covenant-relation, in which you and yours stand allyed to God. I know not how to testifie and render dues of thanks to you, in any other or better way than this; if you shall continue to favour me, in accepting this small testimony of love, and respects to your self, and family, as I know you do not only ap∣prove of, but also are perswa∣ded of, and have embraced the Truth, and Priviledges herein presented to the World, I have attained the end in this Dedication. Sir, though they
are devoid of the Embellish∣ments of large and many Mar∣ginal quotations, and the Em∣broidery of curious and en∣ticing words; yet here are the plain Truths of God which I do the rather present to you, knowing that true of you which is upon record of Ja∣cob, as his high Commenda∣tion, by the Holy Ghost, who though he was a great man, yet he was a plain Man; which phrase is no mean Commendation, if we Con∣sider the Lord himself giving it to Job. chap. 1.1. with Gen. 25.27. Which I cannot better express than in the Paraphrase of a Re∣verend Divine. It is of larger signification than that phrase of ours [a plain man] for that in Common speech noteth one that is simple, and dealeth squarely and evenly, without fraud, deceit, guile, or any tricks in his actions, so may one be and have no great good∣ness in him; but this word is used to denote an up∣right-hearted man, a truely and intirely Godly man, a perfect man that is good within as well as with∣out, and good in all things, at all times, and in all places, one as well as another; one that care∣fully follows all the Commandments of God, not gi∣ving himself leave to swerve from any of Gods ways at any time. Mr. Wheatlys Prototype Examp. of Ja∣cob. Cap. 26. P. 42. who was a non-such in his Generation; he
was a perfect and upright man, &c. yea to the accusers face, Job 2.3. in the same words. Sir, desiring God to reward all your labour of love to my self, and all my brethren, which hath not been small, for quantity or duration, even ever since I knew you, to my self. In Testimony of my thankfulness to you, being well-assured of this, that your self, and all yours will very well relish and accept, and do partake of the things herein treated of and humbly pre∣sented to your view, not doubting, but they will be all your portion, I crave leave
to Commend them to you, and your self and yours to the protection of Almighty God, and shall Continue to be,

