



Right Honourable,
IT may seem somewhat strang, that one of so low a name, and as low desert (especially being so far gone towards the Sunset of his day here below) should now in this press-oppressing Age, ha∣zard himself thus upon the publike stage, I hope, I may speak it in truth: it is not any itching desire to be seen in
 print, that hath prevailed with me to make this adventure. The great Motive was this. Sundrie of my worthy freinds both Ministers, and private Christians (which conceive a better opinion of me, than I doe of my self) have sometimes ex∣pressed their desires, that I would leave something behind me, before I shall goe hence and be no more, which might conduce to the building up of my hearers in their most holy faith, and obedience. This in∣vitation, comming from seve∣ral hands, and so frequently re∣newed, after along time of se∣rious
 debating it within mine owne brest, I inclined to think it might be the call of God. VVhereupon I resolved to make choice of some fit subject, to handle in mine ordinarie ministration at home; and having pitched upon this, and brought it to a period by the good hand of God upon me (notwithstanding many inter∣ruptions), I shall now send it forth, to shift for it self in the crowd. I have no reason to account it any thing worth, as it commeth from me. I freely acknowledg, that I fail very much in the manner of hand∣ling?
 yet the Argument it self is of special necessity, and worth, touching upon the three maine Pillars, or princi∣ples of Christian Religion. viz. Mans miserie by the fall, his Recoverie by Christ, and his Duty, arising thereupon. If the Lord be pleased to give it favour in the eyes of his peo∣ple, and to make it usefull to raise the price of the grace of Redemption in the hearts of those that heard it, or of any o∣thers, and to engage them more strongly to the love, and service of their dear redeemer, I have my whole desire.

I humbly crave leave, that I may inscribe it to your Lord∣ships Name, thereby to mani∣fest some small Testimonie of my thankfulness for your ma∣ny undeserved favours. You were pleased to take notice of me in the time of the fist wars, and ever since, as occasion was offered, to looke upon me, with a far fairer aspect, than I could desire. Although I am a man of a mean parentage, and con∣dition in the world, and for∣merly a stranger to your Ho∣nour, yet you received me as a minister of Jesus Christ, and have shewed forth a tender
 care of my welfare (a rare con∣descension in persons of so high rank), besides many reall kindnesses, making me at sun∣drie times very noble offers of places of considerable profit, for my better support, and more comfortable progress in the Lords work.
How much your Lordship hath deserved of this Nation, by managing the militarie af∣faires of it, to the apparent ha∣zard of your estate, health, and life too, is so famously known to all, that I am willing to hope, that this age (although other∣wise unthankfull enough)
 cannot so easily forget it, as not to send down the memorie of it to posteritie.
Your love to true godliness in the power of it, your readines to supply the necessity of the Sts. your affectionatness to faithful Ministers, your care to provide godly Preachers for all places, where you have power, or in∣terest, and to allow them com∣fortable saleries for their la∣bours, these and the like good works do praise you in the gates, in the hearts & tongues of all those, which either know, or have heard the report of them.
But I am perswaded that the
 lowlines of your spirit, cannot willingly heare a trumpet sounding forth your praises. Therefore I forbeare. The Lord direct your heart into the love of God, and the pati∣ence of Christ, put under his hand, to support you in all your weaknesses, and afflicti∣ons, and conferre upon you all spirituall blessings in heavenly places preparing for salvation, which shall be the dayly pray∣er of.

