


Beloved Brethren,
I Need not say much to you concerning the Re∣verend Authour of the ensuing Treatise. You fully know his doctrine, manner of life, purpose,2 Tim. 3.10. Faith, Long-suffering, Charitie, Pati∣ence. That he hath laboured long in his masters Vineyard, as with great diligence, so not without some suc∣cess. It is the high commendation of blessed Paul, that from Jerusalem, and round about, even to Illyricum,Rom. 15.19. he fully preached the Gospel of Christ: So our Reverend brother, not onely in the populous places near unto us, but in lesser Villages, hath
 frequently sounded the Gospel of Salvation, not confining his labours to that obscure Congregation where∣in he hath officiated as a painful over∣seer for many yeares, but commu∣nicating the sweet savour of Christ to many others: and let us adde this; He hath been so farre from heeding the preferments of this world, (though tendered him at several times) as he hath contented himself with a mean allowance, not worthy to be named, considering his worth, and industry. but I shall say no more of him, though I might say exceeding much, as know∣ing his modestie to be such, as he would rather blame than thank me for it. Give me leave to say a little unto you who have so often been partakers of his Ministerial labours: and
1. To you of Pudsey, whose Pa∣stor he hath been, and still is, much precious seed he hath sown among you; and therefore from you is ex∣pected much precious fruit: If you after so much Preaching, Catechi∣sing, and expounding, be found, either ignorant, or secure, prophane,
 or dissolute, as you are left with∣out excuse, so the many yeares pains of so faithfull a Teacher will rise up in Judgement against you.Luke 12.45. To whom much is given, of him much is required. God hath given in to you much instruction, He exspects from you much knowledge of the best things, endeared affections thereunto, and abundance of those fruits,Matth. 3.8. which John the Baptist calls Fruits meet for Repentance, worthy of amendment of life. Which, I de∣sire, may be considered, that so you may not be found barren, and unfruitfull in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming.2 Pet. 1.18. The goodness of the soil should be seen in the plentifulness of the Crop; and the pains of the Pastor, in the peoples knowledge of God, and Christ, in their Faith, hope, love, meekness, humilitie, patience, holiness, and obedience.
2. For you of Leeds, and Brad∣ford, as you have all, and often participated of his godly labours, so I heartily wish and desire, it may appear, you have not done so
 in vain, and therefore exhort you, to remember how you have heard,Revel. 3.3. and received, and hold fast, and repent. Yea, to hold fast these good and ancient truths, you have so often heard from his mouth: And forasmuch, as to the weak endea∣vours of your own Teacher, the Lord, as it were by the way of largess, hath superadded the pains of this Reverend brother, I am sure, yee ought to be gracious, yea, to grow in grace, and to a∣bound in every good word, and work.
But alack, it is to be feared, that according to the old Proverb, We are better Fed then Taught, much preaching little reforming of mens hearts, and wayes. It should be o∣therwise, else it will one day be known, and little to the comfort of many, that there have been painful and faithful Teachers among them.
Call to minde the dayes of old, when the harvest was great, the labourers few, many converts, though scarcity of able, and faithfull Teach∣ers.
 Now the Labourers are ma∣ny, shall the Harvest be small? Shall few or none be found, who look Zion-ward, and with their faces to that Jerusalem which is above. My brethren, I speak a little to awake the drowsie: Who can tell, what a little may do? It will do much, if he, who doth all, afford his blessing.
Awake thou that sleepest, and stand up from the dead, and you that are awake, take heed of slum∣bering in these declining times. There is much in the following Treatise, to awaken the secure, because they may finde therein, a plain and full discoverie, what their condition is by nature, as they spring out from the loynes of fal∣len Adam, and there is much also, both to direct, and instruct, and comfort such as flie for help to the Refuge set before them. But I shall spare to mention what every one may read. Pray, that the life of the aged Authour may yet be prolonged, and his Labours bles∣sed, and pray for him also, who
 desires you may profit by this work of his, and other the holy Labours of his servants, which are according to godliness.

From my Studie, in Leeds. April 26. 1658.
