



Rt. Wor.
HAd not the importunity
of friends prevailed with
me, I had never publi∣shed
this Sermon prea∣ched
at the solemnizati∣on
of the funerall obse∣quies,
of your Noble brother, Sir
Charles) for I was never so well con∣ceited
of the product of my weak brain,
as to deem it worthy publique view.
If Moses the authour of my Text,Exod. 4. 10.

professed that he was not eloquent,
that he was slow of speech, and unapt
for so great employment as he was cal∣led
to: I am sure I have ten thousand
thousand times more cause to disclaime
eloquence and to acknowledge my
owne weakenesse, and unworthinesse;
yet this is my comfort Innocentia melior
eloquentiâQuinti∣lian. innocence is better then
eloquence; a good cause better then a
good oratour.
This little Manuall or Enchiridion I
am sure will be censured, and I feare
more then practiced:Scrinia damagnis, me manus una capit. Mar. lib. 1. epig. 2. one perhaps
will quarrell with the stile, another with
the method, and others with the matter,
but let such know that I seeke not the
suffrages of their praise or approbation,
Candor in hoc ae∣o in∣ermortua enc, Ovid e pont. lib. . elig. .  non ego entosae lebis suf∣ragia ve∣or. Ho∣a. lib. 1. ep. 9. Lucian. who like summer lyes breath cor∣ruption
on the best provision: the malig∣nity
of whose wit, can find fault with
the best actions, not onely of men, but
of God also, as Lucians Momus, who

being called to judge of the excellency
of those master peeces the gods had
made, (scil.) a man, a house and a horse,
found fault withal three, with the horse,
that it had not hornes for defence, with
the house, that it had not motion, and
with the man, that he had not a window
to look into his breast: even so these
malevolent censurers criticise with a
froward curiosity upon the best and pu∣rest
volumnes, and often times fill and
blot them with their own Astericks and
errata's. And where a candid censure
might of every thing make a good con∣struction,
and take all in a faire sense,
there will they through misconstructi∣on
or some idle conjecture, though to
the fullest period, adde, a nonnulla
desiderantur, that something is wan∣ting,
or that it might have beene better
done otherwise. Insomuch that it is e∣ven
a taske for divinity to please man,
. Non  cun tis place vel Jupiter ipse Nec mitens pluvam, retinens pluviam. not that this argues any weaknesse in

God who is able to do all things, but a
perversnesse in mans nature that will be
content with nothing.
If therefore such find fault, it shall
not trouble me; if any be contentious,
we have no such custome, nor the
Church of God. 1 Corin. 11. 16.
The more ingenious, are more cour∣teous,
Unus Plato plus est quam Atheni∣ensis po∣pulus. , in vita lat. together with whom, so
your Wor. continues your approbation
of it, I shall thinke my selfe happy in
my labours;magnum oc ego luco, ood pla∣ui tibi, qui tupi ecernis oncstum Hrat-Ser∣. lib. 2. . 6. and acknowledge your
favour herein, to be farre transcending
my merit; the best of whose endeavors
cannot deserve the influence of so noble
a protectour.
It is a good rule that in dedicating
books, we should be sure that the thing
be worthy the person to whom it is de∣dicated.e exhor∣tor mo∣neoque libelle, ut docto pla∣ceas Apo∣lli.
I will not say this is such,Mart. lib. 4. epig. 87. Da mihi te placi∣dum, in∣genium vultu starque caditque tuo. Ovid fast. lib 1. mmensa subit cura ut quae ti∣bi dican∣tur te dig∣na sint. lin. praef in Hi∣at.  Vesp. im∣perat. In hoc faciunt slult quos glo∣ria vexa∣inanis. because
I am conscious to my selfe of much
weaknesse and unworthinesse: yet you

will the more magnifie your owne
worth by receiving so small a mite into
your so noble patrociny.
I shall forbeare much Apologizing,
for your protection of this ensuing Ser∣mon,
having had assurance thereof al∣ready
from you, at your house in Staun∣ton;
my humble suite is, that you will
pardon my demerits, and at your best
leasure peruse it, and I trust that as God
hath endowed you with a great tempo∣rall
estate on earth, so you may by these
my weake endeavours be excited to la∣bour
for, and diligently seek after, an e∣ternall
inheritance in the kingdome of
heaven.
The motto anexed to your coate of
armes is, A Eterna prapon caducis, ad
indeed it is the smme of my exhorta∣tions,
in the ensuing Sermon.
Be pleased therefore to emember
what you in that motto professe. Prefer
heavenly above earthly things, set your

affections on things above, and not on
things beneath; take heed to your
selves, and keep your soules diligently.
But the volumne is so small, that I must
make the preface suitable, lest the City
run out of the gates, as the Philosophers
jeered the men of Myndum.. acrt. de it. Philos. ib. 6.
I shall therefore conclude with that
of Saint Paul to the Thessalonians,
1 Ep. 3 ch. 12. & 13. ver. the Lord make
you encrease and abound in love one
towards another, and towards all men,
to the end he may establish your hearts
unblmable, in holinesse before God
our father, even at the comming of our
Lord Jesus Christ with all his Saints:
which is and shall be the hearty and
constant prayer of

