



Most Noble Senators,
ONE of the greatest Spirits, and as active as later times have yeelded, Charles the fifth, tired out with Affairs of State, resigns up all, and sits down toThe Parliaments Labours and Labyriths, end his dayes in quiet Contem∣plation. I doubt not but many of your Honorable Heads have felt the thorny Crown (of these late years troubles) so sharp, so weighty, that your tired Spirits would joyfully embrace, if not (with Charles the fifth) a totall Cessation, yet like some faithfull tired Judge, (after so long and trou∣blesome a Tearm) at least some breathing short Va∣cation.
Although I dare not (as to Englands peace and safety) admit desires of your Totall. Cessation, or long vacation: yet common Gratitude for such incompa∣rable

labours, expences, hazards, &c. from whence the God of heaven hath vouchsafed such rare and incomparable preservations, deliverances, enjoy∣ments, &c. I say common gratitude cannot onely wish you heartily & pray for earnestly your eternal Rest, and most joyfull Harvest in the Heavens, but also, all the possible breathing hours, and cool reti∣red shades of Contemplation and self-enjoyment a∣midst the scorching Travels of so many vexing and tedious Actions. You cannot (ever renowned Patri∣ots) but like some grave Commanders of Fleets and Armies, who have brought their Ships and followers through tempestuous strms and bloody fights, to joyful Rest and Harbours! You cannot but look back with Admirings, with Praisings, with Resolvings to cast you Crowns, and Heads, and Hearts, and Hands, (for the remaining Minutes of the short Candle of your life) at his Feet, in whose most High and most gracious Hands have all your Breaths and wayes been.
In the review of the multitude of your Act∣ings and Sufferings, your Battells and Victories, Dan∣gers▪ and Deliverances, you cannot, (no man can) but observe and see (a naked)▪ Arm fromTwo Subsidies granted by the Parliament to the King of Kings. Heaven fighting for you, but most especially since the times and houres you gratified the most High Eternall King of Kings (now more then ever Englands King) with these two famous Subsi∣dies (if I may in humble Reverence so call them.)
The first, of Mercy and Moderation to theThe first Sub∣sidy.

poor oppressed Consciences of the English Nati∣on, amidst the throng of which he graciously will, yea he hath acknowledged, that some of his own dear Children (the Sonnes and Daughters of the God of Heaven) have been relieved and suc∣coured by you.
The second your high and impartiall drawingThe second Sub∣sid. of the Sword of Justice upon the great and high∣est offendors: Since which two wonderfull Sub∣sidies, the most wilfully blind must be forced to see the glorious Goings of the God of Heaven with your Councels and Armies, and the discharge of his holy promise in honouring you, who have so highly, (in so rare and unparalleld Travels and Ha∣zards) honored him.
Concerning the first of these Subsidies, I was humbly bold some few yeares since, to present you with a Conference between Peace and Truth, touching a most bloudy Murtherous Ma∣lefactor,The Bloody Tenent a com∣mon Pyrat. the bloody Tenent of Persecution for cause of Conscience: (a notorious and common Pyrate, that takes and robbs, that fires and sinkes the (Spirituall Shipps and Vessels) the Consci∣ences of all men, of all sorts, of all Religions and Per∣swasions whatsoever.
It hath pleased Master Cotton, (a Man in∣comparably too worthy for such a service) to attempt the washing of this bloody Tenent, (as hee speakes) in the blood of the LambMr. Cottons Reply. CHRIST JESUS (though one part of the

Conference, to wit, the Examination of a N. English Modell of Church and Civill Power, he leaveth to the washing of some other of the N. English Ministers, the Authors of that Modell, of whose washings as yet I have not heard of:) This present discourse pre∣sents your Honours with the second part of the Con∣ference between Peace and Truth, and hath examined Mr. Cottons Reply and washings.
I summe up the multitude of my Thoughts touch∣ing your Honours Consideration of this point, in these three most humble Petitions.
First, I most humbly and earnestly beseech yourThe first Peti∣tion. Honours to mind the Difference between State Necessi∣ty of Freedome to different Consciences, and the Equity and Piety of such a Freedome.
State Policie and Necessity of Affairs drew fromDifference be∣tween the Piety and Mercy, and State-necessity of granting free∣dm to mens Consciences. great Constantine (with his Colleague Licinius) that famous Edict of Freedome to all mens Consciences, whom yet afterward he persecuted: But a Succes∣sor of his (of late years) Maximilian the second, comes neerer the Life of the Businesse, when he con∣scientiously profest in a solemne Speech to the Bi∣shopConstantines and Maximilians acts compared, of Olmuts in Bohemia, There is no sin ordinarily greater against God, said he, then to use violence against the Consciences of men.
Your Honours will find (if the Father of Spirits please to spare you time and Spirits, to mind this Cause and Controversie, that all violence to Conscience turns upon these two Hinges.
First, of Restraining from that worshipping of aTwo wayes of oppressing con∣science in Reli∣gion. God or Gods, which the Consciences of men in their respective worships (all the world over) believes to be true.
Secondly, of Constraining to the practising or coun∣tenancing of that whereof their Consciences are not perswaded.
In the practice of both these, the Histories of our own Nation will tell us (besides the forraigne) how sharp and zealous the strongest Swords of England have ever us'd to be.
And yet of the practice of both, what a PropheticallThe late King Charles his conscience to op∣presse the consci∣ences of others, no small occasion of the ruine of him and his. passage of our late troubles and King, did the fore∣said Maximilian expresse to Henry the third of France, (in his passage from Poland to France to claim the French Crown) to this effect, Sir, remember that when men think to get Heaven by using violence to the Consciences of men, they oftentimes loseThe Bishops kild the King. that which they might peaceably have kept on Earth. Some have said that worldly policie perswaded, as well as State-necessity compelled the States of Holland to a prudent permission of different Consci∣ences.Hollands policy. And that the said State-Policie perswaded some Dutch to wish that England might not tolerate, least a permission of Conscience in England should break down the Bridge and Passage into their parts of Freedome in causes of Conscience.
Those prudent and prosperous States have goneThe permission of conscience in Holland. far (though driven by Spanish persecution) to it) in taking off the yoak from the necks of Dutch & Eng∣lish, French yea, Popish & Jewish consciences. For all which (though but Mercy, though but Justice and humanity to fellow mankind) he that runs may read the truth of Gods never failing Promises, Blessed are the Mercifull for they shall obtain Mercy.
Their own Chronicles tell us of a wonderfull walk

of the God of Heaven between three of their mostGods wonderful goings in Hol∣land from Stafore, undone by Pride and Unthankfulness, eminent Towns or Cities, First Stafore was the wondrous Wealthy City, their golden Citie, til a proud wealthy, Merchants widow, caused a whole ships loa∣ding of wheat (which her ship brought home and she despised) to be thrown over into the Harbour, which (with other Accidents of water and weather, Gods most righteous providences) so choak'd up the Haven, that Vessels of Burthen durst never frequent that Citie (by this occasion) most won∣drously impoverish'd) since.
From Stafore God carries all the Shipping andTo Enchuysin, undone by the bloody Tenent of Persecution: wealth to Enchuysin, whose Zealous, over-zealous and furious Clergie provoke the Civil Magistrates to persecute dissenting, non conforming consciences: A∣mongst the rest 'tis rare (if ever) that the most glo∣rious Son of God himself escapes.
From Enchuysin therefore (a Den of persecutingFrom Enchuy∣sin to Amster∣dam, raised to its present hight and glory, by mercy to the per∣secuted. Lyons, and mountain of Leopards) the persecuted fled to Amsterdam, a poor fishing Town, yet harborous and favourable to the flying, though dissenting con∣sciences: This confluence of the persecuted, by Gods most gracious coming with them, drew Boats, drew Trade, drew Shipping, and that so mightily in so short a time, that Shipping, Trading, wealth, Great∣nesse, Honour (almost to astonishment in the Eyes of all Europe, and the world) have appeared to fall as out of Heaven in a Crown or Garland upon the head of that poor Fisher-Town.
O ye the prime of English men and English worthies, whose sences have so oft perceived the everlasting Arms of the Invincible and Eternal King, when

your Ships Hold hath been full with water, yea with Blood, when storms without, fires and mutinies with∣in, whence he hath beaten upon some Rocky HeartsEnglands ship got into Har∣bour. and passages, as if she would have staved and split into a thousand pieces; yet this so neer stav'd, so neer fired, so neer split, foundred, sinking Nation, hath the God of Heaven (by your most valiant and carefull hands) brought safe to Peace her Harbour! Why now should any duty possible be impossible? yea, why not impossibilities possible? Why should your English Seas contend with a neighbour Dutch∣manStriking of Colours. for the motion of a piece of Silk, &c▪ and not ten thousand fold much more your English Spirits with theirs for the Crown of that State-piety and Wisdome which may make your faces more to shine, not only with a common lustre after a Dutch Presi∣sident, but (if it be the holy will of God, and I hum∣bly hope it may be) with a glory far transcending all your fairest neighbours Copies.
The States of Holland having smarted deeply, and paid so dearly for the purchase of their freedomes, reach to the neighbour Nations and the world, a tast of such their dainties. And yet (with due reve∣rence to so wise a State, and with due thankfulnesse for mercy and relief to many poor oppressed Con∣sciences)The States of Holland yet to seek in the mat∣ters of liberty of Conscience. I say their Piety nor Policie could ever yet reach so far, nor could they in all their School of Warre (as their Countries have been call'd, learn that one poor Lesson of setting absolutely the consciences of all men free.
'Tis true, they vouchsafed to the Papists and Ar∣minians the liberty (as I may so speak) of the prison,

and sometimes to go abroad (as I may say) with a Keeper, &c. But why should not such a parliament as England never had, (and who knows whether everTouching abso∣lute freedome to every mans con∣science imparti∣ally. will the like) why should not the piety and policie of such Statesmen out shoot and teach their Neigh∣bours, by framing a safe communication of free∣dome of Conscience in worship, even to them to whom with good security of Civill peace) it is as due as to any other Consciences or Worshippers in the World) the Papists and Arminians them∣selves. Of the Piety and Policie of such a freedom I have discoursed more largely in the answering ofFreedome of Po∣pish consciences. S Chap. 59 more particu∣larly. some Objections of Mr. Cotton in Chapter 59. of this Book: and proved that such a freedom of the Conscience of each member of the Commonweal, and such a Commonweal as Englands now is, especi∣ally, cannot in all probability prove so dangerous and prejudiciall as many do imagine and discourse, but contrarily many wayes prove beneficiall, and marvellously advantageous.
Your Honors know what bloody bickerings and bloodsheds have been in later times in Germany, in the Low-Countries, in France, in England, in Polonia, in Hungaria, Bohemia, Transilvania, &c. about the Free∣dome of mens Consciences and Worship?
The God of Heaven may also please graciously to remember you, that it hath been the fatall er∣rour of all Reformers that England or other States have seen, to doe as the Portugals did in theOld images puld down, and new set up. East-Indies, who pull'd down the Images of the Pa∣gans whom they conquered, and set up their own I∣mages of Portugall in their stead and places.
It is agreed on all hands that subscribe to one GOD, that his worship is but one, and that all be∣sides that one true GOD, are idols, and all worshipAll Images must down. beside his own (but one) are Images: And you know the fiery jealousie of the Eternall will not e∣ver endure an Image (though never so fair) his Ri∣vall: Hence in the many former Changes of estates, and State-worships (by Gods just and jealous permis∣sion) the childrens work hath been to tumble down their fathers buildings. Nor can your most prudent Heads, and potent Hands possibly erect that Fabrick, which the next Age (it may be the next Parlia∣ment) may not tumble down. And yet so may the God of Heaven so please to guide you in the high matters that concern the worship of God, and the Consciences of men, that (what ever be the pre∣sent or future consequences) your own Conscien∣ces may reap the joyfull harvest of their present and eternall Requiems.
The Pope, the Turk, the King of Spain, the Emperour, and the rest of Persecutors, build among the Eagles, and the Starres, yet while they pra∣ctice violence to the Souls of Men, and make their Swords of Steele Corrivals with the two∣edged Spirituall Sword of the Sonne of GOD: the Basis of their Highest Pillars, the Foundation of their glorious Palaces, are but Drosse and Rotten∣nesse. And however in our poore Arithmeticke, their Kingdomes Number seem great, yet in theAll violent courses must break. onely wise account of the Eternall, their Ages are but Minutes, and their short Periods are neer accomplished; for herein the Maxime is most

true (in the matters of Religion and Consciences of men, especially:) the violent motion must break.
But Light from the Father of Lights hath shined on your eyes: Mercy from the Father of Mercies hath softned your breasts, to be tender of the ten∣derest part of Man, his Conscience: for indeedThe Act for Civill Engage∣ment of great necessity. there is no true Reason of Policy or Piety (as this Dis∣course discovereth) why that man that will sub∣scribe (and give assurance for honest meaning) to that most prudent Act of Civill Engagement, (what ever his Conscience be) should be depriv'd and rob'd of the liberty of it, in Spirituall and Religi∣ous matters.
I have (I fear) been long in my first Petition, my second shall be brief, is this.
I most humbly and earnestly beseech your Ho∣noursThe second Pettion. in all the straits and difficulties which yet you are to passe (concerning this great point of mens Consciences, or other high affairs) steere carefuly off from one sunk Rock, on which so many gallant Ves∣sels have miscarried. This Rock lies deeper then o∣thers, and seldom hath appeared but at some Dead∣low water, when the most high Judge of the whole world reckons with Men or States; in low conditi∣tions and debasements.
I humbly beg from God the gracious continuance of his mighty Angels guard about your sitting, to preserve your Honours from the flames of Wars a∣broad, and from such flames at home: from Risings, from Tumults, from Mutinis, from Pistols, from Stabs,Worldly wisdome in straits a most dangerous rock. from Powder-plots, from Poyson, &c. but above all, from your own Wisdome and Policies in straits and difficulties.
The holy History tells, that on this Rock (in a State strait) strook the great Statist Jeroboam, to the ruine of himself and his posterity.
On this Rock split that famous and zealous Re∣former Jehu.
This pluckt the Crown from Sauls high head, when his own wisdome in straits made him presum∣tuous about the worship of God.
This pluckt off the Crown, and pluck out the eyes of Zedekiah, when in a strait he trusted not in God, as Solomon speaks, but leaned to his own under∣standing for his safety.
To which purpose my third Petition is, that in theThe third Peti∣tion. midst of so many great Negotiations of Justice, of Mer∣cy to the Bodies and Estates, or Spirits & Conscien∣ces of so many thousands and ten thousand, you for∣get not to deal justly, & to shew mercy to your selves: Oh how lamentable and dreadful wil it prove, if af∣ter all your high Employments (as the State-Agents &Soul shipwrack. Factors for the Commonweal!) if in the midst of all your cares and fears, and tossings about the Souls and Consciences and salvations of others, your own most dear and pretious selves make an eternal shipwrack?
Your Honors know, that although men have chosen and cull'd you out as wise and noble, yet God hath not chosen (if Paul say true) many wise and noble to eter∣nall life and blessednesse.
Who can love and honor you, and not cry to the God of Heaven for you, and to your selves for your selves: Be not so busie about the Earthly estate, no nor the Heavenly estate of others, as to forget to make sure your own vocation and election, & to work out your own salvation with fear and trembling.
Oh let not this bold cry offend, and though offend, yet let it throughly awake your noble spirits to know your dangers & hindrances (more then other mens)Dangers of Par∣liament men. from a world of distractions from without, from pride & self-confidence from within, from the flatteries of such who (hoping for rewards & morsels from you) proclaim abroad (that you may hear it) O blessed Christian Magistrates, Christian Kings & Queens, Christi∣an States, Christian Parliaments, Christian Armies, so lul∣ling your pretious souls into an eternall sleep.
I need not remember your Honours of that most wonderful summa totalis of all the castings up of Solo∣mons choice particulars (his wisdom, works, riches, peace and pleasures,) Vanity and vexation of spirit. I need notWonderfull Con∣fessions of two mighty Kings. remember you of that wonderfull Confession of Phi∣lip the 2nd of Spain (neer his last) to his successor and son Philip the 3rd, to this effect: I have had and ex∣pended (about the time of these 30 years) 594. mil∣lions of Treasure, and yet gained nothing for my self but heart sorrow, and vexation of Spirit. Your own observant eyes and ears (in the late most wonderfull changes and tossings of all affairs and things) cannot but read a thousand Lectures to your most serious midnight and morning Thoughts of the most certain uncertainties of Friends, Treasures, Revenues, Ar∣mies, Forts, Magazines, Castles, Ships and Navies, Crowns and Lives.
Why then should your renowned wisdom & pru∣dence excel the folly of others as much as light excel∣leth darkness, in searching of the root and causes of matters, in fore-seeing Events and Consequences, inTrue Heavenly wisdome. raising Monies and Armies, in choosing Agents, in framing Laws, in managing great affairs at home & abroad, in discovering plots, in preventing dangers, &

finall overthrows by sure retreats, &c. If yet, alas, that wisdome make not out a saving discovery of the most holy and only wise, the Alpha & Omega, the first of cau∣ses and last of Ends (in whose hand is all your breath and ways:) in raising spiritual supplies against your spiritually devouring adversaries, in discovering their methods, de∣signes, deceits, in preventing that (that) fatall overthrow, and eternall defeat (remediless, hopeless) where the worm never dies, and the fire never goes out?
O why should your renowned valors so glory in theThe onely valour or cowar∣dize. conquest of Cities, Castles, Ships & Armies, if your selves are led captie in the spiritual chains of lusts & passions, a more lamentable, and more to be deplored object, then the poorest slaves in the Spanish and Turkish Gallies.
What shall avail your admired diligence and activity in managing & quick dispatching so many and so highTrue and best dili∣gence. affairs, by day and night, catching hold of all occasions, redeeming all oportunities, improving all advantages, if you lose the fair Gales, and oreslip and sleep away the pretious and inestimable seasons and calls, and knocks and offers of your own eternal Mercies?
What boots your exemplary and impartiall justice on so many and so high Delinquents, if your own bosomesTrue Ju∣stice and Righte∣ousness. are found traiterous to the State of Heaven, rebellious to the King, to the God of spirits, and if in that most high Court of Justice from Gods most dreadful tribunal you hear that thunder (which oh that you may never hear) o ye cursed, &c.
'Tis true your mercies have been eminent to the poor, to the opressed, to the captive, to the maimed, to theHeavenly mercy. wounded, to the fatherless, widows, &c. But will you now be cruel to your selves, incompassionate to your own bowels, insensible of your own wounds and miseries? O search and see, and be perswaded of

your infinite want of Crummes falling from your Table of Mercy! of the infinite price and value of the wine & oyl of the mercifull (though despised Samaritan) to ease and supple, to cleanse and heale your broken Hearts and wounded Spirits.
The flames of your zeal for the God of Israel (as that famous Iehu said) have been so bright, and mounted so high against two mighty Factions of the Kings and Queens (the Prelats & the Popes) that those flames have not only dazled and amazed all British eys (the EnglishLate zea∣lous Re∣formati∣ons. & the Scotch) but or'e the Seas, and or'e the Alps, and or'e the Pirenean mountains, and Romes own 7 hils haue flown & fild all Protestant and Popish ears, and hearts, and tongues, with either admiration & exulting, or furious rage and indignation! Yet what avails these glorious flames, and furious whirling of your zealous Chariots, if yet they are but Jehu's? If Sathan the God of this world possesse the Throne of Pride and Ostentation in your bo∣soms (Come see my zeal which I have for the God of Israel) yea though you should go on where Jehu left, and shoot home where he fell short, yet what avails it that the God of Israel be in Iehu's mouth, when God∣selfe, God-honour, &c. fill his breast & heart? What gains he by the slaughter of Princes, Priests and Gods, when Israel it self is but an Apostate state from the true wor∣shipJehu his zeal and reward. of the God of Israel, and Iehu himself (according to the purity of Gods word and ordinances at Ierusalem) re∣formed not so much as his own privt heart & censcience?
Alas, what solid joy (most zealous Worthies) shall a Crown of leaves (a temporal reward, Iehu's wages) bring to your Noble Heads & Breasts, if you heare not at last that saving Call to all humble and selfe-denying Fol∣lowers of Jesus Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.
Your admired publick patience so wonderfully assaulted, so wonderfully loaden with such mightie Trials from Mans, from Gods hand, with such migh∣ty Losses, mighty Defeats, mighty Labours & Hazards,Of the Parlia∣ments patience. mighty Reproaches, &c. I say your unwearied Pati∣ence hath stood (like some mighty Rock, or Anvill) invincible: Yet who can stile this Patince, or State∣policie! if your private Howses and Breasts swell and swarm with rebellious Passions, Impatiences, Re∣venges! If in the furnaces of your own private af∣flictions, and in the powrings out and changes of the most High upon you, your Drosse and Lees of un∣mortified, unsanctified Spirits remain uncleansed! if you most humbly kisse not the Rods of the most High chastising you by sicknesses, by lesses, and other trialls, humbly thankfull, and longing to declare the Spirits of true Children, truly desiring more and more to partake of his Divine Nature and Ho∣linesse?
Yea, what avails the Crown of your enduring Con∣stancy, that have rid out so long a storm, held outOf the Crown of true Con∣stancy. so long a siege, not fainted in such tedious Travels, Labours, Oppositions, Treacheries, Discouragements, but gloriously cast Anchor in the Port of Patience; if yet your personall Righteousness passe away as the morning dew melted with the warme beams of vi∣ctorious and prosperous Success? If your own pro∣fessions of Christ Jesus prove but a fading colour, and not died in the right Grain of the pretious blood of the Son of God?
Your Honours well remember, that the main point of Luthers Reformation, (and before him of the

Hussites in Germany and Bohemia, and before them of the Wicklevists in England, and before them of the Waldenses in France, consisted chiefly about Repen∣tance and Faith in the blood of Christ: That the main Contentions of Calvin, and since him of the most Reformers, have turn'd upon the hinge ofThe Controver∣sies of late years about Religion. the Form of the Church, and the Administrations thereof, the lamentable though pretious Fuell of those fires of strife among the wisest, holiest, and learnedst of the Followers of Christ Jesus in these times. You know the Lord Jesus prophesied, ThatSo many opposite Churches, so many opposite Christs to the onely true. many false Christs should arise, and the Scriptures more then once give the title of Christ to the Ghurch; whence it is evident, That every severall Modell, Platform, and profession of a Church, is the profession of a various and different Christ. Your Honours also know he spake most true (being Truth it Selfe) that said, That which is most highly esteemed a∣mongst men, is abomination in the sight of God, Luke 16. Hence, such may the glorious profession of Christs or Churches be, as may ravish the eyes and hearts of men, and from which the jealous eys of the true Lord Jesus turn away as from the false and counterfeit with indignation. Beside the Coun∣terfeit in holy Scripture, how famous was the Page∣ant of that counterfeit King of England, which soThe Pageant of Perken Warbeck in K. H. 7. his dayes, a picture of false Christs, or Churches. haunted with long vexations one of the wisest of Englands Kings (Henry the seventh?) How won∣derfully (even to astonishment) did the imposture of Richard Duke of York (proclaiming Henry an usurper and alse.) I say, how wonderfully did that monstrous imposture take, that not

onely Foraigners where that Counterfeit most kept (the Arch-Duke, the King of France, the King of Scots, the King of Romanes, the Irish Nation, &c.) were deceived with that feigned King, but also so many gallant men of our own Nation, even to the wisest and highest (as that famous Stanley Lord Chamberlain, the Preserver and Riser of King Henry himselfe) lamentably lost their Heads and Lives a∣bout that pretended King? Now counterfeit Spiri∣tuall delusions of false and counterfeit Christs, as they are deeper and stronger, so they find more easie posses∣sion of the Ears and Souls of men, so wofully prepa∣red by naturall self-deceivings.
On six principall Pillars or . The six funda∣mentals of Chri∣stian Religion. Heb. 6. Foundations (saith the holy Spirit, Heb. 6. 6.) is built the fabrick of of true Christianity: On Repentance, on Faith, on Baptismes, on laying on of Hands, on the Resurrection, and the Eternall Judgement.
Concerning the two middle ones of these there are and have been mighty and lamentable differences among the Scholars of Jesus, who yet agree in the other foure, of Repentance and Faith, the Resurrection and Eternall Judgement.
Whatsoever your Honours apprehensions are ofwith or without the first two, sal∣vation or no sal∣vation. the foure last, I beseech you (as you love your lives to Eternity) make sure of the two first, and ply (with Sails and Oars) day and nights, and give not rest to your souls till you have anchored in some blessed assurance, that although you find not satisfaction in the many frames of Churches pretending; yet that you have saved (as once you know a wise and ho∣norable personage said) the Bird in your Bosome: and

that those your very eyes which have seen so much of Christ Jesus, and so many wonderfull changes, and have been rotten awhile in their holes (in Death) shall joyfully possesse, and fill their holes again, and be gloriously blessed with the sight of a Redeemer, when these Heavens and this Earth shal passe away. For which humbly and uncessantly prayes

