


My Lords,
IT was a saying of Luther, Let me hear ill as a malefactor, &c. Modo impii silentii non arguar, so that I be not ac∣cused of sinful silence.
The doctrine of Antipae∣dobaptism was preached in many places in IRELAND, and I again and a∣gain challenged to dispute this point; there∣fore I resolved to give place to none such, no
 not for an hour, (it being urged as a thing so necessary to salvation by many) that the truth of the Gospel might continue with us, as Paul speaks of Circumcision, Gal. 2. but did publickly disown that way and practice, which though watered by the foot of man, as Aegypt: yet was never watered by the dew of heaven, as Canaan) & accordingly I found (blessed be his glorious grace who delighteth to breath in such poor worms as I am) more of Gods presence in the publick dispensing of that Ordinance of infant baptism, (assuring me by his spirit that he would own it and bless it to the babes) than ever I did in all my days, these eight and twenty years since I entered into the Ministry; to which I was called from my childhood, and assured I should win ma∣ny souls. This I speak in humility of spirit, (as knowing my self to be the chief of sinners) not to magnifie my self, but to magnifie mine Office, as Paul doth in the first and second Chapters to the Galatians. Paul knew that if those teachers could enervate his authoritie, and make his calling void, his doctrine would be slighted and made of none effect; there∣fore he labors to prove by many Arguments
 that he was called from heaven to the Mini∣stry; especially by the good success the Lord gave, I was (saith he) sent to the Gentiles, as Peter to the Jews: for he that wought effectually by Peter to the circumcision, was mighty in me to∣wards the Gentiles. Gal. 2.7.8.
In these lines I look at Christ as standing by, and overlooking what I am doing, who well knows with how many prayers and tears I have looked upon the several texts mention∣ed in this Treatise; (for I often think, what would Christ say to such a text if he were to preach on such a subject? or will Christ own this or that truth another day?) begging of the father of lights, from whom every good giving and perfect gift doth come, that he would lead me into all truth; and not suffer me to build upon his foundation, wood, hay, and stubble, least the day should discover it, and I suffer loss either of my labor or crown (making it less massie and weighty, not ha∣ving so many pearls in it) another day. And I am assured that those prayers shall not prove abortive: for the prayers of the saints dyed in the bloud of Christ are of eternal efficacie; there being a necessity and tie lying upon Je∣hova
 that they should be fulfilled in due time, Acts 1.16. However if Christ take pleasure in me, here I am: if not, let him do with me what seemeth good in his sight.
I have not affected enamel'd phrases, and words of mans wisdom, (which perhaps are expected from one in my capacity) but with as much plainness as I could, I have held forth the truth as it is in Jesus. The riches of Greece did not consist in words, said Demosthenes of old. Therefore I had rather say Ossum than Os, with Austin, least I should not be understood. Cibus simplex est optimus, the plainest meats nourish most. We say of a diamond, Quic∣quid absconditur perditur; for truth is like to Adam, never so glorious as when it's naked. Therefore, saith the Apostle, we use plainness of speech. 2 Cor. 3.12.
If any be offended, I say, Praestat ut scanda∣lum admittatur quam ut veritas amittatur. And with Seneca, Mallem boni viri famam perdere, quam conscientiam. For we are set for the de∣fence of the Gospel, and the appertenances thereof, (Phil. 1.17.) and therefore may not with hold our testimonie from the present truth, (i.) the truth of this age, (though never
 so much opposed) what ever the event may be.
I have without gall or bitterness to any, as I hope, managed this controversie, truthing it in love, , Eph. 4 (for truth needs not passion) desirous to weep and bleed over such souls who are contrary minded, (o∣ver whom Christ hath bled) as Paul speaks Phil. 3.18. If at any time God will give them repentance to the acknowledgment of the truth; that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the devil, who are taken captive alive at his will.
However though many will not own this disgraced truth, I am assured that Christ will own it another day, and then truth will be truth: in the mean time put it in the open field and let it work out it self, which doubt∣less it will; for all truth is from the spirit, which onely is able to make way for it in the hearts of the sons of men, and to batter down those strong holds, even those royal forts of the imagination and will, that stand out in op∣position to the truths of Iesus.
My dearest Lords! I ow no less than my self to you, for that tender love you have ever ex∣pressed
 to me; therefore having nothing else to give, worthy of your acceptance, I give my self to you. Many have given more, but none ever left less to himself: and as a token of mine endeared affections to your Honors, I humbly present this plain discourse to your Honors patronage, being the first fruits of my labours; and leave it in the hand of the spirit to bring it hme to the souls of all into whose hands it may come, assuring my self, I have a friend within them, the spirit I mean, (if they be Christs) that will eccho to, and close with the spirit that is without. But if I prevale not with those that are otherwise minded, (as I have little hope, seeing God doth not usually recall such, but suffers them to go on in the error of their way) my earnest prayer to God shall be, Father forgive them for they know not what they say, and they do they know not what.
My Lords,

