




NOt to petition King, or Parliament,
Or Court the People, suits with his intent
Who sends you this: Nor, is it come to crave
Your Favours, or, your Patronage to have.
It is almost too late; and 'twas too soon:
At this time, therefore, he expects that boone
From One who better knowes him; and from whom
This VOICE, doth to your sight, and hearing come.
And, had he alwaies done so, he had lost
Lesse labour; and escaped with lesse cost.
He hath no mind to flatter: if he had,
To flatter at this time, were to be mad;
And, perad venture, also, he hath, now,
As little cause, as mind, to flatter you:
For, Courtship on that LADY, who bestowes,
That poore, despis'd, deform'd and aged growes,
Who sleighted him, and left him to dispaire
When she was wealthie, lovely, young, and faire.
Yet, that those old affections may appeare,
With which, by him, you alway served were;
And, that he may not give a just offence
(By seeming carelesse of the reverence

Belonging to your Greatnesse) he professes,
That, meerly, for the sake of these Expresses,
The freedome of bold-language he assumes;
And, that he nothing, for himselfe, presumes:
Nor, means to honour, love, or serve you, lesse,
For your unkindnesses, or your distresse.


The Newes he brings, accepted if it be,
Will warrantize the Speaker to be free:
And, if it be despised, he conceives,
Some will grow bold, ere long, without your leaves;
And, make you heare, with ruder complements,
A blunter Language, and to worse intents:
For, dreadfull things are murmur'd; and unlesse
Men more conforme, to that which they professe,
You'l find, ere long, he dareth, without feare,
To speak more truth, then many dare to heare.
What ever He, what e're his Language seems;
Your Persons, none more values, or esteems.
None loves your Honours, or your safeties, more
Then he yet doth, and hath done heretofore.
None, oft'ner his own blame hath ventur'd on,
That others might not wholly be undone;
Or, is more free from aimes, at that which tends
To personall respects, or private ends.
And, thus professeth he, that you might grow
More honourable, by believing so.


He, that hath done GOD'S errand, was, ere now,
Reputed a2 King, 9.11.Mad-fellow: Some, of you,
Have so been pleas'd, perhaps, of him to say,
Because he hath appear'd in such a way,
As, never, since the Christian-paths, were trod,
Was traced, by a Messenger from GOD.
But, times have been; and, this is such a time,
In which the People, much regard not them
Who speak in Ordinary: And, then must
Some Ploughman, or some Herdman, forth be thrust

To help awake them; and, He, perad venture,
With Riddles, Signes, or Parables, must enter;
Or, els, by some unusuall straines proceed,
To make his Hearers give the better heed;
And, know, the Spirit stoupeth from on high,
Somtime, ev'n with a vulgar2 King. 3.15. Minstralfie.


Be pleased, therefore, not to under-prize
Him, or his Present; lest (when his disguise
Is taken off) you find him somwhat els
Then you have thought, or his appearance tels.
Permit you not the crafty Polititians
In either Faction, to beget suspitions,
That, he, who wrote this VOICE, hath some Intents,
For compassing whereof, he, now, invents
A Fancie, and pretends the publike-Peace,
When, really, he aimes at nothing lesse.
For, that his purposes, no other were
Then he professeth, plainly shall appeare
To men of ingenuity, or wit,
Who weigh things past, with what he, now, hath writ.


For, whosoe're hath observation took,
With what impartiall-freedome he hath spoke
To either side, (nor sparing Friend, nor Foe;
Nor caring, who displeas'd, or pleas'd shall grow)
Can never draw that false conclusion thence,
Without much folly, or much impudence.
Yea, since it is apparent, that his Pen
Hath spar'd himselfe, no more then other men;
Since he hath, now, nigh five and thirty years,
This Freedome used; and nought, yet, appears
To be, thereby, acquir'd, but sad events,
Disgraces, losses, close imprisonments,
Despights and mischiefs; how can you suppose
His folly such, that, now, the world worse growes,
He thinks, this course will him advantage more,
Or, bring him fewer mischiefs, then before?



He knowes, there is the selfe-same basensse, yet,
The same corruption, the same little wit,
And malice, which in former times was here;
Though, now, in other habits they appeare,
And act another way. He knowes, what then
Best pleas'd; and, what will, now: yet, takes agen
The selfe-same Course: Because, he knowes from whom
His messages, and warranties do come:
And, that it shall be more his reputation,
To be undone, by such a Generation,
For doing of his Dutie; then, therby,
To be advanc'd for furth'ring vanitie,
Till he and they into perdition fall,
Like Sheep, or Bullocks, slaught'red in their stall.
This, hath so steel'd him, that he can abide
To heare a foolish-Gallant him deride,
And (taking up his Poem) grin, and say;
Come, let us heare what novelties we may
Collect from this New-Prophet? and behold,
What future things, are here, by him, fore-told?


This, makes him bold, and resolute, for you;
Who, for himselfe, doth bashfully pursue
The meanest favour, while you seeme to see
Another, who thereof may worthier be.
And, therefore, now, this one time him regard,
For your owne sakes, though never afterward.
Be warie, that this VOICE you truly heed,
Before to any censure, you proceed,
Condemning it, or him, by whom it came;
Lest your, your selves, incurre the greatest blame:
And, thereupon, this also, may ensue;
That, thousands for that censure, censure you,
When they perceive, that you a course have run,
Whereby, you are dishonour'd, and undone.


And, to this end; of those, who cause have bin
Of all your present Plagues, and of that sin,

Which brought them on you (that two-horned-Beast)
Beware of: yea, be warie that no Priest,
Of either side, make void what this VOICE tels,
By their prejudicating it: Or els,
By showes of Learning, or fain'd Holinesse,
Make you beleeve, that this way to expresse
Divine concernments: Or, for Saints, to use
The Muses language, some way doth abuse
Their Sanctitie: Or, that this way of Preaching,
Is Heath'nish, and a Pagan-straine of teaching.
For, though most Poets were, long time ago,
(And yet are) Priests of Lust, and Drunkennesse,
They, from their first beginning, were not so;
But, men inspir'd divinely, to expresse
The will of GOD; and, by their holy Songs,
To rouze up that affection in the heart,
Which to the Love of Pietie belongs;
And, to incline it to the better-part.
At this our Author aimes; and, to restore
That Gift, to what it hath been heretofore,
His Muses consecrates: and, shewes the way,
That, others (if it please them) follow may.


Permit not then, the rigidnesse of those,
Who think Divinitie confin'd to prose;
And, Verse ordain'd, at first, for nothing els
But, carnall fancies, foolish charms, and spels:
Oh! suffer none of those (who have beside
Their ignorance, much envie, and much pride)
Your judgements to pervert, divert your eyes,
Or, fill your eares, with vanities and lies,
To keep off your attention, from this VOICE,
By juggling with Formalities, and noyse;
Both to the prolongation of your woe,
And, losse of good effects which thence may flow.


For, if this VOICE be welcome to your eare,
The blessed way of Peace, it shall prepare:

And by the Charmings of this new-tun'd Song
The rage of War, shall be allaid e're long.
That wicked Spirit shall be charmed downe,
By whom, the seeds of discords, have beene sowne:
The Hags and Furies, that have danced here,
No longer, to affright you, shall appeare:
But, all the sacred vertues, and the graces,
Shall beautifie your Desolated-places.


If you contemne this VOICE, what e're you deem,
Of that it speaketh, (or, what e're he seem,
Who now proclaimes it) GOD shall spread the same,
In spight of all detractions, to your shame,
And to the honour of that Instrument,
By whom it comes: yea, as a Monument,
Ev'n you, (and yours, who sleight it) shall preserve it
From being lost; your closets shall reserve it,
To bear a Testimoniall of your crimes,
And your impenitence, to future times:
Or, for a warning, to some age to come;
Or, to exalt GODS Justice in your doome:
The least of which, will yeeld a rich returne
For all his paines, though you his labour scorne.


Should you despise these counsels, it will shew
So plainly, those events which must ensue,
That, he shall neither value those respects
The world affords, nor care for her neglects:
But (your sad doomes bewailing) shall desire,
That, he and his, may speedily retire
To that safe resting-place, wherein are found
Sure shelters, from those plagues, that will abound:
And, where he never more shall feel, or heare
The scornes of pride, the rage of malice feare:
Or, labour, as he hath done, heretofore,
To make a White-man of a Blackamoore.


But, yet he hopes; and yet, a while expects
Some other, and more suitable effects,

To his desires: which (if they should succeed
Accordingly, will bring him, or, his seed,
To see (forth of these Fires) that Phanix rise,
Which, is the chiefe desire, of all their eyes,
Who love Ierusalem. And, with this hope,
His heart, he comforting, here, makes a stop;
And signifies, that, He, who doth preferre
This VOICE, is your despis'd REMEMBRANCER.

GEO. WITHER.



BE pleas'd to know, that, though our Author gives,
In these four Canto's, fretting Corosives,
He taketh no contentment in your smart;
But, studies to perform that Leaches part,
Who, rather, seekes his patients life to save,
Then, how to flatter him into his grave.
If you (with patience) let this Plaister lie,
The next that he intendeth to apply,
Shall be a Balsome, which will cure and ease;
And (if you be not verie hard to please)
Give proofe (what ever, knaves and fooles pretend)
Why, ev'ry honest man, should be his friend.


