



BLessed be Thy glorious Name, which is exalted above all blessing and praise. Thou alone workest wonders, and in so doing hast magnified Thy Selfe and honoured man: Thou shewedst signes and wonders upon Thy Adversaries, for Thou knewest they dealt proudly against Thee: So didst Thou get Thy selfe a Name, as it is this Day; and herein didst Thou use man as an instrument, Dust and Ashes he is, give him grace to magnifie Thee. Blessed Saviour, Rock of our Salvation, Desire of the Nations, Hope of Israel in time of trouble, Thou wast content to be made of no e∣steeme, that Thy people might be greatly beloved; to be made a curse, that Thy people might become a blessing; content to be made low, that Thou mightest exalt man. So Thou hast done, Thou hast exalted him, even to sit in Thrones next to Thy selfe; Give him an heart to exalt Thee, to honour Thee, to love Thee much, for Thou art worthy. Blessed Spirit, Thou hast done great things and marvellous, not by Nihil aliundè mutuatur Deus ad Ecclesiae suae conservationē, ergò vult sibi Ʋni acceptam referri Ecclesiae saturē. Cal. (humane) might, nor by power, but by Thy selfe Zach. . 6. Nec tamen omnia im∣mediatè & per se agit Deus, sed tantum ostende∣re vl Ecclesi∣am erigi et con∣servari non hu∣mano & vul∣gari modo, sed mirabiliter & praeter omnes spes & sensus nostres, Cal. in locum., ô blessed Spirit, saith the Lord of Hosts, take to Thy selfe the Glory, even all.

 Almighty Father, Sonne and Holy Ghost, Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity; unspeakably Three in One, and One in Three, One in Authority, Will and Worship of all Three; King of Kings, Lord of Lords; Spare Thy Servant according to the greatnesse of Thy mercy. Thy hand-maid is recording Thy ancient thoughts of Grace and Peace towards Thy Servants, her Sons and her Daugh∣ters: Ancient mercies towards them, when they lay in their blood, for that was a time of love Ezech. 16. 8.. Mercies toward them, exceeding Mercies, when they were in the for∣nace of affliction, for then Thou didst DWELL with them and they had ENOƲGH. Mercies towards her Land and People this former yeare, strange Rescues, wonderfull Deliverances, admirable Discoveries; what then can Thy Servant say now? Even as Thou shalt be pleased to open her Mouth, and give her inlargement. She would take with her words Hos. 14. 2., but from Thy owne mouth, and of Thy owne chusing; Thou must give first; for all things come of Thee, and of Thine owne have we given Thee 1 Chro. 29. 14.. Thy servant must now speake Thy high Praises; then Thou, Lord, must tune my spirit, and raise it up, else it will flag; or like a Bird without wings, now up and presently down. How insufficient Thy Servant is, for so high and excellent an imployment, Thou knowest, for Thou even Thou onely knowest the hearts of all the children of men 1 Kin. 8. 39.. At this present indeed, now that I have some high thoughts of Thy glori∣ous excellencies, Thy Servant can speake, as one brought downe to the ground, whose speech whispereth out of the dust; yet, as one presently stolne away from her selfe, she can, with that Sorcerer, thinke her selfe some GREAT ONE Act. 8. 9.. Lord, rebuke this proud spirit, and cast a spew∣ing upon Selfe-glory Hab. 2. 16.: for truth Lord, something it would be, and something it would doe, though a thousand expe∣riences have told us, that nothing it is, nothing it can Ier. 3. 5., but sinne against Thee. Thy grace in us doth all, no more po∣wer in selfe, no more canning except the contrary way, then can the instrument of late held in the worke-mans hand, but now cast-out, or lying by him. Lord, leave
 me not, no not a little, worke all in me and for me, then worke by me, for what we give to Thee is from Thy own hand to us first. And though flesh and bloud would share here, yet suffer it not; but say (where Thy voyce is, there is power) it shall not be so, and so take to Thy self Thy proper right, all the glory. Let not so excellent a thing as the Spirit is, so vast and capacious, be lost in selfe, which is nothing; but, let it runne forth to Thee, and though it will be lost there also, amidst such an Ocean, yet there it finds a proportionable good, even all in Thy self, for Thou art All.
Behold now, I have taken upon me to speake unto my Lord, that am but aust and ashes, Thou wilt suffer this once, and leade me into Thy Treasure-house, to behold Thy mercies there, which I am no more able to understand, then I can the treasures of the snow and of the haile Iob 38. 22.; nor compre∣hend, no more then I can measure the wind in my fist, or Heavens with my Span: for I must looke backe to the dayes of eternity, and Thy ancient thoughts towards Thy Sons and Daughters before the foundation of the world. And behold Thy wayes there, as undiscernable as the way of an Eagle in the Aire; or of a Serpent upon the Rocke Pro. 30. 19.: as is the path which no foule knoweth, and which the vul∣tures eye hath not seen Iob 28. 7.. But blessed be Thy Name, though there in that darke path, the soule can find no rest, nor feels any bottome, yet, in Thy Christ De praedesti∣natione dspu∣taturu incipe  Christi vulne∣ribus, Mel. Ad. in vitâ Stap. Vera est ea poe∣nitentia quae ab amore justitiae & Dei incipit., we have a foundation, even according to the good pleasure of Thy will, towards us in Him, to the praise of the glory of Thy Grace Eph. 1. 5.. For Him we blesse Thee, we praise Thee, we adore Thee, for Thy glorious manifestations, secret inspirations, immedi∣ate workings; for all the meanes of conveyance, whereby Heaven is pleased to condescend and to have communion with earthly creatures, and earthly creatures have fellowship with the FATHER and the SONNE. For Thy Sons sake all this, therefore we blesse Thee for that unspeakable gift, with Whom Thou givest all things, a subduing of ini∣quity, victory over sin; (sinne is not left to bring forth its owne cursed fruit, an exceeding mercy) pardon of sinne;
 communion with Thy selfe; joy in the Holy Ghost; then the strongest, when we are weakest, and our sufferings the greatest: Then the highest elevation of spirit, then the floud of consolation runnes highest, when the floud of wickednesse runnes over the head, and seemes ready to swallow up. This is that the world stumbles at; nay, we shrinke at too, at sufferings, at persecution, though yet a thousand experiences tels us, Persecution is the signe of a Thes 1. 7. the true Church, and to them, who are persecuted, Rest with us (and our Rest is in Thee and with Thee) at last; and then, even in that houre of temptation, then dost Thou administer abundant consolations, even according as the sufferings are; through fire, yet not consumed; through water yet not drowned Esa. 43. 2.; Surely this is because Thou dost guide Thy Servants by Thy Councell; we are not carefull whether we goe, when Thou hast us by the hand, being assured, the end of the way is GLORY.
And now, that the people may flow in hether, cause them to turne aside and behold this sight, why the BƲSH burnes and is not consumed. All that looke on must resolve it thus, because Thy GOOD WILL DWELLS IN THE Esa. 63. 9. BƲSH. In all their affliction Thou wast afflicted, and the Angell of Thy presence saved them. O blessed be the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, for Thy GOOD-WILL That dwels in the Bush.
O let not my Lord be angry, and I will speake yet but this once; we Thy people have said in our haste, Our hope is cut-off, we shall be termed FORSAKEN, and our Land DESOLATE. But we behold and wonder, Thou hast shewen grace unto us, to give us a nayle in Thy Esa. 62. 4. Holy place, and hast revived our hope, That we shall be called HEPHZBAH and our Land Beulah. Truly Lord Thou hast comforted all my waste places, Thou hast made my WIL∣DERNES like EDEN, and my DESERT like the Garden of the Lord, ioy and gladnesse is found therin, Thanksgiving Ezr. 9. 8. and the voyce of Melody Esa. 51. 3.. But, Lord, why is it so? Why such severity towards our sister-Churches, and such goodnesse towards us and our Land? Even so, because it pleaseth Thee; It is Thy good will so. Be it so, but we are over-charged with
 the consideration thereof, and are silent. Truly, Lord, we stand wondering at Thy works, beholding terrible things Esa. 64. 3., which our Fathers saw not, and we look'd not for; The tur∣ning councels upside downe, &c. (for had Thy Servant the tongue of an Angell she could not expresse it) but at our selves we wonder most of all, at the drossinesse, the dreg∣ginesse of our spirits, not yet resolved into a spirit of Thankefullnesse; no, not yet, though we have seene such and such things, above all, such forbearance; such a patient suffering our manners Act. 13. 18., at such a time as this. Why Lord God, Thou didst send unto us Saviours, we should have looked through them, as through a thin covering, to Thy arme made bare for our Salvation; we did not so, it was a thicke covering before our eyes, it hid Thy Almighty Arme quite from us. We did leane upon that Reed (such is the helpe of flesh) yet did it not pierce nor breake. O won∣derfull! it is not Thy manner so, the prop of flesh did not breake, though we laid so great a weight of expectation thereupon: notwithstanding it hath held, &c. for Thy Ser∣vant is overcome; more she would speake to that point and is not able. But she hath wherewith to answer Thy Ad∣versaries (as followeth.) The Enemy reproacheth Thy Name daily, and asketh, where is now your God? Our God is in Heaven, and thence Thou hast declared Thy selfe a∣gainst Thy Enemies, confounding them: and for Thy peo∣ple, reviving their hope. Thou hast exalted THY CHRIST before our Eyes: and received Thy people into COVE∣NANT; these two things Thou hast done this last yeare. And if Thou dost no more in our dayes, yet thy Servants have ENOƲGH: And by Thy good hand up∣on them, they have out-plotted all their enemies. Thy Ser∣vants have no more to say, but, Remember, Lord, Thy Co∣venant, and keepe the hearts of Thy Servants close with thee therein: Thou art Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, and onely art able to make Thy Servants to performe the words of Thy Covenant, and to STAND TO IT 2 Chro. 34. 31, 32.; and then, though the Enemy rage, he shall not hurt; though he conceives mischiefe, he shall bring forth a lye.

 God in Covenant defeates all their hellish counsels, weakneth all their power, answers all Arguments a∣gainst Thy people, or their Cause, nothing shall doe them hurt, every thing shall doe them good. It is Thy Promise, Lord, I will not turne away from them to doe them good Ier. 32. 0., All shall worke together for their good; losses in the World, for their good; troubles in the flesh, for their good; come what can come, all is sanctified, by all Thou wilt doe Thy children good; Reproaches, wants, necessities, Persecutions, Captivities Ier. 24. 5., All to doe them good, even so Amen.
And yet, Lord, we remember Thou hast spoken good words and gracious concerning the Church for the time to come. We humbly conceive now is the time, when Thou art making good this good word to Thy people; not onely because they doe set their faces unto Thee to seeke by Prayer and Fasting Dan. 9. 3. (a great and good signe that Deliverance is comming-on, that Thou art appearing in Thy glory Ps. 102. 16, 17., because the Fatherlesse, the Destitute pray unto Thee for this thing, and are resol∣ved to give Thee no rest.)
But there are other Reasons, why we should set our hope in Thee, and that it is Thy meaning we should so doe, which we shall speake of before Thee now, and (if it could be) in the eares of all the Christian world, for they are legible in all the peoples sight, and most com∣manding, we thinke, to draw in others that are not willingly ignorant, and to make them fall downe, kisse Thy Sonne, and trust in Him.
1. We humbly conceive that Thine Adversary and E∣nemy shall proceed no farther. Surely, we say, that is Thy meaning and purpose of Thy Heart, because His folly is manifest unto all men 2 Tim. 3. 9..
2. We conceive, that Thy Adversary (a Legion) hath beene at the highest, his verticall point, and we see he is fallen thence. Truth, Lord, he fals slowly now; when his fall is like a milstone Rev. 18. 21., with violence, then it shall be mighty, quicke and irrecoverable; there is
 that in his fall now, which, in our haste, we call slack∣nesse, and we say, in the same haste, we may fall before him: If so, yet so, as we shall rise with more strength and in more glory; but he never to rise againe to that same point. We conclude so (for so Thy manner hath beene) when the Adversary begins to fall, he shall fall yet lower Est. 6. 13.; when he ascends againe (if he falls not low in humiliations) it is up the Gallows. 7. 9.
3. The Adversary hath been proud, as Moab, ƲERT PROVD Esa. 16. 6., exceeding proud Ir. 48. 29., as proud waters, which went over the heads of the righteous. We humbly con∣ceive now, they must be brought LOW, VERIE LOW; now they must be made Base, EXCEEDING BASE, even now.
4. Prayer hath commanded (wee looke above all meanes to Thy glorious Right-hand) as strange a stan∣ding still of the starres in one place of the HEAVEN, as was the standing still of the Sunne upon Gibeon, and the Moone in the valley of Aialon Iosh. 10. 12.. We humbly con∣ceive, Thy meaning thereby is, and Thou wilt have it published to the whole Christian world; That the great Court of Nobles and Worthies shall not arise from their place, till Thou dost arise in all Thy peoples sight, to avenge Thy selfe upon Thy Adversaries, for all the dis∣honours they have done to Thy House, Thy Day, Thy Servants, Thy Service, &c. Come Lord Jesu, Thy Ser∣vants wait Thy comming; Praise waiteth for Thee in Sion. The souls under the Altar say COME; multitudes, we cannot number, thousand thousand souls on the Earth, wea∣ried out, because of these Murderers Jer. 4. 31., all these say come. The sighing of the needy and the oppression of the poore, saith come. Thy Day so prophaned, saith come; The spirit so grieved, saith come; Thy Spouse (so often forced before Thy face) saith come; and because of the present feeling, she doubles it, Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly; ease Thy selfe and Thy poore flocke of those Adversaries, who have fed themselves and fleeced Thy Sheepe; have made void Thy Law, have taken peace from the Earth; have valued
 precious soules no more then they doe old shooes Am. 26.. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, and worke so, that a man shall say: verily there is a reward for the Righteous, verily He is a God That iudgeth in the Earth. Ps. 58. 11.
Thy Servant hath spoken, doe Thou according to the greatnesse of Thy power and mercy, for Thy words sake, Thine owne sake, Thy Names sake, Thy Christ His sake, Thy Churches sake, His deare one (the price of His blood) His neare one (as the Apple of His eye) His only one, His beloved one, the Crowne of His sufferings, the Glory of His shame; and then will the Church ascribe power, ri∣ches, wisdome, strength, honour, glory, blessing to Him. Who is worthy to receive all this; for of Him, and through Him and to Him are all things, to Whom be glory for ever, Amen.
