



ROBERT Earle of VVARWICK High Admirall of his Navy by Sea, for the Defence of the KING and KINGDOME; his Crown, their life, Religion, Lawes, Liberties, GRACE and PEACE be multiplied.
WHen I looked upon the subject matter of this Book▪ the History of the good Kings their good way, good Ayms, good ends; The glory of God, Their owne and their peoples safety: I thought so honourably of it, as that it would become the hand of the highest Person in the Kingdome. But considering again, That my selfe, the lowest of ten thousand, has his hand in it, my thoughts fell very much in my own sense, and much also in my Dedication, from a King to his Subjects; notwithstanding, I think so honou∣rably of it still, and still shall so thinke (not as it comes from my hand, but) as it comes from Gods
 mouth, That the Dedication will become two Per∣sons, though Subjects, yet the most Excellent in three Kingdoms. Such are You, who, feeling the weight of Duty to Your Prince and Country, doe wish from an entire and ingenuous heart, O King live for ever: And to his Kingdom, That it may be the Lords Kingdom. Vpon this, The noblest design that ever was on foot, You do move, laying out Your selves and jeoparding your lives, To main∣taine the Cause of God, His Gospell, The Crowne of Your King, The Glory of the Kingdome.
You will find a mighty resistance, All the Powers of darknesse against you, the King of the bottomles pit, and all his Subjects associated now and folden together like thornes. But You cannot be discoura∣ged, The God, Whom You serve is Great, The Cause You Owne and Appeare for, is His Cause▪ The way You are in, is troden before You, by all the truly Noble of the world, who made themselves and their people a Blessing. You can suffer no more from the tongue and hand, then what all the good Kings and Princes have suffered before You in this way, not more hard words, nor more un∣godly deeds. You cannot be brought to greater straits, then these Nobles have bin in before You: A Ship tossed with Tempests, is the Embleme of
 the Church: So He suffers the Cause of His Church to be carried as a Ship in a Storme, now VP, and yet the Righteous are where they were, not raised above the height of an holy confidence and humble dependance, knowing the manner how GOD brings His People to a wealthy place; Then DOWN, That the wicked may rise in their hope, may be lifted▪up, and made lively and strong to prosecute their owne way, and to hasten their owne ruine. But still GOD is the same, as wakefull as ever; His Cause the same, and it shall be as victorious as ever, and the more opposition has or shall be made against Him, by the Assemblies of the wicked; The more glorious the victory shall be▪ And the more weight shall be added unto Your Crown of Glory, who have not forsaken their Master in the houre of Tempta∣tion, but have stood by Him, have owned His Cause, laid out Your Selves for Him.
So You have done; surely the Lord remembers this, and will let You know, What a good Master You have chosen, His Attributes shall be laid out for You; His VVisedome, Power, Goodnesse; As You have laboured to advance His Name, He will make Your Name to spread, and to cast a sa∣vour, sweeter then the most precious oyntment
 to all Generations, when the Name of the wic∣ked shall rot, and their memoriall be as the Cities, GOD over-threw and repented not.
Now blessed be GOD, Who hath instructed You to Discretion, giveth Courage and Might, that You can be valiant for the Cities of Your GOD, and can resigne all into His Hands, to doe that, which is good in His Eyes. That which He do' is good still, and will be best at the last. In the meane time You know You serve a good Master, and have a good Cause in hand; And therfore can say with the whole Family of GOD; The LORD is our Iudge, The LORD is our King, He will save us. Amen say all, That love and feare the Lord all the world over, Amen and Amen.
