


NOw the Church hath tendred Homage to her Lord, you will give me leave to be her mouth to you; and to neglect Titles, when your workes render you truly Noble, and Right Honourable, so praising you in the Gates. I know not how to give flattering Titles, said Job Iob 32. 27., for in so doing, my Maker would soone take me away. Since Thou wast precious in mine eyes, Thou wast honourable Esa. 43. 4., saith the Lord, and you will beleeve Him. I cannot crave your Honourable Patience neither, to heare me out: let that be as your leasure serves, I must doe my duty; and, being the mouth of the Church, whose heart is full, and thoughts not so composed, I cannot so con∣tract as I would: others may reade, who need information, and receive benefit there-from, while you worke.
Follow on your worke, in Gods Name, you worke for a good Master, whose wages are sure, and like Himselfe; He gave an Heathen King for serving a great service, no lesse then a great Kingdome, the wages for his worke Ezek. 29. 8.: You
 have done a greater service, you may expect greater wages, A Kingdome that cannot be shaken, for so God will ho∣nour you. We say surely, you have honoured Him, so blas∣phemed in the world, so sleighted and dis-regarded there. You have got your selves a Name: Ʋerily, we conclude, you have wrought singly and purely to advance the Glory, and to get Christ a Name in the world, which as it is the end, so should it be the worke of the whole life.
Worke-on, You shall prosper yet more, though you have prospered already to a miracle; and know for encourage∣ment (if you needed any) That, while You are so working, not Man only, but God also is Recording, whose Records are never laid aside, being ever in His eye. While you are giving out for the publike Good, all good people are giving in to you, PRAYERS and THANKS; great matters both; The one turnes and wheeles about things to Admira∣tion, being the strongest engine in the world, and the grea∣test stocke you have upon Earth, alwayes gaining, because always trading Heaven-ward.
Certainely the PRAYERS of the Church, of all her Sons and Daughters, all the world over, are for you (a mighty consideration, these onely make Prayers, the other par∣ty speake onely or curse rather, they doe not pray) And all their BLESSINGS (as mighty and prevailing now, as were the BLESSINGS of the Tribes, that stood upon Mount Gerizzim) are upon your heads and endeavours, a Deut. 27. 12. shower of blessings. Much may be gathered touching the strength and noblenesse of those blessings; to blesse did be∣long to the children of the free-women (the Church and her free-borne can blesse, and they onely) but yet, though these were appointed by Moses to blesse, yet there is not one bles∣sing expressed, and that is very notable by the way. For by such silence, Moses would have Gods people expect great Mr Ans. blessings, such as cannot be expressed by the tongues of Men or Angels: but yet this good people must looke for those blessings by another, that is Christ. For the Cur∣ses, these are mentioned, not the people, who must curse; as if Moses were loath to name them for such a misery.
 But the curse not causlesse must come Pro. 26. 2.. The point and com∣fort is (which required clearing notwithstanding the haste, for I would be very short, though in such a businesse I can∣not well frame to it) the viols of the Saints, so full of pray∣ers and blessings are all powred out upon your heads, and the Lord smels a savour of rest and peace from these odours, for such they are, being presented by the hands and through the Mediation of His Beloved Sonne CHRIST JESUS.
The Nations will rush now, as the noyse of many wa∣ters; There will be a shaking in the Earth; much strife and contention there. Who shall have the Day, and over∣come? who shall returne ashamed from the battle, with their hands upon their heads, as Mourners? A foolish question this; I might as well aske, what will prevaile most with God, PRAYERS or CVRSES? Who shall treade downe most, the feet of the proud and lofty ones, whom God re∣sisteth, and hath now cast out of their places: or the feet of the poore and steps of the needy, whom the Lord guides with His eye? yet I determine not. It sufficeth me, and you too, I beleeve, that all the prayers in the world are for you; all the blessings of all that can blesse there are upon you, as assured yours, as if they were pronounced by the very mouth of Christ: and all the curses in the booke of God are upon your enemies, and shall over-take them in due time, if hearty Repentance pre∣vent not.
So much touching the first great thing, so prevailing in the world, PRAYER: You will be remembred of it again anon; For, as with Esther Est. 4. 16., you have commanded it, so with her, you will pray likewise. THANKS follow, and that is the sub∣ject of this Treatise; a gaining commodity also, freely laid out, and the more freely so, the more they receive-in, the fuller are the returns and In-comes every houre.
These you have here from a most considerable person (for I take a single word) The CHURCH, who can prise mercies, speake them forth with rejoycing; can skill in giving thanks, for the time, matter and manner, and order in the same, excel∣lently well.

 Thankes! You may say; That is a poore Returne. No, A rich Returne, considering who offers them; The Church, and from her They never goe alone; her hand goes with them, she workes for you (never was there a greater, a better, a more hopefull cause to set all on worke) and her heart also, she pray∣eth for you too she cryeth in the cares of her God, night and day, though you heare her not, for so you reade of Moses, he cryed Exod. 14. 15., and yet there was not a syllable of a word heard.
Some doubts are to be cleared here, the Method also which is easily done. Another worke there is, not so easie, the answering some grave questions about the THANK-OFFERING: Church-men (so in name) question it very much; set them∣selves against it; pleade rather, not for a return of curses, we hope, but mightily set against a returne of thankes: here they have indignation also, saying, to what purpose is this waste? And some are so pinched gnawing their tongues, that they know not what to say, only they mutter, that the LAW is against a Thank-offering too. The Lord knowes how willingly I would have stepped over these blocks; but He knows, so I could not doe, and not offend the Church, and the Reader both, so great is the offence in the way, which by His strength, I shall remove from before his eyes, who is not resolved to shut them, that he may stumble with lesse excuse, and more impudence in a Sun-shine. But I have so much wit and manners both, to reserve this for him, that hath leasure, disposition, and reason to hearken to it a∣non. It will be sufficient for you, if you take leasure for two things; &, whatsoever the imployment is, they must take place, Considera∣tion and Prayer: the one will take up some length in your thoughts not more then may be thought necessary in this Paper; the o∣ther may be lengthned also in your closet, it shall be very short here.
Consider, for it is also HIGGAION-SELAH Psa 9. 16. Rem meditand summè. Jun., A thing much to be considered on; That there hath beene no undertaking, no Designe of yours, all this time, which God hath not prospered: and no designe of the Adversary, which God hath not cursed. You doe consider this, and is it not wonderfull, That you should goe over such Mountaines, all along through a Sea, so full of straits and and rockes on every hand, and yet not dash the foot? No, for you consider this with it, That you
 have managed the cause of Christ all this while; you have carried all things, your Counsels and Consultations and Actions, le∣vell to that Marke, the advancing that STANDARD (call it what you will) that GLORY: Your Adver∣saries have done the cleane contrary. Not any one ACT hath passed through your hands all this long Session; not any one Vote from your mouth, that hath sadded those hearts, which should not bee sadded Eze. 13. 22.. The Church hath high thoughts of this, thus shee thinkes, Nay, shee knowes; That never was there such a PRICE put into mens hands; nor more wisely managed then by you, for yee have set your hearts to it Pro. 17. 16.. You natu∣rally Phil. 2. 20. . cared for the CHURCHES state; as Sons, yee served with her in the GOSPELL. The Church wonders not at all this; for, (1.) You naturally cared for her, therefore you worke and are not weary. Love feeles no more burrhen; then the Woman did, taking the Childe into her Armes, being the true Mother Exo. 2. 9.; Shee did it heartily. (2.) Heere wee can discerne GODS hand with you: Wee must say, as the Heathen did, GOD IS Gen 21. 22. WITH YOU IN ALL THAT YOU DOE; GODS hand hath beene with your KING, therefore hath His Hand beene so gracious to you, and his heart is still in the same Hand, not as Iron and Brasse (and yet all is one to an Almighty Hand) but as wa∣ters there Prov. 21. 1., easily bent and called forth TO HIS FOOT Isa. 4. 1. 2. Ʋt aqua in a∣reolâ quocun{que} dux ris sequitur Hier ep. 16.. You that have God for your Pilot, if Hee steere your course (certaine enough He does) what ever straits or rockes there be, you shall not dash against them. Yea, but there is the Leviathan, he takes his pass-time in this Sea, A mighty and grievous Adversary, we meane LEGION, for he is Many; They heare and see, that the walls of Je∣rusalem are made up, and the breaches begin to be stopped Neh. 4. 7., They will be, as then they were, very wrath: As then the Adversary reported, faining out of his owne heart, That Nehemiah was King in Judah, and the Jewes thinke to rebell: very likely he will say as much now, for ma∣lice boyles as hot in his heart now as then; Therefore
 such scumme must run over at his mouth. You have tormented him, casting him forth, and so have cheared the hearts of the Righteous, and gauled the wicked, yea, cut them to the heart: you doe expect now, they will gnash on you with their teeth Act 7. 54., and bite, yea, swallow you up if they can, for they will speake devouring Ps. 5. 4. words; their mouth being an open sepul∣chre Ps. 5. 9., and the poison of Aspes under their tongues. But let malice draw her bow with full strength, and shoote forth her arrowes, yet she shall not be able to wound you; or if she doe, these considerations will yeeld you soveraigne balme, whereby to cure the venome thereof, or to turne it into balsome, and that is better.
1. It hath been the manner alwayes, To take away the Righ∣teousnesse of the Righteous from him Isa 5. 23.. A notorious wrong that; A little consideration will serve here, for there is but one way to turn now, ye will TURN to the LORD our RIGHTEOUSNESSE Jer. 23. 6.; That is a garment, which all the unclean spirits in the world cannot defile. There is one Con∣sideration.
2. Here below, things are miscalled now, as in former time; The greatest Idolatresse and Murderesse, that ever was in the world; (She had killed all the seed Royall, excepting one, and he was wonderfully rescued and preserved in the ISLE of PROVIDENCE) calls out TREASON TREA∣SON: what was the matter? This and no more; she heard a noise saying, GOD SAVE THE KING, singing and praysing, for all the people of the Land rejoyced, and the City was quiet. This was Treason doubled from her 2 King. 11. mouth, TREASON TREASON.
So also, True Piety, a sense of Duty, is called Rebellion; This opprobry hath been cast, like dyrt, into the face of all the true Ministers of Christ, with this addition, that 7. times washing in Jordan shall not wash it off. No? what had the Ministers done? They would not proclaime a liberty for sports Siccine expri∣mitur pulicum gaiam per plcu deec &c etul. cap. 37. on the Lords day, &c. Well, you have been judge in this case; you have outed that blasphemer, his places shall know him no more; You have cast him out, where the unsavoury salt is, for he is not like unto it but the very same. So let all thy Adver∣saries
 be cast out, O Lord, who blaspheme Thy Name daily, calling good evill, and evill good; Thy servants by their OWNE Exulem me de suo nomine vo∣cat Cicer. Parad. Name, and that is as bad as can be. But now, this is the point we have in hand, how persons and things are miscalled here below; Loyalty is called Treason; and so back∣ward, Oppression is called Justice; that which is truly Law is called Violence; and Violence is called Law. The vile person is called liberall, and the churle bountifull Isa. 32. 5.; The Messengers of the Churches, and the glory of Christ, are mis∣called, blasphemed, as we heare and reade. Thus we call things and persons now. It shall be otherwise here on earth towards the end of the world, as it was in the beginning, when every thing shall be called by it's proper name, and according to it's nature. The vile person shall be called as he is, and the churle as he is: And as it shall be done here below on earth, so it is now done above in Heaven. That consideration yeelded much comfort to the servants of God in ancient time, and so it will do now Quae hic mala putantur: haec sunt in coelo bona. Lact. 5. 15..
3. We reade of Petilians tongue, as fiery a flying serpent, as any is now in the world. It stung Augustine exceedingly, it scorched the Church, as it could. Augustine seems either not to feele it, or not to care for it two strawes; for, using another Metaphor, he sayes thus; Petilian blowes hard, but all his wind blowes away nothing but the chaffe. Thanks be to God, PETILIANS TONGUE IS NOT CODS Lingua Peti∣liani non est ventilabrum Dei. FAN. He will not loose one graine of wheate by all this blustering wind. That was his consideration then, and very comfortable it was then; it is yours now, and it is as com∣fortable now.
4. Consider Dayes of old, since man was created upon the earth, and you will find the proverb true, An unjust man is an abomination to the Just Pro. 24. 21.: and he that is upright in the way is abomination to the Isa. 32 5. wicked. And so, though you cannot ward off a blow from the tongue, for it wounds sud∣denly and undiscerned, and more deeply then any sword Quovis gladio acutior calam∣nia, &c. Lips. Orat. de Ca∣lum., being as an arrow shot out Jer. 9. 8.; yet you know a Dogs tongue is healing, if he be not mad; and grant he be so, and so goes about the City grinning, yet these considerations yeeld you balme enough to cure the poison thereof.

 You have but Angers first weapons Prima semper irarum tela ma∣lecta sunt: & quicquid non possumus imbe∣cilli, optamus irati. Salv de Gub. l. 3. pag. 81. yet, Devouring words; you must expect violent hands, hard and ungodly deeds, whole Armies against you, while you are for Christ; Troopes after Troopes from all quarters; such a Muster, or Combination rather as you reade of Psal. 83.: for the Lord Almighty hath taken to Himselfe great power, and hath reigned. What then? It followes, And the Nations were angry Rev. 11. 17, 18.. So they are now, and for the same reason, very angry and full of wrath. Consider now, the Lord Christ is King; be the earth never so unquiet, Yet he raigneth then most gloriously amidst His enemies Ps 110., When they make a tumult, and speake in their pride, Zion shall be defiled, and our eyes shall looke upon her Mich. 4. 11.. Consider now what that zealous Reformer said, who set his face like a flint; Be not afraid, remember the LORD who is GREAT Neh. 4. 16.; great in power, great in wisdome, &c. This answers all. Great tumults, great rage, great wrath, The Enemy comes in like a flood, with open mouth to devoure all; REMEMBER the Lord Who is GREAT, His Spirit will set up a Standard against them Esa. 59. 19.. When the sonnes of Belial do, as their Name imports, breake bands, and cast away coards, then the Lord will laugh Psal. 2.: And then, said Luther well, he would not cry like a child; he would be merry as a Man, and sing for joy of heart, the 46. Psalm: For he remembred the Lord WHO IS GREAT; It fol∣lows, and TERRIBLE, To his Adversaries, fury to them Isa 59. 18.; and He has them under His feete already (like unto fine brasse Rev. 2. 15.) and He can stampe them to pouder (but He is patient, He will endure a little while their wrigling) sooner then you can a worme under yours. Nay you have had assurance ever since the dayes of Joshua Josh. 10. 25., That you shall set your feete upon them too. It seemes the Lord is fulfilling this good word to you now; nay, doubtlesse, He hath fulfilled it even now; He hath done as He promised to His worme Jacob, He hath taken you, a company of wormes (yee are no better) worme-like men; He hath given you armes of steele, and feete like brasse, and you have threshed the Mountaines like straw, and have come upon the Princes as upon Morter, and as the Potter treadeth clay Isa. 41. 15, 25..

 Thus the Lord hath done, Who is GREAT and TER∣RIBLE even now in all the peoples sight. Remember Him, you cannot be afraid. And remember where you are. And yet, as one saith Nihil interest ubi sitis in sae∣culo qui extra saeculum estis. Tert. ad Mar∣tyres. chap. ., no matter where you are in the world, who have your thoughts above the world, and managing the great things of Christ there. But yet to tell you what you know, and what your security is, you are in Gods hand Deut 33 3..
Now put all together and consider on it; God, He is GREAT and TERRIBLE; He is your God; you are His by covenant; you are in His hand; your enemies under His feete; nay under your foote. The Result from hence is; A Glorious Dependance upon this Lord, Who is Great; yea, a TRUST FOR EVER in Him, Who is EVER∣LASTING STRENGTH Isa. 26. 4., and that is a sure ground for EVERLASTING CONFIDENCE; That, though the earth should shatter to peeces, and the moun∣taines be taken off from their everlasting foundations, yet God is good to Israel; you shall not be greatly moved; your head may ake, but you may repose it in the Lap of your EVER∣LASTING FATHER; certainly He will sustaine you; you may lay your selves downe in peace, He will make you dwell in safety. The enemy shall not be able to come neare you to doe you hurt, no nor to sad your spirits, who in all this time, have not spoken one word, whereby to sad the heart of the Righteous. Yee must (the promise is so Isa. 65. 13, 14.) reioyce, when the Adversary shall be ashamed: yee must sing for ioy of heart, when your enemies must howle for vexation of spirit; your Name must be a blessing, theirs a curse. This is glorious matter for faith to worke upon; it will make you pray in the Holy Ghost. You need not be entreated to take leisure for that, it is the very breath of faith, and it hin∣ders nothing at all, but sets forward businesses exceedingly, it makes them glide-on. I give my selfe to prayer, said David Ps. 109. 4., when he was in the very case you are in ver. 2, 3.; He made prayer his worke, what ever he was doing; and so his worke slided-on; he had an easie passe through all; hee could leape over this wall, and that mountaine was a plaine before him; and his enemies were given into his hands, for he gave himselfe to prayer.
 What ever we omit, we must not omit prayer. It commands your Marke, that, betwixt the Kings Question to Nehemiah, and his Answer, there is a prayer; his Answer was as ready as the Question was, but he would pray first Neh. 2. 4.. A hint only is enough to wise men. Your prayer shall be short, you may leng∣then it in your closset; pray as Nehemiah did; he beleeved as you doe, and you have done as he did, and you have as many enemies as he had, and so envious against you; They would make you afraid too; they would weaken your hand from the work that it be not done, pray; now THERE∣FORE O GOD STRENG THEN OUR Ne. 6. 9. HAND; AND REMEMBER US O OUR GOD, FOR GOOD. Now there is a voice gon up (that never returnes in vaine) and cryes aloud in the eares of the Lord, like the sound of many waters, saying, AMEN; Mercy and Truth be with you, AMEN: And the God 2 Sam. 15. 20. of both these give you favour in the eyes of the Man, Amen: wipe not out the good deeds that you have done for the Ne. 13. 14, 22. house of your God, and for the Offices thereof; AND SPARE YOU ACCORDING TO THE GREATNESSE OF HIS MERCY, AMEN, AMEN.
