



MY dear and good friend, these Papers come now to your hands, to give you assurance, that my many late discourses up∣on the subjects here trea∣ted of, were in good earnest. What ever it was that occasioned the forming of my conceptions into this shape, there is nothing in the world hath had a great∣er hand (if so it may be said of motives) to give them birth, than your Passionate opposition. For I am weary of those debates by word of mouth, wherein men of much zeal and prejudice grow so hot and so far transported, that instead of solid arguments advancing orderly under the command of sober Reason,
 they can Levy no other forces but froath and choler to assist them. That I may no more break the peace (in this kinde) with you, nor indanger making the least flaw in that dear friendship, that hath by so long a conversation grown up to so great a height betwixt us; I have resolved to take this calmer course, to give an account of some grounds of my present perswasions, wherein I dif∣fer from your judgment. Perhaps they may sometime or other finde your af∣fections so quiet, your understanding so well awakened, and your Will so Willing to stand neuter, till these truths have a fair and full hearing, that they may make a better impression than hi∣therto they have had opportunity to do, upon you. And because I remember (in some heat of dispute) you have thrown some things upon me, (which were not so much faults in me, as pre∣judices and scandals taken up by your self) I shall briefly wipe them off, that such rubs being removed out of your way, you may have the less objection to fright you from a further inquiry into the Articles under question.

 And now, I beseech you, in the first place, to upbraid me no more with the errours of my education (for so I must now account them;) because the greater the prejudices were which were instil'd into me against these doctrines, the greater you ought to conclude the light to be, which hath wrought this my pre∣sent conviction of their truth, and indu∣ced me to imbrace them, (against all the charmes of interest, and secular ad∣vantages, wherewith the world tempts us, to the contrary.)
Unconstancy (one of your other char∣ges) I confess is sometimes Culpable: but may we not say so too of Constancy ma∣ny times; which is therefore resembled (somwhere) to a fullen Porter, who keeps out better company oftentimes than he lets in? Our happiness that will be un∣changable commenceth in a change; and 'tis our duty to turn from darkness to light, though we be called inconstant for it. We were not born with our eyes open; neither shall we ever see far, if we look no further than that prospect, which some few admired writers have
 set before us; The new man, which we are to put on, is renewed in knowledge &. [Col. 3. 10.] If we receive our illumi∣nation regularly from heaven, that is given according to the capacity of the subject. We have a dawning first, but the progress of our light holds a propor∣tion with the sedulity of our studies. We are never too old to learn in Christ's School. But the great scandal, you say, is, to profess my self a disciple to such Masters. What Masters do you mean? I call no man Master on Earth (in this sense) nor ever will give any so great a dominion over my faith, as to swear allegiance to his doctrines. (I would others were as free from this yoak of bondage.) But yet I know 'tis not only a thing commendable, but a duty to march after the standard of truth what hand soever carries it before us. And who do you think were the bearers of it? If you enquire into their learning, (even their adversaries being Judges) they were as lights shining in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, [Phil. 2. 15.] and if you examine their lives, for
 piety and justice, they were blameless and harmless as becomes the sons of God, not more polite in their intelle∣ctuals than unreproveable in their mo∣rals, but very eminent in both. And they have declared their virtues as well in a way of Passive obedience as Active. What professors were ever more con∣stant and cheerful in their sufferings for the word of God and for the testimony which they held (having been taught it (according to their full perswasion) as the truth is in Jesus. [Ephes. 4. 21.] They have been banished, imprisoned, &c. Insomuch that one of them bespeaks his fellow souldiers (in this Conflict) after this manner, Vos societatis Apolog. pro Confess. in Praefat. ad finem. nostroe decora ac lumina, quorum vincula iam non in Belgio tan∣tum, sed penè ubique per totum or∣bem Christianum celebria facta sunt, qui patientiâ vestrâ iam per tot annos invicta atque infracta, adversari is totique adeo mun∣do fidem fecistis, Conscientiam Remonstran∣tibus Pluris esse, quam quicquid uspiam carum est in mundo. It a Pergite &c. You the lights and glory of our society, whose
 bonds are famous throughout the whole Christian world, whose invincible pa∣tience hath given proof to your very ad∣versaries and all the world besides, that the Remonstrants value their conscience, above all things whatsoever. March on with me, saith he, to the mark, By ho∣nour and dishonour, by evil report and good report, as deceivers and yet true: as un∣known and yet well known: as dying and be∣hold we live: as chastened and not killed: as sorrowful, yet alwayes rejoycing: as poor, yet making many rich: as having nothing, and yet possessing all things. 2 Cor. 6. 8, 9, 10. Thus far he.
But you will say, non poena sed causa, 'tis not the suffering but the cause that makes a man a Martyr; and those men run after the errour of Pelagius, who was condemned by the Antient Fathers as an enemie to the grace of God. To this I shall return Arminius his own so∣lemn protestation. Inspiciantur capita omnia Pelagianoe doctrinoe, Examen Thesium Gomari pa. 156. & 157. prout illa in Synodis Mile∣vitana, Arausicana, & Hi∣erosolymitana enarrantur & condemnantur,
 etiam ut à Pontifice Romano Innocentio refe∣runtur; & adparebit posse quempiam Re∣lagianam doctrinam improbare, & tamen doctrinoeisti (Gomari sc.) de Praedestinati∣one, non accedere: and a little after, Pro∣fiteor intereà me Pelagiana dogmata, quae ipsis imponuntur à Synodis supra nominatis, ex animo detestari, & si quis commonstrare possit, ex iis quae dico, quidpiam sequi, quod illis affine est, sententiam mutaturum & correcturum. If the protestation of this person be not sufficient to clear the innocencie of these tenents, then take Vossius his Historia Pelagiana, and Groti∣us his Disquisitio on that very argument, for their Compurgators. Withal let us remember the Caveat, which Arminius gives (loco citato) Neque id solum studio habendum, ut à Pelagiano dogmate receda∣tur quam longissimè: Cavendum etiam ne in Manichaeismum, aut quod Manichae∣ismo est intolerabilius, ratione saltem con∣sequentiae suae incidatur. But you object further, that these tenents are not agree∣able to the doctrin of St. Augustine, the Maule of Hereticks, as he is stiled. St. Augustine must give us leave to depart
 from him, where he takes leave to de∣part from all that went before him, and from himself also; (and which of you will follow him in all he held?) For it is observed, that he changed his Batte∣ries, as he changed his enemies, and imployed other principles against the Pelagians, than those he used in comba∣ting the Manichees, and from the varie∣tie of his opinions in these points it pro∣ceeds, that his followers express them∣selves in such different terms, that though taught in the same Sclool, and of the same master, yet they seem (as he saith) not to have learnt the same les∣son. And yet we must not denie what Arminius observed (ubi supra) that St. Augustine might have confuted the Pela∣gians sufficiently, and yet have omitted that way of Predestination which he taught. And yet the doctrin of Prede∣stination, as it is handled by Gomarus and the rest of his perswasion, differs much from that of St. Augustine, and layes down many things which Augustin would by no means grant, though the greatest Adversarie the Pelagians had.
 And therefore your objection that these Tenents are against the doctrin of the Sy∣nod of Dort; is of value, for besides their dissent from all the Antients and from St. Augustin himself, the manner of their proceedings, in carrying on that business against the Remonstrants, were enough alone to beget an aversation to their doctrin. Take it in their words, who had most reason to be sensible of the injury. Scrip. Hist Rem. (mihi p. 211.) Where they refer us to their Historica Narratio, & Antidotum, in which they say, iniquitas (Dordrac. Synodi) impri∣mis autem fraudes, imposturae, & aequivo∣cationes in Canonibus Synodicis ad horren∣dam illam Absolutae Praedestinationis senten∣tiam colore aliquo fucandam & incrustan∣dam usurpatae, clarissime deteguntur. Ti∣lenus, who was present there, an eye and an ear witness of those transactions, could discover something: but he spares you. And yet he cannot but tell you, that the many pittiful shifts, and thin distinctions and horrid expressions, which he observed to be frequently made use of, by persons of that perswa∣sions
 have contributed very much to the rectifying of his judgement. Would it not startle a man, that were well in his wits, sadly to consider that opinion so stifly maintained by Piscator, Maccovi∣us, and diverse others, viz. Pisc. ad amic. dupl. Vorsti. p. 175. in summâse tueti fatetur Deum absolutè decrevisse ab aetérno & effi∣caciter. ne quispiam hominum plus boni faciat, quam reipsa facit, aut plus mali omittat, quàm reipsâ omittit. See the doctrine, of these Divines recited, Act. Synodal. par. 2. pa. 36, 37. That God hath so predetermined the will of every man to every action, that he can∣not possibly do any more good than he doth, nor omit more evil than he omitteth? What sad inferences may be drawn, and pro∣perly enough from this doctrine? will it not (in the consequence of it) take off the wheels of duty, and furnish the care∣less with an excuse, and lay all sin at the door of the most Holy God? Some of you indeed, to decline the odium of this assertion, do tell us the quite contrary, and affirm roundly that men may doe more good, and commit less evil if they will? but (see the fallacy) they hold withall, that for them to will either, the
 decree of God hath made impossible. You may as well say, that a dogg can fly, and a horse become an excellent Philo∣sopher, if they will. You cannot but take notice when you are treating of these points, how your doctrines and uses do interfere, and when it hath cost you much noise and sweat to confute, what you account an errour, in the do∣ctrine how you are sain to court the very same opinion to come in, to help you, at a dead lift, in your exhortation. You deliver it for sound DIVINITY, that Christ died only for a few, and yet you vehemently urge all men to believe in him, which they cannot rationally do unless they be perswaded of the con∣trary. Have you heard the Preacher inveigh against Apostacy, and yet almost in the same breath, tell his Audience the Elect can never fall away, and the rest ne∣ver stood? What is this but to take a∣way the very subject of that sin? What construction have I known some men put upon those particles, in those Texts, [Let him that thinketh he standeth 1 Cor. 10. 12.] and [What he seemeth to have
 Luk. 8. 18.] as if they signified nothing but a bare appearance or misconceit, when 'tis most evident, they are either a redundance in the phrase, or imply re∣ality? Hebr. 4. 1. One while you cry O ! and declaim against prying into God's secrets; anon you are as de∣finitive, as if you had been of God's Counsel, and seem to be angry that others should pretend to have as good a key to open that Cabinet, as your selves. You ascribe much to God's Omniscience, and yet you will not allow him to see future events but by the perspectives and opticks of such decrees as yourselves fancy him to have made to that purpose. Vide infra ad lit. E. ideo praesciverit, quia decre∣to suo sic ordinaverat. You set up his Sovereignty to confront his o∣ther attributes, viz. his Justice and Mer∣cy, and think you do much honour him in assigning him a power Fateor & pse, quod ad communem sentiendi con∣suetudinem crudum nimis hoc videri; Deum posse bla∣sphemiam, perjurium, mendacium &c. imperare:- quodotamen verissimum est in se &c. vid. Szydlovium apud Steph. Curcellaeum, de jure Dei in Creaturas. p. 25, 26. This is bound up with Armin. Examen Thesium Gomari in octavo, of small price, and great profit. to Command Perjury, Lying, Blasphemy, and a preroga∣tive to cast poor innocent babes into Hell torments; a piece of doctrine which the
 great Patriarch certainly never dreamt of, when he expostulated with his Ma∣ker, and said, Shall not the Judge of all the world do right? [Gen. 18. 25.] What think you of that passage, which an ho∣nest ear-witness told me from the mouth of one of your brethren, that God deals by Reprobates, as the Rat-Catcher does by those Vermine, who stops up all their avenues and Passages, and then hunts them with his doggs that he may provoke them to fly in his face? Do such expressions become the pulpit, or that reverence which should govern our thoughts, when we speak of the Di∣vine Majesty? But this is one of your excellent artifices to salve the justice of Gods decree of Reprobation, and be∣cause you dishonour him in the first act of it, [the Praeterition of those forlorn wretches, without any respect to sin,] you think to make him amends in the later, by saying in effect,

Ant. Thesius ad Summ. Baronis ex Piscatore, Re∣probatio facta est nullâ habitâ peccati ratione: Idem ib. ex Wittak. Cygn. Cant. p. 57. Ibi demum infinitum  & abyssus est divinae discretionis, quando sine peccati ratione quidam reprobantur. that he does necessitate them to sin, that he may seem not, to condemn them without ju∣stice. Zanc. de nat. Dei. l. 5. c. 2. de praed. part. 4. Resp. ad postrem. arg. pa. 743, 744. Quia reprobatio immu∣tabilis est &c. damus reprobos necessitate peccandi eo{que} & pereundi ex hac Dei ordinatione constringi; atque it a constringi, ut neque aut non peccare & perire. Et Mox, Non dubitamus ergo confiteri &c. vide. For thus, some of your party say, his wisdome hath contrived it, and his will decreed it, and his power brings it to pass insuperably. I know you will shift this off, by saying that the Repro∣bates sin voluntarily. But will this plea more alleviate, or aggravate the cruelty? That holy man could say, It is better to be in Hell without sin, than in Heaven with it. If a man be cast into the Goale without fault, he carries the comforts of a good Conscience to help to bear the burden of his durance; But when his Judge con∣trives to draw him in to be a partner in some crime, that the guilt and remor∣dency of his own Conscience may make an accession to his misery, this leaves
 him nothing to reflect upon to mitigate his torments. I pray, by whose decree comes it to pass that the soul of the Re∣probate is polluted at the first. Calv. Instit. l. 3. c. 23. Sect. 7. Unde factum est, ut tot gentes, unà cum liberis eorum infantibus aeternae morti involveres lapsus Adae absque remedio, nisi quia Deo ita visum est?—Decretum quidem horribile, fate∣or: inficiare tamen nemo poterit quin praesciverit Deus quem exitum habiturus esset homo, antequam ipsum conderet, & ideo praesciverit, quia decreto suo sic ordina∣rat. Et in responsione ad Calumn. Nebul. ad artic. 1. Interea hanc meamesse doctrinam agnosco, Non solo Dei per∣n issu, sed arcano etiam Consilio lapsum fuisse Adam, omnes{que} Posteros suo lapsu in aeternum interitum traxisse. Et paulò post: Quod si Deum naturae legibus subjicere tibi proposi∣tum est, injustitiae eum damnabis, quod ob unius hominis cul∣pam omnes aeternae mortis reatu tenemur impliciti. Peccavit unus, omnes ad poenam trahuntur; neque id modo, sed ex unius vitio omnes Contagionem Contrahunt, ut Cor∣rupti & mortiferâ labe infecti nascantur. Quid tu ad hoc bone Censor? An Deum crudelitatis damnabis, quia suos omnes faetus praecipitaverit in exitium, unius homi∣nis lapsu? Et si enim se & sus perdidit Adam, corruptio∣nem tamen, & reatum arcano Dei judicio adscribere necesse est; quia nihil ad nos unius hominis Culpa, nisi nos coele∣stis judex aeterno exitio addiceret. He hath also these words: Liberi arbitrii fuisse dicunt [Adam] ut fortunam ipse sibi fingeret: Deum vero nihil destinasse nisi ut pro me∣rito eum tractaret. Tam frigidum Commentum (So he calls it) Si recipitur, ubi eri illa Dei omnipotentia, quà secundum arcanum consilium, quod aliunde non pendet, omnia Moderatur? Vide Iocum. Instit, ubi suprà. Their 1. sin comes to them only by imputation (as diverse of your party do contend) and
 that drawes all the rest after it by an un∣avoidable and invincible necessity, as they acknowledge likewise. Upon which account, God should have been less se∣vere, if he had cast them into hell inno∣cent, and without any sin at all, as, you say, he Cast them off, or past them by, at first, without any respect at all to it. But you have one reserve behinde, by the strength whereof you are confident, after all these disputes and foils, to win the field at last. Upon the matter you say, Gods decrees could be no other than they are; For Decreta & liberae Dei actiones sunt ipse Deus: The Decrees of God are God himself, and therefore to make a conditional decree, were to make a conditional God, and if Election or Repro∣bation should have respect to any qualifi∣cations in their objects, this would a∣mount to a denial of Gods Independency. And having resolved justification to be an immanent act of God, and consequent∣ly God himself: it follows, you say, from the same Topick or principle, that it must be from all eternity, and that mens sins are remitted before they be commit∣ed,
 and that it is as impossible for all the most horrid sins in the world, to cause any interruption of a mans justifi∣cation, as for Almighty God to become immutable in his nature and being; that faith serves not as a condition to qualifie us for our actual justification before God, but only for a meane to procure the sense and feeling thereof in our selves. These opinions with many others of like import, you say, do unavoidably follow from that one position, which you think as certain, as if you found it (toti∣dem verbis) in the Gospel. But that the very foundation, upon which you build so many gros errours, is it selfe unsound, you may learn from your own Gomarus, who was once of that opinion with you, but being afterwards awakned to a more clear sight and mature judgment in this point, he hath left arguments enough up∣on record in his own writings to confute you; to which purpose I shall subjoyn his own words presently. Gomar Tom. 3. Disput. 9. Thes. 28. & seqq.
XXVIII. Ex qua, efficientis decreti. explicatione, gravis illa & ad veri Dei notitiam ac cultum pertinens, controversia; An decretum Dei, sit Deus, nec ne? como∣modissimè
 dirimi potest. Siquidem spectata, cum rei, tum Dei, natura, negationis veritas, perspicuè demon∣stratur.
XXIX. Nam à natura rei haec demonstratio est; Nulla actio, à consilio & voluntate Dei liberè agente dependens, est Deus: Deus enim, à se, naturâ est: non veró, à consi∣lio ac voluntate libere agente, dependet: Atqui decretum Dei, est actio, à consilio & voluntate Dei, liberè agente de∣pendens: Ergo decretum Dei, non est Deus.
XXX. A natura verò Dei (ut causae efficientis decre∣ti) altera etiam invicta demonstratio promanat; Deus est ens, absolutè necessarium: Decretum Dei non est ens absolutè necessarium. Ergo decretum Dei, non est Deus.
XXXI. Ex quibus etiam (ut alia omittamus) cla∣rissimum, aeternitatis Dei & decreti discrimen, elucet. Nam ut Dei existentia sit aeternitas ejusdem, absolutè necessaria est. Contra verò, et decreti existentia, à causa, liberrimè agente, dependet, sic ejusdem aeterni∣tas merè arbitraria est: ut quae sic est, ut non esse potuerit: quemadmodum ex superioribus constat. Ideoque decretum, non , seu eadem prorsus ratione, qua Deus; sed , aeternum appellatur. Ac propterea ex eo, decreti deitas, non firmatur; sed evertitur.
XXXII. Neque tamen, essentiae divinae simplicitatem (qualem Sacrae literae ei attribuunt) ideo violari, si non omne quod in Deo est, sit Deus, ex actionibus personali∣bus (generatione Filii à solo Patre, & spiratione Spi∣ritus sancti, ab utroque) evincitur.
XXXIII. Eas enim, sic in Deo esse, ut tamen, illaesa illius simplicitate, non sint Deus, sole clarius apparet. Essentia enim Dei, absolute ac simpliciter, communis est tribus personis: contra verò actio personalis, ut ge∣neratio silii, non est absolutè & simpliciter communis tribus personis; sed propria certae: Engo actio perso∣nalis, non est essentia Dei. Deinde, Deus  praedicatur, de singulis personis divinis: actio personalis Dei, non praedicatur  de singulis personis di∣vinis: Ergo ea non est Deus.

 XXXIV. Ideoque mirandum non est, si liberrima voluntatis Dei, in rebus futuris, pro arbitrio, determi∣nandis, actio, in Deo sit, nec tamen sit Deus. Idque sanè non ignorasse, Clar. Ursinum, apparet ex Cate∣chesis explicatione, ad quaest. 58. de vita aeterna quaest. 1. etsi minus accuratè exponere videatur.
In the mean time, if there be in any one word of this address, more asperity, than I ought to use, or your self can well digest, I desire you to pardon it, for Gods honours sake, which I am zealous to vin∣dicate from that foul impeachment, which something more than a mere je∣lousie prompts me to believe your opi∣nions guilty of. Nevertheless, to con∣clude with the words of the great Apo∣stle, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us minde the same thing. Endeavouring to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. [Phil. 3. 16. Eph. 4. 3.] I have two things, which I must yet begg of you upon the score of our old friendship, viz. the continuance of your affection and your prayers; which Il'e assure you, how freely soever you lay them out, they shall not be cast away upon.
Sir,

