



GOD is pleased to put so much Honour upon his Ministers, as to stile them his peoples Watch-men, and his own Remembrancers: There is one Scripture that shews them in both these capacities: I have set Watch∣men Isa. 62. 6. upon the walls of Jerusulem, ther's the one: You that are the Lords Remembrancers give him no rest, there's the other. Which same perhaps your wisdomes sometimes light∣ing upon, is the cause why in so solemn a way, and for so long time together, you have thought good to employ them in both Capacities. And
 not in vaine; For by the exercise of one of these I doubt not but many a blessed discovery of dan∣ger hath been made, and so timously prevented; and by the other, hath been obtained many a sea∣sonable and full Blessing. And herein the Ene∣my (whatsoever other thing he can match you in) yet in this is certainly upon extreamesi dis∣advantage; as neither having Remembrancers appointed to give the Lord no rest, till he shall make their Babylon a praise in the whole earth: or Watchmen set upon the walls there∣of, that are able to fore-see its neer approach∣ing misery, and desolation.
Among all those excellent ones that have been cal'd in this solemn way to watch and pray for you, you were pleased whether because the number was low which you had stinted your selves unto, or whether because you will have a taste of every man, or that the enemy might see the meanest among you is not altogether contemptible, or for what other cause I know not; but you were pleased (I say) not long since to Command me upon the Service. I could not but be conscious of very great insufficiency to such a taske, and yet it was Religion to me, not to dispute, much lesse refuse the com∣mands
 of those to whom not onely my own parti∣cular, but the publique it self, is also so much engag'd. I resolved therefore, that seeing I could not avoyd the service, I would be faith∣full in it, and look what I was short in other accomplishments, in that I would endeavour compensation:
Accordingly therefore, when I stood Senti∣nell for you, and perceiving danger approa∣ching (as was my duty) I fired a warning∣piece in your hearing, the Report whereof I now this second time do humbly offer to you.
And now what further do I wish concerning it, but that this same Report which came (be∣sides my expectation) so acceptable to your eares, (I hope your hearts too) might now finde the like favour in your eyes also: and that this Alarum which took so well at the main Guard of this Kingdom (the Parliament I mean) may passe from you, to all that are concern'd, and be a seasonable warning to them also.
If I have been somewhat loud, and plain, the Nature of the discourse will easily be my excuse, which in such cases must either be so, or 'tis worih nothing: If the Trumpet give Cor. 14. 18. an uncertain sound, who shall prepare him∣self
 to the Battell: And when I was a declai∣ming against unfaithfulnesse in others, you know it behooved me to avoyd all appearance and suspition of it in my self.
But why stand I thus excusing, when your goodnesse had forgiven me this, and much more already?
And now this piece of my task is over, and having stood my time upon the watch, reliefe also comming, I must at present cease in this capacity to do you further service: yet in the other I shall not: I shall not cease to make men∣tion of you in my prayers; and though I can be your Watch-man but for a season, yet shall I alwayes be

