


BY the Blessing of God upon this treatise (con∣taining His own directions there) it can heale the heart and the hand palsied with feare: It will be no dishonour then to take it into your hand, and to lay these directions (if it can be) yet closer to your heart, whereby the City of God have been a quiet habitation, Esay 33. 20. when, as now, The blast of the terrible ones have made the earth to shake and tremble under us: And you now, with such as you, that love, feare, trust GOD, doing your duty, and maintaining your watch, doe maintayne PEACE, and at such a time. Ezra. 4. 17.
Peace is good at all times, but ever best in the worst times, perilous and feirce, as are the times of Refor∣mation, troublous evermore: when hands and Dan. 9. 28. Jer. 20. 3. Tongues are bent to make the City of GOD MAGOR MISSABIB, terrour on every side: Then peace is good; Then cordi∣alls
 are so indeed, strong consolations (they are the con∣solations of GOD) at such a time. Peace in and with the world is good, if it could be had upon good termes: But that it not possible. The world will love their own, And they shall have peace, such as the world can give; They, who can comply with the world; can give out unto them the right hand of fellowship, to thrust Christ from His Throne, and out of the world: these shall have peace, for they are the worlds first born, and right hands of the times, but you cannot do so. Such a peace, peace without truth is of vile esteeme with you, you abhor it at such a price, and upon such termes as the world bids for it, and doth purchase the same. You follow peace with all men, and Holynesse (That is a point of the highest wis∣dome) without which no man shall see the LORD: you pur∣sue Heb. 11. 14. . this peace, as others persecute it: your zeale cannot boile higher then to their As, as they persecute it. Pur∣sue it so still, and if you overtake it not, (for it flees from you (else you should not need to pursue it) if you cannot establish peace in the City; yet, in that you have done your office, you have peace in your soul, a peace, which passeth all understanding; for whatsoever things are true Phil. 4. 7. 8. are he∣nest; are just; are pure; are lovely; are of good report, these things you have done, and will doe, you have assured confidence now in this which follows, and the peace of ver. 9. GOD shall be with you. What a good word is this, and at such a time, when the Adversary doth, as in all times he hath done (it is no new thing, when the breaches of Je∣rusalems walls are making up) he sends, and writes, and lies, and rayles, and blasphemes, what doth he not, after his manner, to make the work to cease Nehe. 4. and 6.. You know your charge concerning him, Answer him 2 King. 18. 36. not; you look to the answer from a good conscience, That, in zeale to you▪
 LORD, The Cities peace and crown of rejoycing, you have done and spoken hitherto: And you are resolved so to do still, To stand up for Christ still, To shoulder up His Throne still; And you have made up your reckon∣ing, you know what it will cost you, possible as much as it hath cost All His faithfull servants in all ages at such a time; And having so wisely counted your Cost, you can mock at feare; and laugh at your Adversaries, as the LORD doth, seeing their day is comming Psal. 37.: for their rage riseth high, and their rising by steps that way, are but steps and degrees to utter destruction, which shall rise as their rage doth, unto heaven, and be lifted up, even to the skies. Jer. 51. 9. You cannot be deceived now, as, we thinke, good Jeremiah was; He heard the defaming of many, fear was on every side, and he heard a cry: nay he cryed out himselfe, and said, Violence and spoile! Then sayes Jere∣my, Jer. 20. 8. 10. . O LORD, Thou hast deceived me, and I was deceived. He was indeed, but GOD did not deceive him; He had set up Jeremtah, and made him so strong for Himself, and for such a time as that, when the adversaries deeds and words would be as hard as iron against the Truth and him; but Jeremiah should be hard enough for them; The Adversary might, to as good purpose, strike his hand against a rock as strike Jeremiah: shall iron breake Jer. 15. 12. the Northern iron and steele?
No, no, the Adversary was hard, and cruell, and vi∣olent against Jeremiah, but God made Jeremiah too hard for them all, as He will all His faithfull ones, (standing up for Him) a defenced City and a strong brazen ver. 20. wall: That was the promise to Jeremiah, and in him to all faithfull ones, many thousand yeeres agoe, and you have the comfort, and your fast standing from it at this day; The blast of the terrible ones, what can it doe? It was
 answered long agoe; As much as a blast of winde a∣gainst a brazen wall, so the Spirit slights what flesh can do against Him: say 2 4. They shall sight against Thee (The Adversary will make an experiment, what mettal you are made of, so you must expect) but they shall not pre∣vaile ser. 1. 1. against Thee; There is the comfort, and it is yours, who wil stand up for God and at such a time. As your ex∣pectation from the World cannot deceive you (after the experiences of all the faithfull that have stood up for God) All hath been done against them, All shall be done against you, that Angry Nations can doe, Atheists and Papists swelled with wrath, and big with rage: So, nor wil The Lord, The Hope of Israel and Saviour there∣of in time of trouble, He will not deceive you. Then you shall see your strength presently, that you are better bottomed then are the perpetuall Hills, and everlasting Mountains, a sight worth the beholding and at such a time. And because your work is now to read the times, not books; To get understanding in them, and what Israel ought to doe; and because you feele so many shocks and thrusts made against you to make you fall, noman more; I will make bold to draw out this Epistle (against my disposition and judgement) beyond its usu∣all proportion to persons of your ranke; That I may make known not to you but to the world of ungodly men, where your strength lyes. Then past all question it will be said, their rock is not as your Rock, the enemies themselves being Judges.
I have by the assistance of the great Physitian writ∣ten, I hope, from His Mouth, touching the Cure of Fear, your Lordship may have the marrow of it here.
First, You magnify your Office, contending for Christ against His enemies, who would shoulder Him out of
 His Throne and out of His Kingdome; These enemies are in a rage, because you are a friend to Christ; they fight against you, and have faire hopes too, they shall take revenge on you. Let them hope till their day comes, when their flesh must consume away, and their eyes in their holes, and their tongues in their mouth, Zech. 14. 12. you have the answer of a good conscience within: A GOD to go to, His promise to cleave to, which you find, in the place you were upon even now; They shall not prevaile against thee, for I am with thee, saith the LORD, to deliver thee: And not barely so, but a Mighty TERRIBLE one: There Jer. 20. 11. you may reade what follows, to your everlasting com∣fort, and confusion of your Adversaries. This answers all that can be said or done against you, all hard words and ungodly deeds.
GOD is with you; All His attributes, power, wisdom, goodnesse shall be laid out for you, and for all like you, who lay out themselves, all they are and have for Him.
You have now, as All His faithfull servants have, written this downe in the Table of your heart. Now you may write what you will, for a Legion, now marching on against the City of God, you can set down quickly (before feare surpriseth the heart, for it hath sudden and violent motions) and write, fifty: what? froggs, lice, flies. So The Church despi∣sed her proud adversary, that terrible one, laughing him to scorne, regarding his huge Host, not so much as 2 Kings 91. 2. a legion of froggs, an armie of lice, or swarme of flies. These Egyptian, these Northerne Troops (the Armies of The Lord of Hosts have been a plague to the Aegyp∣tians, and other Nations, as idolatrous as they, never so to a people with whom God is, a mighty terrible One.
 Certain it is That he, who wil search into the records of time, shall never read, that an Army of Papists, a People of Gods curse, ever did the Church hurt: They have annoyed it, that is granted: For frogs, and lice, and flies in aboundance, can doe so, (& yet not so much un∣lesse God pleaseth, but if so, then) for the Churches good. Idolatrous Israell have pillaged Judah, and have taken away much spoile (sometime the Lord made the Adversary vomit it up again:) their rage has reached yet higher, but then their day hasteneth as now it doth, and they come down mightily, this also was forthe Churches good. Indeed, and to contract; every thing, which we commonly call evill, nay, what properly is so, (sinne it selfe) is for the good of those with whom the LORD is, a God in covenant, our God. You see your stability now, your security, your exceeding comfort. It is good to looke upon it with all your eyes, well to consider on it at such a time as this, lest you fainte in your minde, as a faithfull servant of the Lord did, eying his Adversaries, and not observing his standing, nor his strength where it was, and then he speakes unad∣visedly with his lips. Jer. 22. 14.
Truly I thinke it my Duty, being upon such a Subject, and at such a time, to make some enlargement to my Epistle here, now that tongues and hands are so busied to cause feare, which is so encroaching, you cannot keep it out with all your power, unlesse you hold fast still-fast to this strong hold, I will be with thee a mighty terrible One, blessed be His name for that promise.
You shall heare your selfe charged as Job, perhaps by Eliphas a friend, and that, if you will observe it (a) you will think very strange, and nothing now that is new. Iob. 22. , 6, &c. Your enemies, and they are many, all that are ene∣mies
 to Christ, they will for His sake defame you, speak all manner of evill against you, for they call you by their Exulem me de suo nomine vo∣cat. Cic. parad. owne names. While they reproach God in you, you feele a sword in your bones: Psal 42. 10 But in reference to your selfe, and that good thing within you, the souls pillow, you goe away rejoycing, bearing the reproach; and, being at peace Recta conscien∣tia culcitra animae. with God, no more moved then the Moone is at the bar∣king of dogs. Behold her course, saith one, Chrysost. the course of the Sun too, they run on like mighty Giants: such is the course of a godly man, he is for God, God is with him, he breaks through all difficulties in this way, as through spiders webs: he is above all, hard words, and ungodly deeds, riding upon the high places of the earth. Esay. 58. 14.
Againe, you shall see the earth smitten terribly, that her bloud may be discovered, and her Idols there given up to the Moles and to the Bats; you shall feele it shake under you, and the Kingdomes totter like a drunken man. All the while you shall stand still, Exod. 14. 13. calme in your mind, beholding the salvation of GOD, for you stand up for Him, and He is with you as a Mighty Terrible One.
Againe, you shall heare of War, and the desolations that it causeth; Whether you shall live to heare that GODS peace is concluded on, and established in the land, I cannot tell, nor, perhaps, the best Seer in your City: But this I can tell you, because you have the Answer of a good conscience, and can tell your selfe, you fear GOD, and you stand for Him, and He is with you, a God in Co∣venant, and a Mighty Terrible One, That you, and all such as you, who follow peace, and holinesse, shall have peace, not as the world gives, but peace in God. Oh how sweet it is! and as sure, as it is sweet, in God; and yet sweeter yet at such a time, when the Kingdomes totter, the gods there are all starved, nay when the heart-strings and eye-
 strings must break: O how sweet is Peace then! swee∣ter then honey was to Jonathan, when his soule fainted. This peace is yours, for you are Christs, and Christ is GODS, Whose you are, and Whom you serve. This peace is yours, and now it passeth all understanding indeed, when you shall heare the most comfortable word that ever was spoken, Well done good and faithfull servant.
This is the heritage of them that feare the LORD; hard words and ungodly deeds cannot discourage you now, for God is with you, there is your security Christum sse cum Pa summa secui∣tas: Paulum as∣se cum Christo summa foelici∣tas. 1 Thes. 4. 17, 18.; you shal be with Him anon, there is your happinesse; for ever with the Lord, you can comfort your selfe in these words.
Heare me with patience one word more, touching the successe of the great work in hand, and the security of this great City, where the Lord hath made you a Watch∣man, and hath found you faithfull, which is your glory, but in The Lord. Surely, surely, the work shal prosper, for it is wrought by God; your City shall not be destroyed, for it is GODS City.
Surely a work carryed on with so many hands and hearts; so much life, and spirit, love, faith, patience, can∣not be disappointed of its end. And for the City Where are many thousands that cannot speak, yet is their language very moving with their Lord. Jonah 4. 11., her fil∣thinesse is in her skirts Lam. 1 9.; Ai and upon her forehead too: But yet a righteous people are there, and Gaius mine Host Rom. 16. 23., and many such as he: She is a refuge to the op∣pressed, a great Sanctuarie at this The day of Jacobs trouble. Jer. 30. 7. time; and much good is found there: We doe not boast of her goodnesse, but we boast in The Lord, Who hath instructed her to discre∣tion, To stand up for Him and His Cause above all the Cities, that are or ever were in the world, and at such a time. Surely the Lord will watch over her; & her Watch∣men think so too, & pray for her night and day. And be∣cause they be such, as never sought God in vaine, they are
 bold and confident, That The Lord will watch over this City for good, it shal stil be said, The LORD helpeth them; The North shall give in unto them, the south shal not keep back: the East and West shall confer unto them the bles∣sings of the Land and of the Sea. But this is the com∣plement of all, Salvations will God appoint for walls and Bulwarks. I will conclude with the close of a Psalm, Let Ps. 48. 11, 12, 13 mount Sion rejoyce, let the daughters of Judah be glad, because of Thy judgements: walk about Sion, and go round about her, tell the towers thereof (A goodly prospect, and at such a time) Mark ye well her Bulwarks, consider her palaces, that you may tell it to the generation following. What shall they tell? or what is this strength? wherein doth it consist? or where is it? for it is not visible. It follows, For This GOD is our GOD for ever and ever: He will be our guide even Psal. 41. 13. unto death. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting and to everlasting. AMEN and AMEN.
