



AS large and spreading a Dedication almost as was the Anchoran, An. 634. French-mans, who dedicated a Booke, not his own neither, to Prince Charles, then to all the Popes and Cardinalls, Archbishops and Bishops: and to all the learned-men within and without all the Uni∣versities in all foure Kingdomes. Every man abounds in his own sense, I in mine. But I conceive, and that I cannot be mistaken; That when you shall have read this short Epistle throughout, you will say, There is infinite Reason why I should dedicate these following leaves to you all, you
 Princes, Nobles and Worthies; and to the good people too, in all three Kingdomes: But more specially to you. You! The Lord has picked you out of Thousands; You are His peculiars; His chosen ones; He has honoured you with his own Name, Saviours, Repairers of the breach, wide as the Sea; Restorers of the paths to dwell in; Builders of the wasts, Raisers-up the desolations, which a people of Gods curse have made in your LORDS Kingdomes. A marvellous honour has the Lord put upon you! A glorious worke has He wrought for His King∣domes by your hands! You are intreated now by the mercies of Christ to shew mercy to your owne soules, To work out your owne salvation, To doe the same worke for your owne soules, which you have done for the Nation: You are entreated to take the same way in posturing your selves, which you have taken in posturing the Kingdomes. A most just request, It is granted. You will observe now what you have done for the King∣domes.
1. You have plucked downe the high and lofty ones, proud Persons, and vile Things, Idols of jealousie before the eye. Pluck them downe in your heart too, or else you have done nothing for your soules.
2. You have commanded Prayer. Pray in prayer, pray servently, in your own house and closet: And if you cannot pray so, mourne that you cannot.
3. You have opened the prison doores, and the mouthes of Ministers: you have sent forth Angels (a more proper word then Bishops) To preach the everlasting Gospell (as you read.) (Truly the Lord will doe Great Things for this Land, Truly He will.) That you may see it with your eyes, and re∣joyce with His Inheritance, labour with all your might to bring your hearts to the rule, and under the power of the Gospell.
4. You have vindicated the LORDS Day, a day so vilified, so reproached, so blasphemed; never was day so dealt
 with since the beginning of dayes; you have vindicated That Day; Let it appeare you have done it in Truth, for your LORDS Day is your delight, and you sanctifie that day un∣to the Lord.
5. You would keepe-off common-hands from taking the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of the LORD: You will looke to your hands, that they be cleane: and your vessels, that they be holy, wherein you have put that shew-Bread, those Holy mysteries. You are consulting about a Church way. You are resolved, with Joshua, To walke in it amidst your owne house.
6. You would bring the three Kingdomes into covenant with their God; Blessed be you of the Lord. But you doe all this faith∣fully; you have lifted-up your hands, to the high God, to Reforme your selfe and yours. Now you must not start aside. The Cove∣nant is as a large circumference, it fetcheth a wide circuit about three Kingdomes; If you love your soules, as you doe the Kingdomes, you must Center this Covenant, every man in his own heart; you must stand to it.
7. Active you are to quench the fier in the Kingdomes. You are as active to quench the fier in your owne-bosomes, which let alone there, may burne to the neithermost Hell, a place below the grave.
8. You would have the Lord purge-out the Rebells out of the Kingdomes: He must doe it, for it is his promise; But if you desire it heartily, you are more active in subduing the rebellions in your owne heart. This is to love the Kingdomes in Truth; This is to walke in the Truth; This is to doe faithfully whatever you doe to the Bretheren and to strangers: And why not, to your own soules? Goe on and prosper, as your soules prosper. Love the Kingdomes still, and love your own soules still; Posture and strengthen the Kingdomes with one hand,
 your soules with the other. All this is done by the same means, in the same way. The LORD keepe your hearts close to Him, and your hands to His worke, which shall turne to your salvation also, through your prayers, and the prayers of all the Churches for you, and the supply of the Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ. Amen and Amen.
