



Sir,
I Have finisht the task, to which, whe∣ther your haesitation or curiosity did more earnestly solicite me, I shall not determine. A task, I confesse, so much the more unpleasing, as I had rea∣son to conceive it the lesse needfull. For (to tell you the truth,) 'tis the obser∣vation of Judicious men, that your great Champion comes off, in this incounter, with as little reputation, (though he falls on with as much scorn and passion) as the Proud Philistine in his Combate with little David. Indeed he makes out very fierce and frequent
 Sallies upon the face of our Tilenus, and defies him utterly in the bitterest asperity of foul Language: But with∣all he does him the honour to leave him Master of the Field, and exposeth his own Cause to the danger of being de∣stroyd by his own weapons. I do not impute this to any want of skill or met∣tle in him; for his abilities have appro∣ved themselves sufficient to advance him above the pitch of contemptible, would he be carefull to manage them with that Prudence and Christian tem∣per, that becomes a faithfull Souldier of Jesus Christ, minding nothing more than the interest of his Church. But forgetting his duty herein, like a Soul∣dier of fortune, who lives by warrs, or some young Gallant flesht by the weak∣nesse of an Aggressor, whom he hath worsted upon advantage, he is apt to have a hand in every quarrell; and though he be not satisfied in the grounds of the difference, yet rather than take up the dispute, and make men friends, he will take a side and make a Party.
 That he hath done thus in this Contro∣versie is evident to every impartiall Reader, that is conversant in his wri∣tings. Nay, he hath much ado to keep his vizor close about him, he is ready to unmask himself upon occasion, as the attentive eye may easily perceive, even whilest he is in conflict with Ti∣lenus.
For his six daies hard march in pur∣suit after the Grotian Religion, as I am not concern'd, so neither do I think it tant-amount to observe the motions of it. But I pray God (besides design in order to the carrying on of that old disputeLuk. 22. vers. 24 amongst the Di∣sciples) there be not as much uncharitablenesse, (and that of as ill an influence and aboad) in Le∣vying this war, as well against the ho∣nour and integrity, as against the most Christian (if equally managed) enter∣prize of that Learned man, as Master He himself concludes to be in Master P. his bookPreface, Sect. 20., for which he strongly insinuates,
 that for the Prest m account, he is more then unca f salvation.
He hath snatc e faire flowers from off the Herse of the immortall Grotius; but his expectation will de∣ceive him, if he flatters himself with an opinion, that they will serve to dresse up his own reputation. For they be∣gin to welk and fade in his hands alrea∣dy; and besides, my information doth assure me, Master P. is Mustering his forces, to go out, with Letters of Re∣prisall, to recover all such spoils of him; of the successe of which accomplish∣ment, no doubt, we shall have full In∣telligence in due season.
In the interim I have addressed my self, for pitty sake, to the rescue of a poore Fatherlesse Tilenus, whom Ma∣ster Baxter falls so foul up∣on, in his forlorn hopeHis Prae∣face to the Grotian Re∣ligion., in this Expedition against Grotius.
You may be confident Tilenus expe∣cted fairer Quarter at his hands, having some temptation to think he was as in∣clinable
 to a state of neutrality, as to an ingagement  Quinquarticular Con∣testation. We i, if I be not much mistaken, he hath made the greatest mis∣adventure that ere befell him, whether you consider the Party or the Tenents, whose Vindication he hath so roundly undertaken.
Yet I must professe ingenuously, that from my first perusall of his Aphorisms, and my taking notice of his purpose to reduce them to a better Method, and an∣nex what, he saith,Postscript to his plaine Script. proof of Infants, &c. he had prepared [Of universall Re∣demption], I have expected with some degree of Longing and impatience this perfor∣mance from him. And my desires have been much inflamed by some Colours which he hath since hung out and dis∣played in a Preface to [Certain Dispu∣tations of Right to Sacraments,] whereby he invites and tolls in his Reader, as with the sound of Drum and Trumpet, to ad∣mire his Invention and Acutenesse in these words, [To the praise of God I
 speak it, tha in those ancient common di∣sturbing Controversies between the Armini∣an and Anti-Arminian, Lutheran and Calvinist, Jesuit and Dominican, I have discerned those Principles which quiet my own minde, and which, I am confident, were they received according to their Evi∣dence, would quiet the now contending world: But, saith he, I am past doubt, to be derided as arrogant for this Confidence; And should the Principles in a Method with Evidence be propounded, though purposely to heal the divisions of the Church, many of the severall Parties, would but rage at the Reconciler, and pour out their impotent ac∣cusations and reproaches against him, be∣cause he would attempt the healing of their divisions, and would feign him to be Au∣thor of some new Sect, for seeking to put an end to Sects. But let any man make good my just demand, that the Principles pro∣pounded shall have an impartiall reception according to their Evidence, and I will give you security to make good my Confi∣dence, that they shall quiet the Christian world hereabouts. Thus far M. Baxter.

Now if it were but a piece of curio∣sity in me, to desire to see what prize Master B. would play, if he were brought upon the stage, after this good∣ly flourish, yet it were very innocent and pardonable. But to a Person that professe to bear a cordiall affection to Gods Truth and the Peace of his Church, finding himself much unsatisfied too in the common way of stating these Con∣troversies, it is very allowable, if his heart entertained some passion, and were transported with some longings to tast the fruit of this so deep rooted and full blown a Confidence.
When the Jewes met with any diffi∣culty, for which they could finde no competent solution, they were wont to say, that Elias would come; and when he came, he would untie all such knots, and unravell such intricacies, scatter the cloud, and administer a clear light of satisfaction. It was the desire of my soul that God would vouchsafe to send some such Elias, as might be able to disintangle the intricacies of these
 Controversies; and why, thought I, may not this Master Baxter be the man? though I must adde withall, that too many Reasons throng'd in on a sudden, and offered themselves to oppose that thought, and did actually check and silence it.
At last forth comes the Examination of Tilenus; and by that means, I thought, a faire Price was now put into Master Baxters hand, or rather a handsome invitation and an opportunity offered to him, to shew his wisdome. But what was the Result of it? He took the bait, but one would think, by his mere nibbling at it, that he was affraid, there was a hook too sharp for him, either to swallow or dally with.
In earnest, (because you are so very urgent to gain my opinion of it) I tell you, though I finde little abatement of the confidence he profest, yet I can ob∣serve nothing of the successe he boasted himself able to accomplish; for indeed his Arrogance flew so high a pitch, that it flew to Lessening; he could not see the
 game he had undertaken; if he had, he would never have offered his security to perform that, whereof in his very next line, he saith [But I know this is to be expected from none but God.In the said Praeface.]
What shall we say then, that he was so nice and chary of his healing Princi∣ples that he would not affoard the Church of God their Benefit? I dare not think him so uncharitable. He tels us, I remember, (in his forementioned Postscript) I am not onely distracted between mens contrary Judgements and desires: but far more, between a fear of wronging the Church by mistakes, and of wronging it by my silence, and Christ by hiding my Talent and his precious Truths, which after hard study and earnest supplication, he revealed to me on these terms, that I should reveale them to others.
I hope mens contrary Judgements did not still hold M. Baxter in distraction, (from November 12. 1650. till April 14. 1658.) when he wrote against Ti∣lenus; and sure we may conclude [his
 fear of wronging the Church by mistakes] was blown over, when he made this proclamation to the world. 1657. viz. [And to the Praise of God I speak it,Ʋbi supra. that in those—Con∣troversies—I have discerned those Prin∣ciples, which quiet my own minde, and which I am confident, were they received ac∣cording to their Evidence, would quiet the now—contending Christian world. And now his fear of wronging the Church by mistakes was so well blown over, that he could see nothing but fair weather, and so clear a light of evidence round about him, might we not very well ex∣pect that his other fear should work up∣on him, His fear of wronging the Church by his silence, and Christ by hiding his Ta∣lent and his precious Truths, which (he saith) afer hard study and earnest supplica∣tion, he (Christ) revealed to me on these terms, that I should reveal them to others? May we not very well conclude from hence, that Master Baxter hath unfolded his napkin, and disburst his Talents, and held forth his Revelations?

What then, have we all, or the Quintessence of all, that Master Baxter hath to reveal for the worlds satisfacti∣on in these Controversies? Some of his Principles, no doubt, he hath commu∣nicated in these papers: but unlesse those Principles be propounded to us in a Me∣thod with Evidence, haply they will not conveigh their healing virtue to us; and that Method, that charming Method, I suspect he hath yet concealed from us. But whose fault is this? Why, he was now in pursuit after Tilenus, and so engaged to leave his own Method, that he might trace his Adversarie by his steps. But grant this to be true, in re∣spect of that Part of his Preface, (from Sect. 6. to 17.) wherein he had concern∣ed himself against Tilenus; yet when he came to review the severall heads of Controversie (from Section 28. to the end,) he was then at Liberty to pro∣pound his Principles as himself pleased; why did he not then give us his own Method with Evidence, but put Master P. off by playing his old Notes over a∣gain
 with a little new descant?
If you object, that I have not made good Master Baxters just demand, in gi∣ving his Principles an Impartiall Reception according to their Evidence; if you please you shall have my Protestation, that I am verily persuaded, I have done it; and whether I have or no, is referred to the Reader to judge by this Reply. I shall but adde as a further evidence hereof, that the Effect of this Receipt of his Principles, hath brought much comfort to me; for observing that his promise amounts to so great Confi∣dence, and his performance brings so little satisfaction, he hath healed much of my haesitation, and quieted my mind, with a stronger persuasion than ever, that the certain Truth abideth on the Remonstrants side, in these Contro∣versies.
For the matter of Fact charged by Tilenus upon the Synod, and their Ad∣herents; that M. Baxters VINDI∣CATION with all his Artifice and ill language, will not serve to make a suf∣ficient
 plaister to cover, much lesse to heal that soar, is abundantly evinced in the insueing Papers, but, for the Synods part, especially in the Reflexions upon Master Baxter's discourse, relating to each Article. To which I can now add a further proof from some Intelligence which came very lately to my hands from a ForreignerArnold. Poelenburg. Confut. Di∣sput. Inau∣gur. Span∣hem. p. 115. who tells us of a most bitter con∣tention betwixt Voetius and Maresius about the sense of that Synod. One of them maintains that the Synod de∣termined the Decree of Predestination and Reprobation to antecede the considerati∣on of the fall of Adam; to which as∣sertion the other hath opposed an Apo∣logy for the Synod. So that, though Assembled on purpose to decide these Controversies, and appease the broiles that emerged, and were inflamed upon them, yet (that they might seem to a∣gree together in something) have they wrapt up their Decrees and Canons in so many clouds, and Confounded them
 with so many intricacies (if a man hath recourse to their Suffrages for an inter∣pretation) that they are like to fall into a New Schisme, before they come to a settled Resolution, what the meaning of that Synod is; whereof notwithstand∣ing M. Baxter makes himself so great an Advocate.
By which his Advocation, I grow a little jealous, he hath given Scandall, and led his Brother into temptation. For was it not upon the account of his Ac∣cusations, and the persuasion he had of the truth thereof, that Master Hickman, (whose Pamphlet you mention, as a smart piece) takes the boldnesse to inveigh and raile so uncivillyPage 21. (with∣out any provocation from him) upon Tilenus; calling him by the Names of Aethiopian, Scribler, this poore Fellow? I know it is the Apostles Lesson, Rom. 12.17. Recompense to no man evil for evil. And this is to follow that Co∣py that our Blessed Master hath set us, Who being reviled, reviled not again.1 Pet. 2.21, with 23. Nay Michael the
 Archangel, though he had the Devil for his Antagonist in that dispute, yet he durst not bring against him a railing accusation.Jude epist. vers. 9. Master Hickman may passe muster for a preci∣ous Saint, as the present Accounts are made below, but I am sure he can ga∣ther none of those flowers of Rhetorick from the Discourses of the Holy An∣gels that converse above. He chargeth that Author with impudence in abusing the Triers: but I must tell him (on his behalf) when such Schemes of Rhetorick are used, (as they may be with won∣derfull advantage, being not onely in∣strumentall to illustrate and adorn a Truth, but also to make it the more pungent, and take impression,) the a∣buse imagined to result from them, is ever, amongst wise men, ascribed to him that takes the impudence to make the Ap∣plication. And whereas he saith further, that the Synod of Dort, which Tilenus writes against, is a man made up of his own ugly clouts, (or to that purpose; for I have no list to look upon his Scur∣rilous
 language) I must tell you, he shall find before he hath read these Pa∣pers half way thorow, that those clouts, as ugly as they seem to him, are ge∣nuine parts of that Home-spun-stuffe; which was warpt and woven and mill'd too, by that very Synod of the town of Dort. Neither hath Tilenus set this web upon the tenter-hocks, nor torn any part, to make ugly clouts of it: but onely used that Liberty, which is allowed to all Ar∣tists of this kinde, fairely to cut out of the whole piece, such Proportions, as might best serve, to cloathe his discourse, in that fashion 'tis now Represented in. This is all I am willing to return to Ma∣ster Hickman.
But because I perceive his Pamphlet hath raised a double scruple in you, I shall adventure to apply something in order for your satisfaction. First, you say, that his Evidence, to prove the Anti-Arminian principles, to be accor∣ding to the Faith of the Church of Eng∣land, is so pregnant, that it must needs beget a great prejudice in the minds of
 men against such as attempt the dissemi∣nation of another Doctrine. To which I answer, (1.) Seeing these men have razed the very Foundations of the Church of England, upon which it was establisht at the Reformation; and made it their design to erect a new Fabrick up∣on, the Platforme of a new Confession, a new Catechisme, a new Directory, a new Government; why should such a Seal of Secresie be stampt upon these Controver∣sies alone; why may not these be exa∣mined by some new Triers in order to a further Approbation, before they be admitted to take place of Authority in this Church?
2. If these Principles, which you call Anti-Arminian, were embraced as part of the Faith of the Church of England, I might puzle you perhaps, by asking you, which of them, the Supralapsarian, or the Sublapsarian Principles? But I intend to be brief and clear with you; I say therefore, though those opinions were Canased as Problems of the School, yet they were not intertained as Do∣ctrines
 of the Church, much lesse deter∣mined to be Articles of the Faith. Oe irrefragable Argument to this purpose, is as good as ten thousand, and it shall be this.
Doctor Whitaker, having obtain'd the Bishops approbation to the Lambeth Ar∣ticles, (and not discerning that the Al∣teration) of certain words and Phrases in them, had made them capable of a dif∣ferent sense and interpretation to what he intended in their first contrivance) big with joy, as he was, at the apprehensi∣on of this conceited victory, he addres∣seth himself to the Chancellour of their University, the Lord Burleigh; shews him the Theses, and acquaints him with all that had been done, (in favour of his opinions, as he thought, and the rather because these Theses were drawn up in the absence of some that opposed him) in that Convention. But contrary to Whitakers expecta∣tion,Artic. Lam∣bethae exhi∣bit. Historia P. 4, 5, 6, 7. that Great man, and wise Counseller, was extreamly dis∣tasted at this transaction; and
 threatned that he would make the Au∣thors repent them of it. In pursuance whereof, having declared to the Queen how her Majesties Authority, and the Lawes of England were hereby violated, he added as the very burden of his Complaint, That it was no hard matter to discern what they aimed at, who stickled in this attempt; For, saith he, this is their Opinion and Doctrine; That every hu∣mane action be it good or evill, it is all re∣strain'd and bound up by the Law of an im∣mutable Decree; That upon the very wills of men also this necessity is imposed, ut aliter quam vellent homines velle non possent, that men could not will otherwise then they did will. Which assertions Ma∣dam, saith Burleigh, if they be true, fru∣strà ego aliique fideles Majestatis tuae Mi∣nistri, quid in re quaque opus sit facto, quid ex usu futurum sit & Regni & tuo, su∣spensa diu consilia versamus, cum de his quae eveniunt necessario, stulta sit plane omnis consultatio; I and the rest of your Majesties faithfull Ministers do sit in Counsell to no purpose, 'tis in vain to de∣liberate
 and advise about the affairs of your Realm, since in those things that come to passe of necessity▪ all Consulta∣tion is foolish and ridiculous. At this narration of the Lord Burleigh the Queen was much moved, and sent for Whitgift, and the Councell in her Majesties pre∣sence, fell sharply upon him. At last they came to the Question de Facto, (meaning the Absolute Decree) & Do∣gma (u ipsis videbatur) bonis moribus, Reique publicae, adversum graviter exa∣gitant, and did vehemently charge that opinion, as opposite to good manners and the Weal Publike. The Result of this debate, or rather Increpation was this; The Arch-bishop begged pardon for his temerity, and promised he would write to Cambridge, that those Lambeth Articles might be supprest, and never come to Publick notice.
If the Fundamentall point of all these Controversies, and that upon which the rest do inseparably depend, had had so ill an influence upon good manners, in the judgement of this Sage Councell, and
 tended so manifestly, (as they thought) to the frustration of Law, Counsell, Go∣vernment; certainly such as now sit at the stern, are so Prudent, they will not be induced to believe that those opini∣ons were ever Adopted into the Articles or Doctrine of This Church, though there were alleaged many more instan∣ces of single persons that did Pretend to have it so. And yet how invalid these Instances are otherwise, might easily be demonstrated, if I were, not onely loath to exceed the limits of an Epistle, but also confident that this work will be undertaken by a more accurate hand, to the Readers abundant satisfa∣ction.
As for you, my worthy Friend, if your scruple, about this branch of Ma∣ster Hickmans Book, be not yet remo∣ved; Let me offer one thing more to your consideration. If in any part of the Christian world these opinions be e∣stablished, as their Doctrine, you will easily grant, it is likelyest to be in the Belgick Churches, for the settling of
 whose distractions (about these points,) that Synod of Dort was Assembled. But do you think these are propounded, as Articles of their Creed there, or ac∣counted currant Pulpit-Doctrine a∣mong them? You must not believe it. For now adayes how many are there that dare tell them out of that Place, [God will not have All men to be saved; and the greater part of mankind are Repro∣bated by Gods absolute Decree; or that Christ did not die for all men; or that God calls those, whom he would not in any wise should come to him; or that the Elect (as they are called) cannot by any, no not the most grievous sins, be removed from their Election? Insanire credas eum, qui jam haec dogmata pro concione ausit defen∣dere, saith a Learned personArnold. Poelenb. ubi supra in Ep. dedicat. imployed amongst them, you may very well conclude the man is not sound in his brain, not well in his wits, that takes the boldnesse to maintain these Points in his Sermon. And if any person lesse discreet and provident, hath exposed the Arcana,
 or Secrets of that his Doctrine, naked to the understanding of the people, illico ma∣gna animorum perturbatio existit, there follows presently such a great Commotion and disturbance in their minds, as looks like the Praeface to a new Schisme: which thing, saith that Reverend Per∣son,Ibid. we remember to have fall'n out in this very town, (of Horn) where we now exercise our Sacred Ministeriall Function.
This, Sir, I hope, will be sufficient An∣tidote to allay and cure the Palpitation of your heart, though it had beaten a great deal thicker upon M. Hickmans sugge∣stion, that his Quinquarticular opinions were the Doctrine of the Church of England. And for the other branch of his discourse you may acquiesce in a con∣fidence, that Master P. never intended to assert a positivity of every sin, not of sins of omission to be sure. But he is of age to answer for himself. Yet since you presse me for my sense of Master H. Metaphysicall Divinity, you shall have something towards it.

I am not satisfied, that his distinctions to avoid the Possibility of sin, are suffici∣ent to avoid the making God the Author of it. For thus he saithEdit. the first., pag. 91. Because it belongs to the Universality of the first cause to produce not onely every reall being, but also the reall positive Modifications of be∣ings; therefore we say, that in good works, both the works themselves, and their recti∣tude are positive, and are from God; in e∣vill works there are also two things conside∣rable, the works themselves, and their pra∣vitie; the works themselves we doubt not, are positive, and from God, as all other po∣sitive things (are); but their pravities adde no new entities to them, but consist in a mere privation. Thus Master Hickman. In reference to sinfull Actions, others deliver the distinction in these termes, (telling us,) [The sinfull Act is to be considered, either Materialiter, as to the matter of it, and so it is from God, and of his production; or else Forma∣liter, as to the Form of it, and so it is from man. But we should remember,
 that many times, the Materiall Act (as we may say) cannot be disjoyned from the formall, and in that case, why he that is the Cause of the one, should not be ad∣judged the Cause of the other, is a Que∣stion that requires a solid determinati∣on. If God produced the Act of eat∣ing the forbidden fruit materially, why not formally too, seeing that sin consist∣ed wholly in the eating of that fruit? for Adam could not eat thereof without sin. And if God by an Omnipotent concurse determined Davids lying with Bathsheba, will that distinction mend the matter? Will the matter of that foul Act tend to the praise of Gods efficiency, when he tells us,See 2 Sam. 12.12. with Num. 15.30. the Form of it, con∣duced so signally to his disho∣nour? If the Act which is evill ex genere & objecto, be materially of Gods production, why should we invest man with the formality of it, which is the sin? Is it because the Act is repugnant to the Law of God, to which man stands obliged,1 Joh. 3.4. and the transgression of this
 law is sinne? This seems to be Master Hickmans sense, (pag. 91.) In those things which are to be done according to a Rule, good consists in a conformity to, and con∣venience with the Rule, but evill in a dif∣formitie or discrepance from the Rule. But I say, that Act of Adultery cannot be materially committed, but it must una∣voidably be discrepant to the Law of God; so that if God produceth this Act materially, it is impossible man should give it any formality, but what is sinfull; especially seeing this formality or sinfulnesse doth of necessity result from the materiall Act. Indeed were there no Law in force about it, it were possible to conceive, how he that pro∣duceth (that which we now call) the Act of sin materially, should not, for all that, be the formall cause of it. But the law being now made, and that by God himself too, what Subterfuge can be in∣vented to avoid it, but that God, who is affirmed to produce the Act, should be accounted the Author of the sinne? But God made the Law, you will say,
 not to bind himself, but to regulate his Creature; Though this be true, yet it doth not take away the objection; for how can it stand with the justice of God, first to make a Law to regulate his creature, and then to impell and Act that creature contrary to that Law, and at last to punish the same Creature, for be∣ing so Acted and impeld? Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? Gen. 18.26. God will be justified when he judgethPsal. 51.4.; and therefore when he comes to execute judgement upon allEpist. Jud. vers. 15., he will convince all that are ungodly among them of all their un∣godly deeds, which they have ungodly com∣mitted; not which himself hath Acted them unto, or Acted in them.
But Master Hickman perhaps, will stick still to his Metaphysicall formality, and say, here is (in the supposed Act) a discrepance or opposition to the Rule which is the Law of God. To this the answer is very easie, that man seldome, or never entertains sin, or consent to it, with a design or minde to oppose
 himself to the divine Law; but for the most part to enjoy his pleasure and sa∣tisfie his Appetites; (Besides if he should consent to sin, with such a set purpose to oppose Gods Law; yet we must grant, according to Master Hick∣mans Doctrine, that that Consent, and that purpose (being reall positive Entities, Acts of the Humane Soul) are from God and of his production;) whence it follows still, either that man doth not sin when he commits such an Act, or, if he doth sin, that the fault is to be trans∣ferred upon God, who is the first Cause of that Act.
By the way, (before we proceed further) Let me ask you one Question; Can a manViz. under the same in∣flux and assi∣stance. do any more good than he doth; or omit any more evill than heThat is, whether he can be guilty either of o∣mission or commission? and upon what ac∣count? omitteth? I know you are clearly for the Affirmative: But that will hardly stand with M. Hick∣mans Metaphysicks; for I ar∣gue thus; and first for good works; He that can do more
 good than he doth, can do some good that God doth not produce in him; the consequence is apparent; because he is supposed to do allready all that God produceth in him. But man cannot do some good, that God doth not produce in him; for every good is a reall being, and every reall being, or reall positive mo∣dification of beings is from God, and produced by him, saith M. Hckman. Thus for good; Then for evill; That man can∣not omit more evil than he omitteth, accor∣ding to M. Hickmans Metaphysicks, I prove thus; He that can neither omit the Act to which the evil (of sin) ad∣hereth, nor avoid the obliquity of that Act, which is the sinfulnesse of it; He can omit no more evil than he omitteth; the consequence is evident: But a man can neither omit the Act; nor avoid the obliquity. Therefore &c. He cannot omit the Act, for that is of Gods pro∣duction; nor avoid the obliquity, for that is either to be done by some other Act, or without it. If by some other Act, that is not in his power, for every Act is
 from God; and 'tis absurd to say it may be done without it.
If Master Hickman holds the negative of that Question; the Brittish Divines of the Synod are against him; and a world of absurdities do follow that opi∣nion, viz. That a man cannot bury his Talent, nor receive the grace of God in vain, nor be idle and neglect the great Salvation; nor watch, nor fast, nor pray, nor do any one good duty more then he doth, nay, that he can do no duty proper∣ly so called, nor sin at all, if he be thus chaind by a Fatall necessity to every A∣ction and omission. And then what will become of the word of exhortation and the power of Godlinesse?
But let us follow Master Hickman a little in that instance of Ha∣ting GodPag. 90.; This, saith he, is Complexum quid, and must not be spoken of, as if it were one; the vitall action or hatred, is a thing positive, and consequent∣ly, (he grants) that is from God; but the undue referring or terminating of that Act to such an object, (to God,) which is alto∣gether
 lovely: that, saith he, is the sinful∣nesse of the Action. But whence is this de∣rived? He saith (pag. 75.) onely from mans corruption, and the Devils temptation. But what is mans corruption? is it not his vitiosity? yet he saith, (pag. 97.) where the cause it self is vitious, its vitiosity is not the cause of the vitiosity of the effect; for vitiosity of it self, neither can effect, nor be effected. And for the temptation of the Devil, is not that an Act? if it be, then it is from God, for every Act is from him, saith M. Hickman. If he saith the malice of the temptation is from the De∣vil; I demand, what is that malice of the Devil? Is it not his vitiosity? and then (as before) where the cause is viti∣ous, its vitiosity is not the cause of the vitio∣sity of the effect; for vitiosity it self, nei∣ther can effect, nor be effected; what then? the vitious cause (saith he) taking toge∣ther the being, and the supervenient priva∣tion, is the cause of the vitious effect, taking it in like manner for the being, and the su∣per added privation. But I say again, the being, whether mans or the Devils, doth
 not act (according to Master Hickmans Metaphysicks) for every Act is from God and produced by him, and conse∣quently 'tis the Act of God that gives the corruption of man, and the malice of the Devil their life and vigour; and how then can God be freed from being the Cause or Author of the sin? Besides, in the hating of God there is, not one∣ly, the Act of hatred, which he confes∣seth to be positive, and so from God; but there is also the turning of the will in this Act, and the undue determination of it upon God, the object altogether lovely, wherein consists the sinfulnesse of the Action, as he confesseth. I demand then, is not this determination of the will an Act? If it be (which I presume cannot, with any shew of reason, be denyed) then, whose Act is it, and from whom? If he saith, from man himself, his best course is to whisper this assertion as softly as he can, else, I must tell him in his own language (p. 96, 97.) he and I both were best not to make too much noise, lest we should awaken the youngsters to fall
 aboard us with such an Argument as this. If man be the efficient Cause either of a good action or a bad action, then he doth effect it by another action, and so we may proceed in infinitum. Well, for fear of these dangerous Bugbears, we will, for once, ascribe it unto God. So that God is made the cause of that hatred, and of deter∣mining the will upon this lovely Object, which is God. Now if we should im∣pannell a Jury of honest men, to inquire who is the Cause or Author of this sin of hating God (in this case;) who would they finde guilty, think ye? Doctor Molin saith,In Anat. c. 13. parag. 10. Quod si Deus insontem creaturam desti∣navit ad perditionem, necesse est eandem destinaverit ad peccatum, sine quo non potest esse justa perditio, & sic Deus erit causa impulsiva peccati. Nec homo poterit juste puniri ob peccatum, ad quod est aut praecise destinatus, aut Dei voluntate com∣pulsus. If his destinating men to sinne makes him the impulsive cause of sinne, how can he produce in them the Act that is sinfull, and determine their wills unto
 it, and yet not be the Cause of the sinne? Let us put a Case for illustration. Sup∣pose a Prince should make a Law, injoy∣ning his subjects to write none but per∣fect Italian Characters, and then should take the hand of a child to write with, and the Characters prove Bastard Roman, or Secretary: or suppose one should take a dead mans hand and forge a Deed with itSuch a case hath been and a Triall upon it too: and the dead hand acquit∣ted by the Jury.. Though the Subtilty of Master Hickmans Metaphy∣sicks should finde the childe guilty, and distinguish the Forgery upon the dead body, yet without all peradventure an honest Jury would bring in a better verdict. If it be objected, that these are no competent instances, because there is no vitall Ptinciple in the one, nor power to resist in the other (and what else is to be alleaged I cannot ima∣gine), it is to be remembred that, ac∣cording to this Doctrine, the will of man in sinning, is full as much acted by Allmighty God, as the hand of the child and dead man, in those instances,
 are by those who make use of them re∣spectively. That is, the will is merely passive; and how can it be otherwise? For every Act is from God; and if God useth the will to this Act of sinning, how can the will avoid it? Should the will resist Gods motion, when he does Act it? That is impossible, 1. Because that Motion, according to the Doctrine of the Calvinists, is omnipotent and insupe∣rable, 2. Because to resist is to act, and every Act is from God, and produced by him. And now we see how little rea∣son Master Hickman had to sleight and reject the Answer, which Gregory de Va∣lent. and Bradwardine give to that Obje∣ction, from the hating of God, as he doth (pag. 89, 90.) I recite not their words, saith he, because I need not their help, and because they seem to make impossible hypo∣theses, as if the hatred of God were produ∣ced by God in a stone, whereas it cannot be that there should be the hatred of God in a stone, which neither hath, nor can have any knowledge. The stone is like to be the less miserable for wanting this capacitie.
 But how much doth Master Hickman make man better? He allows him a will and understanding, I suppose, but no more use of these faculties, is ascribed to man, by his Metaphysicks, than to a stone; For to use them is to Act them, and Act them a man cannot, because he can produce no action without another action, and so in infinitum, and then the youngsters will fall aboard us again.
If Master Hickman will not see these absurdities, and what reproach falls upon the Holinesse of Almighty God, by this Doctrine, yet Master Baxter doth con∣sider, and sufficiently censure it; for he saith (in his Call to the Unconverted pag. 229.) Some are so loth to think that God can make a self-determining creature, that they dare not deny him that which they take to be his prerogative, to be the determiner of the will in every sin, as the first efficient im∣mediate Physicall cause. And many could be content to acquit God from so much cau∣singMark that word. of evil, if they could but reconcile it with his being the chief cause of good; as if truths
 must be no longer truths, then we are able to see them in their perfect order and cohe∣rence: because our ravelled wits cannot set them right together, nor assign each truth its proper place, we presume to conclude that some truth must be cast away. This is the fruit, saith he, of proud self-conceitedness, when men receive not Gods truth as a childe his lesson, in a holy submission to the omni∣science of our Teacher, but as Censurers that are too wise to learn.
I hope Master Hickman will become at least M. Baxters Proselyte; especially, if he considers how impossible it is, that his Doctrine should hold good, in refe∣rence to the first sin of the first Angel, that fell from God; For I argue thus, The Materiality of that first sinfull Act, granted to be from God, from whence will he derive the formality, or irregula∣rity, which is the sinfulnesse of it? Was it from the Angels own Corruption, or the Malice of his Tempter? this could not possibly be, for he had neither; There∣fore it must either be from God, and then God is the Cause and Authour of that
 sin; or else from the self-determination of his own will, and then, if that determi∣nation be an Act, we have at last found an Act, whereof God is not the first im∣mediate Physicall cause. What can Ma∣ster Hickman say to this? Truely he seems very fairely to grant it, if I be able to understand him; whether this be out of inadvertency, or conviction, I determine not: But in contradiction to what he had said before, he saith (Pag. 97.) Suppose the first sin of Angels to have been a proud desire to be equall unto God; the cause of this proud desire was the will of the Angel; but it was the Cause of the action (in such a sense as a causality may be said to have a Cause) Per se, of the vitiosity of the action, it was onely the Cause Per accidens, & per concomitantiam. Thus far M. Hickman.
And now, as Poelenburg saith of Doctor Twisse,In confut. Disp. inau∣gur. Fred. Span. that be∣ing affrighted partly by his insolent asperity, and partly by the tedious prolixity of his Vo∣lumes, he would not undertake him
 wholely, but satisfie himself with a Con∣futation of that one Argument, whereof his Confidence boasted, that the Devil, and his Angels were not able to Answer it; and by his performance in that, the Ju∣dicious Reader might judge, what returns might be made to the rest, if any man would give himself the Leisure and trouble to attempt it. So shall I resolve concerning M. Hickman, though neither the strength of his Arguments, nor the length of his Discourse be very formidable; yet there is so much asperity in his style, (which brings no advantage at all to the Cause he undertakes to manage) as de∣terrs me from a further procedure in the examination of his Pretensions. What is already done is sufficient to evince, that his Armour is not inchanted or impenetrable, nor his weapons mor∣tall. But such is his provocation, he must expect a sharper assault, when it shall be seasonable, from a hand that will strike home and lose no advantage to de∣feat him, being guided by an eye so piercing, that it discovers every posture
 that layes his weaknesse open, and expo∣ses him unguarded to the mercy of his Adversary.
Sir, If you would be kept upright, you must not suffer your self to be led by them who could never keep their own judgements steady in these Controversies. After your recourse to God and the Ho∣ly Scriptures, you will finde Primitive Antiquity your best Directory; and the nearer you approach the fountain head, the purer, you may be confident, to find the stream you drink at. But if you come down to S. Austin, so many Ad∣versaries had padled, and troubled and spil'd the waters of his Cistern, that he could scarce see his own face in it. For instance in that one Question; Whether the truly Regenerate may totally fall away and perish, Master Baxter is very confident, he was for the AffirmativeAccount of Persever. p. 5. &c., and calls them immodest, that deny it; yet M. CalamyHis Serm. at the E. of Warwicks Funerall. p. 19. &c. tells us, this learned Brothers evi∣dence is all slur'd and made invalid by Bishop Abbot, and
 that there is in S. Austins writings suffi∣cient proof to the contrary.
It may conduce something to ones settlement, to consider seriously, how many of the most Learned and judicious Heads, these last Ages have produced, even when they lanched forth on purpose to oppose these Truths, have stook saile and paid homage, and some absolutely yielded up themselves to the Empire of them. Arminius undertakes the defence of Beza, but finding himself in pursuit after an utter impossibility, he retreats upon Conviction unto those opinions which have worn his Name ever since. Tilenus while he sets himself in opposi∣on to Arminius, is awakened with so clear a light of Truth, that he becomes a Proselyte. The force of Arminius's Arguments press'd so hard upon Junius, that he thought fit to give ground, and Piscator flincht a little more upon the impression made by his Adversaries. Go∣marus was brought to his Retractations a∣bout these Articles; and Walaeus, as well as he were glad to take Sanctuary in Sci∣entia
 Media, when they could finde no other way to disintangle themselves, and free God from the fault of sinne. And what an admirable Provi∣dence, as PoelenburgƲbi supra in Ep. Ded. observes, appears in that late conflict between Amyraldus (the M. I presume of M. Baxters New Method) and Span∣hemius! Amyraldus maintains, that God will have all men to be saved, if all men will believe; and from hence Spanhemius infers a necessity of yielding not onely Objective, but also Subjective grace, (in∣ternall and effectuall, as well as externall and insufficient,) quia nisi haec admitta∣tur, sententia illa Amyraldi ridicula fue∣rit & insulsa, Deique tum sapientia, tum potentia indigna, for unlesse this be ad∣mitted, that opinion of Amyraldus, saith he, is ridiculous and foolish, and unbe∣seeming both the wisdome and power of God. So that, in the judgement of Spanhemius, if he will opine and speak what is Consonant to himself, Amyraldus must shake hands with the Remonstrants: And indeed those objections these men
 make one against another (which no doubt they respectively conclude to be strong and valid) are clear confirmations of all those Arguments, which the Re∣monstrants manage against them both. And thus, as sparks of fire fall from the Collision of two flints; so from the mutuall Conflict of these Adversaries the glorious Light of Divine truth breaks forth and falling between them, it serves the Remonstrants to light their Candle.
To conclude; The Absurdities, which do unavoidably follow from these Do∣ctrines, if men would admit the light of Reason to discover them, are very many and very reproachfull to the Majesty of Heaven; They deflower the beauty of his Attributes, evacuate the merits of Christs Death, frustrate the use of the Holy Ordinances, and enervate the po∣wer of Godlinesse, as is evinced in the en∣suing Papers. For while they advance his Soveraignty, they impeach his Good∣nesse; while they magnifie his Liberty, they obscure his Wisdome; while they
 sweeten his Mercy, they imbitter his justice; while they boast his Grace, they confound his truth and sincerity.
This Doctrine attributes to Almighty God, a power, not onely above the Laws he prescribes, and the Promises he makes unto his servants, but Paramount to his own Essentiall Equity; For it saith, he may ordain, yea that he hath ordained the greater part of Mankinde to destru∣ction, merely for his own pleasure, with∣out intuition of any sin, or respect had to any demerit in them. It makes God like an unwise Potter, who makes some vessels on purpose, that he may dash them all to pieces. It teacheth, that of men a∣mongst whom he found no Disparity of condition, he hath elected some, and Re∣jected others; and that he introduced a necessity of sinning for the illustration of his glory. How shall we reconcile these things to Gods wisdome, or his ju∣stice?
It teacheth, that God elected men to glory without Christ: but that he de∣creed through the intervention of Christs
 death, to bring them into possession of that glory, that it might be done with∣out any detriment to his Justice. But this is either against the wisdome and ju∣stice of God, if he decreed what he ought not to execute, or against his O∣mnipotence, if he could not bring the same to execution.
It teacheth, that God sent Christ to reconcile men to himself, whom he loved with a most deer and unchangeable love, and that before he decreed to give Christ to die for them; That he Courts others to be reconciled, whom he hates immu∣tably; That he calls them to repentance, inlightens them, gives them a taste of the heavenly gift, and zeal to do good works; and all this to serve but for a golden chariot to conduct them with the more formality to a sadder execution; That he bindes some men to believe in Christ, for whom he never died; That he invites them to a Covenant of Grace, and ties them to impossible conditions under it, that he may inflict the greater torments upon them; That some mens
 sins, (of what nature soever,) are but paternall castigations, Priviledges of their Adoption, Emergences of provi∣dences for their benefit, Confirmations of their grace, and that they do pave their way to glory, being part of that Medium conducing to the execution of the Decree of Election in them.
This Doctrine implyes moreover, that God is more severe to the greatest part of mankind than to Devils; That they cannot pray but for their own damnati∣on, or that the divine Decrees may be rescinded; That others living in the fil∣thyest sins, may notwithstanding be cer∣tain of their salvation, and need not fear hell-torments; for their sins shall not be able to separate betwixt God and them; contrary to the expresse word of God by his Prophet I∣saiahCap. 52.2.. This Master Baxter doubtlesse had a full view of, as may be collected out of his Assize-SermonOn 1 Cor. 6.19, 20., where he saith, I had rather say to scandalous sin∣ners [you are bought with a price, there∣fore
 glorifie God] than (to say) you are absolutely elected, therefore glorifie God; Yet, if I mistake not, the Synod of DortDeputati Syn. Geldric. call it, Fun∣damentum Christianismi. In Act. Synod. Dord. p. 30. a. m. par. 3. makes this Doctrine of Absolute Election, the great prop of godlinesse.
Besides, this Doctrine empties Hell of a considerable part of its torments; which consist in the anguish and remor∣dency of conscience, proceeding from her reflexion upon lost advantages. Now this must needs be taken away by that DoctrineFor who ever suffered anguish of mind, for that he could not fly, or be∣come an An∣gel, or any such thing, as is made impossible, by Gods own or∣der?, (if true) which implies, that Gods Decree hath from all eternity, set heaven and sufficient means to lead to it, out of the reach of the Re∣probate, and made their state of sinne and damnation so una∣voidable, that they never had the reall offer or tendry of such advantages.
It renders Gods Commands and Elogies irrationall; for though he commands
 the work to others, yet (according to the tenour of this Doctrine) he must do't himself; and his Euge's, [Well done good and faithfull servants,] are for such acti∣ons onely as himself hath irresistibly pro∣duced, and the men could not do otherwise. In a word; it makes a double Gospel, and a double Saviour; as is sufficiently pro∣ved in the following Papers.
That these absurd inferences, (and many more which might be deduced) are evident to me, though they should not be so to others, is enough to binde up my Judgement. But if M. Baxter can salve them by his New Method, I am so far from being obstinate, that I shall not onely acquiesce in his Performance (when I see't accomplish'd;) but rejoyce in it also, as one that findeth great spoils.
Sir, I commend you heartily to the Lord, and to the word of his Grace.
