



WE must give out reason, though haply you may guesse at it, why we put the third Section first. Please you to consult the Epi∣stle to the Reverend Ministers, there you will find an account of our business, and Method of our processe therein; and that this of Christmass, for we must speak that we may be understood, is the third part of enjoyned task. But considering that Day is now approaching, whereon the God of this world (as a world of men have made him, and do now as God honour him) will be together with the Belly another
 God (of the same make) most studiously ser∣ved with a service well becomming such Gods, Riotting and Drunkenness, Cham∣bering and Wantonness: considering this time, as we said, together with thy good now and hereafter, we have offered this to thee first, least you should run with the mul∣titude that keep Holy-day into all excess of riot, whereunto you will feel your selfe dri∣ven by a cunning Satan within, and another without, if a glorious Arm interpose not: For so it must needs be, where two Gods are served, The onely True One is blaspheamed and abhorred. Considering, we say, all this we have done as you see, desiring heartily, it may be a word well Timed, spoken in sea∣son, and set as upon the Wheel, Prov. 15. 23. 25. 11. 12. It is not proper for us now to Charge or to Counsel, But wo to that man that will not hear the Charge of the Lord, and Counsel from his mouth, for so saith the Lord. Therfore indeed of that wo let us pray That we may hear this charged upon us, by truely learned and Godly Ministers as deeply as Paul chargeth Timothy upon another ac∣count 1. 5. 2. 11. we charge you before God,
 and the Lord Jesus Christ, & the Elect An∣gels, That ye enquire into the mind of Christ, in reference to the observation of those dayes, we very ignorantly, and then as boldly, if not presumptiously, call the Day of his Nativity and Circumcision-No more.
Then secondly, that we hearken what God saith by the said Messengers of the Churches and glory of Christ, and as dear chil∣dren be followers of them, as they follow Christ, and those truely called Christians, who thorow faith and patience inherit the promises. And for other guides follow them, as they lead to Christ, and be com∣manded by them, as they command for him: For there is One and but One, a Lea∣der & Commander for his people, Isa. 55. 4. He that rules over men should be just, and command in the Lord; But be that at his pe∣ril. Look we well to this, that we obey in the Lord. The greatest Rulers in the world then much more our petty Rulers in our Towns (we will go no higher, that we may not out compass our knowledge) O how crosse and contrary they are, and as they are they run, some of them clean crosse to that
 Onely Leader and Commander, stretching out the hand against God, and strengthning themselves against the Almighty, they run upon him. Some, yea too many of them, e∣ven on his neck, upon the thick Bosses of his bucklers. So Job describes a wicked man in his natural course, ch. 15. 25. 26. Even so our Rulers in some of our Towns do, what they do in Cities we enquire not. But we were saying, the greatest Rulers in the World are but Rules ruled. Jesus Christ alone is the Rule Ruling, Beware of him, and obey his voice, provoke him not, for he will not pardon your transgressions: for my Name is in him, saith the Lord, Exod. 23. 21. If you shall observe this with all observation, you shall do well.
Farewel.
