


IT is in Hope, My dear Brethen, of making some Addition to your Pious Fraternities, (and thereby to the invisible Church of God) that I have (at your Re∣quest) published this compassionate Call to sinful Prodigals; who, by leaving the House and Government of their Heaven∣ly Father, have parted with all true Ho∣nour, Peace and Happiness; and can ne∣ver return to these, but by their effectual
 Return to their God and their Duty Which gives us such an undeniable Reason for the Necessity of the Conversion of  Sinner in order to his Happiness, that none who will seriously consider it, ca withstand the convincing Power of it.
For, who can once think, That men ma fight against God, and come off with Victo∣ry and Triumph? Or, that such as love nothing so much as Sin and Pollution can inherit the undefiled Kingdom  our Lord Jesus Christ? Or, that such who serve the Devil, and bear his likenes upon Earth, will be as happy as the Rege¦nerate Children of God in the othe World? The least Application of mi will shew us the impossibility of these thing and consequently, that all wicked Peop must speedily repent and amend their Live or perish for ever.
But yet indeed, It is a very sad Truth of which we have too many gross Exam¦ples; That habituated Sinners may at la arrive at such a desperate Pitch of Insen¦sibleness, as to be blind to all the Convic¦tive Methods of the Gospel, and dead t
 all the mighty Persuasives of it.
I have therefore chiefly directed this E∣vangelical Call to Young Persons, who are not yet so fatally inured to sin; hope∣ing that their Ears are not thus judicially closed against the proclaimed Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.
And truly as to this, It is matter of abundant Praise to God, that he hath opened the Ears and Hearts of many of You to receive divine Instruction; and this, to such effectual Purpose, that it is enough to affect a very dull Soul to behold the Vigor and Stedfastness of your Zeal for God, and your humble and holy De∣portment in his Sight.
What suitable Praise can we offer to God (the Giver of all Good) when we behold Youth punishing Lust, and giving Examples of Piety to Age? Delighting in the Praises of God, as their chief Joy; and celebrating the Exercises of our Holy Re∣ligion with such Relish and Delight, as gives a seasonable Demonstration to this Epicurean Age, That there are vaster Pleasures to be reapt from the blessed
 Entertainments of Religion, than fro all the possible indulgence of sensual Van¦ties.
I would therefore intreat all Young Pe¦ple (who are naturally Lovers of Plea¦sure) to make this Experiment, namely To frequent your Societies, and joy their hearts with a suitable warmth t yours, in the Worship, Love and Prai¦ses of God for a competent time. An then let them tell us, whether one day in the House (and with the House-hold o God) be not better than a thousand in the Tents of Wickedness? An whether any Company be really so desire¦able as that which tends to advance o spiritual and everlasting Happiness?
In this they will have an inconceivabl advantage over such who engage them selves in wicked Company. For, thes meet to their mutual Condemnation, and to the confusion of each others Faces; to fewel each others Lusts a while, and t be Firebrands to each others Consciences for ever. And therefore, except they are perfectly hardened, they who meet toge∣er
 for sinful Ends must needs leave ch others Company with sorrowful earts; wishing they never had seen  met each other; regretting the Guilt with hich they have loaded each others onsciences; fore-seeing with horrour e light of that Day which will discover l the Works of Darkness; in which e Partners in sin must appear together  all their Nastiness before the Judg∣ent Seat of Christ to give an Account r what they have joyntly done in e Flesh.
But pious Society begins and ends ite otherwise. Such meet to advance e Glory of God, and the Grace and eace of each others Souls. And there∣re they part (as I have sometime seen ) with joyful Reflections on what they ve been transacting together; and itle a blessed Hope of meeting each other ith Joy before God, and of being for ver with him.
Enlivened by this Hope, your Zeal ay well take wing, and soar to a very fty Eminency. But then lest it should
 evaporate, or (like an Enthusia Phantom) become unsteady and move travagantly: You happily take care your excellent Rules, to poize your Z by a ponderous Humility, and the ste Love of Unity and Order. For make a truely Christian Reformati without a Sect; and whilst you hate  separate from sin, you love and pitty  Sinner: And whilst your affections  in the greatest warmh, you keep to th Form of Doctrine and Devotion which you have been educated; and your utmost to revive the primitive P¦ty and Power of the Christian Religi in the most antient Methods.
In these and other particulars,  shew a Zeal steered by Knowledge  ballanced by Humility; which is a g Argument that it is a Fruit of the Spi of God; and is the best Ground I  where find, to hope that God will not le us utterly. Only be exceeding care to walk worthy of this your special P¦fession of Religion; always remembri of what concernment all religious Acti
 e, wherein God is the Object, Consci∣ce the Register, and Eternity the Con∣uence.
It may be expected from You, that ye uld do more than others. And, O! y it ever be seen, that you are to others emplary in all Humility, Purity and tegrity of Heart and Life.
Then will you lay a good Foundation  Stability and Increase in your Holy rposes; and you will engage the Pray∣ of all the Lovers of God and Religion  your behalf. And may it please the od of all Grace to enliven and advance ur Orthodox Zeal for his Glory to ch a conspicuous Brightness, as may eatly glorifie his Name on Earth, d retrieve the Honour of our Holy eligion, and increase the numbers of e true Worshippers of God; till at st, all these lesser Luminaries of the hurch below shall be united in that  and Constellation of the Church a∣ove; where Holiness will never be vied, reproached, or molested; and ill never need to be excited, cherish∣ed
 or advanced by humane Assista For, there it will be the very Nat Bliss, and Glory of perfected So o love, serve, and praise God.
Into this blessed Society of t First-born, may it please God (in  time) to introduce every one of Y and every one that bears the Name  Christ, in particular.

