



GIve me leave, most famous and renowned
City, and ye the Right Honourable Lord
Major, the Right Worshipfull Aldermen,
and religious Common-Councell and Com∣moners,
to congratulate and rejoice with you,
for that honour which the Lord hath laid on you in these daies
of great confusion. You, under God, have been the guard of
this present Parliament, by which so great things have been
done for the safety and defence of three Kingdoms. Your
free contributions of your wealth and substance, have been
the sinews of this warre, undertaken for the defence of our
Religion, Laws and Liberties. Few Counties in this
Kingdom have been able to defend themselves, much lesse to
help others, except those whom you have encouraged, and set
on work by your example, and to whom you have been a bul∣wark
against the enemies, who by you have been terrified
from invading them. All the associated Counties have
cause to blesse God for the vicinity and neighbour-hood of
London. And all the rest of the Kingdom may say,
If the Lord had not helped us by the Forces, Arms, and
supplies of men and money from London, we had been

utterly destroied and laid waste. But the chief glory be∣stowed
on you by God, is your courage for the truth, and
true Christian Religion; your earnest study, and constant
endeavour for promoting an happy Reformation of the Church
in Religion, Dostrine, Worship, and Discipline, accord∣ing
to the Word of God; your zeal against Sectaries,
Schismaticks, Hereticks, and Blasphemers, who labour
cunningly to corrupt your servants, to steal away the hearts
of your wives and children, to pull many fair feathers
out of your wings, and to draw Disciples after them, and
your standing steadfast in the old paths, and walking in
that good way, Ier. 6. 16. which the Lord Christ by his
Apostles hath praescribed to the Vniversall Church; In
which all the pure primitive Churches of old, and all the
best reformed Churches have walked from the daies of your
Fathers, untill this day. God hath inabled you wonder∣fully
by his grace, to resist the subtle temptations of the
world and the Devil. I know when you were courted
with offers of greatest honours and priviledges, to with∣draw
you from your purpose and resolution, of standing
for the common weal of State and Church, and of sup∣porting
and upholding of the props and pillars of this Land,
when it trembled, and was ready to be dissolved.
I cannot forget that sad time, full of fears and dan∣gers,
when (the chief command of your City, being in the
hand and power of Malignants, who had also a strong
faction, by which they attempted to overthrow you) it was
the opinion and profession of some of the most faithfull Pa∣triots,
aud wise members of Parliament, that unlesse God
did put into your hearts a resolution to stand up for them,
they had small hope of saving either the Church and King∣dom
from ruine, or our Religion, Laws, Liberties, and their

own lives from destruction; and in that juncture of time
the Lord did put such a spirit of courage, fortitude and
holy zeal into you, who were the main body of the City,
that you stood up, and appeared openly for the worthy Pa∣trons
of your Religion, Laws and Liberties, whereby they
were animated to proceed vigorously in their wonted course
of justice, to the terrour and astonishment of all the ene∣mies
and disturbers of our peace. After this you have
been strongly assaulted by spirituall wickednesses divers
waies.
First, by cunning seducers, who usurping the name and
outward shew of rare Saints, have stollen away the hearts
of many, and with feigned sanctity and large promises
of a pure platform and modell of Church-Discipline and
perfect Reformation, according to Christs own institution,
have drawn them into Schisme, and separation from their
own Congregations. But you, by your wisdom have quick∣ly
smelled out their fraud, and vain boasting of great
things, which they can never perform and bring to
passe.
Secondly, you have been tried, (when Scriptures fail∣ed
them, and favoured not their modell) with bold pre∣tences
of new lights, which you have scorned, as wise
men are wont to scorn, and not vouchsafe to look after those
ignes fatuos, wandring lights and night fires, by which
fools, who follow them in the dark, are lead into danger∣ous
pits, boggs, ditches, and downfalls.
Thirdly, they have represented unto you Presbyterian
Government as a Bugbear, and cruell monster, worse then
Popery and Prelacy, unto which if you submit, you and
your children are made slaves for ever, to the lust of proud,
peevish, tyrannicall Priests; And allthough many cre∣dulous

fools, and unstable souls, are hereby terrified and
skared out of their wits, and run wilde after severall
dangerous sects, and know not where to rest: Yet you are
no such strangers to the Gospel, nor so little acquainted
with the Scriptures of the New Testament, as to be mo∣ved
with such skarecrowes; but rather by such rabid
railing against Government of the Church by Classicall
Presbyteries, you have been moved and stirred up (after
serious consideration, and consultation had with your god∣ly
Pastours, and Teachers, diligent searching of the Scri∣ptures,
and good assurance of understanding of divine truth
gained to your selves) to be more earnest and importu∣nate
in promoting that Presbyterian Government, besides
which there is no mention of any other in all the writing
of the Apostles; nor any other acknowledged or recei∣ved,
in any well reformed Churches in all the Christian
world.
The Apostolicall Church at Jerusalem, consisting of
many thousands and ten thousands of beleevers, and so
many particular Congregations, was altogether governed
by the Apostles and Presbyters, Assemblies, Synods and
Presbyteries, as appears, Act. 11. 30. and 15. 6. and
21. 18. The Christian Church of the Gentiles gathered
unto Christ in severall Nations, Countries and Cities by
Paul and Barnabas, had every one their Presbyters, or∣dained
to have rule over them in the Lord, Acts 14.
23.
The Church of Ephesus, that great City of Asia, had
also divers Presbyters, whom the Holy Ghost had made
overseers to watch in common over it, Acts 20. 17, 28.
And of them S. Paul speaks, 1 Tim. 5. 17. saying,
Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of

double honour. Also S. Paul left Titus in Creet,
and appointed him to ordain Presbyters in every City,
and such overseers as were fit to rule the Church, Tit.
1. 5. Peter and Iohn were Presbyters, and called
themselves so, as they with others governed severall
Churches, 1. Pet. 5. 1. John 2. 1. and John 3. 1.
Wherefore, ô London, thou that hast chosen the best
part, rejoice in the Lord thy God, who hath made his
glory to rise upon thee, and his light to shine upon thy
grave Senatours, thy religious Common-Councell, and
all thy true hearted Citizens; and hath led them into
those waies which be in Christ, which Saint Paul
taught every where, and in every Church, 1 Cor. 4.
17. For the encouraging of you, worthy Citizens, in
your constancy, and for the confirming of them that are
weak and wavering, I have framed out of the Scri∣ptures
this brief discourse, concerning that one uniform
Church-Government, which Christ by his Apostles or∣dained,
and appointed to be set up in the whole univer∣sall
Church, and to be observed in all other Churches,
members of the universall. Here you have the Heaven∣ly
patern shadowed out in a small compasse, of that Go∣vernment,
for the establishment whereof in this City
and Kingdom, you have stood up and appeared openly at
severall times. If the Lord be pleased to blesse you with
courage for his truth, and with constancy and perseve∣rance
till you obtain your desire, which is the desire also
of all Orthodox faithfull Ministers in the Land, then
shall London be called, The City of the Lord, the Zion
of the holy one of Israel; And they who despise her and
stand up against her, to hinder the work of God in her
hands, shall bow down at the soles of her feet, and her

enemies shall lick the dust, even lick up the dust of her
feet, for they shall not be ashamed who wait for the Lord,
Isa. 49. 23.
This is the praier of 
