



Right Honorable!
I Am often in very great doubt (if I may so speak), That the Goodness & Wisdom of God, & his Thoughts of these, are very rarely met with, in the Paths, which the scantling of Man's Reason and Judgment walk in; And as I dare not but own the Belief of the Coming of his Appea∣rance, and the breaking forth, very shortly, of his Glorie: So I believ likewise, this will bee a sight very strange, and very unexspected to men; and not onely great∣ly above, but in som measure even contrarie (and perhaps, very unwelcom) unto the most enlarged and raised thoughts wee have yet prepared our selvs with, to Receiv it.
The sign of which Coming, will bee the Detection, by little and little, of all Imposture, and the laying of all things low, naked, and mean before him; the stripping men of that Honor, Credit, and Repute, that they had by several means been gaining with themselvs, and (by themselvs) with others, either through
 a Not-knowledg, or through an artificial concealing of them∣selvs.
In these very things lying, and within these indeed, beeing spent and consumed, the whole Indeavors, Practice, Studie and Wisdom (if not Religion) of All, States, Nations and Men, viz.
Either in devising shifts (by acquisition of such and such Ha∣bits, or otherwise) not to appear uncomly to themselvs, but to beget rather an esteem and satisfaction of themselvs;
Or, in Concealing and keeping close (by several Glosses) the Imperfections and uncomlinesses, (known to themselvs) from the sight and apprehensions of others.
The most exquisite humane Wit exceeding the more inferior onely in this, That the former is able to finde out more Tight and exquisite Textures for it self then the other; And the most Fortunate man in this world, having the Advantage of the more Ʋnfortunate, but after the same manner also, viz. That the Co∣vering of this fall's off a little sooner, and the other wrap's him∣self up in it a while longer.
And thus all Lusts, (as well those of Acquisition) in the minde (as others to exterior things) both in their first Issuings forth, and also in the Accomplishments of them, are still but to give countenance unto, and keep up a Repute and Esteem in us. The Assumption (on the other side) of Repute and Esteem to our selvs, is the very ground and original of all Lusts (These two, observing tune, and keeping time each to the measures and motions of the other) and within this Circle is concluded whole Humane Nature, with all the Parts, and the most perfect Acti∣ous of it.
Ʋpon these Thoughts (Right Honorable!) I finding none not very ready to have asscribed to himself the name of beeing (in som measure) wise, finde none that can endure the Manifesta∣tion (in any kinde) of their Follie; or that can bee willing to have this their Wisdom and Glorie to bee flatly and plainly cal∣led
 Pageantrie, Mumming, or a playing at Bo-peep with them∣selvs and others; and yet (it really beeing no honester) if wee cannot bear the Judgments thus one of another, how shall wee abide the Trial, or bee able to stand before the Judgment of God, which seeth us, (and will shortly search us) with more pure and uncorrupt Eies? And how miserably then are the Imagina∣tions of men muffled up in their own dressings? when the Truth is our Beeings, at their best (natural, or acquir'd) Appearances, are yet such feigned subsistences, and Propp'd up with such funda∣mental mistakes of themselvs, that they would moulder and shat∣ter themselvs to pieces, should they bee taken quite asunder from the disguises and patchings they have put upon themselvs, bare-facedly and undeceivedly to see themselvs but one half hour.
Beeing convinced, by these thoughts, therefore (Right Hono∣rable!) of the low Condition wee are herein, I not knowing what the Councils of God intend to bring forth for the settlement of this Nation; Nor how hee hath resolved in his Wisdom to dispose of it, as to its outward Condition, whether Hee intend's wee shal bee oppressed by other Nations about us, that hee may the more manifest his Power and Protection over us: Or that wee shal bee advanced in prosperitie above others, that so hee may perhaps shew us our vanitie (the Casting of the Scale either way in appea∣rance much depending upon the present Councils) I say, not know∣ing This, I can as little Judg what means Providence will pleas to use in order to the bringing to pass these his purposes, whether hee will chuse This, or reject That.
But in this Case, remembering the advice of Solomon, and Eccles. 11. 5, 6. knowing nothing (for I can affirm it but as to mine own under∣standing) that hath presented it self of more Import to bee look∣ed after, or to bee very heedfully taken into Consideration, then Matters of Trade (if wee shall either regard the Safetie, Ʋna∣nimitie or Defence of this Nation) Nor any other waie pos∣sible but This, to preserv and maintein this Countrie: calling al∣so to minde, how many times I have heard it urged, That there
 is no other means to quiet or keep up the spirits of the poorer sort of people: No other to give them Imploiment, or to finde a vent and Incouragement for their Labors (when they have wrought) and consequently no other to provide against the wants and distempers of them, and of the Generalitie, but solely by Trade, and by a due Order and Regulation of it. All these things making up a strong Affection in mee, I judged it my dutie (Right Honorable!), and what necessarily became the faithfulness I ow to the Common-wealth's service, to indevor the representing of this Truth (for your Honor's fuller Information) with the clearest Grounds and demonstration I could, which beeing a thing that did much depend upon Experience, I knew not how to bring this more home, then by propounding a President; and such an one as is stil in sight, which may at once witness, The Advantage of Trade, By themselvs, and the benefit they found by it; The Disadvantage of neglecting it, By what they brought upon us; And the clear waie of Governing it, By the Courses they Actually took, and have practised to effect both these.
All which Conceptions, nevertheless, are with all humble∣ness Submitted By

