



GENTLEMEN,
YOu whose constitutions are even and equall, not over-balanced with earthly and base metall, love Ho∣nour and Gallantry in any man, & virtus in hoste probatur. You who know God made all things by his owne Rule of Propor∣tion, (in weight, measure and number:) you who are friends to that Divine, Noble, and Royall Art of Poesy, for what is it but well weighed words, made even by that Lesbian Rule of Proportion? you can best judge of these phancies dedicated to you, as they are meant. The subject of my Poetry is noble, and the noblest of Gods creatures, Man, brave men,

loyal men, who have dyed like Ionathan and his brothers, either with the King, or in his Cause, (most of them) the other were worthy a bet∣ter Muse as well as they.
This way of service to the memory of the dead wants not presidents worthy our imita∣tions, Kings and Prophets, and the greatest Law-giver, whom I will take for my first pre∣sident of Poetry, even Moses, who from Gods owne mouth gave the Law to his owne peo∣ple: he composed such a song, as the Lambe and Angels make use of it, (Apoc. 15.) which was his song of deliverance he left composed, and so first sanctified Poetry, as Christ and his Apostles in the New Testament by the alle∣gation of the Psalmes and Prophets, who were both Poets and Vates. Also S. Paul san∣ctified the Heathen Poets. David, vir secundùm cor Dei, that pious Prince, that martiall King, that glorious man of God, truly deserved that glorious Epithet, Princeps Poetarum. Solomon, the wisest of men, composed his Songs and Canticles. David in this way of Poesy made an  for Saul and Ionathan. And Ieremy made the  for good Iosias. He that goes up to the mountaine of God, shall meet the Prophets

with musicall raptures. The Jewes buryed their dead with great ceremony, and had their Praeficaes, women singers, their , their songs of mourning and lamentation, their burning of Incense and sweet odours for their Kings, and solemn mournings for their Prin∣ces. They mourned and fasted (1 Sam. 31. 13. and 2 Sam. 1. 12.) for their Kings, they mourned ma∣ny dayes, as for Moses and Ioshua, and so for Iosias; for whom (as I said) Ieremy made the . The chief mourner at every resting place sung the usuall , or as we call it, the bur∣den of the song; like that in Ier. 9. 18. that our eyes may run downe with teares, and our eye-lids gush out with waters. And this they did in hope of Resurrection, as well as honour of the dead, for they comforted their friends with places of Scripture fullest of comfort, as that of Esay 25. 8. He will swallow up death in victory, and wipe away all teares: And Psal. 72. 16. They shall flourish and spring againe as the grasse on the earth. And they called the Church-yard, or burying place, BETH CHAIIM, Domus viventium, the house of the living.
The Primitive Church used such Ceremo∣nies

in this way, as would passe for Popery a∣mongst us now adayes▪ though it was in the purest times of the Church used, (so much as it was by mistake abused) and turned to Ido∣latry. But if that were a just exception against lawfull Ceremonies, it may stand as well a∣gainst Doctrine as Discipline, for both have beene abused, the one by Heretiques, the o∣ther by Schismatiques, and both ought to be observed, the one in ordine ad esse Ecclesiae, the other ad bene esse. So this kind of Poesie hath warrant beyond exception, and this ceremony of Buryall: He who wanted it amongst the Jewes was said to have the buryall of an Asse, so Ier. 22. Ieconia vvas said to have such a buryall.
Thus much I have said to satisfie the curi∣ous, or rather ignorant concerning Poesy, and the honourable mention and memory of the dead: And they who had it not in the Primitive Church (if it could be had) were said to have insepultam sepulturam. As for my Cha∣racters and Translations, they are fruits of Phansie, and vvere but as Salads are to solid dishes, to sharpen the appetite: so these to my serious studies vvere, or as Davids Harp, to the

melancholy thoughts of my imprisonment. I must acknowledge (with thanks to God) I found singular comfort in this way, and this sufferance, and that it set an edge upon my over-tyred and dulled braine, and these Phan∣cies vvere the fire vvarmed them. My vvish is, they may be accepted of such as know how to judge, and have so much honour not to mis∣interpret good meaning, and my zeale to the Cause vvherein I suffer. I thanke heaven, God hath supplyed me vvith a large measure of pa∣tience and comfort, as pledges of his favour, and so much charity▪ I wish them rather a right understanding, then any ill; and such a proportion of inward comfort as may make them as happy in their Liberty as I am in pri∣son. Let them therefore with Charity reade, what they find in this little Volume, and such an encouragement may produce to the view of the world, my more serious Studies, to which these were but a preparative, and as I said before, a salad to more solid dishes, which I will promise you shall be served up, if this please; if not, I have not lost my patience, much lesse the comfort of my phancie, (which

none can take from me) and I can content my selfe with that Greek saying, which suits me as well as if it had been made for me,
.

The Motto of my Family.
AMICITIAS VOLO, INIMICITIAS SPERNO.
I study my friends, and scorne my causelesse enemies.
This is the Resolution of 
