




Much Honoured, and be∣loved in the Lord,
SƲch as I have, I give, had I any thing of more worth,
to present you with, you should have it, the best is due: and I desire to be honest.
Poore Ministers have no∣thing elce, wherewith to re∣quite their obliging friends, but prayers and Books.
But why say I nothing elce: This, as it is an honest requital, so, may be a meet compensation, Prayers ascend, and mercies descend upon him that prayeth and upon those that are prayed for, the prayer of Faith can do much with God, fetching blessings from Heaven, Prayer (saith one) is the Christians hand,Oratio justi clavis caeli, ascendit precatio, & descendit Dei misera∣tio. that reacheth to Heaven, and taketh every good thing out of God's Treasurie: The effectual fervent Pray∣er
of a righteous man availeth much.Jam. 5.16
Now any Grace-gift from God, or blessing of his love, any Spiritual gift obtained by prayer is incomparably better then any thing that man hath to give, so that a poor Christian who hath an interest in God, and acquaintance with him may be so far beneficial to his greatest benefactours, as to ob∣lige tem.
Books there are in this Scrib∣ling age, many (more then a good many,) some filthie, some frothie, and frivolous; some Heterodox and pernicious, others, (howvr Orthodox, yet) rather wrie then wor∣thie: thoug there are (bles∣sed


he God) not a few, of great worth, and excellent useful of precious matter well clothed with words, set forth in a handsome dress, fitted for Edi∣fication, and for laudable, ho∣ly insinuation, to get within the Reader, for the convey∣ing light into the understand∣ing, and Spiritual life, and Heavenly heate into the heart and affections, prepared, and published, by men of much learning and piety.
Now a good Book may (if good use be made of it) prove a good gift indeed, and of greater advantage than a great bag of gold.
The prayers of many (I doubt not) as well as mine, an
sent up to heaven for you; (The good God receive them, and answer them with a gra∣cious and plentiful return of blessings upon your heart and head.)
This little Book is (I hope I may say) sent from heaven to you, by the hand of an un∣worthy servant of Jesus Christ, in the work of the Gospel.
Bookes (no doubt) you have many, and those good, yet this little one, added to the rest, may not make your store to be more than enough; and (for ought I know) it may be as su∣table, as useful; and through divine grace as beneficial to you, as any other.

The Wind bloweth where i∣lisieth, the Spirit of God com∣pared to the Wind hath his in∣fluence according to his own choice of means, chusing some∣times to blow in an oaten Pipe refusing a silver Trumpet, tha the efficacy of the blast may b ascribed to him, and not at∣tributed to the instrument tha he makes use of.
The Lord accompany this Ink-work of mine, with the powerful working of his own spirit, to a great encrease o spiritual light, and life, an strength, and warmth i your soul, and to your estab∣lishment in Christ, and to the furtherance of your joy o faith.

Receive this gift from God hank fully, accept (I pray you) this labour of love, and rvice of debt, favourably from

Eastlake in De∣von. Aug. 24 1670.
