


RIght worshipful, Your reli∣gious stedfastness in these times of change, adhe∣ring to your fixed princi∣ples, and not bending like a reed with every wind (as many have done) makes your name deservedly honoured of all that know you.
What you have suffered by false calumniations, God hath in a great measure already cleared; And I doubt not but in his due time your
 light shall break forth (like the Sun out of a cloud) more glorious then ever before.
How great your love hath been to Godly and Orthodox Ministers, your pains and labours to helpe them out of their troubles, which in these broken times they have fallen into, you have ample testimony.
Your indefatigable paines as a Member of the Honourable House of Commons, the Kingdome can∣not but take notice of.
And SIR, How much my selfe am obliged to you for your counte∣nancing of, and respect you bare to my Ministry, when I lived in Col∣chester; And your continued favour and respect towards me ever since, I desire with all humble thankfulness to acknowledge, and testify to the world.

 And as a testimony of my grati∣tude I humbly dedicate this Trea∣tise unto your Patronage.
SIR, I observe in these erroneous, licentious, distracting and dividing times, that men spend their thoughts and studies for the most part in need∣less questions, tending onely to strife and contention, but not to edifica∣tion: whereas our Lord Christ hath taught us, there is but one thing e∣specially needfull for us to busy our heads about, and that is, to know Jesus Christ and him crucified; and to be able to say with Job I know that my redeemer liveth.
If it shall please you, so far to ho∣nour this Treatise, as to grace it with your favour, and to bestow the perusall of it; and if your noble spi∣rit (and the Church of God) shall
 thereby be the more inflamed with the love of Christ and longings to in∣oy him (As it hath been my desire and indeavour, according to my talent received, to set forth the riches and excellencies that are in Christ, to draw the heart of his spouse to be sick of love to him) I shall desire to give God the glory: And this shall be a sufficient refuge against the captiousnesse and carping of the curious, the slanders and reproches of the malicious, and the sharpest censures of the Criti∣call.
From my Study at Mich. Cornhill March 25. 1648.
SIR,

