



Noble MADAM,
PArdon my Confi∣dence that I make use of your Name, and place so rare a Frontispice before so meane a Piece. My desire hath been to
 honour your Lady-ship some kind of way for those many fa∣vours derived to me, not only from the Root and Stemm, but also from the severall branches of that your noble Generation and Parentage. Yet in this, I must needs Confesse I honour my selfe, while the eminency of your graces casts a lustre upon my Services; and the high e∣steem of those magnetique vir∣tues draws greater acceptance to these endeavours. Howe∣ver, be pleased to receive this manuall, & give it some place
 in your Closet among the Saints of God departed this life, with whom you have beene used to Converse frequently in their writings. It will not take up much roome, and though it Containe little that you may learne, yet doth it somewhat that you may remēber, the in∣cōparable blessing of Christian atonement, which is the very foundation of all our Comfort. This I Commend to your pious thoughts, and the religious ex∣ercise of your diviner Medi∣tations: that you may joy in
 God, and be strengthened daily in the Spirituall Ʋnion which you have with him in Christ Jesus. For I well know when the Scriptur's were a delight unto you, and you had (as Saint Ierome wri∣teth) of Marcella, a Roman Lady (ardorem incredibi∣lem &c:) an incredible desire to read & understand, the pretious Mysteries of those saving Oracles;  (in the words of the Apostle) from a Child: wherein I have late evidence, that you perse∣vere
 Constantly, to the honour of God, and the rejoycing of your Spirit, with the Continu∣all feast of a Good Conscience. Sure I am, it was the practise of that Honorable Lady your dear Mother, now with God blessed for ever: whose Good∣nesse like an Oyntment poured out, left a Sweet Savour in the parts where she lived round a∣bout: whose paths you tread, and seeme to enlarge, or make plaine, in a Pious aemulation, and zealous Imitation of Her choicest Graces. But I will not
 make an Elogie of an Epistle, or a Panegyrick of a present∣ment: (though you well de∣serve it) least I seeme to dipp my Pen in Oyle, and mingle Hony with my Oblation: Con∣trary to the direction given to Moses by God himselfe in those Leviticall instructions. The Lord poure a blessing up∣on you all, from the top, and head, to the severall branches of your Noble Family. Irest,
MADAM, 
