


My Lord,
GOD hath shed such a Glory upon the Suc∣cesse of your Undertakings, for the best of Kings and Causes, (for like your fa∣mous Predecessor Wallworth, you did not only stab the Rebels, but gave the deaths wound to Rebellion it self) as hath ra∣vished me into such a high and passionate veneration of your Lordships Person and Parts as well as Place and Power, that I think it little less than a sin to think the least of your desires less than Commands, as ap∣pears not only in Preaching this Sacrifice, but Sacrificing this Preaching by Printing this broken Discourse of a bro∣ken heart; setting it up as a mark to be shot at with Basi∣lisks eyes, and shot through with Adders tongues, which are like
 to do the more sudden execution, because it comes so weak in∣to the world, being by your Lordships command delivered be∣fore its time; it is abortive, though not still-born, and therefore there had bin no great miscarriage, if it had dyed as soon as it was born. The truth is, my Lord, it was a due debt to, and designed for St. Peters Westminster (to which I owe all my little parts and greatest pains) so that I did but rob Peter to pay Paul, in Preaching it to you; as a punishment of which guilt, I might justly fear a severer sentence from your Bench, then that it should be judged to be pressed to Life. But since your Lordship and your Court will have it so, be it so, let it live, let it live, by, and for, and in, and with, and within, and without you and them, that is in your lives. The life of the Sermon is the Ser∣mon of the life: we may Preach well, but it is you that must make the good Sermons, by making the Sermons good, by Preaching the use of our Doctrine in your Lives. Then are Sermons delivered to the hearers in a Gospel-way, whenRom. 6. 17. the hearers are delivered to (or into) the Sermons. This is the sense of the Apostle, Ye have obeyed from the heart that form of Doctrine which was delivered to you: it is in the Greek , to which ye were delivered. TheCornelius A∣grippa in Occultâ Philo∣sophiâ. Hebrew Doctors say, that there is a stone in every man, which they call Luz, of such an unpenetrable, indissoluble hard∣nesse, that it dastards and desies the fury and force of all the Elements, as being the Garrison, that defends the being of the Individuum; its immortall seed, and the life out of which man springs up again in his intire nature to the harvest of the Resurrection: and the Poet seignes, we are made of stones, Inde genus durum sumus—. This is the Constitu∣tion of every natural man; and those that be still in their puris; or rather impuris naturalibus, in their natural hard∣ness of heart, I know will not like a Discourse of a broken
 heart, because they are not like it: for likeness breeds liking: and they are not like it: at least they are not it, that is, broken hearted, and they that are whole, as they need not, so they care not for the Physician—. Whereas to those whose hearts were broken before this Sermon, or by it, it will be as pleasing a service to their eyes, as to their ears, and to both, as a broken heart is a pleasing sacrifice to God. But be it what it will, what ever it is, it is your Lordships, for not only the season, but the Subject of this Discourse owes it self wholly to your Lordship: For I had pitched upon a∣nother Theme that had spoke more home, and more handsome to the Times, had I not bin taken off by your Lordships Of∣ficer, intimating your desire not to meddle with Governe∣ment, &c. I must needs say, it was a sharp Sarcasme of Luther to his querulous and criticall Melancthon, Desinat Philippus esse Rex mundi, Let God, and those that governe the world under him, alone with governing the world under them; and it was a great truth, though spoken by him, that was the eldest Sonne of the Father of lies, that deified Swine Mahomet,  God is his own Ma∣ster of the works, that is eminently the Reiglement of the world, and therefore the same Impostor calls God  Dominus Mundi, and yet the same God hath given a large Commission to his Ambassadors in Cases where the Laws of man are built upon, or built up to the Laws of God, as all should be. But I will not swell an Epistle into a Treatise on that Sub∣ject; it is enough, that your Lordship sees I did comply with your desires in it, even though the times were so happily fruit∣full, as to afford a large crop of excellent matter, that would prodesse & delectare, to entertain you with profit and plea∣sure in the blessed change of Governement, from the worst of
 Tyrants, to the best of Princes: And I the rather chose to resolve my self into the obedience of your Lordships dictates, because the last piece I Printed was, The Bowing the Hearts of Subjects to their Soveraigne, and I could hardly do lesse (since it did not goe before it) than follow it, with Break∣ing the heart in sacrifice to God: For that heart is never sweetly bowed in subjection to the King, that is not sa∣vingly broken in sacrifice to God.
Your Lordship hath the honour of aeternizing your name, by being an Active Instrument in digging the Church and State from under those heaps of Ruine and Rubbish, the Am∣bition and Covetousness of a Popular Tyranny, had long buryed them under, in the blessed Restoring of his Sacred Majesty to his Suffering Subjects, for which Generations to come shall blesse your memory. Go on, my Lord, go on to plant whole Groves of Laurel, to crown your Self, your City, your Posterity with unperishable glories, by a Generous and Charitable Reflection upon that Aged heap of Ruines, once the wonder of the world, and the Crowne of this Queen of Islands, I mean the Church of St. Paul, in a Canton of which this Sermon was delivered to you. When I first came into that eminent Monument of Ancient Piety, (and Moderne Impiety) for Gods service and yours, though I may be easily imagined to have bin so full of the great work I was to do, that I had little roome to entertaine other thoughts; yet I must ingenuously confesse, that sadding Ob∣ject (which looked like the Picture and Emblem of the Church of England, in its late ruinous posture) broke through all my other notions (that were then upon wing and fluttered to get out) and stormd my hear, till at length it retreated to my eyes, and went out where it came in with a wet Prayer in Davids language, Psalm 102. 13, 14. Arise ô Lord and have mercy upon Zion, for the time is come
 that thou have mercy upon her, yea the set time is come, and why? thy servants think upon her stones, and it pitties them to see her in the dust. Pardon my Zeale (my Lord) if it swallow down my Discretion, it is for the House of God, and that eat up David and the Sonne of David: I owe my Birth and Breeding to the Neighbourhood of that Mother-Church (to me in a more eminent way) I have many precious Pawns deposited under her deare walls, besides my living Re∣lations, that I must say with David, For my Brethren andPsalm 122. 8. Companions sake I wish thee prosperity: And so I know doth your Lordship, and let the world know it too, by a sea∣sonable lending your successefull hand to raise up our Aged Mo∣ther out of the Dust. It is a labour worthy such a Hercules to purge that Augaean Stable, it is sad to call it so, but it was so, and blessed be God we may say it was so. You know when a Den of Thieves made it a Stable for Horses: and so or worse they would have used all our Churches: They would have destroyed all the Houses of God in the Land, de∣stroyed them at least from being any longer Houses of God, at least these Mother-Churches, to spoile the breed, and to that end they said, let us take the Houses of God in possession, they said, that is, it was resolved upon the Question: but God repealed their Act (if it be worth that name) and turnd their Ordinance upon themselves, and as it follows there, made them like a wheele, turnd it from Regno to sumPsl. 83. 12, 13. sine Regno. And who knows but that as God hath bin plea∣sed to honour you with a great part in this glorious work of Restoring the King to his House, but that it is intended by it, to prompt you to restore God to his House, the House of God to the God of the House. Let me say to your Lordship as Mordecay said to Esther, who knowes whether thou art come to this honour for such a time as this? Never was Lord Maior wellcomed into his Office with more generall a∣lacrity and acclamations, which as they did loudly speak the
 good you had done, so they did lovingly bespeak the good they would have you do. And therefore let me be so bold to say to your Lordship as David did to his Son Solomon,1 Chron. 22. 16. who was designed for such work, the building of the Tem∣ple, arise therefore and be doing, and the Lord shall be with thee. You cannot want incouragement, for besides that, the wishes of Prince and People concenter in it, God hath blest London with a prudent Bishop, cut out as it were for all manner of Church-work. Therefore I will say no more, but, that, when I see two such benign starres in conjunction and vertical over this great City, I cannot but prophesie (prognosticate is too fallible a term) great blessings, and I pray that I may be a true Prophet, as I am truely
My Lord,

Westminster, Jan. 1. 1660. Juxta Comput. Ecclesiae Anglis.
