



MY LORD,
YOUR Honour may perhaps
think it strange that a person
so wholly a stranger as I,
should tender you such a peece
as this: Yet will, I doubt not,
acquit me of rudenesse and in∣civility
in so doing; when you
consider, That the adverse party, whom it
takes to taske, hath made his appeale hither;
and finding himselfe foiled in Latine, hath

here put in his English Bill for some reliefe:
And it is but reason that Bill and Answer be
filed in the same Court. He had the confidence,
to tender his book first to another honorable
Person the Earle of Devonshire, with this presump∣tion,
That though things were not so fully demon∣strated
as to satisfie every Reader, yet 'twas good
enough to satisfie his Lordship, he did not doubt. Which
presumption of his was then the more tolerable,
because he then thought his demonstaios
good. But when he had been so fully convinced
what weake stuffe it was; that now the utmost
of his hopes is (for so I understand from his
friends) that though he be mistaken in the Mathematicks,
yet he hopes to prove himselfe an honest man, (which
yet is more I suppose than, by his principles, he
need to be:) To make the world believe, that
your Lordship doth approve of his Principles, Method, and
Manners in those writing; and, that this is the only
cause of the favours you have expressed towards him; is
so high an affront, as had he not a great confi∣dence
of your Lorships Magnanimity, to despise
it, or Clemency, to pardon it, he would not
have offered to a person of so much honour and
worth.
Since therefore he hath brought it before you as a
controversy, wherein he desires your Lordship to consider
and judge, whether he have said his six Lessons
aright: I shall not at all demurre to the jurisdi∣ction
of the court; but as readily admit his
Umpar, as allow him the choise of his own Wea∣pon;

and so tender your Lordship an English
Answer to his English Appeale from my Latine
Confutation of his treatise in Latine: That
when in the judgement of this own Umpar, he
sees himselfe foiled at his own weapons; he may
hereafter make choise of French or Dutch, or
some other Language, which he may hope to be
more favourable to him, than Latine or English
hath yet been.
He tells your Lordship, what great feates he
hath done in his book; and your Lordship knows
as well, by this and my former answer, how
they have been defeated.
And then he reckons up certaine positions (some
of them absurd enough) and would have you
believe them to be our Principles at Oxford: But
doth not tell your Lordship where they are to be
found in any writings of ours.
Now, (that your Lordship may not seek them
there in vaine, where they are not to be found,)
I shall briefely shew where the rise of all these ac∣cusations
lye; in his own writings, not in ours.
First, He had taught us Cap. 13. §. 16. Si ratio
detur minoris ad majus, rationesque aliquot addantur ipso
aequales non multiplicari proprie, sed submultiplicari dici∣tur:
ita{que} quando additur primae rationi altera, ratio
primae quantitatis ad tertiam, emissis est rationis primae
ad secundam. That is, in plaine English, If there be
any proportion assigned of a lesse quantity to a greater, and
to that proportion be added another proportion equall
to it; that proportion that doth result by this addition,

is not the double, but the halfe of that assigned proportion.
Now, because this is very absurd, and I had told
him so; He would have your Lordship believe, that
it was I had said (not he,) that Two equall proporti∣ons,
are not double to one of the same proportions. Which
is his first Charge.
Secondly; He had sayd farther, in the same
place, Cap. 13. §. 16. Ratio 2 ad 1 vocatur dupla,
& 3 ad 1 tripla, &c. (and he saith true.) But then
(forgetting that these were his own words) he
would have it thought (Less. 5. p. 42.) absurd to
say that the proportion of two to one is double; and asks,
is not every double proportion, the double of some proporti∣on?
And doth here intepret that phrase (of his
own) the proportion of two to one is called double, to
be all one as to say, That a proportion is double,
triple &c. of a number, but not of a proportion. Which is
his second charge.
Thirdly he had Cap. 8. §. 13, 14. (without any
necessity) layd he whole stresse of Geometry,
upon this supposition. That, It is not possible for the
same body to possesse at one time a greater, at another time
a lesser place. (For, if this be possible, the same
body is, by his definition, at the same time equall
to a bigger, and to a lesse body than it selfe: as
I there shewed by a consequence so cleare that
he cannot himselfe deny it.) Which he there first,
attempts to prove, (as simply as a man would
wish,) but then presently flyes off againe, and
say that a thing in it selfe so manifest needs no demon∣stration.
But sayd I, (without declaring my own

opinion in the case, which what it is he knowe
not) An assertion of such huge consequence to
his doctrine as this is, and being (as he well
knows) generally denyed (whatever he or I
think of it) by all those who maintaine Conden∣sation
& Rarification in a proper sense, (without
either vacuum, or the admission and extrusion of a
forraigne body;) ought to be well proved, by
him that builds so much upon it, and not be assu∣med
gratis. Now because of this it is, that he tells
you in his third charge, That 'tis one of our
principles, That the same body without adding to it,
or taking from it, is sometimes greater and sometimes lesse.
So hainous a matter is it, to require a proofe from
him, of what he doth affirme though of never so
great consequence.
Fourthly, He tells us Cap. 14. §. 19. (and 'tis
true enough) that an Hyperbolick line, and its Asymp∣tote,
doe still come nearer and nearer till they approach to a
distance lesse then any assignable quantity: And conse∣quently
if infinitely produced, must be supposed
to meet, or to have no distance at all; (and so
the distance of that hyperbola so produced, from
a line parallel to the Asymptote, to be the same
with the distance of that Asymptote from the
said parallell; that i, equall to a given quantity.)
And that this is a good inference, we are
taught Less. 5. §. 43. as standing on the same
ground with the demonstrations of all such Geome∣tricians,
Ancient and Moderne, as have inferred any
thing in the manner following, [viz. If it be not greater

nor lesse, then it is equall. But it is neither greater nor lesse.
Therefore &c. If it be greater, say by how much. By so
much. 'Tis not greater by so much: Therefore it is not
greater. If it be lesse, say by now much &c.] which, being
good demonstrations are together with this overthrown, if
this inference be not good; that is, if things which
differ lesse than any assignable quantity may not
be reputed equall, But now, to say thus, That
the distance of an Hyperbole, from a streight line
drawn beyond its asymptote and the parallell
thereunto, doth continually decrease, so as, if it
be supposed infinitely produced, it must be sup∣posed
to be at length the same with that of the
Asymptote from the sayd parallell, because nei∣ther
greater nor lesse by any assignable quantity;
(which is but the result of his own assertion) is all
one as to say, That a quantity may grow lesse and lesse
eternally, so as at last to be equall to another quantity; or
which is all one, saith he, that there is a last in Eternity▪
which is his fourth charge: and, what absurdity
is in it, falls upon himselfe. Just as, when having
told us Cap. 16. §. 20. Punctum inter quantitates
nihil est, ut inter numeros Cyphra: And Cap. 14. §. 16.
Punctum ad lineam neque rationem habet, neque quanti∣tatem
ullam: He railes upon me, twenty times over,
as if I had somewhere said A point is nothing; only
because I say with Euclide, .
Fiftly 'tis his usuall language, in designing an
angle, to say, it is contained or comprehended by
or between the two sides: As for example Cap. 14.

§. 9. (three times in two lines) idem angulus est qui
comprehenditur inter AB & AC, cum eo qui comprehendi∣tur
inter AE & AF, vel inter AB & AF, And
§. 15. cor. 1. anguls comprehensos a duabus rectis.
And §. 16. angulus qui continetur inter AB & eandem
AB &c. (And 'tis well enough so to speake.)
But now, forgeting that it was himselfe that sayd
so, he delivers it as a principle of ours, That the
nature of an angle consists in that which lies between the
lines which comprehend it; that is, saith he, An angle is
a superficies.
Sixtly; when he had said (absurdly enough,)
Cap. 11. § 5. Consistit ratio antecedentis ad consequens,
in Differentia, hoc est, in ea Parte majoris qua minus ab
eo superatur; sive in majoris (dempto minore) Residuo,
&c And again, Ratio binarii ad quinarium est ter∣narius,
&c. And Cap. 12. § 8. Ratio inaequalium (li∣nearum)
EF, IG, consistit in differentia GF, (and
the like elsewhere.) which is all one as to say,
that the nature of proportion consists in a num∣ber,
a line, an absolute quantity &c; (which how
absurd it was I had let him know;) He hath then
the impudence to say (as though it had been I,
not hee, had so spoken) that, I make Proportion to be
a Quotient, a number, an Absolute quantity, &c. or, as
he here speaks in his sixth charge, that the Quotient
is the proportion of the Division to the Dividend, (as
pure non-sense as a body need to read;) Only
because I affirm Rationis (Geometricae) aestimatio∣nem
esse, not penes residuum, but penes quotum: that
Geometricall proportion is to be estimated, not according to

the Remainder, but according to the Quotient (which
himselfe now knows, though he did not then, to
be true enough; for he hath now learned to say
so too, Less. 2. p. 16. As the Quotient gives us a
measure of the Proportion of the Dividend to the Divisor
in Geometricall Proportion; so also the Remainder after
Substraction is the measure of Proportion Arithmeticall.)
And by these means he goes about to prove him∣selfe
an honest man: Just like the honest man, who
when he had cut a purse, put it slyly into another
mans pocket (after he had taken out the mony)
that so this other might be hanged for it. And I
hope, by that time Your Lordship hath perused
the peece which I now tender, you will be able
to judge, whether M. Hobs be not as well a
good Mathematician, as an Honest Man; much a∣like.
Your Lordship hath now the case fair before
you; if you shall think it worth the while to take
cognizance of it. I shall leave it here, and permit
it to your Lordships judgement, whether to per∣use
and consider it, (which by reason of your
good accomplishment in these, as well as in other
parts of Learning, you are well able to doe,) or
to lay it by for those that will: as being un∣willing,
by any importune solicitation, to tres∣passe
upon your Lordships leasure, or divert your
thoughts, from matters of more concernment,
to consider of such toys as these. Desiring mean
while your Lordships favour so far, as to give mee

leave to honour you, and (though I have not hi∣therto
had the honour to be known to you) to
subscribe my selfe,
MY LORD, 
Oxford. Oct. 15.
1656.
