



Right Worshipfull,
IT was an excellent speech of Luthers, E∣go odi meos libros, et saepe opto eos interire, quod metuo, ne morentur lectores à lectione ipsius scripturae, quae sola omnis sapientiae fons est. I hate my own books, and wish them lost which yet were of excellent use and for which the Church stands much bound unto God in thankfulnesse, because I fear the reading of them will hinder the reading of the scriptures, which indeed is the fountain of all spirituall wisdome. And for this reason we have cause to wish that many bookes were burnt, especially such as tend to corrupt the sense of the scrip∣ture; And of all bookes, such as serve to cast the reader
 quite off from the foundation, and to turne them aside to another Gospel. This caused that holy Apostle to thunder out an anathema against such: if an Angel from heaven shall preach any other Gospel, let him be accur∣sed. And the truth is, we can never erre more dange∣rously then in the doctrine of justification; For which cause he is of small judgement, and lesse observation, that seeth not how needfull it is to have this doctrine kept pure: And especially with you, whereMr. William Eyre. one is risen up amongst your selves, who hath sown tares in the Lords field, whose opinion treads Antipodes to the gospel, which he hath published to the world in his booke, which he calleth Vindiciae justifications gratuitae, which (that I may doe him right) I judge the strongest shield and buckler, wherewith this Antinomian cause was ever protected: Yet as in Salem of old, God brake both sword and shield, so I doubt not but he hath done the like now in this ensuing treatise (though by a weake hand) making a few scripture arguments to pierce this shield, and to wound the Cause that he maintaines, that it lyes a bleeding at the feet of a scripture truth. And for the Authour, I wish he had had more respect to truth, the churches peace, that he had carried meekenesse and love to the persons whose judgement he doth oppose, fight∣ing with his heart and pen, against their arguments, not their persons: but the want of this is obvious to every eye, his opinion is diametrically opposite to the letter of the Scriptures, to the vnanimous Consent of all orthodox antiquity, and the learned of the present age, to the har∣mony of the Churches; and yet he boldly chargeth us, and all that dissent from him, to be no better then Papists and Arminians. And I doubt not but all to whom wee
 are known, have done justice upon this peice of his morali∣ty. And for his opinion it self, I question not but every be∣leever that hath imbraced the truth as it is in Iesus, (as a sufficient professour in this controversie) hath condemned it for Novelisme, and a dangerous errour, and doe judge that Satans designe by him is to draw others, but you e∣specially (if it be possible) from the simplicity, & sincerity of the gospel received: but I am perswaded better things of you, and things that accompany salvation: Yet I think it meet to stirre you up to a diligent examination of the Scriptures, that this Corner stone of justification in the building of your faith may be layd aright. And whereas Mr. Eyre hath in the hearing of some of you, condemned a Sermon of mine, preached amongst you, as Anti-scriptu∣rall, and my arguments irrationall, and now in his printed booke hath de-cryed it as wide from the orthodox faith as well as contrary to his doctrine, and contradictory to many plaine Scripturrs, and dorogatory to the full atone∣ment which Christ hath made by his death, and discon∣solatory to the soules of men, in laying the whole weight of their salvation upon an uncertaine condition of their owne performing:Where ob∣serve, that Mr. Eyres name was not men∣tioned in the preaching of the sermon, though it be in this printed Copy, and such passages as re∣late to his book were ad∣ded since the publishing of his. I have once againe presented this to your eyes, which was delivered to some of your ears, with some small addition, and as little alteratin as I could but in substance the same; and I willingly submit it to your examination by the word, and to the censure of my brethren, who I know are most able to award an upright judgement in this case; and I doubt not but I shall have publique right done as your Reverend Pastor, Mr. Conant by name, of precious esteem now with Christ, did before in your hearing give a pub∣lique, and seasonable acknowledgment to the soundnesse
 of this Sermon, in the Congregation, at the time of this Crimination. I have likewise sent forth together with it a Polemicall discourse, to vindicate this distressed truth, which this Sermon holds forth, and to breake the staffe of the oppressour. And as little David, I am come forth against this enemy to the truth of Christ, with a sling and a few stones, drawne out of the pure Chrystall river of the scriptures, and doubt not, but God, whose cause I pleade, will so farre assist me, as that these stones shall smite and sink into the forehead of this errour, that it shall fall Goliah-like to the earth, and the weake hand that he useth shall only poynt at the mighty arme of God, which neither any errour, nor they that doe defend it, are able to resist,Hieron. Novit Veritas paucorum manu, et non de multis mili∣tum copiis triumphare. Truth is great, and will praevaile, though destitute of all weapons, except what is drawn out of the armory of Scriptures, yea I doubt not, but you your selves have done execution upon his errour. And I was glad (though not so much in my owne behalfe, as in respect of you) of that letter, which was signed by some of you, bearing witnesse to the truth, and desiring me not to be discouraged for that uncivill affront, And al∣though Mr. Eyre blame me for the like practise, and that of all men I had least reason to be offended with it, because I had done the same thing in another place, I must tell him, I tooke that liberty but once, and that out of constraint; for after I had privately borne witnesse against some Antinomian errours vented by one Mr. Symonds at Rumsey, the next time I heard him, he was advanced higher into familisticall blas∣phemie, asserting, A beleever was as righteous as Christ, and that being one with him, according to the prayer of Christ in the 17 Chap. of Iohns Gospel, Lord make
 them one as we are one, and having the righteousness of Christ imputed, which is the righteousnesse of God himselfe, he propounded it to the people to consider, if a Christian were not a certaine divine person as the sonne of God is: And to have been silent in this case, had been my sin, especially seeing the people were led captive by him into his former errours of Antinomianisme, admirers of his person, and of a ductile spirit: But that I desired the people not to beleeve a word which Mr. Symonds taught, hath as much truth in it (though Mr. Eyre relate it) as that had which was spoken to Christ concerning the King∣domes of the world, All this power will I give thee, and the glory of them, for that is delivered to me, and to whomsoever I will, I give it. And he himselfe doubted of the truth of it, for he addeth, how justly I cannot tell, yet in his passion to render me odious he relates it, though he be commanded not to re∣ceive an accusation against an Elder, under two or three witnesses. But to returne unto you,1 Tim. 5.18. Right wor∣shipfull, to whom I have been bold to dedicate this little Tractate, I beseech you in the bowels of Christ, receive neither it nor me, but so far forth as it is agreeable to the word of truth, and if God hath not given me darkness for a vision, I apprehend a marvellous beauty in the truth here offered unto you, nay already imbraced by you, which Mr. Eyre striving tanquam pro aris et focis, seeketh to undermine. I beseech you stand fast in the truth, and in the love of it. The raine fell as impetuously upon, the floods did swell with as great rage against, and the winds did storme with as great violence, the house built upon the rock, as that, which was built upon the sands: And the truth of Christ that is built upon the scrip∣tures
 as an immoveable rock, is capable of as much oppo∣sition from men, (and especially this of the free justificati∣on of a sinner by faith) as any brain-sick opinion of men that lie in wait to deceive, wch hath no affinity, nor confe∣deracy with the word of God. Having therefore such a sure word of prophesie, you shall doe well if you take heed to it,2 Pet. 2 9. as to a light that shineth in a dark place: Ac∣count it your great honour to honour God, and your honourable profession, by keeping the doctrine received, and as you have hitherto done, shew your selves to be men of understanding, and not Children, tossed up and downe with every winde of doctrine; even so stand fast immoveable in the truth of Christ, And Copy out that grace and faith in your lives,3 John. 1. wch you professe to have, and practise that great commandement of loving one another as Christ hath loved you, hereby shall it be known that ye are his disciples indeed, though the Antinomians judge it a dark signe that cannot give a sufficient evidence to the conscience of justification, and herein they contradict Christ and his Apostle, who said, By this wee know that wee are passed from death to life because we love the brethren;1 Iohn 3.15 Ephes. 4.3 Rom. 16.14 study to keep the vnity of the spirit in the bond of peace: Beware of dividing principles, and dividing practises, and marke those among you that cause divisi∣ons and offences, and avoide them; be thankfull unto God for the light of his gospel that yet shines amongst you; be thankefull to the Lord, that although errour walke abroad without a vizard, there is so much liberty to professe, and defend the truth. Pray to the Lord, which is all you have to do in things which might be better in the publike, and praise God that they are no worse. Prize the Churches peace next to the peace of a good conscience, and yet buy
 not peace with the losse of truth. And as God hath mag∣nified his word above all his name, do you esteeme it a∣bove your credit. Remember Obed Edom that was blessed for the arks sake; and though I know and beleeve some of you doe not count gain to be godlinesse, yet you shall finde godlinesse to be great gaine: the gospel is not so poore a guest, but it is able to recompense those that lodge and entertaine it. A Guest seldome bestowes his bounty but at his departure, but there is no gaine to be expected by this guest at his departure, but a losse that cannot be reco∣vered. I commend it to your care to preserve the ark a∣mongst you, faile in this, and the vitall spirit of your cor∣poration will be lost together with it. And I beseech you have not mens persons in admiration, affect not the word for the persons sake, but the person for the words sake. Let not knowledge be layed up for discourse, but for prac∣tice, not so much to inrich the head,Luke. 12.14. Math. 23.22. as to amend the heart. Beware of covetousnesse, least the cares of the world choake the good seede of the word. Thinke not an hour more prrofitably spent in the Shop then in the church, in enquiring into your debts, then in searching of your consciences, cast up your accounts often with God, consider what religion will cost you, make sure your evidences for eternall life, have not a Christ to seeke, when you shall have life to seeke: Bee sure to do good, or to receive good wheresoever you goe, with whomsoever you deale, let your publique trust make you men of publique spirits, suffer nor your Taverns to be ful, when your churches are empty, and whilest you complaine of the badnesse of the times: let them not be the worse for you. what evill you cannot help to redresse, bewaile, let your sighes be more for your sins then your
 crosses, incourage them that teach the good knowledge of the Lord, and hide not your talents in a napkin, but trade with them for your Master, that at his coming he may say to you, Well done, good, and faithfull servants, enter into the joy of your Lord. Which that you may not faile of, nor be led aside with the errour of the wicked, & fall from your own stedfastnesse, (but may grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Christ, who is our hope) shall be the prayer of him, who is

