

Sir.
YOu may justly challenge that impudence, which from Raggs presented a great person with a Cup of cold water, when the Conquer or without peradventure could have commanded choyce Liquors; yet that escaped not unrewarded, though another with a higher Present from a more gallant hand, through a covetous end, did. Truly, Sir, I can onely say, I am yet a living Monument of mercy, having sometime been a small Atome
of a Soldier under your happy conduct; and consi∣dering our enemies pressure now at our Walles, to be great, as once at Haddington, before that ap∣proaching glorious Deliverance and Victory, I should be ingrateful to God, as sometimes I am, my Country, and your Honour, if I should not bewail the present conditon of affairs, and cast my small Mite into the Publick Treasury, towards sup∣port of a Christian interest, though shaken, and ne∣ver more threatned. Would my tears prevail, I should desire to weep to death; that so a day of Ju∣bilee might cover the face of this place of my Nati∣vitie, now neer her extremitie, wherein her Faith, Patience, and Meekness will not onely be tryed, but must be extended; The God of glory give the blessing. Indeed, Sir, your known greatness and worth, must give me leave (though a low, simple, despised fellow) to be plain with you; for albeit a Raven bring you bread and flesh in the morning of this accomplished New-year, and water from the Brook, despise it not; your former favours to me (when clouded in carnality) have induced me to this weak Oblation: I must acknowledge it with thanks to our Creator, the love of his dearly be∣loved Son, and sacred Spirit resting in his Saints; but withal confess (as I have said) in my heart, that as he was just by afflicting me by so bad as my self, (though externally my Superiors) so likewise in admitting some to be punish'd by worse then themselves, and to shake their body Politick, who first touched my Oeconomick; yet since it was to call forth my slender Candle, before hidden under
a Bushel, though lighted at a Divine Torch, and the Talent which before lay buried in a dirty Nap∣kin, I cannot deny my Country-men a sight of those thoughts which may trouble us all; if I am a Shimei, be you a David. Sir, I here bring you a Brat called forth with Lazarus (I hope from the grave of corruption) and lay it at your feet, because I am not so able as you to prefer or maintain it: you may do well to take the grave cloaths off, lest it stink too much, and dress it in the attire you most desire to see it; though it cannot prattle, yet to call you Excellent, or your Excellency at every word, yet in time it may be blest, and have occasion so to do. Truly Sir, I am heartily sorry I have no bet∣ter New-years-gift for you that have deserved it; but you (if you come to me) must be content with what I have, not what I would have. I hope the Lord of Hosts will sanctifie your heart to the ad∣vancement of his glory, and defence of his Saints; else, Sir, what shall be done to those late-rais'd Princes, who continue to walk (without light in these dayes) in the steps of their Predecessors? sure∣ly, so much War as attended the gate of them, must attend theirs; yet is there an appointed time for Nimrod's ruine or safety. I hope it was in your heart to build the Temple; well, it's enough, you shall live to see the materials brought together that shall do the work. The Lord God of mercy in∣cline the Pillars and Members to seek his Face whilest it may be found, and the Evil day crush us not altogether; be confident in your Maker, and he may yet do much by you. The God of wis∣dom
and innocency inrich your heart therewith from his Fountain, that the Nations about you may have occasion to bless God for and with you: So prayes heartily him that is
Decemb 20. 1652.
A poor Fellow-labourer, a dead Dogg.

Sir, enquire not after the Author of this, but that of us both.

