



Right Worshipful,
LEt it stand with your pleasures, whom one profes∣sion of Religion towards God, and execution of Justice towards man, whom one neer Neighbour∣hood, and one neer affection combine, to bee conjoyned also in this Dedication: wherein, as my desire is to manifest my dutiful respect of you both, so also to entreat your favourable con∣struction and acceptance of this my presumption: whereof I want not just reasons, whether I look upon you joyntly, or severally. Your joynt government under which we the Inhabitants of this Town of Watford enjoy our publick peace, bindeth all of us, wherein wee may, to testifie our thankfulness for so great and publick a good. God might govern the World (if he pleased) by himself immediately, yet he committeth it to Magistrates and Rulers, both supream and dele∣gates; whom he honoureth with an high style, calling them Assistants to him that ruleth the whole earth, Zach. 4.14. yea the shields of the earth, Psal. 47.9. to bear off wrongs and evils from men. The boughes of this fair tree of Magistracy (as in that sacred embleme) are shelter for all, and the fruit meat for all, Dan. 4.7.17. And the weilding of so stately an Ordinance, is not to be committed, but to fit and qualified persons, as they are described by Jethro to Moses, by four most wor∣thy properties, Exod. 18.21.
First, they must be men of courage, stout to undergoe all the parts
 of their calling. How fit a vertue this is for a Magistrate, will appear, if we consider, 1 The good and godly in the hand, Rom. 13.3. who are to be incouraged and praised in well-doing by their Rulers: which will never be, if a man be afraid to be seen, or be timorous, as Nico∣demus was, who would fain be with Christ, but cast himself into the night, as though that had been a work of darkness. Moses for his cou∣rage was called Pharaohs God, he told Pharaoh to his face, hee would not leave an hoof behind him, that Pharaoh himself stood in awe of him. 2 The wicked, who are stout in their wickedness; and sin is with them as bold as an Harlot, as Salomon speaketh. Now the Magi∣strate, with Job, must bestirre himself, and cloath himself with zeal and courage, that the young men may hide themselves, and the old rise up at his presence, Job 29.8. whereas an irreligious mildnesse and re∣misnesse, strengthneth the hands of the ungodly. 3 The wicked one, even Satan himself, who emboldneth offenders against the chiefest Ordinances of God, I mean Magistracy, and Ministry, to bring them into contempt, and so bring in all confusion into the earth.
Secondly, they must be men fearing God, and they are specially cal∣led upon to kisse the Son of God, Psal 2. For, 1 Gods fear is the begin∣ning of wisdome, and who should be wise, if not Magistrates, to judge and discern of the most difficult cases amongst men? 2 If hee fear not God, he will fear the face of man, and so accept of persons con∣demned, Deut. 1.17. 3 He must herein assist the Lord himself in planting the fear of God in all his government. Cyrus must perform not his own, but all the Lords desire: hee must say to Jerusalem, thou shalt bee built, and to the Temple, thy foundations shall be surely laid, Isa. 44.28. Every Christian Magistrate must be a Nursing Father to the Church▪ and here begin his government, as Moses, with celebrating the Passe∣over, Exod. 12. Joshua, with renewing Circumcision, Joshua 5.7. Gideon, with destroying Baal, Judg. 6. David, with establishing the Ark; Salo∣mon, with building Gods house, Asa, with renewing the Lords Altar. And whereas many inferiour Magistrates look on, whilst this care slippeth into other mens hands; yet must they all know, that they are Gods Vicegerents, and the judgement is Gods, that is, from God, and for God: and therefore they must not only cut off Thefts, Mur∣ders, Adulteries, and such barbarous outrages, and ryots against pub∣lick peace and humane society; but Blasphemies, Heresies, Swearing, Sabbath-breaking, and such sins as more directly oppose God and his Worship: and these will the fear of God, where it is, especially hunt out. This was the grace that made Nehemiah seek the wealth of Israel, by making the Princes swear to Gods Covenant: this made him almost forget himself in zealous revenge against the Sabbath-breakers: all Jerusalem could not maintain this one sin against that one godly Magistrate.
Thirdly, Magistrates must be men dealing truly. 1 Affecting sin∣cerity, truth, and justice, which are the very sinews of humane socie∣ty. 2 Effecting it, by taking true pains, that the truth of every cause may be sifted out, Exod. 23.6. and receive a true sentence, that the
 poor may not be born down with power and greatness, nor go away in a good cause disappointed, Deut. 16.20. 3 Opposing with all their strength, whatsoever is opposite unto truth: not suffering the truth to be clou∣ded and veiled by flourishing pleas, or shews of truth: but resembling God, whose Judgement-seat is said to be a throne of whit Ivory,
Optima res∣pub quae maxi∣me leges mini∣me hetore n∣diat. for the purity and innocency both of the Judge and Judgement, before which every secret shall one day be set in a clear light.
Fourthly, They must be men hating covetousness. For, 1 a publick person must seek the publick good, and not be privately minded, or self-seeing. 2 He will then hate gifts, which blind the wise, and per∣vert the words of righteousness: Now what a fearful inversion of Gods order were it, if he who is set up to execute judgement, should per∣vert it? 3 He is in place, wherein (if he bee corrupt) hee may help himself by the damage of others: but who should hinder the confusi∣on that would flow in as a deluge, if the means ordained by God to help the oppressed, should be corrupted to help forward oppression? Now such a man thus qualified, Jethro thought sit to bee set over thousands, and over hundreds; over fifties, and over tens. To this serve those ancient Ceremonies used among Gods own people, in the in∣stalling of their governours: example whereof we have in Joash, 2 Kin. 11.12. whom when Jehoadah had set into the right of his Kingdom, they did three things unto him.
1 They crowned him with a Crown of pure gold, set with Pearls and precious Stones: and these signified both the integrity of his Person, and the incorruption of his manners.
2 They gave him the book of the testimony: the book shewed that wisdome is meet for a Ruler: and that it was the book of the Testimony, sheweth, that 1 The most necessary wisdome for a Magistrate, is the wisdome of God: 2 That he must judge by Gods Book and directi∣ons, and therefore must be learned in Gods Laws, and skilful in the ca∣ses of Gods Statute-book: and 3 The Book was given him, that he might keep and preserve it, and see the contents of it observed in o∣thers: for he is a keeper of both the Tables.
3 They annointed him, to signifie the power and gifts of courage, magnanimity, and other ornaments sit to attend Magistracy. And in∣deed it notably preserveth the honour of this Ordinance, when the person executing it, is as eminent in gifts and graces, as in place, and preheminence. I take not upon me to teach your Worships how to govern, but only declare how the Lord would every way have this Ordinance of his, and the bearers of it honoured, and what be the spe∣cial ornaments which draw the eyes, and reverent respect of inferi∣ours upon you.
Now more severally, your gravity (Reverend Judge) your huma∣nity, your equity in the just and unpartial carriage of causes, your zeal against vice and vicious persons, who gladly decline your censure, your diligent frequenting the house of God, your care of promoting the pure Worship of God, which you witnesse by your new erection dedi∣cated thereunto, have got you a worthy and due regard through all
 our Country, wherein though I bee but a stranger, yet must hee bee more strange that meeteth not with the report of your vertues. And you noble Knight (whom I have known of longer time) will give me leave to conceal a great part of that I conceive of your worth. You do well to imitate your worthy Parents, one of whom hath left you with a fair inheritance, a pattern (as I have heard) of many vertues, from which you may not depart: the other, God hath yet left unto you, to follow you with motherly advice and counsel, to set before you still the best Patterns: but above all, the glass of Gods word, the reve∣rent observation whereof, if you adde to the other excellent endow∣ments of your mind, person, and estate, you shall give a number of your years and rank leave to come behind you, and follow you farre off, whilst your Country shall be reaping the encrease, and your self the comfort of those hopeful seeds which every one that know you, acknowledge with gladness in you.
Thus humbly craving pardon for my boldness, I commend this Book to your Worships acceptance, which for the whole argument (containing a plain unfolding of the most grounds and main pillars of our Religion) is worthy your respect; and your selves, with your ver∣tuous Ladies, and hopeful Children, together with all your studies and endeavours for the Church or Common-wealth, to the rich bles∣sing of God: who fill your hearts with heavenly wisedome, and pre∣serve you both blameless till his appearing, Amen.

Watford, July 20.
