




LEt me crave your Honorable patience, while your eye runs over this Epistle and Preface: both as short, as possibly I could make it. For the Book it self, it cannot crave, haply it may command your eye and eare both, for this Reason. It is a CHRONICLE fully and wholy taken out of the Book of God. It treats of Kings and Princes, Priests and Levites too, of common-people also; their severall ways here on Earth, with severall notes upon these wayes, ta∣ken from Gods mouth too.
I will take leave to tell you, how I fell upon this work. I heard a great cry, and I was one, who helped to make it greater; we complained of the Times and of you, not a word of our selves, and thus we spake unadvisedly e∣nough after our manner; our expectation is cleane fru∣strate: we looked for good, behold evill: for peace, behold a Sword: Summer is come and gone, we are not delivered. Delivered! never in worse case then now. That we thought would do us good, hath done us hurt. Then, as that stubborne people, never well full nor fasting, called out Moses, Moses (he was in all the blame still) so we called out upon you, and wished ten times, as they did, that we were, as we were, in Egipt a∣gain. Thus we, poore simple ones, have done and doe, standing all the while in the bottom and upon the levell of our own Imaginations.
By the good hand of God upon me, I did according to the charge, SEARCH THE SCRIPTURES; they testifie of

the Lord Jesus Christ, yes, and of all that ever was, is, or shall be done in the world, for, or against His Kingdom there, wherein these times are eminently, very infamous and very glorious both.
I thank God, that I did search the Scriptures: for now I can give a full and cleare account of all the affairs now a days. 1. That they are what they have bin, nothing NEW, that is now under the Sun. What is now irregular and our of Rule is not new, but as it hath bin done by these, whose will was their Bias, so they run apace furiously, I had almost said, but very directly to their own and their peoples ruin: And they that walked regularly after the line of Heaven, obtained the Sabbath and port of all their labours, were a blessing to themselves, and to the place where they lived. 2. I can reprove my own folly now, and theirs, who are but a little wiser, That we have not a faith to live upon, for we make haste; we ask and we have not, because we asked amisse; we expected, and our ex∣pectation is vain, because we were too hasty, and expect∣ed without the book: we would have God goe our way, and do things just when and how, we would have Him: as if wisdom were with us, and we could tell the fittest time.
Our complaints are as wild as our thoughts; we com∣plain as if some strange and new things were done now, when indeed there is nothing now that is new; Man was mad upon his Idols in ancient times; he is but mad now. And when his Idols Ier. 50 38. were struck-at, he would strike too, and be in a rage; he do's no more now. The Nations were angry, when Christ had taken to Himself power Reve. 11. 18., then they made Tumults; they do but the same now: And in pro∣portion to their rage now, shal their judgment be anon, it shall reach unto Heaven, and be lifted up even to the skies. Ier. 51. 9. 2 Chron. 28. 9. They brake His bonds before and cast away His Cords, They are not more like to Devils now. The Lord laugh∣ed

at those furious fools then; He laughs now: He saw their day was coming Ps. 37.; we thank Him for His Eye salve, we see as much now. The LORD Christ has few friends, that will own His cause, that will stand by Him, and that troubles a few in the world: That is no new thing neither: Time was when all forsook Him, Disciples and all: And then His Adversaries wrought their will on Him, but then He wrought most gloriously, for from the Crosse and the grave (the Adversaries thought Him sure enough, they had their will on Him, when they had Him there, but from thence) He hath brought life and immortality to light, through the Gospell. He is the same, and by the same 2 Tim. 1. 10. crosse-ways and wills, can worke as gloriously still; and there is nothing now that is new.
3. But that, which pleaseth me most of all, is, I have found a price, and I find it put into your hands, I meane, A way opened unto you, whereby to deliver a Nation, brought even to the mouth of destruction; which you shall do, not by commanding the Sword to be still, (for it is the Lords Sword, and out of your command; you are no more able to stop it in it's way, then you can the Sun in it's course) but by striking at the root, Idolatrous persons and things; by removing them from before the eyes of His jealousie: and by casting them out: If not, the Lord has sworne, and He will not repent, that He will do with you, and with your Land (for it is yours now, and not the Lords, so long as Idols are countenanced there, and they are countenanced, so long as they are not throwne out, whether persons or things) as you should have done to the Idols there; & as He hath done to Israel and Iudah, be∣cause of those Idols; They did not cast them forth from before His Eyes; therfore they are cast out of their own Land, and from being a Nation. Now the choise is easie; you must cast-out these abominations, els you and your

Land must be cast-out; it is at your choise, chuse you whether.
You are about it, you will say, you have made an Or∣dinance against Idolatry, and we must be humbled for it, every man of us. Blessed be God for that, and His blessings be upon your souls. But do ye consider what an engage∣ment you have laid upon your souls; or do we silly ones consider what it is, to be humbled for this high provocati∣on? To loath our selvs, because of our whorish hearts, and a∣bominable Idolatries, wherwith we have broken the Lords heart Ezek. 6. 9., as His Highnes is pleased to expresse His loathing of that sin; This is to be humbled; and then presently fol∣lows a casting-out, as we do that we loath, and our stomack riseth against Esa. 30. 22.. But herein you must lead us the way, els, like Behemoths legs, we shall break before we bow; we must see you humbled before us, as all the worthies of Israel, before the Lord for this thing; but we shall never believe our eyes neither, till we see you, as you may see them, ca∣sting-out Idols, and their services, till they were all cast-out, I mean al these abominations; and so I met with a 4h thing.
4. The exactest patterne of posturing a Kingdom that e∣ver was looked upon; the very work you are upon now. Shall it prosper? The Lord knows, I cannot tell, and yet I have enquired of the Oracle. I can tell, it is your work, and woe unto you if you do it not; but how you hand-it I can∣not tell, nor by what line and levell you go; nor do I take upon me to judge therof; but till you make answer to God in that point, you will never be answered. Truely I can∣not tell vvhat to say to men or their vvork. The Oracle (that is the word of God) tels me, they are fickle, incon∣stant, preposterous too, they begin where they should end, and end where they should begin, the manner of Men.
This only I can tell, for so the Oracle tels me, that when the Worthies of Israel, Kings and Princes there, Priest and

People too (in the Nonage of their King) fell upon this great worke, the Posturing their Kingdom, they began vvith an Ordinance against Idolatry; That is the Land vva∣sting sin: nor did they mock God, for vvhosoever lifted up his hand to a strange god, him they cut-off 2 Chr. 15. 13.. Then behold breaking, cutting, burning, drowning, casting out of Idols, all, untill they had utterly destroyed them all 2 Chro. 31. 1.. Nay they cast down the talest person, and Image in the Land; The Queen Mothers Image her son Asa the King did not spare her, no not her. Then the work went on, and they prospered.
Now (as was said) I take not upon me to judge by what line and levell, the work is carried-on, if, as Iudahs vvork was, we can the more heartily wish your prosperity in the name of the Lord, for our lives, to say no more, the life of our lives is wrapt-up with it: if otherwise, and you work not as you have them for an ensample, yet the worke of the Lord shall go-on, that shall prosper; He is vvorking now, to make His Church a quiet habitation: and He vvill bring His work about through the straits and by the crosse ways and wils of men, though you should desert the work and vvith-draw your hands from should ring up the Lord Christ to His Throne (He cals for your hand to honour you, and wo to you if you with-draw, but I say, He needs you not) He can set Himself in His throne without you, & His vvork shall go-on in despight of Devils or men. As sure as the Lord lives, His work shall go on. What a proud word is that from a mans mouth! Yes, if it were not from Gods mouth. Lift up thine eyes round about, saith the Lord; Esa. 49. 14. now hearken what we say; what shall we behold, a com∣pany of Pillagers, Robbers, Spoylers? It grieves our hearts to lift up our eys round about and behold. The Lord give us patience, that we may stand still and heare Him out, and wait till He hath done His whole work; for hearken what He saith to stay the heart; All these gather themselvs

and come to thee; what to spoyle, and rob the Church? No, to adorne and beautifie her; The Church shall have many Ʋid calv. children; they shall flock-in unto her, as the Chickens to the Hen, as Children to their Mother, and their graces shall abound, and there is the Churches ornament. But shall this be? Yes the Lord hath sworne it shall be, As I LIVE, saith the LORD, thou shalt surely cloath thee with them Esa. 49. 19. all, as with an ornament, and bind them on thee as a Bride doth: For thy waste and thy desolate places and the Land of thy DESTRVCTION, (Mark that, this Land shall be glori∣ous for all this, it shall rejoyce over her enemies, the Land of thy destruction) shall even now be too narrow by reason of the Inhabitants, and they that swallowed thee up shall be farr away. As I LIVE, saith the LORD. And this work in His Hand shall be perfected in His time. Our time is now, His time not yet, till His whole work be performed. Bry∣ars and thorns are now set against the Lord in battell. Esa. 27. 4. As sure as the Lord liveth, He will go through them, and burn them together, in His own time, when these thornes have bin to His people, as those were to Manasseh, when they have humbled His people, been a sanctified meanes to purge the iniquity of Jacob (for that is the fruit of thorns to the servants of God) when their hearts shall be therby prepared for the great work of Reformation; then the Lord will goe through these Bryars and thornes, there shall be no more feare of them. In the meane time, the Lord will helpe His people with a little helpe, so much as shall re∣vive their hopes, when they be fainting, and keepe up their spirits, in assured Confidence, That the work shall be done then, when Jacob shall most rejoyce, and Israel shall be right 1 Kin. 8. 59, 60, 61. glad Ps. 53. 6..
Amen.
