



SIR,
THat which Solomon teacheth in that one A∣phorism often repeated, wanted not apparent weight and moments of Reason: saying,
Prov. 11.10. & 29.2. that In the prosperity of the Righteous, the City rejoyceth: For God being in Cove∣nant with them, for their sakes doth good to such as are joyned in the same Society with them: for one Joseph all Ptiphars house was blessed; and for one Paul, all that were in the ship with him are saved: yea, good and vertuous men by their presence, as Lot in Sodome; by their Prayers, as Moses in the breach; and by their prudent Counsel, as that poor wise man,
Eccl. 9.15 withstand the judgements of God, and save the City: for had there been found one good man, all Jerusalem had been spared for his sake. Again, vertuous men advanced, will confer all their honour and grace to the publick good: they live not to themselves and theirs, but take in the Church and Common-wealth, as fellow-Commoners of all their goodness Mordecaies authority wrought publike deliverance to the whole Church;
. and Josephs advance∣ment sustained the whole Land, by opening the Garners in time of Famine. The honour of one good man shall bee the grace of all good men; his power the strength of many; his greatness the raising of many: as when one Mordecai is raised, light, and joy,
Ester 8.16. and glad∣ness,
 and Honour, came to all the Jews. Further, good men ho∣noured by God, will honour God again, and withstand his disho∣nour: they will (to their power) provide that Gods worship bee e∣rected, that his Sabbaths be sanctified, that true religion bee main∣tained, that falshood and errors bee suppressed, that publke pace bee not disturbed, that common justice bee not perverted, est Gods favour bee discontinued,
Sine pli cen∣uplex murus rebus servan∣dis parum est. and his judgements let in. Whence they are to bee esteemed the strongest Towers, the thickest Walls, the most impregnable Forts, the surest Muniments, and the stou∣test Horsemen and Chariots of their Countrey: yea, the Wise man in one word saith much more,
Prov. 10.25 Justu funda∣mentum mun∣di. that the Righteous is a sure foun∣dation, upholding the whole World.
But why write I this, or to your Honour? surely as one who e∣ver reverenced your worthy parts. I could not but crave lave to express my self one of the City, rejoycing, and praising God in your honours prosperity, and advancement: and the rather, be∣cause my self was an eye-witnesse how God led you through some of your younger years; which were so studiously and commendably passed, as this your later time fitly answereth that expectation which was then conceived of you.
You were then dear to our common Mother, that famous Vni∣versity of Cambridge, which for your Eloquence and grace of speech and perswasion, appointed you her Orator: for your wisdome and gravity in government, chose you her Proctor: for your soundnesse in all kinde of fruitful and commendable literature, ten∣dred you all her honours and degrees: and for your sober, studious, and vertuous conversation, worth ly held now her great Orna∣ment. And now, as riper for greater imployments, the same God (whose priviledge it is to dispense promotions, for bee pulleth down one, and setteth up another) hath moved his Majesty, not only to set your seat among the honourable, but to admit you (as it were) into his breast, and betrust you with the secrets of this great state and Kingdome: an Office not more Ancient than Honourable, befitting only men of rarest wisdome, fidelity, and fitnesse to stand before so great, so wise a King. This was a most honourable Of∣fice among the most ancient Kings of Israel: for King David had his two Principal Secretaries, Serajah, and Jonathan, whom the Text commendeth for a man of Counsel and understanding:
2 Sam. 8.17 1 Chro. 27.32
 and King Solomon his Son had two other, Elihoreph and A∣hiah, who were in chief place neer the King.
1 King 4.3 We read also of Shebna, principal Secretary to King Hezekiah,
2 King. 18.18 of whom Ju∣nius saith, hee was secundus a rege. Now your place being a service of such Honour under his Majesty, cannot bee without an answerable weight and charge. Your Honour easily conceiveth, that the Lord chargeth you with a chief care of honouring him, who hath honoured you: that you stand charged to his Majesty with great trust and fidelity: that the Church expecteth, that by your authority, you should promote her causes, and stand in the main∣tenance of pure Religion: that the Common-wealth claimeth her part in you, for the preservation of peace within her walls, and prosperity within her Palaces: that the Vniversity looketh you should advance her just causes, promote Learning, and incourage her Students, by helping them into the rooms of the ignorant and unlearned Ministers: in a word,
Prov. 11.11. that the whole City hopeth to be exalted by the prosperity of the righteous.
And now if your Honours thankful heart shall call upon you, and say, Quid retribuam Domino?
Tota vita Christiani sanctum desi∣derium est. Aug. in Joh. tract. 4. you will easily fall into fre∣quent thoughts and desires, of discharging all this expectation. This shall be happily done, if you shall chuse about you the wisest Coun∣sellors, for the happy and prudent carriage of your great affairs, imi∣tating herein that peerless pattern of wisdome, Solomon himself; who notwithstanding his extraordinary measure of wisdome, chose unto himself, selectissimum senatum, a bench of most wise and grave Counsellors, whose Counsel Rhehoboam after despisd. The best Counsellor is that great Counsellor, who is daily to bee con∣sulted by fervent prayer. The next is the word of God,
Isa. 9 which as it giveth no less certain direction in difficult cases, than the Oracle did unto Israel, or than did the pillar of the cloud and of fire, by day and night for their motion or station, while they passed through the wilderness: so the daily consulting with Gods statutes, by read∣ing and meditation (as with so many learned Counsellors) made ho∣ly David wiser than the Aged, than the Learned, than the Prin∣ces, than his Adversaries, Psa. 119 98, 99, 100.
Josh 1. And if Joshu∣ah would prosper and have good successe in his high enterprizes, he must keep him to the book of the Law, and not depart from it.

. Prov. 10.32 The fear of God is wisdome, and the next wisdome to that, is to converse and consult with such as do fear God, whose lips speak just and good things: whereby a man shall become both wiser and better. This is the high way to attain and retain grace and re∣putation with God and good men; for this is an inheritance not got∣ten with greatness, but with goodness: the former cannot force or compel affections, the latter sweetly draws and allures them; the former may procure flattery and applause, the latter only yeeldeth true honour and sound comfort.
Might I adde but one grain to your godly care, by this little di∣rection, with which I offer my most inward affections, I have my expectation. I know well your Honours sufficiency, even in this kinde, above many of my profession, to furnish your self with Di∣vine directions, if your leisure or weighty affairs would permit you to set them down: yet I assure my self, your Honour will not refuse the help of such, as are at more leisure to gather them, and humbly offer them unto your hand. I was also more presumptuous to offer these lines unto your view, because I conceived that the rules of Christian prudence and circumspection, could not bee more fitly di∣rected, nor bee better welcome, than to so prudent and circumspect a personage. In which assurance I rest, commending your Honours further happiness and prosperity to him, who is an exceeding great reward, abundantly able to fill your heart with grace, to crown your daies with blessing, and finish them with comfort, life and immortality. .

