



SIR,
WHEN that great Prophet Moses, was to bee confirmed in the certainty of his vocation for the delivery of Gods people out of Egypt,
Act. 7.30 There appeared unto him in the wildernesse of Mount Sinai,
Christ himsel so called,  Just. Matt. an Angel of the Lord in a flame of fire in the bush:
Exod. 3.1 and hee looked, and behold the bush burnt with fire, and the bush was not consumed. A sight at which Mo∣ses
Act. 7.31 wondred; and so may we. But if you please with Moses,
Exod. 3.4 to turn aside to see this great sight; that is,
Act 7.31 draw a little nearer to consi∣der it, This it is:
I. The bush (which at that time betokened the people of Israel,
Exod. 3.7, 9. under the oppressions of Egypt) signifieth the Church of God: for 1. As a bryar∣bush is a base and despicable thing, made for nothing but the fire, or to stop a gap, or some other base use: so seems the Church and members to be in the eyes of men; in so much as not the most eminent members, the blessed Apo∣stles themselves, are
1 Cor. 4.10 & 13. . despised, and accounted the filth of the World, and the off-scowring or out-sweepings of all things: but the Head of it, our Lord himself, was in the eies of men without form
Isa. 55.2, 3 or beauty, des∣pised and rejected of men, who hid their eies from him, and esteemed him not. 2 As a bush pricketh and vexeth him that deals roughly with it; so shall the Church of God bee as a stiff and prickly bramble, to vex, and wound at length, all the proud enemies of it, so as all that
Zach. 12 3 lift at it shal be torn, though all the people of the earth should be gathered against it. 3 As the creatures for their own safety make their nests and muses in a bush; so the mighty Creator (not for his, but the bushes safety) vouchsafeth
Deut. 33.. to dwell in this bush of the Church. The bush was in Mount
Exod. 3.1 Famous for s memorable things in Mos done there. 1 This visio 2 Fasting the forty daies an nights. 3 Re¦ceiving the  there. 4 Scri¦king the rock for water. 5 Lifting his hands against Amck. 6 Breaking t ables of  Horeb, and God was in the bush: even so the Church is in the mountain of the Lord, lifted up (as a mountain above the vallies) in holinesse and priviledges a∣bove all the earth besides: for of this mountain the Lord hath said,
Psa 68.16 there will I dwell for ever.
II. The bush burns with fire: In this resemblance is shadowed the oppres∣sed estate of the Israelites in the Egyptian furnace: and by fire here is meant, the most painful, and pittiful afflictions and miseries, which seiz up∣on the Church and Members, as a raging and devouring fire upon a dry bush: for 1 Fire is a diffusive and spreading element, catching whatsoever com∣bustible matter is neer it: even so not a sprig of this bush of the Church, shall escape the flame of affliction, but whosoever will live godly in Christ Jesus,
2 Tim. 3.12 shall suffer persecution: for either the fiery darts of Satan shall scorch them within; or they shall be sindged with the fiery
1 Pet. 4.12. tryals of the worlds hatred; or at least, they must look to bee be-smeared, and blacked in their names, with the colly and smoak of odious, false, and scandalous imputati∣ons: and what are
Quid a sus quam flemma ? Gods people (saith one) but the fewel of the wicked worlds fiery indignation? 2 Fire shineth and inlighteneth: so the afflicti∣ons
 of the Church, as fire, inlighten the mind,
Psal. 119.71 teach the statutes. The rod and correction (saith Solomon)
Prov. 29.15 give wisdome: and the Lord
Job 33.16. & 36.9. openeth by correction, (saith Elihu) the ears of man which hee had sealed: in which use, this fire of affliction becomes as another
Exod. 13.21 pillar of fire, to inlighten and guide the Israel of God, in the night of their wandring through the wilderness of this world, towards their land of promise, that heavenly Canaan. 3 Fire giveth heat and warm'th: so the heat of this fire of affliction melteth and thaweth our frozen hearts, condensed and con∣gealed by the pinching air of cold security: this fire kindleth our devotion, enflameth our zeal,
Isa. 26.16. & Hos. 5.15. warmeth our prayers, and makes us hot suters for re∣leef. 4 Fire softneth and smodreth metals:
Exod. 9.27 Pharaohs steely heart will melt and soften while it is in this hot furnace: yea, in the same man it se∣parateth dross from pure metal, and like that fire which burnt only the
Dn 3.27 Igis non perdi sed purgs. bands of them that were cast in, but not their bodies: so it only consumeth the corruptions, but preserveth alive the children of God, who only walk at more liberty and further inlargement in the fire, than they did out of it; and as gold, come forth more purified, more glorious. 5 Fire is a climbing and ascending element: so the fire of affliction maketh the heart to ascend, and raiseth the thoughts to heaven-ward.
Luk. 15.17 Misery maketh the Prodigal bethink himself of his Fathers house, when he is a great way from it: and this is the fire which Moses saw seizing upon the bush.
Stabilitatem po∣puli ex veritate promissionum dei adravit. Junius in analys. III. The bush burning is not consumed: signifying the preservation of the Church and Members (as Israel in Egypt) in the hottest furnace of their afflictions. Well may wee wonder, that so flaming and terrible a fire, falling upon so contemptible a bush, and so dry and despicable a shrub, should not presently turn it into ashes: for why? is the fire too weak; or is the bush so strong as to defend it self; or is it not disposed or apt to be burnt & consumed by so fierce a fire? Certainly it is not from the impotency of the fire, nor from the strength or constitution of the bush (which is in the matter of it as com∣bustible as any chaff, and as easily destroyed as any stubble) that it is not con∣sumed. But, 1 This fire is not kindled against the bush, cut of the sparks of Gods wrath,
Heb. 12.29 Heb. 12.10. and indignation (which is indeed a consuming fire) but of his Fatherly affection and love, not for the hurt of the bush, but for the profit of it: not to destroy the persons, but the sin for the persons sake. Wee have in∣deed kindled and blown up our selves a violent and devouring fire,
Heb. 10.27 which God might send into our bones,
Lam. 1.13 Psal. 83.14 Lam. 3.22 to burn us up, as fire burneth the forrest, and as the flames set the mountains on fire: But the mercy of God is as water to quench this fire (for else would it burn to the bottome of Hell) and in¦stead of a Furnace of fury which melteth away his enemies,
Ezek. 22.22 he setteth up in Zion,
Isa 27.9 a furnace of favour, only to melt the metal, consume away the dross, and refine his chosen ones to become vessels of honour. 2 Because the fuel of the consuming fire of Gods wrath are slaves, not sons: those wicked brambles,
Ezek. 15.7 which if they escape one fire (saith the Prophet) they fall into a∣nother, which shall consume them: but not this bush, which is only made brighter, and better by the flame, but not blacker, not worser. The chaff and stubble must feed the fire of wrath, never to come forth more; but the pure metal is cast into the furnace to come forth so much the purer, as it hath been the longer tryed.
Exod. 3.2 3 Because the Angel of God is in the
 bush. This Angel was Jesus Christ, the Lord of the holy Angels, and the great Angel of the Covenant. For Moses saith expresly of this vision,
ver. 4. The Lord appeared unto Moses: and, God called unto him out of the middest of the bush: and S. Luke recording the same vision;
Act. 7.31. 2. greeing with Exod. 3.6 after that hee had called him an Angel, bringeth him in, saying, I am the Lord of Abraham, &c. This same presence of the Son of God, was noted the cause why the three children in that furious furnace of Nebuchadnezzar,
Dan. 3.25. being cast in bound, walked loose in the midst of the flames; why, not they, but their bands were burnt; and why, not an hair of their cloaths,
vers. 27. and much lesse of their heads were touched, no nor smelt of the fire.
Isa. 43.2 Behold the bush burned, but not consumed; because the King saw four men walking loose, having cast in but three bound: and, they have no hurt; for the form of the fourth is like the Son of God. Because God is in the midst of it (saith David of the Church) it shall not bee moved:
No potentia urendi sublata ab ige, sed ope∣ratio tantum: ut Dan. 3 for God shall help it very ear∣ly. How? partly, 1 by restraining the natural force of the fire: 2 partly by obfirming and strengthening the bush against it: 3 partly by watching it that it spread not too far; for himself (as it were) sits by the fire to tend it: 4 partly by slaking and cooling it when it groweth too hot, lest the heat smite the bush, as the worm did Jonas his gourd. By these means,
Jonab 4.7. the bush in the flame becometh like the Gem Amiantus,
Amiantus g∣a ig non ab∣sumitur, sed luci∣di ac urior redditur. Dub. Chytrs. Isa. 53.3. which is not consumed by fire, but becomes brighter and purer than before.
This most holy and comfortable truth is fully assured unto us, in the per∣son of our Lord and Head, as well as in the body: who in the daies of his flesh was, 1 A bush, most able to peirce and wound his enemies: in himself most desplicable, and base in all outward appearances: and in this bush God dwelt not in any visible sign of his presence; but (as never in any before) essentially and bodily. 2 A bush in the fire; partly of Gods wrath,
Col. 2.9. . Isa. 53.10. Matth. 26.38 Mat. 27.46 Lam. 1.14 True first in the head, and then in the members. in in∣ward passion and suffering in his soul the sorrows of the second death, which made him cry, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? into which flame had the bush of the Church been cast, it had been utterly consumed. Partly of mans wrath, in outward passion and misery, such as whereof hee complained, that no sorrow was ever matchable to his. And partly of Satans wrath, in most fiery and furious temptation: the which hel∣lish fire was renewed, and blown up against him, in most violent sort three several times, as in the Treatise following we shall (by Gods grace) discover. 3 A bush in the fire not consumed: but came forth of the hotest Furnace that ever was kindled, more bright and glorious than the Sun in his strength. For easy it was with him to convince his temporal adversaries by the mighty raising of himself from the dead, through his own Divine power,
Rom. 1.4 when hee had overcome the wrath of God his Father: and not difficult for him that had in his life overcome Satans Temptations, and in the wilder∣ness spoiled him of his power and weapons in part:
Col. 2.15 upon the cross by his death openly and perfectly to destroy his Forces; and as on a glorious Cha∣riot to triumph over him.
This bush burnt, but not consumed. As he is the end of all the Scriptures, so also of the exposition of them; in whom, and for whose glory I have publish∣ed this Exposition, at the importunate request of some Friends: Notwith∣standing many discouragements that was on the one hand, and sundry god∣ly
 lights in our own tongue opening the same Scripture on the other.
Mr. Udal. Mr. Perkins. Mr. Dike. 2 Sam. 23.13 The truth is magnified in the mouth of many witnesses: and a poor man may give in as true an evidence as a rich. If I may hold Benajahs place in the Church of God, and stand for God among the thirties, and the many of his Worthies, it shall well content me, although I attain not unto the first three.
What ever this labour is, I have presumed to dedicate it unto you (noble Sir) as a testimony of my true and unfeigned affection and duty. 1 Because God hath made you a worthy instrument in this place, which as well by your authority and care, as through your godly affection and countenance of good men and causes, hath a long time enjoyed much comfort, assistance and refreshing. 2 Your sound love to the truth hath invited this truth to run under your patronage. 3 As he which hath been once friendly bid welcome, will boldly come again; so your good entertainment of this doctrin in the de∣livery of it, assures it you will now bid it as welcome to your eye, as it was to your ears at the first offer of it. 4 Your loving respect of me and mine, hath been as a continual shadow and refreshing,
Phil. 2.2. unto mee, who may and must truely say with the Apostle, I have found no man in these Parts Like-Minded: And out of my answerable respect, I would set by you, for your refreshing, a little vessel of comfortable wa∣ter drawn out of the Scriptures,
Isa. 12.3. the wells of consolation; by which you may allay and cool the heat of that fire, which every sprig of the bush shall be scorched withall, and which perhaps you have not altogether, or shall not escape. I would also express my desire to put into your hands a weapon a∣gainst the like fiery assaults of Satan, who spareth neither head nor members: which while you buckle fast unto you; as you have your honourable Fathers name, and resemble him in other vertues; so herein also you shall imitate his wisdome and prudence: of whom I have heard, that living in the Court to a great age, and usually wearing his weapon about him, one asked why he being so weak, burdened himself with his weapon: his Noble answer was, Hee would not lay off his weapon so long as he knew one Papist in the Court.
A resolute an∣swer of a grave and noble Counsellor. This will be also your wisdome, so long to buckle your weapon unto you, as you know one enemy left to tempt and assault you. And now in leaving you, let mee leave with you a medicine or receipt against the sting of that fiery Serpent,
Rabi folia su∣perjecta serpenti, interimunt eum. Amb. Hexam. lib. cap. 9 of power to drive him away. For as Ambrose speaks of the leaves of the bramble bush, that being cast upon one kinde of Serpent they kill him: so much more true it is, that the leaves of Gods word, which properly belong to the bush of the Church, and opposed to Satans poysoned temptations, over∣come and Master them.
Deut. 33.16 And thus as Moses requested that the blessing of him that dwelt in the bush, might come upon the head of Joseph; e∣ven so, the good will of him that dwelt in the bush, come upon your head, upon the head of your vertuous Lady, upon the heads of your children, to the sweetning and crowning of your age:
vers. 13. And blessed of the Lord bee your portion,
vers. 23 for the sweetness of Heaven, and for the sweetness of the earth, till you be satisfied with favour, and filled with the blessing of the Lord. Amen.
Reading,
Octob. 28. 1618.

