





SALOMON that most re∣nowned & roy∣al King, weigh∣ing the wret∣chednesse of this world, by the weight of his wonder∣full wisedome; could no lesse but redouble his words and say, Vanitas vanitatum, Eccle. 1. 2. vanitas vanitatum: & omnia vanitas. Which seing it is so (Right ) it be∣hooueth
 euery one of vs, not somuch to auoid the causes that may prouoke vs to vanity, as to practise all the means that may procure vs to piety; and to walke with such foresight in this terrestriall pilgrimage, as we may haue fruition of felici∣ty in the Celestiall Paradise; according to the counsell of our Sauiour Christ, who willeth vs first to seeke the Kingdome of God, and his Mat. 7. 33. righteousnesse: and not dis∣senting from the saying of the Apostle, who perswa∣deth vs to set our affections on things that are aboue, & Col. 3. 2.
 not on thinges that are on the earth; Insomuch that all our knowledge is but vaine, that is seduced with vanity: all our wisedome is but meare folly, that is car∣ried away with earthly co∣gitations: yea al our doings detestable that tend onelye to temporall dispositions; for there is none to bee dee∣med wise indeede, that will not bestow his talent in the treasure of Gods word, con∣sidering it is so precious, that it ought more to be de∣sired then Gold, yea then much fine Gold: and it is so delectable, that in sweetnes
 it excelleth the hony, and the hony combe, wherein Psal. 19. 10. Dauid did oppose his whole Psal. 119. 97. delight: And it is so expe∣dient for vs to profit therin, as he that hath much, may yeeld somewhat, sithence that he that hath lesse, shall not bee excused with no∣thing; the Lord will looke for ten Talents, where hee Mat. 25. 22. left fiue, and wil punish him that maketh no profit wher he bestowed one. Heereof it is I haue proceeded in this enterprise, and bestowed my time to the benefit of others which although it bee not comparable to any commē∣dable
 worke, yet that is not excusable for any to detract his duty, seing God will ac∣cept of a Mite, of a willing mind, neither ought to bee contemptible amongst o∣thers, though all bee not currant: for the building is furthered by inferiour helpes, though it be framed by finer heads.
Againe the world is now growne into his last age, wherein Sects, Schismes, and errors doe spread, and sinne and iniquitie. aboun∣deth: Insomuch as (I feare mee) it is with ma∣ny of vs in ENGLAND,
 as it was with the people of ISRAEL, they loathed Exod. 16. Manna that fell from Hea∣uen for the sustenance of their bodies, and too too many of vs doe little regard that spirituall Manna, (the word of GOD) that is sent for the succour of our soules. Heereof it I haue made choice of your good  and presented my labours to your Godly patronage, assuring my selfe as you be fauourers and fol∣lowers of Gods word, so you will be defenders of the fruites of the same, and ra∣ther bee preferrers then de∣facers
 of a forward action, not doubting but your  will well accept of it, as a worke ymporting and proceeding of good will, by the consideration of that ex∣ample of the poore widdow preferring the simplicitie of the giuer, before the suffici∣ency of the gift, knowing that the imperfection of the present may bee couered by the presumption of the Po∣et; and I may say in the want of well doing, Est vo∣luisse satis. Thus being loath to bee too tedious in my E∣pistle, hauing obserued breuitie in all my said book,
 I referre the consideration thereof, to your graue cen∣sures; submitting my selfe to your good curtesies, and committing your to the protec∣tion of the Al∣mightie.

