


RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL,
IT is not wi∣thout cause, that the observa∣tion of the LORDS

Day is called, THE KEY OF RE∣LIGION; which being neglected, the same should quicklie decaye, and quyte perish out of the hearts of men: and, so, they should turne Athiestes, and become without GOD in the World. For pre∣venting whereof, the LORD praefixed a speciall Memento to the fourth Precept of His Morall Law, enjoyning men, to Remember to keepe holie the Sabbath Day; and subjoyning a moste pithie reason thereof. But (alace!) men now vnder the Gospell, are come to such a degree of impietie with vs, that, tho they haue a more for∣cible reason to obserue the LORRS DAY, whereon our Saviour rose, and brought vs from Death, to Lyfe agayne; and which from the beginning hitherto the Christian Church also, everie where, hath so religiouslie observed. Yet these,

not through oblivion, nor igno∣rance, but agaynst knowne light, and wilfullie, as also both peart∣lie, and publicklie, to the high of∣fence of GOD, and scandall of His People, prophane that Holie Daye, consecrated to His Wor∣ship, by Salmond-Fishing thereon, in tyme of Divine Service; where∣by GOD is depryved of His Ho∣nour, the Church of Reverence, the Common-wealth of Order, the Bodie of Rest, the Soule of Edification, the Life of Direction, GOD'S Word of Audience, and His Law of Obedience: counting onelie their Gayne to bee Godlinesse, and not (as the Apostle sayeth) Godlinesse to bee great Gayne:1. Tim. 6.. and esteeming the Word of GOD in the mouthes of His Servantes, (be∣cause it crosseth their commodi∣tie, as it did Alexander the Cop∣per-smith's) even as Pharao cal∣led

it in the mouth of MOSES, for the lyke cause,Exod. 5.9. Vayne wordes onlie, not to be regarded; tho one day they know they shall bee jud∣ged thereby.
Yea, some are come to that hight of impietie, hating to be re∣formed,Psal. 50.27. that they dare call in que∣stion the verie Institution, and lawfulnesse, of the observation thereof, which Augustine decla∣reth,Aug. Epist. 118. ad Ian. Insolentissmae esse insaniae; or, an expression, & a fit, of a most in∣solent, & audacious madnesse; not worthie of anie modest answere.
For due informing and reclay∣ming of whom, (if they bee not lyke Babell, which would not bee cured) I haue taken these paynes, in all loue, and care of their salva∣tion; and shall count it my grea∣test joye, and most happie besto∣wed travells, if heereby (besides my preaching, and daylie prayers

for them) I may fish, by the Nette of the Gospell, but one Soule amongst them, to bee obedient to the LORD; and lyke Noah, in his age, by their practise, to op∣pose the speat of wicked and com∣mon Example. But, if not, wee that are their Pastoures, must not bee quyte discowraged, because wee see neyther our paynes nor preaching to prevayle; seeing that Noah, in cxx years, both by prea∣ching and building the Arke lyke∣wyse, converted not one soule of the whole world to fayth and re∣pentance; and that the Lord's Pro∣phets haue beene commanded to preach, and yet it hath beene told them before-hand,Ezek. 3.4. that they should not bee heard; yea, more∣over,Isai 6.10. that their doctrine should harden the heartes of the hearers. But this wee shall doe;1. Sam. 15.35. As Samuell mourned for Saull, whom he could

not mende, and as the Apostle be∣wayled those that sinned,2. Cor. 12.21. and had not repented; So our soules shall not ceasse to mourne for them in secret; and, in the meane whyle, our worke shall be with our God: And whether our labours bee vn∣to lyfe or death to our hearers, to convert or convince them, we shall bee vnto God, a sweete savour in Christ,2. Cor. 2.15. both in them that are sa∣ved, and in them that perish.
These paynes, then, (Sir) I haue dedicated to Your Worship, for sundrie respectes, and diverse obliegementes mooving mee; but especiallie, in regarde of that reli∣gious disposition, and zealous af∣fection, Yee haue to the Trueth, and hatered agaynst such enor∣mous abuses as this, or anie lyke wilfull & grosse violation of Gods holy Cōmandements: with which disposition, both evidently & emi∣nently

is conjoyned a patterne in Your person of an assiduous & ver∣tuous inclination: that so for Reli∣gion & Policie, your W. is famous both in Church & Commonwealth; even as it was wished of Boaz, that hee might doe worthilie in Ephratha, and bee famous in Bethlehem. With the constancie of which worthie & imitable parts,Ruth 4.1. I shall also wish the continuance of all true happinesse, both with your self, your most re∣ligious Ladie, honorable House, & all Your hopefull Posteritie; as one who shall ever approue himselfe

