



IN these distress-full dayes (Right Honourable) if ever the LORDES Watch-men, who are set up-on the Walles of Hierusalem, should not cease;Isai. 65.6▪ then surelie now (as the Prophet exhorteth) those that are mindfull of the LORD, should not keepe silence, when the Kirke of CHRIST is not onelie by open cimnies assaulted abroade,Psal. 55.12. Genes. 25.22. for (with Da∣vid) that shee could beare, and hide her-selfe from those that avowedlie hate her, and magnifie them-selves against her: but as a dolorous Re∣becca, complayning, Why am I thus? shee bath an in-ward strugling wi∣thin
 her wombe at home: and the Aegyptian not onelie striveth with the Is∣raelite,Exod. 2.11 but as that Royall Psalmist complaineth of his verie familiar, in whom hee trusted, that hee rose up against him; and of his companion, and acquain∣tance,Psal. 41.9 who went with him to the House of GOD together; that even hee re∣proached him, and was his adversarie. Even so, that glorious Profession of the Trueth, which wee have taken up-on us, and the true Spouse of CHRIST, hath not founde amongst most professed Opposites, those that have beene to her (as Esau his Wyves were to his Mother) greater griefe of heart, and hurt∣fuller enemies,Gen. 26.35 than those whome most tenderlie shee nursed, and did owe un-to her a Filiall duetie, and not a Foe-lyke dealing: and in place where-of, as in sundrie sortes shee hath founde of late, their unnaturall wounding, and cursed under-myning. So to the shame of our Nation, and scandall of Religion, that of the Vniting of Kirkes hath not beene the least: and where-in even Kirke-men (as Iudas did in the death of CHRIST) had the chiefest hand, and are stayned there-by with the most odious guilt: So that (as in Zedekiah's time) it may bee justlie sayde,Chrō. 36 That the chiefe also and of the people trespassed here∣in wonderfullie: their Eyes, and their Heartes, (as sayeth the Prophet) being onelie for their covetousnesse:. 22.17. And there-fore no marvell that wrath and the woe∣full day bee imminent above the Land, and that Worme-wood bee prepared as Meate, and the Water of Gall as Drinke: For in the LORDES owne House hath Hee found this wickednesse: and from the verie Prophets is wicked∣nesse gone foorth in the Lande, whose course hath beene evill, and their force not right.
Sam. 24.It smote the tender Conscience of David, that hee cut onelie a lappe from Saul's Garment:Sam. 24. and hee would no wise drinke of that Water out of the Well of Bethlehem, which was gotten with the hazard onelie of the corporall lives of a fewe. But (alace) to cut off, by that woefull Priviledge and Practise of Vniting, so manie of GODS Houses, destinating them to ruine, after robbe∣rie; and to drinke and eate that which most sacrilegiouslie is gotten not with the hazard onelie, but the apparent losse of the Soules-lives of manie, in these remote Vnited Parishes: as a Cage is full of Birdes, so filling their Houses with De∣ceit: what Conscience, yea, what Crueltie, sheweth it? Or what Wrath and Vengeance shall it procure? Surelie, lyke the trespasse of Iudah, this sinne is written with a Penne of yron before the LORD,. 17. . 5. and with the point of a Diamont. And shall not Hee visite for these thinges (sayeth the LORD?)
 Or shall not His Soule bee avenged on such a Nation as this?
These small paines, there-fore (Sir) which I have taken, in taxing this Sinne, and the discoverie there-of, to beare record,Ier. 6.17. Ier. 88. And 6.29. Amos, 6.12 that (as the Prophet sayeth) the Watch-men have warned, and sayde, Take heede to the sound of the Trum∣pet; all the men would say, Wee will not take heede: and that the Penne of the Scribes bee frustrate, or the Bellowes bee burnt, the Lead bee consumed in the Fire, and that the Founder hath melted in vayne. As I have directed my Speach to the LORDES Vice-gerent, and moaned to him who best can mende the Wrong; So (Sir) I have dedicated the same to you, my most worthie and ever-honoured Parishoner; as one who is freest of anie of your Ranke or Rent in the whole Kingdome from anie sacrilegious guiltinesse: and who ever hath ab∣horred, in all your Earthlie Conquestes, where-with the LORD hath greatlie blessed you, (that same GOD graunt you still an humble and thankefull Heart there-fore) from medling with the Tithes of anie, inhauncing Patrona∣ges, (the High-way now to become Master of other mens Tithes) or having the least entres in these woefull Vnions. And on the other part, (with-out as∣sentation to speake, and for your further encouragement to goe on) with howe bountifull and chearfull minde you have bestowed up-on the Enlarging, Deco∣ring, and Furnishing of GODS House where your speciall residence is, these Monumentes of your pious Mynde, obvious to the Eyes of all, shall clear∣lie, to GODS Glorie, and your due prayse, give sufficient evidence to all Posteritie.
And for my selfe (Sir) in particular, how constantlie comfortable I have found you in the discharge of my Calling ever, since the LORD layde that Burden on my weake and unworthie Shoulders; as I can not, with-out the stayne of odious Ingratitude, but acknowledge, praysing GOD for you: So in testi∣monie of my most affectionate duetie there-fore, I recommende this small Pam∣phlet un-to you: which since it came from his Majesties Royall hand, with gracious approbation, (being first sent and praesented un-to him in Writ) I have beene solisted by sundrie to put it to the PRESSE.
Receive it there-fore (Sir) from the hand of one, who ever shall wish un∣to you and yours, the accomplishment of all true Happinesse: and that as GOD hath dealt manie wayes liberallie with you in temporall Benefites; so the LORD to sanctifie the right use of them un-to you: and give you an holie Heart, on∣lie to bee set up-on the earnest desire of heavenlie Blessinges: counting all thinges
 (with the Apostle) but Dongue in respect of the saving knowledge of CHRIST, and to bee founde in Him:Matth. 6. and laying up a Treasure for your selfe (as your Saviour commaundeth) in Heaven, where you may surelie finde it at the last day. And as these things are given you (Sir) for Love-Coardes, to draw you nea∣rer in a thankefull Heart un-to Him: So by a fruitfull lyfe, in godlie and good Workes,1. Tim. 6. (as those that are rich in this worlde are charged to bee) testifie that grace to the worlde, that so your age may bee as a Crowne of Glorie, being found in the way of Righteousnesse: laying up in store for your selfe a good Foundation, against the tyme to come; that the Glo∣rie may bee the LORDES, the fruite and good example may redound to the survi∣vers, and the Eternall comfort and Reward of well-doing, may cleave to your Soule, and your Soule to the LORD.

