



RIGHT REVEREND, my dutie in most humble wise remembred, I am to beseech your good Lordshippe, to vouchsafe me that fauour, (if not for mine owne sake, or the worthines of the thing it selfe, yet for Cambridge sake, and that especiall affection, whiche you haue alwayes borne towards Vniuersitie men, and namely your singu∣lar curtesie toward my brother Gabriel, when he should haue trauailed to Smalcaldie, which curtesie he doth of∣ten recognise) that as it hath pleased you alreadie to commit the perusing of the Astrologicall Discourse fol∣lowing, to your most learned sonne in lawe, M. Doctor Squire, who can verie well iudge, and hath verie friend∣ly allowed thereof: so it may now like your Lordshippe, to admit of the same for the best New yeares gift, that

such a scholler on such a suddaine can bestow. Which al∣beit in respect of the base handling, it be nothing wor∣thie either the view, or the handling of such a personage, as I can not but know your Lordship to be: yet conside∣ring the great importance, and consequence of the argu∣ment, I am both perswaded by some friends, who are to ouerrule me in a greater matter, to aduenture the publi∣cation thereof, (insomuch that I haue made my good Lord of Rochester, and M. Doctor Lewen priuie there∣unto, who like well of the impression) and with all am incouraged to craue your good leaue, that vpon your priuate liking, (which notwithstanding my selfe of my selfe can not greatly hope for) you would suffer it to passe vnder the title of your good Lorshippes publique maintenaunce, and patronage. I may easily presume too much of your accustomed fauour, so assuredly knowen as well in both the Vniuersities, as abroad in your Lord∣ships Diocesse, and other parts of the Realme: and there∣fore (notwithstanding the importunitie of those my friends, and the grauitie of the argument it selfe) being loth to be ouerbold, where I owe so much reuerence and dutie, I haue thought good, not to vse your name without your owne licence, but wholy to commit the publishing, or suppressing of this Discourse to your Lordshippes li∣king or disliking. You may haply maruell what I meane, either to deale my selfe in any such matter of Astrologie being shortly to professe Diuinity, (so soone as my place in the College shall call me thereunto) or to dedicate a Treatise of anie such contents vnto one, that hath both so many yeres, euen in King Edwards, & Queene Maries daies, (as appeareth by his owne, and others writings) ca∣ried so singular credit for his knowledge, and practise in Diuinitie, & now by Gods prouidence is in place, to be∣nefit and countenance those, that being admitted to that vocation, shall deserue to be well accepted therein. But for the one, besides that I might alleage for my defence,

the examples of Melancthon, Chytraeus, Iunctinus, Maest∣lyne, our M. Doctor Fulke, your M. Doctor Squier, and some other of like credit: who being professed in Di∣uinitie to their owne speciall commendation, & the ge∣nerall benefite of the Church, were not afterward asha∣med both to defend, & to practice Astrologie: the verie subiect and matter of the Arte it selfe is such, that none, which knoweth it in deede, can iustly charge it with the least contrarietie or repugnancie either to Diuinitie it selfe, or to the soundest partes of Morall and Naturall Philosophie. Coeli enarrant gloriam Dei; and Platoes opi∣nion is, that our eies were principally giuen vs, for this vse and end, to be occupied in the contemplation of the heauens; whereunto he attributeth so much, that he thinketh Astronomie and wisedom to be so inseparably linked and chained togither, that neither a very wise man can want Astrologie, nor a very good Astrologer want wisdom. To which effect, that notable saying of his, de∣serueth to be as famous, as your Lordship knoweth it to be amongest the learned: . Which verie saying seemeth vnto me to import some part of that Diuinitie, whereof so many ages he hath caried so high, and honourable a surname: the ra∣ther because the singular and incomparable wisedom of Salomon, as your Lordshippe best remembreth, is thus particularly described, in the booke intituled, Liber Sa∣pientiae. Deus mihi dedit harum rerum cognitionem veram, vt sciam dispositionem orbis terrarum, & virtutes, effectionesque elementorum, initium, & finem, & medium temporum, solsti∣tiorum vicissitudines, & consummationes temporum, & morum mutationes, annorum orbes, & stellarum situs, ac dispositiones, & naturas animalium, & iras bestiarum, & ventorum impe∣cus, & cogitationes hominum, & stirpium differentias, & ra∣dicum virtutes: & quaecunque sunt abscondita, & improuisae didici, cum me omnium Artifex docuit Sapientia. For which verie kindes of knowledge, (albeit I beleue neuer anie

had them in that full measure, that it pleased God to be∣stow vpon Salomon) our chiefest Astrologers, especial∣lie the most learned Arabians, so often as they are occa∣sioned to cite, or mention any of their predecessors: call them commonlie by the name of Sapientes, which some I know merrily translated Wizardes, but how wizardly, (if they speake generally without exception of the bet∣ter sort) let the prouerbe testifie, which saith, Scientia non habet inimicum, nisi ignorantem. What should I speake of Thales Milesius, who being the first, that among the Graecians was called , as Diogenes Laertius repor∣teth▪ was also the first among them, that searching out the secrecies, and misteries of Astrologie: both foretold the conuersions, and eclipses of the Sunne, as Eudemus witnesseth in his Astrologicall historie, and found out Vrsa minor with hir litle starres, whereby the Phoenices direct their nauigation, as Callimachus testifieth in his Greeke verses: and foreseeing a verie great dearth of oliues, and thereupon purposing to shewe, howe easie a matter it was for Philosophers to grow rich, gat into his hands by a reasonable price, all the oliue gardens in Mi∣letum, and Chium, the winter before, whereby after∣ward making his owne price at his pleasure, he gained exceeding great summes of money: as is crediblie re∣corded not only by Hieronimus Rhodius, and Aristotle in Greeke, but also by Tullie De Diuinatione, and diuers other in Latine: Aristotle saying, one while he did it, , an other while, : and Solon the wise Lawmaker among the Athenians, following his aduise, set downe certaine Astrologicall obseruations of the Aequinoctia, and corrected the Attique yeare, as ap∣peareth by manie histories: and finally by the defects of the Moone and Sunne, he prognosticated the defects and subuersions of certaine states and kingdoms in Asia, as out of Plinies Naturall historie, I haue specially no∣ted in my briefe Treatise of the late eclipse. I should be

ouer tedious vnto your Lordship, if I should go about to recite the tenth part of those testimonies, and auctori∣ties, which I coulde easilie alleage to the same effect: whereby it is certainlie euident, that as wise, and wor∣thie men, as euer were in the world, both made verie speciall account of this studie in other, and trauailed ex∣ceedingly therein them selues: as namely Iulius Cae∣sar, Octauius Augustus, Ptolomey, Theodosius, one of the best Emperours, Fredericke the second, (who cau∣sed Ptolomey, Messahalah, and diuers other princi∣pall Astrologers, to be translated out of the Arabian in∣to Latine: Hos quia consilijs regum conducere sensit: as Hellerus writeth to Ernestus, Prince of Hennenberg:) Alphonsus the most excellent King of Arragonia, and Naples: Matthias Coruinus of Hungarie: Charles the fift of famous memorie, and sundrie other, as well Prin∣ces, as subiectes of the most notable sort. But I can not praetermit that Astrologicall conference betwene Cae∣sar, and the Aegyptian Priest in Lucans Pharsalia, where Caesars owne confession of him selfe is thus deliuered: media inter praelia semper, stellarum, coelique plagis, superisque vacaui: Eudoxi Fastos noster superabit & Annus. Which he in deede performed, correcting and reforming the Romane yeare by the helpe of Sosigenes, as Solon did the Attique yeare by the helpe of Thales: an other ma∣ner of reformation, than that of the Calender, which the Pope Gregorie the xiij. hath newly published, by the helpe of I knowe not what Astrologers. As for the rest, least I should seme to forget my selfe, in not hauing that regard to your Lordships person, which I ought, wil re∣serue their Astrologicall commendations vnto some fit∣ter place, thinking it sufficient for this present, to stande vpon the Reasons, which Melancthon, a man as your Lordship best knoweth, of a sharpe, and sounde iudge∣ment in most schollerly points of learning, alleageth, in a notable preface of his, In Theoricas nouas planetarum

Georgij Purbachij directed to his most learned countri∣man, Simon Grynaeus: wherein he sheweth how neede∣full Iudiciall Astrologie is, both for priuate vses, and for publike. For priuate vses, first in medendo: then, ad regen∣dos mores: thirdly, ad deligenda studia: plurimum enim re∣fert intelligere, quo quemque natura ducat: (I vse not a word, but his owne:) beside, fortuna saepe comitatur mores: & quanquam aliae quoque causae funt humanorum euentuum, ta∣men res loquitur ipsa, interdum in Astris causara esse, cur vt Hesiodus inquit: ipse dies quandoque parens, quandoque no∣uerca, sit. Fiftly, conducit tempestatum obseruatio ad Oeco∣nomiam: last of all, hi proximi anni aliquot satis claras signi∣ficationes praebuerunt, sidera magnam vim in aere, & re∣bus nascentibus habere, idque palam testantur insignes side∣rum congressus (which maketh directly for the present Discourse.) And as for the publike vse and necessitie thereof, he goeth forwarde thus, in my simple opi∣nion, both very politickely and diuinely: Existunt & inrebus publicis fatales tempestates, in quibus admoniti ab hac arte, multa prouidere possunt, vel ad cauenda, vel ad mitiganda pericula. Saepe enim fata consilio in melius flecti queunt, saepe fatorum saeuitiam lenit Deus, placatus pio∣rum votis. Quare haec quoque grauis causa fuerit, rerum futurarum significationes animaduertendi. He addeth for reason. Prodest enim commonefieri homines atrocibus side∣rum minis, vt à Deo opem implorent; deinde, vt bonitatem Dei magis agnoscant, cum viderint aliquam esse superiorem ac meliorem naturam sideribus, quae tristes significationes miti∣gat. To the breeding of which politike, and diuine considerations in the mindes of some or other, I would to God, this slender Discourse of mine might be anie meanes. Melancthon leaueth not thus, but still goeth on, as it were in a certaine feruent zeale towards this profession. Nec dubia est harum Artium fides: nam & motuum ratio demonstrationes habet, quarum eò est suauissi∣ma cognitio, quia delectat animos certitudo, & harmonia,

seu consensus in tanta varietate argumentorium: & Diui∣natricem si quis prudenter ad Physicen referet, intelliget eam habere graues causas; & tuetur eam experientia peri∣tissimorum hominum: rectè verò Galenus de hac ipsa arte inquit: Sophisticum esse, contra experientiae testimonium, rationes quaerere. Finally, to aunswere common ob∣iections, and suche ordinarie contradictions, as A∣strologers eares are well acquainted withall, he at last breefely decideth, and determineth all such doubtes in the wordes following. Nec eo detrahenda est arti fi∣des, quia aut artifices aliqui inepti sunt, aut non omnes e∣uentus humani in arte monstrantur: sunt enim & aliae quae∣dam praeter sidera, euentuum causae. Etsi autem in tantis tene∣bris humanae mentis, multa prospici nequeunt, tamen ariis beneficium non leue ducendum est, quae pleraque interim; & ad vitae summam pertinentia monet. Quoties fallimur in le∣uioribus artibus, & in ijs rebus, quae sunt, vt ita dicam, in manibus? Neque tamen propter eiusmodi errata explodan∣dae sunt artes; sed prudentia est, ad vitae vsum inde, quan∣tum possumus, transferre. His resolution and conclu∣sion there is. Illud etiam rectè institutis iudicare facile est, quis esse modus Diuinationum debeat, & quòd religio approbet has Diuinationes, vt Medicorum iudicia, aut cae∣teras Physicae partes. Which reasons of Melancthon, I doubt not but your Lordship will admit, and allow for effectually materiall and good. Now I see not greatly, what remaineth to be yet obiected: vnlesse haply some will oppose the olde decrees of the Romane Senate, and some newer imperiall lawes, against all such, as were vulgarly called Mathematici, Chaldaei, Arioli, and Di∣uinatores, of whome Vlpian the famous lawyer trea∣teth libro 7. de officio Proconsulis, vnder the title, De Ma∣thematicis, & Vaticinatoribus: Which verie title I haue hearde so alleaged. Whereunto, first I might aunswere, that they dispute not ad idem: those lawes being made only against such, as Moyses condemneth in the XVIII. of

Deuteronomie, who vainly tooke vpon them, to diuine by magicall and superstitious sorceries, numbers, lottes, characters, charmes, interrogatories propounded to the dead, inspections of birds, entrals of beastes, and such other monstrous, and abhominable meanes: for so saith A. Gellius in his first booke of his Noctes Atticae: vulgus quos gentilitio vocabulo Chaldaeos dicere oportet, eos Mathe∣maticos vocat; & Seruius Honoratus vpon the fourth of Virgils Aeneidos: Cum multa sacra Romani susciperent, sem∣per magica damnarunt; probrosa enim ars habita est. Second∣ly, that albeit those Romane lawes had in deede bene de∣uised as well against their Astrologers then, as against a∣nie other Diuiners or Soothsayers: what reason is there, they should make more against ours now, than the like lawes make against our Rhetoricians, Philosophers, Phi∣sitians, and in a maner against all other professours of a∣nie liberall arte? All such being by one Romane decree or other, at one time, or other, vpon one suddaine occa∣sion, or other, banished the citie, as troublesome, and needelesse persons, in a politike and martiall state, so long as the rage of that tempest endured. Thirdly, admit their Astrological diuinations were lawfully forbidden, being found commonly deceitfull and false, by reason that the art it selfe was then verie vnperfect, and vncer∣taine, as it continued to the age of Ptolomey, who flo∣rished but in the time of the Emperour Antoninus Pius, which succeeded Traian and Adrian: yet may ours ne∣uerthelesse lawfully stand, the art being nowe generallie of the most and best acknowledged to be much more perfectly reformed, and a right art in deede: or if that seeme more, a right science in deede. For which two last reasons, I am to thanke a late conference, that I had with my brother Gabriel, about Hallowmas last, touching the validitie of those Romane lawes. As for other later lawes, & statuts, either forreine, or our owne, I know not anie that vniuersally and simplie condemne Astrologie:

and as for those, that condemne some particular abuse thereof, I must needes confesse, they are verie wise, and necessarie ordinaunces, to meete with the lewde practi∣ses, and impostures of manie, that vnder the pretence of their figure commit intolerable villanies, wherein for my parte, I doubt not, but they deserue the penalties, in∣flicted vpon them by law, thinking them worthily puni∣shed, Pro mensura consultationis, as Vlpian speaketh of his Mathematici in the forenamed title, with this addition of his, following immediatly after in the same place: qui de principis salute, capite puniantur, vel qua alia grauiore paenae afficiantur: extending withall the force of the law in that point, euen to the punishment of other simple wizardes: Qui contra quietem, imperiumque populi Romani, improbandas artes exercent: and finally alleaging the example of the Emperour Marcus, Qui in Syrum insulam eum relegauit, qui motu Cassiano vaticinatus erat, & multa quasi instinctu Deorum dixerat: Neither dare I excuse either Thrasillus, or Ascle∣tarion, or Gauricus: whereof the first foretold the destru∣ction of Tiberius the Emperour: the second of Domi∣tian: the third of the Bentiuoli in Bononia: or the Priest, that gaue out the rumour of the future murthering of Galeacius Sfortia, Duke of Millaine, (who were all wor∣thily rewarded for their folly) or anie other, that by their Horoscopicall predictions might seeme to harten, & ha∣sten one conspirators, to the atchieuing, or attempting of their Princes death, but in that case would wish all A∣strologers, either not to deale at all, or else to deale pri∣uately and priuily with the Prince him selfe: & then too, to hold Cardanes rule, set downe amongst eight other like conditions, in the end of his booke, De Astrologicie interrogationibus: principi ne magnum malum firmiter vn∣quam praedixeris, sed periculum: howbeit Cardane him selfe dealt more plainly, and therefore more daungerously with our King Edward the VI. as appeareth in the Iudi∣cials of his natiuitie, giuen out in the beginning of his

Duodecim illustres geniturae. At mihi, ex innata sinceritate, & quod miserum adolescentuium amarem, sortisque eius misererer (quoth Cardane there) certum erat, etiam cum manifesto vitae discrimine, omnia patefacere; quamuis futurum crederem, vt me irriderent. But what followeth? Ergo volentibus fatis, nec singularis hus artis cognitio prodesse regi potuit: nec bo∣nitas, atque simplicitas ingenij, mihi obesse. Which good suc∣cesse of Cardane, was partly to be attributed to his owne discreete handling, free from all maner of suspition, but specially to the innocent, and singular good nature of that most noble young King, who accepted so fauoura∣bly of his affectionate intention. But, neither this spe∣ciall priuiledge of his being withall a straunger of ex∣traordinarie credit, nor anie like personall example can warrant other priuate men, to intermeddle in like sorte in the natiuities, and destinies of their Princes, otherwise than is before limited, or vpon the Princes owne direct commaundement. And yet if either this way, or any like, the art happen by some busie, and fonde fellowes to be abused, it hath but the same fortune, that all other artes and sciences haue beside: & the Lawiers rule, Abusus non tollit vsum, will still iustifie the right, and commendable practice thereof. The bounds of which limitation, I ha∣uing no way exceeded in anie parte of the Discourse fol∣lowing: I hope, there is nothing therin contained, which, considering the premises, might not proceede, euen from one, that were already professed in Diuinitie. And, then I trust, in respect of the matter, I haue committed no in∣conuenience, in recommending the same to the fauour and patronage of such a Diuine, as all England knoweth your Lordship to be: who I doubt not, can iudge exactly thereof. For the maner, I am humbly to craue pardon, be∣ing neither practised in writing English, nor purposing anie such publike dedication at the first. It may perad∣uenture be an occasion, that hereafter I shall acquaint my pen better with enditing in our owne tonge. In the meane

time, I am to beseech your Reuerend Lordshippe, to re∣spect rather what is here said, than how it is said: presu∣ming that I haue litle erred in my iudicials, whatsoeuer defects may chaunce to appeare in the style. And yet for the verie consequence of the matter too, I must say with Tullie, Optanda quidem optima: expectanda deterrima: ferenda quaecunque erunt. How Gods omnipotencie ouer∣ruleth all causes, and effects, as well particularly in specie, & indiuiduo, as vniuersally in genere, I haue sufficiently vt∣tered as it were by the way in other places: our last re∣medie is Christian pacience, if there be no other reme∣die. But that is a Theologicall argument, worthie your Lordships handling: and I see I haue already presumed ouermuch of your Lordshippes pacience, in being thus troublesome, and tedious vnto you, beyonde the com∣passe of an ordinarie Epistle, or Preface. Which neuer∣thelesse I durst in no respect haue done, but vpon cer∣taine assurance of that fauourable acceptation, which from time to time, it hath pleased you to vouchsafe the like writings of diuers Vniuersitie men, being litle past my standing there, and namely my brothers Anticosmo∣polita, when he was not much aboue the same conti∣nuaunce. In full hope, and affiance whereof, I will here most humbly take my leaue, committing your Lord∣ship to the protection of God, who giue you many pro∣sperous Newyeares, and long preserue you, to his owne glorie, and the benefit of his Church. Here in London this 23. of Ianuarie. 1583.

