



Worshipfull Sir,
AS there is no vice more odi∣ous and detestable in the sight of God, more hurtfull and pernicious to the Common∣wealth, and more repugnant and con∣trary to nature and reason, than ingra∣titude (that mother sinne, or rather monster of all mischiefe) so there is no vertue more praise-worthy, more re∣quisite and more commendable in a Christian than thankfulnesse; that is, a
 requitall of one good turne with ano∣ther, a rendring (at least a willing desire to render, if meanes and ability faile) of one gift in lue and recompence of another; whereto the Prophet Dauid tieth the godly as to a duty which they must of necessity doe;Psal. 33.1. It becom∣meth (saith hee) the vpright men to bee thankefull: and the Apostle Paul rec∣koneth the vnthankfull amongst the number of those from whom wee should turne away,2. Tim. 3.2. whose number (a∣las) in these perillous times increaseth too fast. Against the neglect of this precious Iewell the Lord himselfe bit∣terly enueigheth by his holy Prophet Esaias,Esa. 1.2, 3. saying, I haue nourished and brought vp children, and they haue rebel∣led against me; yea he preferreth brute beasts in the returne of their duty be∣fore them, saying, The Oxe knoweth his owner, and the Asse his masters crib, but Israel knoweth not me. And our Saui∣our Christ hauing cured ten Lepers,
 and finding one onely thankfull, en∣couraging the one, he saith, Arise,Luk. 17.17, 19. goe thy way, thy faith hath made thee whole: and checking the others ingratitude, he saith, Where are the nine? The Gen∣tiles so worthily hated and abhor∣red this vice, that they adiudged those whom they found more willing to re∣ceiue than willing to requite, execrable vnto God, iniurious to nature, and vnprofitable members of a common∣wealth, the which is cleere by the ex∣ample of Naaman, who being cleansed of his leprosie,2 Kin. 5.15. turned againe to the man of God, and would haue giuen him a reward, yea and would haue constrai∣ned him to receiue it: Finally this vice is so detestable to the very beasts, that they striue to shunne the foule impu∣tation hereof, as Androdus his Lion (of which Gellius lib. 5, noct. attic. cap. 14. mentioneth) and Porus an Indian Kings Elephant (of which Erasmus in the sayings of Alexander) manifestly
 sheweth. And surely, if it be so odi∣ous in Gods sight, & so detestable and hatefull to the Heathens and brute beasts, what should not Christians doe to auoid and shun it? The considera∣tion hereof, together with your Wor∣ships fauour to my Vnkle being aliue, and earnest care of his Orphane (his centuries) hee now being dead, and kindnesse to mee (vnworthy thereof) since I came to this Country, hath em∣boldned, or rather constrained mee to dedicate this little Booke (albeit the talent of another mans zealous inuen∣tion) to your Worship (wherein is contained the miserable estate of those who are without Christ, and the ioy, ease, peace, contentment, and hap∣pinesse of those who delight in him) humbly beseeching your Worship to accept of my good will herein at this time, hoping if God permit, ere long to propine you with an increase, which in some measure shall bee pro∣portionable
 to your sowing. Thus ceasing, I beseech the Lord to conti∣nue you in your godly course, and en∣due you with all blessings which ei∣ther this earth affordeth or Heauen containeth.

