



I Beseeche you thinke not muche (good mystres Prouze) that ha∣uing kept your papers so long, and not restored them. I do also novv at the length adventure vvithout your knovvledge, to make that common to moe and many, vvhich vvas priuate to your selfe and some fewe others. I doe it not (God knovveth) to seek any commoditie to my selfe; but that I may profite the whole church of God. And me think, it is not meete, that that vvhich vvas first publiquely done in the Church, by so vvorthy and notable an instrunent of God, as M. Iohn Knoxe was: althogh in respect of perticuler friendship himself, did only at the firste communicate it vvith you, and some fevv of his freends: it also being a thing that would be so fruitfull and comfortable to manye: that it
should lie any longer in the dust, in secret, and not be published to the comfort of al. For first amongst the rest, it is a seal of his godly and vvonderfull la∣bours, carrying in the forehead thereof, of vvhat an heroicall and bolde spirite he vvas: how painful¦ly and constantly he stoode for the glorious truth and religion of Iesus Christ, and hovv mightily in the end after many and tedious troubles, persecu∣tions & calamities, God gaue him yet a victory, so that he preuayled against all those bulles of Basan. And althogh al this be testified in his sundry works already published, by that story of his life vvhich M. Smeaton, a godly minister hath alreadye sette forth in the latten tong yet if euer God shal vouch safe the church so great a benefite (vvhen his infi∣nite letters, and sundry other Treatises shall be ga∣thered together) it shall appeare, vvhat an excel∣lent man he vvas: and vvhat a vvonderfull losse, that Church of Scotland susteined, vvhen that vvorthy man vvas taken from them. In mean time, I shall desire you, that if you haue any thing, besides those that I haue receiued already, you vvill communi∣cate them vvith me. He maketh mention in a let∣ter to you, of the last parte of this Treatise, if you haue it, I praye you giue it againe to the Churche, from vvhence you had it. And if by your selfe or o∣thers, you can procure any other his vvritinges or letters, here at home or abroad, in Scotland, or in England, be a meane that we may receiue them. It were great pittie, that any the least of his writinges should be lost. For he euermore wrote both godly and diligently, in questions of diuinitie, and also of
Church pollicie And his letters being had togea∣ther, would together set out an whol historie of the Churches where he lyued. I am bold with you (be∣cause I know I may be thus bold with modestie) to employ any thing, that is yours to the good of the Church. I know you liue to your God, and as you haue in times past; being no young scholler in his schoole, giuen sufficient testimonie to the Church of God, of your sincere faith and holy profession, vvhen you liued in exile to enjoy it: so I persvvade my selfe, that in this peace you vvill not forsake it, nor thinke any thing that you haue too precious to bestow vpon it. I keepe also by me, many of the writings, labors and letters, of that worthy & godly mans, your late & deare husband, M. Edward De∣ring (vvhom I name euen for honors sake,) and ga∣ther them in dayly, as I can get them, of his & my good friendes: One day the Lord may giue oportu∣nitie, that as he liueth stil by those notable readings of his in Poules Church, so he may liue in his other vvritings, and all may thorowly see vvhat a man al∣so he vvas, & what a losse we receiued vvhen God tooke him from amongst vs. In meane time, I be∣seech you; do you as you do: continue the Lordes duetifull and faithfull remembrancer. Remember the hope of your calling, and beeing novv nearer your saluation then at the first, striue on forwarde with good courage. Beware of the worlde, and let those be an example to you to stand fast, vvhome you haue sene and see dayly to fall frō the loue of the truth. A day shall come, when you shall reape, in ioye, that which you sow now in mourning and
sorrow, and he that hath strengthned you here to fore to endure stronge tentations, afflictions, and troubles, and to ouercome them, will strengthen you still, if you still leane vppon him. Assure your selfe, that he cannot deceiue you. He that loued vs for him selfe, and for his owne names sake, before we vvere, and before the foundation of the worlde vvas layed, hee vvill loue vs still, because his loue is vnchaungeable, built vpon his own good will, and not vpon our workes either good or euill. Be ther∣fore of good comfort in your profession, let not the vvicked grieue you, but looke vp to him, that guideth all things for his own glory, and hath made the vvicked for a day of vengeance, that he may be magnified in his iudgements.
The Lorde Iesus euermore assist vs, and seale the reconciliation vvhich hee hath wroughte for vs in our hearts, with the seale of his ovvne spirit, that vve may feele it, and bee comforted vvith that comfort that none can take from vs. Amen. Fare you vvell. London this first day, of the first moneth, in the yeare 1583.

