



MY singular good Lorde. The doynges of Papistes standyng wholly, as theyr religion doth, vpon falshed and crueltie, and taking to themselues by vse a licence of vntrue speaking & wor∣kyng, playnly sheweth what fayth is to be geuen to such as thinke them selues bounde to keepe no fayth. Such hath euer bene theyr maner, not onely in dissimulation & practi∣syng before things be brought to passe, but al so in shameles lyeng and misreporting them after they be ended. For what els is to be lo∣ked for of that vnfaithful faith that is groun∣ded wholly vpon falshead and blasphemie, is pursued wholly with malice and treason, is auaunced wholly by crueltie and tyranny, and hauyng no respect of prosperitie beyond this life, hath by confidence in man destroyed the feare of God?
What maruell is it then if such kynde of men, Monkes, Friers, and other Parasites, hauing bene writers of hystories heretofore, haue filled the world with fayned miracles and with intolerable absurdities, to flatter Popes and deceiue the people haue sclande∣red

Emperours Kynges and Princes, and as ordinarely layd vp in their Libraries false treatises and Chronicles to beguile posteri∣tie, as in their cofers forged euidences which they dayly made to robbe true owners of their inheritaunce. In these falsities they so farre proceded, that their impudencie fallyng with want of shame by vse of lyeng into so great imprudence as that manifest contradi∣ctions and inconueniences conuinced them, they then resorted to iustifie their vntruthes & seducyng the world with pretense of a pro∣fitable deceiuyng men with godly errour. Surely whoes conscience can serue them to do murders, to tumble vp kyngdomes, and rayse all kynd of horrible and tragical exam∣ples, will not much sticke to tell lyes in ex∣cusyng or reportyng the doinges of them sel∣ues, and their aduersaries. For Ex ijsdem sunt & nutriuntur mixta, a sect patched vp of lyes must be fed and mainteyned with the same. Much lyke it is to the doyng of kyng Ri∣chard & Catesbie to bleare the worldes eyes with the proclamation of treason supposed to haue bene intended by the Lord Hastings and Shores wife, and shewyng out his owne withered arme, after the example of Anto∣ninus Caracalla concerning his brother Geta, and such like. So dyd that honest man Boner immediatly vppon the death of the excellent Martyr the Archebyshop of Caunterbury o∣penly cause to be published in Print a report

of the Archbyshops death and his woordes before hys death, directly contrarie to that which was spoken, and all in fauor of Papi∣strie. Thence came it that all foreine hysto∣ries are at this day so stuffed with sclanders agaynst our estates people and Princes, spe∣cially sins that kyng Henrie the viij. resu∣med his lawfull iurisdiction from vsurpyng Popes. Our kynges be villanously termed tyrauntes, vertuous Queenes and Ladyes defamed, Nobilitie disgraced, Parlamentes despised, the people reprochfully taunted, theeues, whoremongers, sodomites, mur∣derers, and traytors sainted, victories pin∣ched, factes and successes falsly vttered, and that so playnly euen while lyuyng witnesses present and parties to the maters them sel∣ues are hable truely to disproue them. And all this they do vpon trust that though it be some shame a while, yet theyr bookes shall ouerlyue mens persons, and so at length de∣ceiue posteritie: and so thinke they it reason now that other papistes hereafter shold en∣ioye the fruite of their falshed at this tyme, as they haue the frute of other Papistes false hed heretofore. So doth fabulous Iouius, So doth pratyng Paradine, so doth the whole heape of Popish Pamphleters, with∣out reuerence of Princes estates or of other mens eares, of their owne outworne hone∣sties. This hath made common lyers to shew aduises of newes from beyond seas so

freshly arriued that ye very inke blotted whē the letters were shewed in Paules, men surely worthy of their card cousin to hang on their backes to warne them, and F. cudgell better to aduise them. This doyng of theirs hath of late yeares continually enforced no∣ble Princes and good men to publish Apo∣logies and set foorth bookes to yeld true ac∣compt of theyr factes agaynste this poyso∣nous kynde of Parasites and rumor sprea∣ders. This, my Lord, hath caused the noble men and other of base Germanie to publish in Supplication by them exhibited to the Emperour the Electors and other Princes assembled at Spires, the report of theyr do∣inges and sufferynges, with request of good interpretation and charitable ayde. Bicause the same conteineth a great deale of mater of good hystoricall knowlege, and bicause the dayly rumors of Papistes do amplifie euils to kyndle vncharitablenesse agaynst poore men, I haue thought good to turne the same into English, and to set it out to the world to behold, without preiudicing the credit of any, but leauyng euery man to beleue so far with them or agaynst them as euident truth & apparant proues shall leade them. Onely this by the way remembred, that the publike ministers, embassadors, messēgers & agentes for those against whom these do complayne, haue not sticked agaynst common fayth to be certifiers and auouchers of vntruthes and

parteners of treasons agaynste our noble Queene, as in publike arrainementes and other open places and doynges, beside secret knowledges, hath lately appeared.
Hauyng performed this worke of trans∣lation for credit of truth, and for raysing of good affections in iust and indifferent per∣sons, and for a good monument of know∣lege to such as lacke helpe of the Latin tong, wherin & in the Dutche tong it hath ben be∣fore printed, I thought it my dutie to offer the same to your good Lordshyp. Wherunto many reasonable respectes hath moued me. First your zeale to true Religion, your ver∣tuous gouernaunce of your household ther∣in, your noble and sincere administration of iustice, without vsyng the Queene seruice to priuate malice and affections, and your se∣uere lookyng to daungerous cariers of vn∣true rumors and seditious speeches in your countrey, all which vertues become a perso∣nage fitte to receiue a worke intended for de∣claration of truth and confutation of sclan∣ders. Beside that I beyng susteined in studie by your Lordshyps liberalitie, do owe you that dutie that vnder your name should passe to the worldes commoditie such frutes of learnyng as I haue bene hable to yeld, humbly praying your Lordshyp to accept the same, and most humbly besechyng God long to blesse your Lordshyp and my good Ladie, long in honor and prosperitie to serue

our most gracious Queene, whō God long defend to hys honor and the succour of hys Church, and comfort of her owne conscience in not omittyng any thyng to the helpe of Gods flocke, and sure remouyng of Gods enemyes dangerous practisers, that as her present gouernement ministreth aboundance of good frutes, so the tymes imminent and posteritie may find no lacke, but for her good prouisions yeld her eternall thankefull memorie, when God shall haue recei∣ued her as hys faythfull seruaunt to eternall blessed kyngdome.

