



HAVING nothing of myne own worthy of your Honorable Acceptance, or any way proportiona∣ble to your Merits; I present you with a Strangers Labour in an English at∣tyre: which although for quantity it be one of the least, & for tyme the last that hath come from that learned Pen: yet for generall profit it may
 proue the best, as treating a more fa∣miliar Argument then any of his o∣ther spirituall Books haue done.
Nothing is more certayne, no∣thing more vsuall then Death, which hath consumed all that haue gone be∣fore vs; and we, whether we will or nill, must tread the same path, and follow them. There is no exemption from this passage, to which (such is the swift and short course of our life) we doe not so much runne, as fly: and yet for the most part come to it before we would, yea altogeather a∣gainst our will; and that specially for the great horrour we conceaue there∣of, which for the most part is groun∣ded on the guylt of Conscience. For as the Wiseman saith,Sap. 17. timida est nequi∣tia, wickednesse is full of feare, and condemnes it selfe, and where the soule is surcharged with synne, & hel fire prepared to receiue the sinner, no meruayle though he feare and trēble:
 or els for want of Fayth of the future life. For such as make their soules as mortall as their bodyes, and stretch their thoughts no further then to that which like beasts, they see with their eyes, do easily with the Philosopher esteeme of death as if it were,Arist. 3. Moral. 6. Ma∣ximè omnium rerum horribilis, of all things the most dreadfull, in regard that it depriues them of their tempo∣rall Emoluments, their Friends, Ho∣nours, Disports, and all esteemed Happines; so as the first for feare of what is to come, these for griefe of that which is past esteeme death dre∣adfull. Or finally this falls out for want of due consideration thereof, of death I meane, which to such as haue it still before their eyes, as it is a bridle from sinne, and spur to vertue; so is it an encouragement against the poyson thereof. For the sting of this snake (as the Apostle sayth) is synne, Stimulus mortis peccatum,1. Cor. 15. which by
 continuall meditation thereon, is ta∣ken away: memento mortis tuae (sayth Saint Hierome) & non peccabis,Hier. ad Cypr. Greg. 13. Moral. c. 10. remem∣ber thy death, and thou shalt not sin; or as Saint Gregory sayth, culparum la∣queos euadent, such shall walke so wa∣rily as they shal not fal into the snares of the enemy, or sting of death; and consequently shalbe free from al feare which the morall Philosopher did rightly obserue, and therfore gaue this aduise to his friend Lucilius:Seneca ep. 30. Tu, vt mor∣tem numquam timeas, semper cogita, that thou mayst neuer feare death, be al∣wayes thinking on it.
Which contemplation is so so∣ueraigne and effectuall, as our wor∣thy Bishop of Canterbury S. Anselme writing to one,Ansel. ep. 113. whome he very dear∣ly esteemed in England, who had de∣maunded his counsayle for spirituall direction, he gaue him only this ad∣uyse saying: So liue euery day as thou doest desyre to be found at the last
 houre of thy life; and so euery day prepare thy selfe as if to morrow thou wert to dye, and to giue account vn∣to God; by this meanes thou shalt proceed from vertue to vertue. So he. Which graue aduise little needs any Commentary, & your Vertuous Dis∣position as little needes my incite∣ment. I know you are not vnmynd∣full heerof; I know your Zeale and Constancy in Gods cause; I know your Charity towards the afflicted, and cannot doubt of the continual vse of prayer and vertuous actions, wher∣with now for many yeares you haue beene so well accustomed; which so dispose you to this end, as you need not feare, but with desire expect this passage, which will open heauen, which will take you from the world, and restore you to God; which will loose the bands of this corruptible clogge, and inuest you for euer with immortall glory; and which finally
 frō the sight of these transitory things, the meere shaddows of true pleasure, will bring you to the full sight of the Blessed Trinity, the maine ocean of all true delights, and there (as the A∣postle sayth) semper cum Domino eri∣mus,1. Thess. 4. we shall for euer be with our Lord.
This is the happynesse of the Vetuous, for euer in the next life, to be with our Lord, who neuer in this life would forsake him, but still continu∣ed in his feare, and fauour vntill the end. These with triumphant securi∣ty tread Death vnder their feete, whiles the wicked surprized & con∣quered by his force, are made a prey to his Tyranny, who is not moued at all, with their teares, cryes, or a∣ny intreaty, but no lesse scornes this their fruitlesse griefe, then he doth the frayle power of the most potent Mo∣narch of the world, whome he ouer∣throwes with as great facility, as the
 poorest beggar, and that without all regard of degree, age, strength, ri∣ches, or what els soeuer the earth af∣foards. This did Clotharius King of France (to name one for all) acknow∣ledge, when being dangerously sicke as Saint Gregory of Towers doth re∣count,Greg. Tu. l. 4. hist or. cap. 21. he sayd vnto such as stood a∣bout him: Vah quid putatis? qualis est ille Rex caelestis, qui sic tam magnos Re∣ges interficit? What thinke you my maysters? How great is the King of heauen, who in this manner doth kill so potent Kings? Death is the in∣strument of execution, which to such as prepare themselues vnto it is a sleep and quiet repose, to others a most dreadfull bitternes and vexing tor∣ment; a Lambe where it is subdued, a lyon where it doth ouercome. The good wish for it, the bad abhorre it; but both the one & the other must of necessity vndergo it; and I know not what greater folly or frenzy can
 be imagined, then to be watchfull in light matters, and to forget this; to behould with attentiue affection the thinges that fly from vs, and not to fee whither our selues, by the swift wings of tyme, are incessantly carry∣ed; to see others euery where to dye, and yet to liue in such careles neglect as if euen in this life we were immor∣tall; to belieue that there is a Hell, & Heauen, & neither to feare the one, or to desire the other; to know that euery one shall receaue according to the workes he hath done good or e∣uill: Referet vnusquis{que} (sayth the A∣postle) propria corporis prout gessit,2. Cor. 5. siue bonum siue malum: Euery one shall re∣ceaue according to that he hath done in this life, either good or euill; and yet not to furnish himselfe with true merits, by the practise of vertue, which alone will crowne him with euerlasting felicity. Filij hominum vs∣quequo graui corde!Psalm. 4. O you sonnes of
 men, how long will you be heauy-harted?
But in vaine do I speake to them who haue their eyes shut, their eares stopt, and their harts hardned; who will not vnderstand to do well, who are fallen into the depth, and therfore contemne all counsaile, and will not be with-held from running headlong into the gulfe of perdition: there is no salue for such desperate soares, vn∣les God by a singular mercy,Psalm. 135. in manu potente & brachio excelso, in a strong hand, & powerfull arme do reclaime them, which in many, yea most, he doth not. For albeit his Mercy be great, yet is his Iustice exact; and the number of the damned in hell fyre, is farre greater then of the seruants of God that are crowned in heauen; & often it is repeated in the Scripture, that many are called, but few elected; that the way to heauen is narrow, & few enter; the way to hell is wyde,
 and troden by many; with the like. All which will not awake them out of this dead letargy, & drowsy sleep, no warnings, no bookes, no threats, no perswasion wil auayle them. And albeit I could wish that this worke might benefit all, yet that I may wel wish, but cannot expect. To your self I know it will be gratefull, and bene∣ficiall also, I hope vnto yours, and others: at least so from my hart I do desire it may be: and the subiect ther∣of being so necessary, and pointes therein treated so important, they cannot but much stir vp any well dis∣posed mind to reflect vpon them.
For in this little Treatise you haue the principles and precepts of good Life, the vse of Prayer, Fasting, Al∣mes, and other vertues; you haue Ad∣uertisements for the Sacramēts, how to prepare your selfe vnto them, how to receaue them; you haue remedy a∣gainst Tentations, Comforts in affli∣ctiōs,
 Instructions for security, Fore-warninges against dangers; in one word hence you haue what to feare, what to follow, what to fly. So as this little booke to such as can vse it well, and frame their liues to the prescript thereof, is a rich Iewell, & heauenly Treasure, of which we may truly say,Prouer. 21. procul & de vltimis finibus pretium eius, and the Author being perhaps neuer to write more, by reason of his great age, and weaknes, (for he wants not two yeares of fourscore) this his last begotten Beniamin deserueth more respect. For besides the subiect and substance thereof, it layes open the true Idaea (or Image) of the Writer, what his Iudgment is of all wordly felicity; where all his thoughts and endeauours haue still beene fixt and directed; how he is disposed to shut vp the last period of his life; although his own actions are more liuely cha∣racters heerof, then any of his books
 haue yet expressed; in so much as of his Familiars he is more admired for his rare vertue, then he is renowned amongst Strangers for his exquisite learning.
These motiues with the band of Gratitude for former Merits haue emboldened me to make this Present vnto your Honour, aswell by this meanes (seeing by better I cannot) to discharg my duty for your deserts as also for that I tender your spiritua good, which heereby may not a little be aduanced. The root seemes bitte but the fruit is pleasant, yea the bit∣ternes it selfe is intermingled wit delight: for the contemplation o death is only fearfull to such as ar vnacquainted with it; when vse hat made it more familiar, then will th remembrance thereof be delightfull because as the Prophet sayth: Cù dederit dilectis suis somnum, ecce heredi¦tas Domini,Psalm. 126 when he shall bestow thi
 sleep on his friendes, then loe, is the inheritance of our Lord at hand. So as death is the end of all our labours in this life; and the end (as the Philoso∣pher sayth) is, or ought to be first in∣tended, and specially regarded, be∣cause all doth depend thereon. What auayleth it a Ship to haue escaped many stormes in the wide Ocean, if in the returne within sight of the ha∣uen it be cast away? What is the Hus∣bandman the better who hauing had a prosperous spring, if a little before haruest his corne be blasted? Or for Souldiers to haue fought a long and sharp battel with valour, if in the end they be ouerthrowne, & discomfited? The end must carry the crowne; till then all is subiect to vncertaine mis∣chance. And so we see many for a long tyme to haue liued well, and e∣uen then when they seemed ready to haue receaued their rewards, to haue miscaryed, & lost all; but this com∣monly
 neuer befalls thē who hauing their end still before the eyes of their soule, do with continuall feare and trembling worke their Saluation. Of which point, for that the worke it self will speake at large, I shall not need to adioyn more, but leauing the same to your serious view, cōmēd the suc∣cesse of all vnto Almighty God; vnto whome I commit you, this second of Nouember, wherein we pray for all faythfull soules departed, that they may be fellowes with the Saints; and for our selues, that we may be fellows of them both, in euerlasting happy∣nes. 1620.

