



NO heart can sufficiently conceiue, much lesse anie tōgue is able with words to expresse, the singular cō¦fort, ioy and vtilitie, that a Christian hath in this most daungerous pilgrimage,Psal. 27.4. in beholding the faire beautie of the Lord, in visiting his holy Temple, and in learning his dutie towards God, his Prince, and neighbours, according to the mind of the holy Ghost expressed in the Scriptures. This is of such great weight and importance, that it doth deliuer vs from euerie euill worke,2. Tim. 4.18. quencheth all the firie darts of the wicked, checketh and choketh all fickle and transitorie vanities, and ma∣keth glad, cheereth and cherisheth the conscience of man in all changes and chaunces of this mortall life whatsoeuer. This is of such singular force and operation,Heb. 4.12. that it entreth through (as the Apostle saith) euen vnto the diuiding asunder of the soule, and of the spirit, & of the ioynts, and the marrow, purifying our hearts through faith in Christ Iesus, and instilling the heauenly drops of his grace into our hard and stonie hearts, to souple and soften the same. This is such a precious balme, & soueraigne antidote, that it healeth all our maladies and infirmities, and such a lanterne to our feet and light to our pathes, that it doth de∣liuer vs from the power of darknesse,Ephes. 6. and translateth vs to the kingdome of Christ, putting vpon vs, vniuersam illam , that same complete armor of a godly man, that we may stand against all the as∣saults of the deuill. O how deare and sweete was this to that blessed king Dauid: how beloued of Saba Queene of Aethiopia: how precious

to Eunuchus,2. . 1.5. Cornelius, Eunice Timothies mother, & Lois his grand∣mother, with many others: and how comfortable and delectable to the Apostles, martyrs, and confessors. Vanitie is vaine, and all things in the world are but vanitie, besides the loue of God, and his onely seruice.
Seeing then, that the word of God is of such efficacie & excellencie, and hath in it such a secret and hidden Manna: necessarie it is that Man which is borne of a woman, and hath but a short time to liue, should with all humblenesse and sobrietie, read, learne, and inwardly digest the same, and with diligent studie and contemplation, employ the course of his warrefare therein. God made liuing creatures (saith Chrysostome) for man: but he made man for himselfe. How for himselfe? onely to glorifie his name, to serue him with feare, and reioyce vnto him with reuerence. He made him after his owne simili∣tude and likenesse: he gaue him his lawes and commaundements: and therefore he onely ought to giue attendance to them, and to continue in learning of them, that through patience and comfort of them he might haue hope, faith, and immortalitie in Iesus Christ. Euerie one must further (as farre foorth as he can) the building of Gods Temple. If he can not bring gold, siluer, or precious stones, he must bring mini∣ma quae{que}, pelles, & caprarum pilos, the least things he hath, skins, and the haires of Goates. We must not be idle in Gods great har∣uest, neither secure in these perillous times: we must neuer cease to la∣bour and learne, trie out and discerne God from Belial, Christ from Antichrist, godly and sincere doctrine, belonging to the true worshipping of God, from erronious and damnable tending to superstition and idolatrie,1. Iohn. 4 1. according to that blessed saying of Saint Iohn: Beleeue not euerie spirit, but trie the spirits whether they be of God.
These reasons (right Worshipfull) being weighed and throughly considered by me, I was not a little spurred and pricked forward some∣thing to take in hand, that might testifie and shew my zeale and fer∣uent affection to the same. And by chaunce taking Platina (though a shamefull parasite for the Popes, yet in manie places truly painting and publishing their filthinesse and abominations) I lighted vpon Pope Ioane, of whom he writeth and craftily, cloaketh, in the life of Iohn the eight. Noting the historie, and perceiuing what a miraculous to∣ken it was sent of the Lord, to the subuersion of poperie, and to the vt∣ter confusion of that purple whore: I framed thereupon a Parlia∣ment, though but a fiction, yet plainly declaring the great choler and

indignation that the Pope and his Prelats haue at the name of Pope Ioane, their palpable blindnesse, and malcontent stomackes, their gree∣die and insaciable hunger for money, their mutinous dissension and an∣tichristian practises that be among them, and their spitefull enuie and enimitie against the true professours of the Gospel: whereunto I an∣nexed an anatomie of Pope Ioane, more manifestly opening their clou∣ted shifts, and excuses for her, and more apparantly reuealing her whole life and storie.
This (right Worshipfull) I boldly offer vnto you, although it may import small manners and little modestie in me: assuming so vp∣on your courtesie, as I assure my selfe you will vouchsafe of my good will and accept of the matter. The matter indeede (I confesse) is such, as deserueth to be handeled of a graue and learned diuine, and can not by reason of my ignorance and small knowledge, be so cunning∣ly and clearkely described, as it ought: yet I doubt not, but it is so handled, as you shall see Pope Ioane painted out in her colours, and behold (as it were) in a glasse, the loathsome corruption and per∣uersnesse of the Romane synagogues: howsoeuer it be, I am to craue pardon of skillesse attempt, shrowding my selfe wholy and solie vn∣der your courteous protection: promising, that if hereafter either my wit or skill shall be able to yeelde anie better fruite, I will offer it at your Worships shrine. For you are the Saint to whom in heart I owe most dutifull deuotion, being such a lampe and light of iustice and good gouernement in this our Countie of Dorset, such a fautor and friend of vertue and good literature, such a furtherer and fauourer of true Christian religion, and of the preachers and ministers there∣of, and so wise, well affected, and giuen euerie kind of wayes, that I should rather embeazle, then illustrate your condigne prayse. What godly and Christian orders be obserued in your house? How fer∣uent and forward are you alwayes in her Maiesties seruice, in de∣fence of the realme against forreine inuasions, and in detecting and punishing those, that wilfullie disturbe, and seeke to subuert our happie state and gouernement?Grafton in the 21. yeere of the reigne of king Hen∣rie the 7. 1505. Rightly do you aduaunce the great worship and credite of your house, and truly tread the steppes of your famous auncestours. For as that noble knight sir Thomas Tren∣chard your grandfather, in the time of king Henrie the seuenth, was commended and renowmed, and greatlie thanked of the king

his maister, for receyuing with all humanitie and reuerence, Philip king of Castile and Lion, Archduke of Austrich and Burgoine, and Earle of Flaunders, who was the kings louing and faithfull friend, and of old familiaritie and acquaintance togither, being driuen by force of weather to the port of Weymouth: so your worship within these few yeares haue beene not a little commended and renowmed, and greatly thanked of her gracious Maiestie, for nobly entertaining Lewys of Burbon, prince of Condee, being driuen to land at the same place. I could vse further discourses to this effect, but fearing the censure of smoothing, and hoping you will deine as well of the poore mans mite, as the rich mans treasure, and shadow this my slender labour vnder the wings of your tuition, I surcease any longer to interrupt your serious affaires, suppliantly crauing of the Almightie, to augment his graces and vertues in you, that after your short pilgrimage here ended, you may rest with the Israel of God, in endlesse blisse and felicitie.

