



MAdam, it is reported that Demonax hauing his head broken with a stone, and being aduised to cō∣plaine to the Proconsull of that iniurie, answered that hee had more neede goe to a surgeon to heale his head, then to a Magistrate to redresse his wrong. I must also confesse, I had rather haue had my head broken, then my sermon so mangled. For this ser∣mon hath been twise printed already without my procurement or priuitie any manner of way. Yea to my very great griefe and trouble. Neuertheles I haue
thought good to complaine of no man. For in whom the fault resteth I cannot learne certainely. This I am sure, not any whi in my selfe. Clinius a Historiographer, hauing written the story of Virginius, and meeting with him vpon a time saide, If you find any thing amisse in your story, I pray you pardon it. To whom Virginius answered, What Clinius, doest thou not know I haue done as I did, that such fel∣lowes as thou art, might write as you would? And so, it was my part, to take such paynes as conueniently I could, is furnishing and prouiding this sermon a∣gainst the appoynted time. But afterward what others, eyther by reporting or prin∣ting would make of it, that was not my fault, that was not in me either to helpe or hinder. Therefore I haue not gone vnto any Magistrate to complaine, but though it be one of the greatest iniuries that euer was offered mee, yet because I knowe not what secret purpose the Lord had in lay∣ing this affliction vpon me, I doe most wil∣lingly pardon it. Yea, euen as Moyses, when the first tables were broken, was content to make new: in like manner, finding in the first editions so many bro∣ken-ended
sentences, I haue as it were gone to a surgeon, or rather in deede I haue played the surgeon my selfe, and by setting out the sermon a new, haue salued the matter as well as I could. Diogenes seeing the city of Myndus very little and poore, but the gate thereof very large and stately, sayd, You of Myndus, shut your gate, and keepe in your citie, that it runne not away. After the same sorte, the gate (as I may say) and the first entrance into this Sermon, was before very lofty and stately, the Sermon it selfe very simple and poore. Such a stirre they kept, in ter∣ming it very vainely and most fondly, A most excellent Sermon, as if they would haue cast the house out of the win∣dow, or the citie out of the gate. Where∣fore I haue made the gate lesser, and the citie greater. The gate lesser, by entitling it, The meane in Mourning, which is the very drift in deede, and the right scope of the whole Sermon. And the citie greater, by adding diuers notes, in sun∣dry places of the Sermon, as I haue since thought best. So that if any which heard it preached be disposed to reade it, he shall not, I hope, altogether lose his labour. For




though hee haue all heere which he heard then, yet hee heard not all then, which he hath heere. But how it will please God to affect others I know not. This I wot well, that many a time and oft I haue beene much mooued my selfe with the medita∣tion of some poyntes in this Sermon. And now of late, next to God and to his holy word, I could take comfort in nothing so much, as in reading that which I haue written in the seuenth part, the first secti∣on thereof. Occasioned thereto, by the certaine report of the death of my most deare father, who was well knowne, for his place and calling, to be as good a man, and as sincere a christian, as any hath li∣ued in this age. But for conclusion, I hum∣bly desire your Ladiship, that as I haue dedicated the Pathway to Perfection to my very Honorable good patron, Sir George Carey: so it would please your Ladiship, to let this Sermon passe vnder the countenance and credit of your name. For if your Ladiship will deigne to reade it ouer, then I doubt not but diuers other Ladies & Gentlewomen, which haue vir∣tuous and noble mindes, will vouchsafe also to learne thereby, how they ought
with the daughters of Ierusalem, not to weepe for Christ, but to weepe for them∣selues. Especially, hauing such a singular ensample before their eyes as your Ladi∣ship is, whom God hath endued with al or∣naments & gifts, both of nature & grace.
From Saint Iohns Colledge in Cam∣bridge
the first day of Fe∣bruary. 1595. 
