



RIght Honorable, The more then honourable and princely Prophet Dauid, entring into a due considera∣tion with himselfe, how to shew himselfe thankfull vnto God for his great and vn∣speakable mercies and fauours bestowed on him, he cryeth out, Quid retribuam Domino? what shall I render vnto the Lord for all his benefits bestowed on me? and finding nothing could be returned, that
could carrie the least proportion to his bounties, he presently answereth, I will receiue and not render, I will take the cup of saluation, and call vpon the name of the Lord. A strange kinde of retribution it is, to re∣pay by taking more; and yet thus stands the case at this time betwixt your Honor and my selfe. I haue many a time and oft meditated with my selfe how to do your Honor seruice, and to shew my selfe thankfull in some measure, for that honorable fauour and rea∣dinesse I haue euer found in you to do me good, but finding nothing in my selfe that might any way para∣lell your goodnesse, I was enforced to say with Dauid, I will take and not giue, I will requite by asking more. My humble petition therefore to your Honor is, that you would be pleased to honor these my weake labours with your honorable protection. The reasons that em∣bolden me to request this fauour at your hands, are principally three.

First the loue you once bare to my honorable friend and deare cozen Henry Lord Da∣cres of the South, the want of whom I feele the lesse, because I finde no want of loue in your selfe towards me for his sake.
The second is that loue and dutie I did euer owe to your more then honorable Vncle Sir Philip Sidney, whom I followed in the warres of the Netherland when he receiued his fatall wound.
The last and principall is your loue to God and true reli∣gion,
which hath made God to loue you, and the world to honour you. The truth of which religion and vi∣sibilitie of this our Church of England, is made mani∣fest in this history for the last foure hundred and fifty yeares: which confutes that common and triuiall ob∣iection of the common Aduersarie, that our religion began with Luther. The Lord of his infinite mercie make you euer constant in the profession and defence of the same truth and religion which you haue bene borne and bred in, that as your loue towards God doth daily increase, Gods loue towards you may in∣crease too, to your euer lasting honour in this life, and eternall happinesse in the life to come.


