



HONORABLE,
IT is reported, that when one presen∣ted vnto Antipater,
 King of Macedon, a treatise of Happinesse, that hee reiected it with this answer, I am not at leasure: your Honor shal finde this a treatise ten∣ding to Happinesse, and shewing the way to euer∣lasting blessednesse, yet I assure my selfe it shall finde better intertaine∣ment at your hands, and that you will finde leasure at your leasure to peruse it. J
 must ingeniously confesse, that many haue, many times, handled many points of doctrine deliue∣red in this treatise: yet I haue done it after ano∣ther method. Jf the wa∣ter I haue drawne from this Well shall delight you, J hope it will not tast the worse being brought vnto you in this vessell. I offer here vnto your view the Anatomy of Da∣uids blessed Man: or,
 a short Exposition of the first Psalme, dire∣cting a man how he may be truly blessed. Jt is not without desert that Ie∣rome doth call this book of the Psalmes, The Treasury of learning: for out of it most frequent testimonies are brought by our blessed Sauiour himselfe. And this first Psalme is a Compend, or an abstract of the whole booke of Psalmes, dire∣cting
 the way to true hap∣pinesse. The text J am sure is excellent for the purpose, but for my man∣ner of handling it, I leaue it to the censure of Gods Church. In Preaching I haue euer counted plain∣nesse the best eloquence, and the carriage of mat∣ters so, that those of the lowest forme may learne somewhat, the soundest and the surest learning. For surely we are so fal∣len
 into the dregges of time, which being the last, must needs be worst that Security hath so possessed all Men, that they will not be awaked: but if at any time the word of God, or any good motion of Gods Spi∣rit hath met with them, presently Security whis∣pers them in the one eare, that though it be fit to thinke of such things, yet it is not yet time.
 Youth pleades a priui∣ledge, though many mil∣lions of yong men are in hell for want of timely repentance. And Pre∣sumption warrants thē in the other eare, that they may haue time hereafter. And thus men spend their daies, vntill at last their houre-glasse be run, and time then is past. Now if your Ho∣nor shal lay this to heart in the strength of your
 yeares, it shall bee your chiefest wisedome. And if to bee religious in all ages hath been held to be true honor: how much more honorable is it in so impious an age? It is re∣ligion & godlinesse that shal embalme your name and make it shine before men, and glorifie your soule amongst Angels. Mary her box of Oynt∣ment shall neuer be for∣gotten: for Godlinesse
 hath the promise of this life, & that which is to come: and without it there is no internall comfort to bee found in conscience, nor externall peace to bee looked for in this world, nor eternall happinesse to bee hoped for in the next. Now, how can Religion but promise to herself a zea∣lous patrō of your honor, being the son & heire of so gratious and religious
 a father, who hath shew∣ed himselfe a faithfull Dore-keeper in the house of his God? Let his godly example teach you not to drinke of those stolen waters, or rather indeed the bloud of soules, wherwith too ma∣ny in these gold-thirsty daies doe purchase A∣cheldama vnto them & theirs. The Lord keepe this euer frō the purpose of heart in his seruants,
 who haue so honourable and weighty a trust com∣mitted vnto them. Let that exhortation of Da∣uid to his son Salomon be euer in your honorable minde: And thou Salo∣mon my sonne, know thou the God of thy Father, and serue him with a perfect heart, and with a willing minde: for the Lord searcheth all hearts, and vnderstandeth
 all the imaginations of the thoughts: If thou seeke him hee will bee found of thee, but if thou forsake him hee wil cast thee off for e∣uer. The God of heauen so vouchsafe to water you and yours, with the dew of heauen, that with the godly man in this psalm you may prosper as trees of his planting: and so bring forth fruit in due season in this

