



AS The Beare (to begin not with an homely cō∣parison as it may seem, but such as the best wits, and most learned haue not been ashamed to vse before me) when she bringeth forth her young one, as Aristotle, or rather as Scaliger the subtile refiner of grosse Philosophie, when she casteth out her ab∣ortiue broode, finding it to be a rude,
vnformed and confused lumpe of flesh, not liking the shape thereof, neuer ceaseth to licke the same, till it hath brought it to a perfect forme and fashion, with apt pro∣portion of euerie parte and member: E∣uen so (right worshipfull) those suddaine, extemporall, and tumultuarie speeches, which at the first I did rawly and rude∣ly deliuer in your audience, as no absolute broode of full grouth, but rather as vn∣ripe fruite of little labour, for matter sound I am sure, but for maner not so sweete as I could wish, such howsoeuer as God thē presently gaue me grace to vtter; Behould here the same reduced into bet∣ter forme, perfected, polished, published, and presented vnto your selues, not for mine owne prayse which I neuer deserued nor desired, but for your profit, which I alwaies aymed at, and sought after, wishing not onely your worldly wealth that you may florish still as hetherto you haue done, in peace, plentie, and prospe∣rity, but thirsting after your soules health that you might growe vp more and more
in grace and knowledge, which is the finall and fruitfull ende and intendement of all sermons either preached or writen: as Peter making it his conclusion of his lat∣ter Epistle 3. Chap. 18.2. Peter. 3.18. For therefore haue I especially and of purpose, directed and dedicated these few sermons vnto you (worshipfull and welbeloued Bretheren in the Lord) that as you first harde them, so you might againe regarde them, yea re∣member and ruminate them, that by of∣ten reading and pervsing them, through continuall meditation they may be so in∣wardly engrafted and ingrauen in your harts and consciences, that you may take proffit, and make vse of them in the acti∣ons of your life and conuersation. O that you would consider thankfully, that as our Gratious Soueraigne hath greatly graced you, in making your town of a country vil∣lage, a corporate Borough, and vouchsa∣fed to bestow vpon you a faire and large Charter for the establishing of your state of gouerment, and publike benefit of your populous multitude. So likewise that God
himselfe hath as graciously blessed you in commending by his good prouidence your parish, for the spirituall cure and charge of your soules, to the patronage of so flori∣shing a Colledge, & so fruitfull of learned preachers, that you may be certaine and sure, neuer to faile of a sufficient and vi∣gilant pastour ouer you, and whereby noe doute you shal euermore cōtinew: I speake it to your comforte as one of the goulden candlesticks of Gods true catholike church, alwaise shining with the bright light of the Gospell. And would to God that as your towne is famous thorowgh the most partes of this Land, for your greate tra∣ding lik a little Tirus, for your meane yet nceessarie and profitable commodities for the common wealth; so your feruent zeale and fruitfull obedience vnto the word, were as faithfully showne heere & as fa∣mously knowne els where, to your owne cō∣mendation and consolation of others, that with gratulation vnto God I might truly say of you and your people and the rest of my parish, as the Apostle Paule of the Ro∣mans.
1.8. I thanke my God thorough Iesus Christ for you all because your faith is published thorough out the whole world: which would be my cre∣dit and crowne, yea and a cordiall of com∣fort to my conscience, among my many te∣dious discontentments in this place, which would gladly feast it selfe with the fruits of my labours in you, which I hope hereaf∣ter to finde in such ample measure in you all, that I againe may say with the Apostle vnto the Rom. That I shall reape and receaue at the length consolation to∣gether with you thorough our mutu∣all faith both yours and myne. 1.12. VVhich grace I trust in due time the Lord God in Christ Iesus will vouchsafe to grant vnto vs both to our owne good and his glorie.

