



AMongest those seauen wise Men of Greece, there was one that commēded A Philoso∣phecall posy. to his hearers this Posie, Fol∣low God: Which sentence he willed them, to haue continually before their eyes: to the end that they might be stirred vp with an earnest desire, to know, loue, and serue God, who is the last and perfect ende of true wisdome. For whereas there be two principall Two prin∣cipall partes of wisedom. partes of trew wisdome, after the opinion of Philosophers: the firste, that a man shoulde know himselfe, the second that he should know God, wherein true felicitie is (as it were a marke or goale) proposed and offered vnto vs: the wise man had good cause, and great rea∣son, in that pithie clause: to commende the last and perfect ende, of true wisdome vnto his Schollers and disciples.
The precept therefore is most commendable & profitable: but when he came to the actiō and




 execution of this immitat: the wise man swarued very much, from that scope & mark The Philo¦sophers ig∣norante in the practise of their pre∣cepte. which hīself had purposed. He could not by his wisdome attaine to the knowledge of God: nei∣ther finde out the right way: neither yet had he any guide, to lede him out of that deep dark∣nes in the which he was more then drowned: wherby it came to passe, that he wandered mi∣serably, somtime on the left hand, and somtime on the right hande from God, whom he willed his disciples to follow. For the wisdome of this world is so weake and infirme: that it cannot bring man vnto the soūtaine of goodnes, & fe∣licitie, euen whose fruicion is his righte and perfect blessednes. VVhich thing is found true both by experience in all worldly wise men, & also by the testemonie of Saint Paule, who spe∣keth out of Gods mouth. I will destroye the Esai. 29. 33. 1. Cor. 1. wisdome of the wise & will cast away the vnderstanding of the prudēt. Although thē the wise man gaue a good precept, yet no man came to blessednes therby: which thing should haue commen to passe, if hee had bene hable to point out the way vnto his followers. This True wis∣dome is only in Gods. church. 1. Cor. 1. true wisdome the Churche of God onely hath and knoweth. VVhereof the same apostle spea∣keth after this manner. For after that in the wisdome of God, the world through their wisdome knewe not God, it pleased God
 through folishnesse of preaching, to saue them that beleeue That is to saye, because that men in the frame and woorkemanship of the world (wherin the singuler wisdome of God is ingraued, and open to the eies of men,) dyd not know God: It pleased God of his free and infinit goodnesse, to deliuer vnto the worlde his wisdome before time vnknowne: euen the gos∣pell of his sonne Jesus Christe, whereby he pur∣posed to saue al beleeuers, that thei might ther by through Grace, atteine to the perfect end of their condicion, whiche by reason of their cor∣rupt nature, through original sinne they could of them selues neuer come vnto: Of this light spake the prophet Dauid saying, In thy light, Psa. 36. shal we see light: and Christe himselfe more plainly. I am the light of the world, he that followeth me shal not in any wise vvalke in Iohn, 8. darknesse, but shall haue the light of life.
In which sentence our sauior Christ calleth his seruants frō the immitation of all others: and vvilleth them, to set him before their eies, Christe is a perfecte ex∣ample for vs to folowe in faythe and lyffe. as a perfect patterne, and absolute example for them to follovv. The ancient writers and best expositors haue vvell obserued that in the ho∣ly scripture Christ is proposed and set out as an example & rule to follow two maner of waies. First they teach vs that he is the author & gi∣uer of remission of sins, iustice, life, and eternall
 saluation to all beleeuers. VVhich thing is so proper and peculier vnto him, that no part or porcion therof, may be in any respect imparted vnto others, vvithout manifest sacralege and blasphemie. Secondly, they discribe him as an exquisyte tipe and rule of a godly and chri∣stian Christe an example in our liffe. life framed after Gods moste holy lavv: vvhich as he taught vvith mouth and voice, so did he fulfil the same in his owne life and pro∣posed him selfe as an example to al those that would be accoumpted, and be in deede Chri∣stians, whereof we haue a plaine testimonie in the gospell of Saint Iohn, I haue geuen you Iohn. 13. an example (saith Christ) that you shoulde doe as I haue done vnto you.
This our heauenly Maister was much vn∣like those whom Saint Paule describeth, to haue a fourme of godlinesse, but denie the 2, Tim. 3. Rom. 2. power therof, and againe: Thou knowest Gods will, and allowest thinges that be ex∣cellent, and hast the fourme of knowledge, and of the trueth of the law, thou therfore which teachest another, teachest not thy selfe, and makinge thy boast of the lawe, through breaking of the law dishonorest God. But Christe saide, and did, taught and followed: to thend that all his schollers might learne to performe in worke, that vvhich they professe in vvord. The Apostles of Chrste
 also the best expositors of their masters will, as they alwaies teache men to beleeue and trust in him being the fountaine and welspringe of iu∣stice and life: so doe they euery vvhere vrge them with earnest exhortations to follow his life and conuersation. Saint Paule sayeth, 1. The. 4 That he hath not caled vs to vnclenenes & filthynes of life, but to holines. Neither 1. Cor. 1. was he made to beleeuers, wisdom and iu∣stice only, but also sāctification and redem∣tion. For as by his wisdom and iustice he hath expelled darknes, naturaly bred in mans brest, and hath kindled the true light of the know∣ledge of himselfe, and his father, and forgeuing our sinnes, doth adorne vs with his ovvne iu∣stice wherwith we being couered and clothed please God his Father: euen so doth hee giue vnto vs the holy gost, vvho doth regenerat and renew our mindes, whereby they doe conceiue holy desires, and affections, vvhich at the laste are plentifull and fruitfull in bringing foorth good woorks. A godly life is alvvaies con∣ioyned with a liuely faith, in sutch sorte that these two cannot be seperate one from another, no more then light can be deuided frō the sun, or heat from the burning fire. For Christ as the apostle saith, gaue himself for vs to purg vs a peculier people to himselfe, reasons of Tit. 2. good woorks, and to redeeme vs from all
 iniquititie. And if Philosophers giue rules & Christian philosophi, most perfite. precepts of maners, not so mutch to make men learned, as to make them vertuous: how mutch more ought christian philosophie to proceed fur∣ther not only to put into mens minds the know∣ledge of pietie and god lines, but also sanctimo∣nie & holines it selfe. Euery one therfore indu∣ed with a true faith, ought to feele Christe so woorking in him by his holy spirit: that he may say with the Apostle, Nowe liue not I, but Christ liueth in me. And as the body endued Gala. 2. with a liuing and reasonable soule receiueth, feeleth, and practiseth the actions therof: so he that is ingraffed in Christe, and is his member, cannot chuse but be pertaker of his spirit, ver∣tue and holinesse. VVhereupon, te apostolike and cathoik faith, nameth the bodie or societie of the church, the Communion of Sainctes: plainly importing therby that those men onely appertaine to tat societie, who meditate and study how they may liue well, and labour with all their might, that they may be that where∣vnto the Apostle exhorteth the Thessaloni∣ans altogether sanctified, Perfect in spirite, 1. Thes. 5. and such as may bee blameles against the comming of our Lode Iesus Christ. And al those that are otherwise affected, and frame not their life to that ende, and yet desire to be named Christians: they dissente from them
 selues, and with their life argue their tongue of vntrueth and falsehoodde.
Moreouer a mans profession is not so much to be weighed by his tongue, and talke, as by his Profession approued by conuersa∣cion. Titus. 1. deedes and life. The Apostle speaketh of such Impastours, saying: That they professe them selfe to know God, but vvith their deedes they denie him. And that holie Martyr Saint Ciprian hath a fine saying▪ That the Dezelo et liuore e aliis locus. testimony of a mans life, is more effectuall then that of his tongue: and that vvorkes haue after a sort, their liuely speeche and e∣loquence, albeit the tongue be silent, and moue neuer a deale. And hee that professeth with his mouth, and walketh contrarie in his life: maie right well be compared to an vnwise builder, who layeth on morter with the one hād, and pulleth down stones vvith the other, of such kind of builders, our Lord and Master Christ speaketh after this manner. Therefore who∣soeuer heareth my sayings and doth them, I wyll lyken him vnto a vvise man, who Math. 7. buylt his house vpon a rocke: and the raine descended, and the flooddes came, and the vvindes blewe and beete vpon that house, and it fell not, because it vvas grounded vp∣pon a rocke. And euerie one that heareth of mee these sayinges, and doeth them not: shalbe likened vnto a foolishe man, vvhich
 built his house vppon the sande. And the raine descended, and the floods came, and the vvinds blew, and beate vpon that house, and it fell, and great vvas the fall of it, &c. Saint Augustine speaking against carnal and lypgospellers, sayth thus. In vaine doth he as∣sume the name of Christ, that follovveth not Christ. To vvhat purpose is it, if thou In lib. de vita Chria∣na, qui falso ascribitie August. bee called that vvhich thou art not, and to vsurpe a strange name? But if thou delight in that name, then do those thinges vvhich appertaine to Christianitie, and then thou maist vvith good cause chalenge the name of a Christian.
Novve if vve viewe Christians after this rule, if vve examine mens daily life and conuer∣sation, and trie the same vvith the touch stone, The small number of perfyte Christians. of Gods commaundementes, that number vvyll appeare smal, and a true Christian vvil almoste be as rare as a blacke Swanne vpon the earth. For neither the negligent and voluptuous Ma∣gistrate, nor the idle Byshop, nor the cruel hus∣band, nor the bytter vvyfe, nor the careles Fa∣ther, Math. 12. Mar. 3. Luke. 8. nor the rebellious chylde, nor the merciles master, nor the vnfaithful seruant, vvith ma∣ny other of that sort, can not by any meanes be rightly named Christians. But those rather e∣uen The fruits of true Christians. by the testimony of Christ him selfe are so to be called that heare his vvord and keepe it.
 And although our saluation issueth frō Gods grace and goodnesse, yet hee requireth at our handes trust and confidence in him, a prompte and readie vvyl to obey his vvord, dilligence & industrie in our vocation, praier and inuocatiō of his holie name, accepting our imperfect diso∣bedience, and forgeuing our infirmities for his sonne Christes sake. Al those that then desire to be true Christians, ought to bee sorie for their sinnes, to flie vnto Christe, and to repose sure trust and confidence of saluation in the mercie of God through him, to bring foorth vvorthy fruites of repentance, and to leade a life agree∣able to the Gospell. For those that be true Chri∣stiās, do alwaies vvrestle vvith vices, and fight vvith concupiscence and lust, they endeuour to bridle vvicked affections: and cōtemning earth∣ly thinges, doo bende and fixe their mindes vpon heauenly thinges. VVhereof Chrisostom vvri∣teth Chrysost. in Hom. thus. O Christian, thou art too delicate a souldior, if thou thinke to vanquish with∣out battell, and to triumphe vvithout fight: vvherefore cal to minde thy condicion, and that vvarrefare vvherein thou hast profes∣sed thy selfe a souldiour, vvhich if thou do, then shalt thou vvell perceaue, that al those vvorthy vvightes, vvhome thou doest so much esteeme, and reuerence, haue by fight and battell, vanquished and triumphed, &c.

 And because true Christians cannot wor∣thelte requite almighty God for his innumera∣ble benefits, neyther satisfie them selues in pie∣tie The care and study of Christians. tovvarde him: yet they are carefull and endeuour to their vttermost, neuer to aliuate Gods grace and fauour from them, neyther to do that vvhich vvylbe displeasaunt vnto his maiestie. But contrarivvise, through the ayde of Gods spirit, they labour to do those thinges vvhich are acceptable vnto him: workinge their saluation with trembling and feare: and frame all their actiods not so muche after the liking of humane reasons as after the prescript of Gods holy wyll and commaundement. And because in actions no man can determine what is good, vnles he first knovv vvhat is true: and for that the same cannot be othervvise had then from the mouth of God in his vvord: they turne ouer the holy Byble, they studye the mo▪niments of the prophets and Apostles, and meditate Gods lavve both daye and nighte. VVherby Christians only come vnto the know∣ledge of the truth, and vnderstanding of Gods vvyll: vvhich to knovve is perfit vvisdome, vvhich to do is true vertue, and vvherein to contnue is the onely and eternall felicitie. Those then that knovv not the vvill of God as the Ethnicks in times paste, and Turkes and Ievves novve a dayes, cannot haue any sure
 and comfortable vvarrantise of their lyfe, and learning. For the Christians onely taught in Gods schoole, knowe his wyll, and in all their life rather respect the same, then their owne wyll and reason, and repute it to be the grea∣test vertue to please, and obeie him, and to fol∣lowe his preceptes and commaundementes. The repen∣tance of Christians. And if at any time through humane infirmi∣tie and weaknesse, they offende and slide awry: by and by they desire pardon and forgeuenesse of God through Christe, and apprehende by faith mercie promised in him, and comforte them selues with a quiet and cheerefull minde in the same. O happie is that man that so staieth him selfe in an assured trust of Gods mercie in Chricte, that humblie and hartilie agniseth his faultes and offences, that careful∣lie endeuoureth to walke in newnesse and holi∣nesse of lfe. But O most vnhappy are those that wander in diffydence and distrust, that thinke too well of them selues, boasting vvith the Pharisees their actes and deedes, that neglecte an honest and godlie life. Vnto whome Math 7. et. 25 the Lorde wyll saie at the last daie. I neuer knew you, depart from me you workers of iniquity, into euerlasting fire, which is pre∣pared for the Deuill and his angels. VVher∣as Math. 25. Luke. 19. et. 21. on the other side, the true Christians shall heare that ioyfull speach. VVell done thou
 good and faithfull seruant, thou hast bene faithfull ouer few things, I wyll make thee rular ouer many thinges, enter thou into the ioye of thy Lorde. Come ye blessed children of my father, enherite the king∣dome which is prepared for you from the beginning of the world.
Of the which two sortes of men, to witte of false Christians in name and tittle onelie: and of true Christians in worde and worke, I haue writtē more largelie in this Treatise folowing. VVhich I thought good to present vnto your vvorship, moued thervnto for diuerse and sun∣drie causes. First with the cōmon, and vniuer∣sall reporte of that great wisedome, and iustice wherewith God hath indewed you by the one, discerning betweene right and wrong, by the o∣ther putting the same in execution, in your of∣fice and calling: which is saide by Cicero to be the Ladie and Queene of all vertues: and of Aristotle to bee more bewtifull and bright then the Day starre it selfe. Secondlie in respect of that great care which you haue nowe a long tyme vsed, for the good estate of Collegies, and houses of learning in the Ʋniuersitie: VVhich thing Plato saide especiallie to belong vnto a good Magistrate, to prouide that childrē borne to common societie, should be well brought vp for the common commoditie. Thirdlie for that
 it hath pleased God to appoint mee the Paster and shepheard of mennes soules in one of thos Manners, where the tytle and interest of tem∣porall Lordes and lyuinges, together with the regiment of mennes manners in a Cyuile lyfe, is vnder the Prince cōmitted vnto your wor∣shippe. VVhere the states of many of your poore Tenauntes being tyckle and doubtfull: yet you ioyne pittie and clemencie, with iustice and e∣quitie: ƲƲhich as that reuerend father Saint Augustine writeth, Is the inheritaunce of children, the ioye of the Commons, and the comfort of the poore. And as no time in this worlde shalbe able to consume this true honour and vertue of yours: so wyll not the same be vnrewarded, in that great daie, at the kandes of the almightie and eternall God, whome increase you in all honour and dignitie.
At VVhymple the xx. of Nouember. Anno. Dom. 1576.

