



Most Reverend Father.
OVR blessed Lord and Master, in one of His Evangelicall Parables, compares the Militant Church, unto a field, in which the Hus-band-man sowed good seede, but while men slept, Dormientibus multis in do∣ctrinae simplicitate
Tert. c. Praxeam cap. 1.
, the enemy came and sowed tares, Avenarum sterilis foeni adulterium
Tert. c. Haer. cae. 31.
. Also, He resembles the same unto a Net, which being cast into the Sea, gathereth fishes, some good, and some bad. The Apostle likewise resembles the same; to a great House, wherein are Ʋessels of Honour,
 and Vessels of dishonour. And the godly Fathers compare it, to Noah's Arke, in which were contained Beasts, cleane and uncleane, of each quality some; wherein also was an impious Ham, as well as a pious and dutifull Sem.
Now the condition of the Church Militant being such: it cannot be otherwise, but that in all ages there shall bee found among those which professe Christ, not onely such as are vertuous and sound in faith: but also men of corrupt mindes, and reprobate concerning the faith: venimous Ser∣pents, noysome tares, pestilent weedes, and uncleane beasts.
Our Saviour's owne prediction was: There shall arise false Prophets: and His admonition, beware of false Pro∣phets: and His description, which come to you in Sheepes cloathing, but inwardly, they are ravening Wolves: Men, carrying a semblance, and having an outside of verity and holinesse: but inwardly, corrupt, deceitfull, and ravenous: working under hand, to infect and impoyson the flocke of CHRIST
Tert. c. Haeres. c. 4. Quaenam sunt istae pelles ovium, nisi nominis Christia∣ni extrinsecus su∣perficies? Qui Lupi rapaces, nisi sensus & spiritus subdoli, ad infestandū gre∣gem Christi intrin∣secus delitescentes?
. Saint Paul, a Master-builder of God's house, foretels: Oportet haereses esse, there must bee heresies among you: ut fides habendo tentationem, habeat & probationem
Ibidem capite 1. Cypr. d. unit. Eccl. Fieri haec Domi∣nus permittit & patitur, ut manente proprio libertatis arbitrio, dum cor∣da & mentes no∣stras veritatis dis∣crimen examinat, probatorum fides manifesta luce cla∣rescat.
, that they which are approved, may bee made manifest. And in his exhortation to the Bishops of Ephesus: After my departure grievous Wolves shall en∣ter in among you, not sparing the flocke: Also of your owne selves shall men arise speaking perverse things, and shall draw disciples after them.
Now these propheticall predictions have beene fulfil∣led in all Ages, and in all states of the Militant Church. For in the Apostles owne dayes, sundry Heretikes, and Schismatickes rose up, Phigellus, Hermogenes, Philetus, Himinaeus, Alexander, the Nicholaitans, &c. But then after the blessed company of the holy Apostles, by severall wayes of death, had finished their course
Egesip. ap. Euseb. li. 3. c. 26. , &c.
, the false and deceitfull conspiracy of impious errour, made entrance, Fraude & astutia illorum qui doctrinam à veritate alienam disseminare laborarunt: by the fraud and malitious craft of those men, who laboured
 to sow a seed of doctrine, disagreeing with truth.
And although by the power of Divine providence, the evil of Heresie and Schisme, was converted in the end, to the benefit and good of the true Church: (for God, who is only good, would not permit evil to happen, but because He being also omnipotent, is able to turne it to good
Aug. Enchir. c. 100. Qui bonus, non sine∣ret mala fieri, nisi om∣nipotens etiā de malo facere posset bene.
; & Divine ve∣rity when it is discussed by the subtill opposition, and cavill of hereticall fraud, is with more diligence searched into, bet∣ter understood, and more zealously defended
Aug. de Civ. Dei, li. 16 cap. 2. Multa ad fi∣dem Catholicam per∣tinentia, dum haereti∣corum callida inquie∣tudine agitantur, ut adversus eos defendi possint, & consideran∣tur diligentius & in∣telliguntur clarius, & instantius praedicātur, & ab Adversario mo∣ta quaestio, discēdi ex∣istit occasio.
:) Yet for the time present, the same proved a grievous scandall, and in the afflictive times of persecution, it increased the misery of God's people.
The Gentile Infidels insulted over Christians, be∣cause of divisions, which by the fraud of Heretikes, were raised among them
Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 7. cap. 8. Cyprian. de unit. Eccles. Chry∣sost. in Act. Ap. hom. 33. & in cap. 1. Ep. ad Galat. Venit Genti∣lis & dicit, vellem fie∣ri Christianus, sed nescio cui adhaeream: multae enim sunt inter vos pugnae, seditiones, & tumultus. Nescio quod dogma eligam, quod praeferam, singu∣li enim dicūt, ego ve∣rū dico. Hanc ob cau∣sā deridiculo facti su∣mus & Gentibus & Iu∣daeis dum Ecclesia in mille partes scinditur.
: they scorned and derided their religion, imputing the base opinions, and actions of He∣retikes, to the sound part of the Church in generall
Baron. Anal. tom. 2. An. 143. n 4. Qui Christianis infensi e∣rant Gentiles, &c. quaecun{que} erant Gno∣sticorum portenta, vel aliorum haereticorum turpitudines, omnia Christianis ascribebant, nimirum infames illos con∣ventus, infanticidia, humanarum carnium esum, promiscuos concubitus, &c. Iust. Mar. Apol. 2. , &c. Euseb. Eccl. Hist. lib. 4. ca. 7. Tertul. Apol. ca. 7. Athenag. Apolog. trium flagitiorum infamis ru∣mor de nobis spargitur: impietas quae Deos tollat, epulae Thyesteae, concubitus incesti. Minutius Foelix in Octavio pag. 3. & 8.
: And alleaged this as a prime reason, wherefore they could not beleeve them, because they were divided into lo many factions, and for that their religion was a con∣fused fardell, and rifferaffe, of various and prodigious opinions.
Now that which happened anciently, is fulfilled like∣wise in our dayes, both concerning the entrance and ex∣istence of Schismes and Heresies, And likewise the scan∣dall arising from thence.
Therefore, if Schisme and Heresies have risen up in our dayes, it can bee no wonder; For the Prophesies of CHRIST and His Apostles concerne our times, as well, (if not more,) than those which are past: and all the causes of Schisme and Heresie are now extant, which were in former ages. For the enemie that soweth tares,
 is neither lesse vigilant, nor lesse envious, than in old time: And on mans part, blinde zeale, vaine-glory, curiosity, selfe-love, desire of change and novelty, overweening of mens owne wit and learning, envying of others which excell in learning or authority, offence for want of pre∣ferment, dislike of that which is present, &c. These vene∣mous rootes and seeds of Schisme and Heresie, are not wanting in these perillous times: And the corrupt soile of mans heart, is no lesse fertile, to nourish and bring them forth, than in the dayes of old.
But from this which is delivered, I shall intreat your Grace, and all other impartiall and intelligent Readers to consider the uncharitable construction of Romish Adver∣saries, who from the Rising up of some schismaticall spi∣rits amongst us, conclude: That the maine body of our Church is schismaticall. For was the whole Church of Co∣rinth reprobate and schismaticall
Bosius de. sign. Ecclesiae. lib. 3. c. 5. Fitz. Simon. Bri∣tannomachia. p. 8. Rescius ministro∣machia. Staphil. d. Concord. Disci∣pul. Lutheri. Gual∣ter. Tabula. Chro∣nograph. seculo. 17. pag. 823. Sciopp. Ep. d. Antichr. p. 21. &. p. 139. & p. 202. Cochelet. Caemiter. Calv. p. 625.
, because some branches or members thereof, were such? Or was it hereticall, because within it, some denied the Article of the Resurrection? For if this had beene so, Saint Paul could not have saluted that Church, with such an honourable inscription: Vnto the Church of GOD which is at Corinth, to them that are sanctified in CHRIST IESUS, &c, A field cea∣seth not to bee a good corne field, because some noysome weeds, and tares spring up among the wheat: And a good tree hath some degenerous branches, which deserve to bee pruned and lopped off.
Our Nationall Church of England is A Ʋine-yard of the LORD of Hostes: A sound body compacted, uni∣ted, and knit together, in an uniforme profession of one and the same orthodoxall verity, which was once given to the Saints, in the holy Apostles dayes: And which in all substantials, was maintained by the holy Primitive Fathers:
Tertul. d. Praescr. c. 38. Antiquum nihil aliter fuit quàm sumus. Our publike forme of Divine Service and wor∣ship is in every part thereof religious and holy, (maugre the cavils of envious spirits, who have depraved it:) The Ecclesiasticall Officers and Ministers of our Church are
 Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, such officers as have administred sacred things, in the Christian Church, yea, in all Christian Churches, for fifteen hundred yeares, ever since the holy Apostles dayes: and the di∣vine benediction, providence, & protection of our great God and Saviour, hath preserved, comforted and honou∣red this Church and State, more then a man could have wished or expected, ever since our reformation: and that which S. Augustine delivered long since of Con∣stantine the Emperour, hath been fulfilled in our Kings and Princes; Constantinum Imperatorem non supplican∣tem daemonibus, sed ipsum verum Deum colentem, tan∣tis terrenis implevit muneribus, quanta optare nullus auderet
Aug. de civ. Dei l. 5. c. 25.
. The Lord of Heaven replenished Constan∣tine the Emperour, who duly served him and not De∣vils, with such abundance of temporal benefits, as a man durst not have presumed to wish or expect.
Now this which is hitherto delivered, is abundantly sufficient to justifie our Mother Church of England, against the unjust reproach and censure of any Adversa∣ries, who shall traduce the same of being schismaticall; for our Saviours owne prediction is; Necesse est ut scandala veniant, it must needes bee that offences doe come: but when among us any offences happen,
Sander. d. visib. Monarch. Tale est militantis Ecclesiae verriculum, quod quia tam malos quam bonos pisces comprehendit, in∣terdum scinditur, & dirumpitur. they are reproved, confuted, and condemned, according to the direction of holy Scripture, and the forme and cu∣stome of Primitive times.
It is not within compasse of humane power, either wholly to prevent, or in an instant to restraine, the ma∣lice of Satan, and his schismaticall instruments, from vexing, renting, and disquieting the Church; and there∣fore if our adversaries were guided with the spirit of charity (as they that will be judges of other mens acti∣ons ought to be) they would forbeare to censure or con∣demne us. For Charity envieth not, it thinketh no evill, it rejoyceth in truth, 1 Cor. 13.5, 6.
Having delivered thus much in just defence of our
 Mother Church, against the uncharitable calumniation of Romish adversaries, I hold it meet in the next place to offer unto your Graces consideration, a view of the deportment of factious and schismaticall spirits, who have beene the authors and fomenters of the scandall, from whence our adversaries before mentioned, have taken occasion to traduce our Church and religion.
There started up in Queen Elizabeths raigne, a new
Athanas. Quod non a Patribus profectum est, sed nuper inven∣tum, quid de eo ali∣ud existimari debeat, quam illud ipsum, cu∣jus Paulus mentionem fecit, In novissimis, &c. 1 Tim. 4.1. Presbyterian-sect, which tendred a forme of Disci∣pline to the Queene, and to the State. And concerning this platforme of their Ecclesiasticall Discipline, they affirmed these things following:
First, that the onely Officers
Travers. d. Discip. Eccl. pag. 142. (ho∣rum) Ecclesiasticorum magistratuum justae authoritati obtempe∣randum. (Magistrates they tearme them) who are to exercise this discipline, are Pastors, Doctors, and (Vestrie) EldersP. 123. Est Ecclesi∣asticus Senatus coetus Presbyterorum, &c. Presbyterorū nomen nusquam Diaconis in Scriptura tribuitur, sed Pastoribus, Do∣ctoribus, & qui pro∣prio nomine Presby∣teri appellantur.
. Second∣ly, this forme of disciplinarian Regiment, is the Scep∣ter of Christ's Kingdome: The Standard of Christ: The Soule of the mysticall body of ChristSions Plea, pag. 5. If the Hierarchie bee not removed, and the Scepter of Christ's go∣vernement, namely, Discipline advanced, &c. p. 110. It is the Scepter of Christ sway∣ing his owne house ac∣cording to his hearts desire; the soule, &c. The chiefe commander in the Campe Royall, &c.
: and a proper Character of the true Church. Thirdly, as the old Canonists say of the Papacie, GOD had not beene discreet, if hee had not made a PopeExtra d. Major. & obed. glossa. Non videretur Dominus fuisse discretus nisi unicum talem post se vicarium reliquisset.
; so like∣wise, say the Presbyterians, CHRIST had not proved Himselfe a Prophet like unto Moses in all thingsTrav. d. Discip. Eccl. p. 7. Quomodo Mosi fimilem fuisse dicemus, si tam necessariam doctrinam de Ecclesiae gubernatione, aut omnino praetermiserit, aut non aeque perspicue & perfecte explicarit? Illam aut a Christo traditam fateri necesse est, aut eum non solum Prophetico, sed etiam Regio munere spoliare.
, nor yet an absolute King, had he not ordai∣ned this disciplinarian Senate in his Church. Fourthly, these divine Magistrates and Senators, must exercise so∣veraigne authority, over all people; and especially, over Kings, Princes, and MonarchsId. pag. 142. 143. Huic disciplinae omnes orbis Principes, & Monarchas fasces suos submit∣tere & parere necesse est.
: Fifthly, all other formes of discipline and Church government, are un∣lawfull, and Antichristian, because they are not com∣manded and appointed by God's Word. Sixthly, the King and temporall State, have no authority, or
 command in matters EcclesiasticallId. pag. 191. The Church hath her lawes from the Scrip∣tures, neither may any King make lawes in the house of Gods for if they might, the Scripture should be imperfect.
:Sions Plea. pag. 285 If any object the Ma∣gistrates interposed authority, it is quick∣ly answered, quod ejus potestas, &c. that his power is not to wea∣ken any ordinance of God, but for guarding and making good all Gods ordinances with the sword, &c. (no more than they have to administer the Sacraments) but their only service is, to be the executioners of such decrees, as these Presbyterian Senators shall affirme to be the Lawes of Christ. Seventhly, the present forme of Ecclesiasticall government, by Bishops and their Officers is Antichri∣stianSions Plea. pag. 38. They derive their au∣thority from the Pope p. 46. Their being is Antichristian, p. 292. The sons of the mon∣strous Gyant, the Ma of sinne.
. Lastly, the Liturgie and common Service of the Church of England, and the Rites and Ceremonies ap∣pointed therein, are popish and superstitious, for they were composed or brought in, by Bishops, who are a limbe of Antichrist: and confirmed by the humane authority of the Prince and temporall State: whereas no common service is lawfull in the Church, but such only as is formed by their Ecclesiasticall Senate, and af∣ter their own Presbyterian Lawes.
Fruits and consequents of the former dictates, are these which follow:
First, concerning the King himselfe: His royall Ma∣jesty according to these Presbyterian-rules, shall have no power to command his Clergy to keepe a Nationall Synode: he shall have no power at all,☞ over these Eccle∣siasticall Senators, to judge of any of their abuses,Id. pag. 331. An able Pastor (H. B.) in a generall Fast in Lon∣don, pleading for re∣formation under Io∣shua's removall of the excōmunicate thing, told us in plaine tearmes, that the main thing was, That damnable Hierarchie (of Bishops) who made no matter of sinking Church and State, so they might swim in honours and pleasures. or to reforme and correct them: And if His sacred Majesty shall deny obedience and subjection to their classicall Mandates, these Senators have Soveraigne Power under Christ, to deliver him to Satan, and to lay the fearefull censure of ExcommunicationTrav. discip. Eccl. Excommunicatio est censura Ecclesiae qua aliquis gravioris sceleris reus, sine certi temporis praescriptione a sacris exclusus fidelium commu∣nione privatur, &c. Huic summos Magistratus & Reges parere, &c. Philippus & Theodosius Impe∣ratores. Tho. Chartw. being asked whether the King himselfe was subject to excommunication, answe∣reth: That excommunication should not be exercised upon Kings, I utterly mislike. upon him.
Secondly, concerning Bishops: whereas, in all reli∣gious Ages, and among all people professing Christ, the Bishops of the Church were highly honoured and respected because of their Office and Order: and their Doctrine, Precepts, Counsels, admonitions, reproofes, and censures, were of great authority: These Sena∣tors, and their Camerades, with their barking, bar∣rating,
 and libelling, have brought, not onely their persons, but their venerable calling, into much con∣tempt and hatred, as though it were some prophane and noisome evill.
Thirdly, they have with bitter clamorsAmb. Epist. 42. Venenum in den∣tibus habent. Op∣tat. Milevit. c. Par∣men. l. 2. In corde livoris acuerūt no∣vaculas linguae.
, defaced the publike service of our Church (being a forme of divine worship, of so good quality, as that since the holy Apostles dayes, the Christian world never enjoyed any more reverend and religious) and by this meanes, the solemne worship of God and Christ, are neglected in many congregations: and instead thereof, an indige∣sted forme and conception of extemporall prayer is brought in.
Now I humbly desire your Grace, and all benevolent and indifferent Readers, to consider the ungracious dealing of these men.
First of all, the generall ground of their proceedings by which they justifie themselves, and their own pre∣cepts, and condemne others, is this which followeth: No officer must governe or Minister in the Church: neither any forme of divine worship, or Ceremonies be used, but onely such as are commanded in the Word. It will be over-long to relate in what manner they prove this; whether by the second CommandementSions Plea. p. 87. In the 2d. Cōman∣dement is forbid∣den all will-wor∣ship, all rites & ce∣remonies of mans devising in God's worship: and fur∣ther, every calling of Ministers and Elders that is not appointed and ap∣proved of God. p. 278. give the se∣cond Commande∣ment the due ex∣tent: this Iron if it be well plied, will bow downe the backe of the Prela∣cie, and breake the iron sinew of all superstitious wor∣ship.
: or by Ier. 7.31. or by Exod. 25.40. Looke that thou make them after their patterne which was shewed thee in the Mount: or by Omnis Planta, every plant which my heavenly Father hath not planted, shall bee rooted up, Matth. 15.13. But in conclusion they resolve us not, what they understand by the commandement of the Word: Whether a literall and formall Commande∣ment: or a Commandement inferred by any necessary inference: or an example and president, which hath the force of a Law. Now we are certaine that their owne Presbyterian platforme, is warranted by no Comman∣dement in any of these three senses. For we reade of no literall or formall Commandement for their Ʋestery
 Elders: Neither can they prove the ordination of this new generation, by any necessary inference of holy Scripture: and as for example of Scripture, we find none having the force of a law. The plaine truth is, we finde no example at all: For the Elders mentioned, 1 Tim. 5.17. were Priests in holy Orders, as appeares plainely, by the eighteen and ninteen verses of that Chapter: But if some example had been extant, Ʋnlesse they can de∣monstratively prove, that such example hath the force of a perpetuall law, This will conclude no more for the perpetuall continuance of Vestry Elders: Then the holy Apostles observing the legall Sabbath; Or their absti∣nence from bloud and strangled: Or their unction of the sicke with oile, will conclude for extreme unction: or for the keeping holy the seventh-day Sabbath: or for perpetuall abstinence from bloud or strangled.
These imperative men mightily forget their owne principle: For they create new Senators, Ʋestry-El∣ders, without any commandement of the Word: They cōmand whatsoever their own working-heads affect, without commandement of the Word, to wit, Omni-parity of Church-men: Fathers to present their children in their own persons, at Baptisme: Christians to dreame religious dreames on Sunday nights: Parents to give significant names to their children, to wit: The Lord is neere: More triall: Reformation: More fruit: More joy: Sufficient: Deliverance: Dust, &c. But their negative precepts are sance number: no Private Baptisme: no Kneeling at the Communion: Bowing at the Name of IESUS: Communicating with a rea∣ding Minister: Keeping Christmasse-day, and other Ho∣ly-dayes: reading Homilies: Reading Apocrypha: Ring∣ing more Bells than one upon a Sunday, or fetching a pint of wine out of ones owne house: Standing up at the Creed: Looking towards the Chancell in Common-prayer: Often rehersing the Lord's-Prayer: Reading the Letany, and Epistles and Gospels, &c.

But these sanctified Senators will say: That the se∣cond Commandement (which they have made,  Co∣tholicon, to prohibite what their will disliketh,) con∣demneth all things before rehearsed. But it is not suffi∣cient to say: They must demonstratively prove out of the Word, their assertions.
Now the second Commandement prohibited none of the former actions, Verbatim, or in expresse termes: Nor yet by necessary illation; For the sense of the Com∣mandement is: Thou shalt worship no Idoll, &c. Lev. 26.1. But the Sonne of GOD, and His blessed Name are no Idols: The Son of God, in the blessed Eucharist, giving us His body and bloud, is no Idoll. Therefore religious adoration of Christ, in the holy Eucharist, and at the rehearsing the Name of Iesus, is no super∣stitious act, prohibited in the second Commandement. But the Author of Sions Plea, wil have Court Bishops, Cathedrall Churches, Parish Clerkes, and Church∣wardens, &c. condemned by the second Commande∣ment. And why not say we, Vestry Elders? For these grave Senators are no where commanded in GOD'S Word, either formally or virtually: And therefore, In malam crucem abeant: Let them be packing to the Crutched-Friers.
Concerning Bishops, and their authority, these men affirme, that the same is not ordained in the Word, But condemned by Christ, &c. But our answer is, that the holy Apostles themselves ordained Bishops in all eminent Christian Churches, to wit, Timothy at Ephe∣sus: Titus in Creta: Evodius at Antioch: Polycarp at Smyrna, &c. Now the Apostles act was according to the Word, for they were men inspired by the Holy Ghost. And the Apostles ordination is proved by wit∣nesses, against whose testimony none can exceptWesenbach. in Pandect. li. 22. tit. 5. de qualitate Te∣stium. 2 Cor. 13.1.
, that consider impartially the infallible properties of true and lawfull witnesses. For they are many in number, A cloud of witnesses: All the orthodoxall Fathers since
 the Apostles age: Some of them lived in the Apostles times, and were their auditoursIren. lib. 3. cap. 3. Euseb. Chronic. Anno Christi. 104.
: and some of them suc∣ceeded those which were ordained Bishops by the Apo∣stles: They were faithfull witnesses, even unto deathAthanas. d. Incar∣nat. Verb. pag. 59. & Ep. ad Dracont. p. 738. Quot ab Idolis con∣verterunt? quot a furi∣osa & daemoniaca cō∣suetudine suis admo∣nitionibus compescu∣erunt? quot aduxerunt Christo servos?
: They consent and accord in their testimony: And they are such, to whose testimony the Christian world gi∣veth credit, for the waightiest matters in religion: to wit, concerning the number and integrity of the Books of Canonicall Scripture: The holy Apostles Creed: and next unto the holy Scriptures concerning The eternall Deity of our blessed Saviour, &c.
1 The subscriptions of two of Saint Paul's Epistles testifie2 Tim. 4. The sub∣scrip. The second Epi∣stle unto Timotheus, ordained the first Bi∣shop of the Church of the Ephesians. Titus 3. It was written to Titus ordained the first Bi∣shop of the Church of the Cretians.
, that Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus: and Titus of Creta. And the ancient History of the Church testifies the sameEuseb. Hist. l. 3. c. 4. Timotheus sane pri∣mus Ephesianae paroe∣ciae, Sicut & Titus Cretensium Ecclesia∣rum Episcopatum sor∣titus scribitur.
. Ignatius the Martyr, (who lived at the least thirty yeares in Saint Iohn the Evangelists dayesTheodoret. Dial. 1. . Igna∣tius. Euseb. in Chron. An. Dom. 104. Ignat. ad Antioch. Memen∣tote Evodii beatissimi Pastoris vestri, qui primus vobis ab A∣postolis ordinatus est Antistes. Tertul. c. Haer. ca. 32. Smyrneo. rum Ecclesia habens Polycarpum a Ioanne conlocatum Episcopum. Iren. lib. 3. c. 3. Polycarpus non solum ab Apostolis edoctus & con∣versatus cum multis ex iis, qui Dominum nostrum viderunt, Sed etiam ab Apostolis in Asia, in ea quae est Smyrnis Ecclesia, constitutus Episcopus: & quem nos vidimus in prima nostra aetate, &c. Ib. Ab Apostolis Episcopatum sortitur Clemens. Ib. Habemus eos qui ab Apostolis ordinati sunt Episcopi. Euseb. Hist. lib. 3. ca. 30. Hieron. Catalog. in Polycarpo. Cyp. Epist. 65.
:) Tertullian, Irenaeus, Cyprianus, &c. testifie the like concerning Evodius, Polycarpus, Linus, Papias, Clemens, &c. And that Bishops ordained by the Apo∣stles, were not titular and nominall onely, but such as had power of jurisdiction, and power of ordination, is witnessed by Ignatius, Tertullian, CyprianIgnat. ad Trall. Quid aliud est Episcopus quam is qui omni principatu & potestate superior est? Id. ad Magnes: Decet vos (Presbyteros & Diaconos) obedire Episcopo, & in nullo illi refragari . Id. ad Smyrnens. pag. 68. ad Ephes. pag. 217: 219. Cypr. Epist. 27. Inde per temporum & successionum vi∣ces, Episcoporū ordinatio, & Ecclesiae ratio decurrit: ut Ecclesia super Episcopos cōstituatur, & om∣nis actus Ecclesiae per eosdem praepositos gubernetur.
, and by the whole Catholike Church: And Saint Hierom himselfeHier. ad Nepotian. Esto subjectus Pontifici tuo, & quasi animae parentem suscipe. Tertul. de Bapt. cap. 17.
, whose testimony some men have laboured to draw another away, confirmes the same.
2 This forme of Ecclesiasticall government is agree∣able with the presidents of holy Scripture, both in the time of the old Testament: and with the Apostles forme of government, who in their owne persons exercised authority over all other Pastors, and at their decease ap∣pointed
 Bishops, to be principall Rulers, in all eminent Christian ChurchesCyprian. Ep. 42. n. 4. Hier. Com. in Titum c. 1. Idem c. Vigilantium. Aug. in Psal. 44. Pro pa∣tribus tuis nati sunt filii, &c. Pa∣tres missi sunt A∣postoli, pro Apo∣stolis nati sunt filii, id est, constituti sunt Episcopi.
.
Now whereas tne adversaries of the Prelacy contend, that Episcopall gubernation is prohibited by CHRIST, Matth. 20. Marke 10. Luke 22. They have no minde to consider, that the holy Apostles themselves, to whom our Saviour's words were personally directed, did all their owne dayes exercise jurisdiction over all other Ecclesiasticall persons: And therefore their great Lord and Master prohibited not superiority and government over Priests and Deacons, but such forme of govern∣ment as was meerly secular, and not conformable or subordinate to the rules of the Evangelicall Law.
In the last place, after these Senators have in such manner (as your Grace hath heard) battered Episcopall Government, with their paper-shot, Then they fall pell mell upon the Service bookeSions Plea. p. 29. What grosse, ab∣surd, blasphemous untruthes, these bookes are stuffed withall, especially the Service Booke, pag. 178. Our re∣ligious worship of God is overlayd with the rubbish of idolatry, and su∣perstition, p. 314. Egyptian Garlick.
.
One of this Novell generation, in a Tractate, intitu∣led, A survay of the Booke of Common-prayer, makes quaeres, nd hath no lesse than two hundred double quar∣rels, against our Church service, and the Ceremonies thereof. T. C. in his dayes, and his disciples named in my margineAbridgement. p. 89. Admon. 1. p. 9. Admonit. 2. ad p. 41. Fall of Babell, p. 29. Altar Da∣mas. p. 612. Sions Plea, p. 29. 316, 317.
, are confederate in the same gall of bitter∣nesse, and bond of iniquity.
Their prime objections are. The forme of the Com∣mon Service, is not commanded in the WordElton on the Colos. pag. 308. Iohn D. upon the second Commande∣ment, pag. 17. Sions Plea, pag. 107. What∣soever is besides the Word, is against the Word, whatsoever wor∣ship is not of God's owne prescription, is condemned under the name of Idolatry.
, And some materials thereof, are taken out of the Romists Breviarie, Portuis and Masse-bookeId. p. 29. The Service Booke which they cannot deny to be raked out of three popish Chanells, the Breviary, Ritu∣all and Masse Booke.
.
Touching the first, they declare not, whether their meaning is, That every lawfull forme of Divine Ser∣vice, must be taken verbatim out of the Scripture: Or whether it be not sufficient, to have the same conforma∣ble to the rules of holy Scripture. If they say the first, propriasua vineta caeduntNullus sanae mentis, quae domi recondita habet, traducit ac reprehen∣dit, sed suis quisque favet.
, they cut the throat of their
 owne praying, singing, preaching, and saying, for the same are not word for word in holy Scripture: but if they require onely the latter, we are able to maintaine against all Presbyterian backbiters, that our English Common Service, and our Ceremonies, are conformable to the rules of holy Scripture.
And their second objection, borowed from the hereticks the Donatists, makes an impetuous sound & impression in popular auditories, but it is vain and of no force with the judicious.Cypr. Ep. 73. Quale est, ut qui hoc Novatianus fa∣cere audet, nos pu∣temus non esse fa∣ciendum? Aug. d. Bap. c. Don. l. 3. cap. 11. Neque enim quicquid Hae retici perverse fue∣rint imitati, facien∣dum a Catholicis non est, quia illi si∣militer faciunt. For if the materials received out of the Romane Missall, and Portuis, are in their proper quality true and holy, then the Lord himselfe is the prime Au∣thor of them: and our Church hath warrant, from the example of God and Christ of using them.
We may not dislike the Magnificat, or Te Deum lau∣damus, or the Lords Prayer, or the Apostles Creed: the Epistles & Gospels: Baptizing of Infants: bread & Wine in holy Eucharist: Imposition of hands in ordination: Re∣verent & decent habit, gesture, & formality in divine wor∣ship; nor any other action, in quality good, or adiapha∣rous, convenient and subservient to Gods outward wor∣ship: We ought not (I say) abhorre or reject such things, because the Roman Church hath used them: for the Christian Church it selfe received the bookes of the Old Tastament from the Synagogues of the IewesAug. in Ps. 41 & in Ps. 56. Nobis serviunt Iudaei tan∣quam capsarii no∣stri: studentibus nobis codices por∣tant. Codicem por∣tat Iudaeus, unde credat Christianus: Librarii nostri fact sunt.
: and S. AugustineAug. d. Bapt. c. Don. li. 6. c. 44. Ipsi Gentiles si quid di∣vinum & rectum, in doctrinis suis ha∣buerunt, non im∣probarunt sancti nostri. saith, If the Gentiles had any thing good in doctrine (or manners) holy Christians did not reject or distaste the same. Our Lord and Saviour made water which had beene superstitiously abused by the Pharisees in their Lotions, Matth. 15.2. Mark. 7.3. the materiall element of Baptisme: and Bread and Wine prophaned by Gentiles in their idoll serviceIustin. Mart. A∣pol. 2. , &c.
, the materiall Elements of the Holy Eucharist. In Io∣shua, the silver and gold of Iericho, was by God's com∣mandement put into his owne treasury, Chap. 6.24. The Censers of rebellious Corah, &c. were by Gods mandate, made Plates, for the covering of the holy Al∣tar,
 Num. 16.38. De luco alienorum Deorum (saith AugustineAug. Epist. 154. ad Publicolam.
) wood growing in Idoll Groves, by Gods appointment was made fewell for sacrifice: and when things prophaned and abused, are converted to holy use: hoc de illis fit quod de hominibus, cum de sacrilegis & impiis, in veram religionem mutantur: the same is done to them, which is done to men, when they from being prophane and sacrilegious, are converted, and made religious.
The Bishops therefore of the Church of England did no wayes offend, by receiving from the Romane Church into our divine service, such materials, circumstances or ceremonies, as were religious and good.
But now, whereas these Zelots complaine of us, for partaking with the Romane Church, in things lawfull and good: they themselves comply with the same in Articles and Actions, which are of no good quality.
For example.
First, as the Romists make their Church, the onely Spouse of Christ, and their Doctrine onely Orthodox∣all verity: So likewise the Presbyterians esteeme them∣selves, and their pure Sect, the only Kingdome of Christ: they stile none Brethren, but their owne secta∣rians: all their doctrinals are the pure Word of CHRIST: they stile their extemporall preaching, per excellentiam, The Word: and as learned Papists make their Churches preaching, the sole instrument of working grace and saving faithBosius d. sig. Ec. l. 2. Greg. d. val. Analys. fid. Cath. li. 8. Stapleton. Relect Controv. 5. quaest 3. ar. 4. Id. Princip. doct. l. 8. ca. 18.
: So likewise do these men concerning their owne ecclesiasticall sermonizing: and whatsoever quality or effect, sacred Scripture ascri∣beth to Apostolicall preaching, or to the word of divine inspiration, Rom. 1.16. & Chap. 10.17. Heb. 4.12. these presumptuous Senators ascribe the same, to their own private doctrine and forme of preaching.
2 These Presbyterian Dictators, without any mani∣fest and demonstrative proofe, make their owns forme of discipline the scepter of Christs kingdome, the stan∣dard
 of Christ, the soule of the mysticall body of Christ, and consequently, a proper Character of the true Church. Now what doe Romists more concerning their ecclesiasticall policie?
3 The Romists teach, that the materiall sword of Kings and Souldiers is to be exercised ad nutum & pati∣entiam SacerdotisCap. unam san∣ctam. d. major. & obed. glossa.
: according to the becke and mercy of the High Priest: so likewise the Presbyterian Sena∣tors, challenge power to command Princes, to execute their decrees, and to say to the King and Temporall State, in our Saviours name, Luke 19.27. Those mine enemies which would not that I should raigne over them, (by the Scepter of my Kingdome, Presbyterian disci∣pline) bring hither and slay them before meSions Plea. p. 196 201. As the Mini∣ster must doe his part with the spiri∣tuall sword: so the Magistrate must doe his part, in re∣moving this evill with the sword of Iustice.
.
4 Some Zelots of this fraternity, are so far transpor∣ted, with furious indignation against the opposites of their New-borne Republike, as that (neglecting what they have objected against the Prelates) themselves com∣ply with the most impudent and mercilesse Romists, in their cursed speaking and writing, and likewise in their cruelty.
Their two generall maximes are: 1. That all things in Religion and manners, ought to be regulated by the Commandement of holy Scripture. 2. It is altogether unlawfull for the English Church, to comply with the Romane in the use of Ceremonies, formes of Service, or any other indifferent things: and by force of these two rules they condemne Episcopall authority; the com∣mon Service; and all Rites, Ceremonies, and Gestures in Religious worship, which have beene used by Ponti∣ficians.
But now presently I shall make it appeare, that these men themselves in their morall practice transgresse both these rules.
1 Holy Scripture commandeth: Be you mercifull, as your heavenly Father is mercifull. Love your enemies, blesse them that curse you, doe good to them that hate
 you, that you may be the children of your Father in hea∣ven. Be ye followers of God as deere children, and walke in love, as Christ loved us. Railing and cursed speak∣ing is a character of infidels. Their throat is an open sepulcher, the poyson of Aspes is under their lips: whose mouth is full of cursing and bitternesse: Their feet are swift to shed bloud. These filthy dreamers despise domi∣nion, speake evill of dignities. These speake evill of those things they know not. Michael the Archangell conten∣ding with the Divell, &c. durst not bring against him rai∣ling accusation.
Now the Presbyterians, who make the Commande∣ments of holy Scripture the only rule of all actions, ful∣fill the former precepts in manner following: to wit, the cleane contrary way.
I will not presume to trouble Your Grace, or my Rea∣ders, with raking into the old kennels of Thomas Cart∣wright, Ʋdall, Penry, Martin Senior, Martin Iunior, More worke for Cooper, &c. But I shall humbly intreate your patience, to give me leave to relate unto you some few passages out of a moderne Presbyterian tractate, intituled, Sions Plea against the Prelacy.
This remarkable author, followeth the Rule of the word in manner following:
First he belcheth out all the venemous, and opprobri∣ous language, which the bottomlesse pit could afford him against English Prelates, and against all that favour their order. Then he perswadeth Ministers and Magi∣strates, to set themselves against their superstitious wor∣ship (the Service booke) and to pursue these Prelates, with an Holy hatredSions Plea. The second mean of re∣movall of this great evill, is: for Ministers and Ma∣gistrates, to set themselves against this superstitious worship, and Anti∣christian governe∣ment: teaching and exhorting others to doe the same: They must labour, and cause others la∣bour, for an holy hatred of the Pre∣lates and their bur∣thens.
: that is, to dash the braines of that Babylonish Prelacy against the stones: and accor∣ding to Luke 19.27. But those mine enemies which would not that J should raigne over them (by my Vestry-Senators) bring hither, and slay them before meSions Plea. p. 196
. And a∣gaine, Strike that Hazael in the fifth rib; yea, if Fa∣ther and Mother stand in the way, away with themIdem p. 240.
.
 Strike this Basilik veine, for nothing but this will cure the plurisie of our State.
2 This Stibiarian presseth audaciously upon the Royal Throne: and after some ScarrificationId. pag. 41, 79. 208. 213. 215, 224, 248, 270 The good harmelesse King being captivated &c. We must not loose you and the Kingdom, by prefering your fansie or groundles affection, before sound (Presbyte∣rian) reason. You should complaine to the heart that the head is much distempered. The Lion must be cured (by the Presbyterian Senate) of the Kings Evill. We reade of Vzziah his proud attempt, &c. the valiant men of the Lord withstood him, shewing from the Law, &c.
, tendereth a bitter pill of sacriledge and cruelty: but when the same was rejected because it was violent, then hee presents his Antimonian potion, to the States of the Kingdome: now these likewise understanding that he was an Em∣piricke, give him repulse. Vpon which occasion, he changeth his profession, and turnes false-prophet: 1. He presageth happinesse to as many as should comply with him in his fury. 2. He denounceth many woes to open adversaries. 3. He declaimeth against luke-warme Lao∣diceans, who being well affected towards the holy cause (of sacriledge) are not active, and such as the Pro∣phet Ieremy requireth; men in the streets.
3 This Presbyterian man of Warre, congratulates a certaine notorious murther, committed by a Zelote of his owne devotion; hee maketh this damned act an he∣roicall vertue: and blasphemeth God Almighty, making him the author of this diabolicall AsassinationD. Buck. pag. 160. 162, 166, 176. Prosp ad ob. Vinc. 10. Detestando & abo∣minanda est opinio, quae Deum cujusquā malae actionis credit authorem: Adulteria matronarum, & cor∣ruptelas virginum nō instituere novit sācta divinitas, sed damna∣re: Nec disponere, sed punire. Gandent. Brixian. in Exod. tr. 3. Ingentis sacrilegii est, vel cogitare, quod Dens, qui non solum bonus & justus, sed ipsa bonitas & justitia est, vei jubeat vel cu∣gat aliquid fieri, quod factum damnet.
.
Hee exhorteth the Nobles of the Land to proceed in this bloudy execution, saying: GOD hath chal∣ked out this way unto you: GOD having offered Himselfe to guide you by the hand, in giving this first blow, will you not follow home? The sprink∣ling of the bloud of the Wolfe, if wee can follow the LORD in it, may prove a meanes to save, &c. The counsell of Hushai to Absalom sorteth well with this bu∣sinesse, that all Israel should bee gathered from Dan to Beersheba, as the sand of the Sea in number: who may with the ropes of their prayers, joyned to the power of your hands, draw the Citie of their Babel into the River of destruction, untill there be not one small stone found.
Lastly, These Novell Senators, deliver some positions concerning the holy Scripture in such a large, and con∣fused
 manner: as that by this meanes they become the occasion of pestiferous schismes and heresies.
For whereas the Article, concerning the perfection and perspicuity of sacred Scripture, ought to be delivered with distinction and limitation: these novell teachers, by their confused and presumptuous tendrye, make their owne opinative sense, and application of Scripture, the common rule and modell, of theologicall questions, and morall actions.
But there is a vast difference, betweene the holy Scrip∣ture in it selfe, and the singular phansies and expositions obtruded upon itHilar. d. Trin. Dicto∣rum intelligentiam, non ex ipsis dictis ex∣pectant, sed imponūt: & hoc cogunt dictis contineri, quod ipsi∣met apud se praejudi∣catis opinionibus per∣suaserunt esse intelli∣gendum.
, by private spirits. For the first is the Word of Truth, and Evangelium Domini, the LORD'S holy Gospell: but the other at the best, is Evangelium hominis, an humane Gospell, but many times, and which is worse, est evangelium diaboliHieron. in 1. cap. ep. ad Gal. Interpretatio∣ne perversa ex Evan∣gelio Domini fit Evā∣gelium hominis, vel quod pejus est, Dia∣boli.
.
The life and soule of holy Scripture; is the true sense and exposition thereof: non in verbis Scripturarum est Evangelium, sed in sensu: non in superficie, sed me∣dulla: non in folijs, sed in radice rationis (saith Saint HieromeHieron. c. Luciferi∣an. & in ep. ad Gal.
.) The verity of the Gospell is in the sense, and not in the bare letter: in the inward marrow, and not in the outside: in the roote of reason, and not in the outward blade or leafes, Tantum veritati obstrepit adul∣ter sensus, quantum & corruptus stilus (saith Tertul.Tertul. d. praescr. ca. 17.38.40. Clem. Ro. ep. 5. apud Gratian. d. 37. c. Relatum. Chrys. in Ioan. hom. 39. August. d. Genes. ad lit, lib. 1. cap. 18. & in Ps. 48. c. 1. Hieron. c. Lucif. in fine Dialogi. Nec sibi blandiantur, si de Scripturarum ca∣pitulis videntur sibi af∣firmare quod dicitur: cùm & Diabolus ali∣qua de Scripturis sit lo∣quutus: & Scripturae non in legendo consi∣stunt, sed in intelli∣gendo.
) an adulterous sense crosseth the verity of Scripture, no lesse, than the corrupting of the Text.
The common rule of Faith and Obedience, must be constant, immutable, and uniforme: but private opini∣ons, expositions, and applications of Scripture, are vari∣ous, mutable, and contradictory: therefore the same can no more be a just rule, and modell of lawfull actions, then contrary windes, gusts, and streames, of safe and regular navigation.
The Article therefore of our Church concerning the perfection of holy Scripture must be expounded in man∣ner following, to wit: Sacred Scripture truely expoun∣ded,
 and rightly applyed, is a compleate and sufficient rule, to direct our judgement and beleefe, concerning all verity meerely supernaturall.
Also it delivereth maximes, rules, canons, and it con∣taineth many presidents and examples, for the better or∣dering and perfecting of civill, morall, and Ecclesiasticall duties and actions. The same likewise is so farre forth sufficient, in propounding the Articles of faith, and the precepts of good manners, necessary to bee be∣leeved and obeyed by Christians in generall: that if they shall duly observe the order and meanes appoin∣ted, they may rightly attaine the sense and understan∣ding of them.
Now the meanes to attaine the sense of holy Scrip∣ture (upon which I shall touch for the present) are:
1 A true, right, and perspicuous translation of the Scriptures, out of their originall tongues. And this is a worke of great skill: and requireth much diligence, good conscience, and many helpes, of learning, art, and reading.
2 Holy Scripture hath formes, phrases, and expressi∣ons of matters supernaturall, peculiar and proper to it selfe. Christ is called , The Word, Iohn 1.1. GOD is said to be Three, and One, 1 Iohn 5.7. The Word was made flesh, Iohn 1.14. Divine predestinati∣on: By nature children of wrath: Iustification: New Birth: the Church the Body of Christ, of his flesh, and of his bones, Ephes. 5.30.
3 Some prime Articles of faith, are not delivered in a literall or catechisticall forme of speech, but they are collected and concluded by argumentation, out of sen∣tences of Scripture, and by comparing of sundry Texts, one with another. And sometimes there is a seeming difference betweene one Text of Scripture and another, Ioh. 10.30. and Ioh. 14.28. Rom. 3.28. and Iam. 2.24.
Now the Presbyterians shall not finde the holy Scrip∣tures in these and many other such like things, so perspi∣cuousHieron. Tom. 3. Ep. ad August. In Scripturarum ex∣positione quaedam vel obscurissima sunt. Aug. in Ps. 140. Sunt in Scripturis sanctis profunda mysteria, quae ad hoc absconduntur, ne vilescant, &c. Id. de Trin. li. 15. c. 17 Id. de mendac. ad Consent. 14. Greg. ep. ad Leand. ca. 4. & sup. Ezech. Hom. 17. Isidor. Pelus. li. 2. ep. 5. Fulgent. ser. d. confes. Aug. ad Volusian. ep. 3. Whitaker d. Eccle∣sia, pag. 220. Sunt quaedam Scripturae loca, de quibus ni∣hil certi statui po∣test. Id. Duplic. li. 1. c. 13. pag. 201. In Scriptura non om∣nia aperta, & palam exposita sunt, sed abstrusa & recon∣dita multa sunt. Parcus, in Genes. 4. pa. 699.
,
 as that every private person, by helpe of the Spi∣rit, and by their mother wit, may easily understand them, and rightly judge of controverted articles by them. And these new men, undervaluing all humane learning, and rejecting, and crying downe the testimony, and traditi∣on of the Ancient Catholike Church; have set open a wide doore to Heretickes, and Schismatikes, and among the rest, to new Photinians, Socinians, semi-Pelagians. Anomians, Anabaptists, &c. And if any hereafter will proceed further, and question the Canonicall au∣thority of Saint Iohns Revelation, or the Acts of the Apostles, &c. I doe not as yet conceive, what these Ma∣sters (having disannulled all Tradition and authority of the ancient Catholike Church) will bee able to plead a∣gainst them.
The Church of England hath proceeded, a right and orthodoxall way: For we have justly rejected all coun∣terfeit and adulterous Traditions, namely, all such as are not truely ancient and Catholike: Nor yet subser∣vient to the doctrine of holy Scripture: But on the con∣trary, we maintaine the uniforme testimony and tradi∣tion of the Primitive Church, complying with holy Scripture, and being subservient to true faith and godli∣nesse.
It falleth out many times, that some verities, which are evident enough, to peaceable mindes, out of holy Scripture, are notwithstanding opposed by Adversaries, as namely, Childrens Baptisme: Communion in both kindes: Church-Service in a knowne language, &c. In such cases, when we have the testimony, example and Tradition of the Primitive Church, confirming our infe∣rences from those Scriptures, which wee allenge: This addeth reputation to our doctrine and practice, and very much confoundeth our Adversaries.Athanas. ad A∣delph. .
Now the Presbyterian faction proceeding a contra∣ry way, are easily brought to a non-plus, even when they have a good cause: But concerning their maine cause,
 to wit, the externall government of the Church: When (upon their grand principle, that no ordinance must take place in the Church, but such as is verbally, or by necessary consequence commanded in holy Scripture,) They reject that forme of government which is appro∣ved by the perpetuall testimony of the true Catholike Church: They utterly damne their owne consistorian Regiment, for the same can neither be proved by any li∣terall Texts of holy Scripture: Nor yet by necessary in∣ference out of Scripture: Because all Texts and senten∣ces, which they make foundations of this new Fabricke, doe not so much as probably conclude that which they require.
By these mens positions, and irregular proceed∣ings, many of our people are infected with dislike and hatred of the godly forme of our Church-Service, administration of Sacraments, ordination of Ministers, and with our Ecclesiastical Rites and Ceremonies: and are perswaded, they are Superstitious, and that it is un∣lawfull, to observe them. And this conceit hath quen∣ched the devotion of many good people, towards God's publike worship: It hath caused a fraction and division in the Church and State: And brought forth a novell spawne and frie of Donatists, Novatians, Separatists, Anabaptists, &c. Also many are become contentious and factious in civill affaires: And the ancient love and respect, which our English Nation was wont to beare to Soveraigne Authority, is much cooled and decreased. But one mischiefe besides, is remarkable: Namely, that many people, piously affected in their generall intenti∣ons, Men and Women fearing God, loving His Word, sober, charitable, and vertuous in their morall conversa∣tion, Are made a prey to schismaticall LeadersMinut. Foelix in Octav. Incautè cre∣duli circumveniun∣tur ab iis, quos bo∣nos putaverunt.
: And whereas, had they exercised religion, and other vertues, in Ʋnity and obedience of the Church, whereof they are members, (as all religious persons in ancient time were wont to doeHieron. c. Luci∣fer. ca. 7. Illo tem∣pore nihil tam cō∣veniens servo Dei videbatur, quàm u∣nitatem sequi.
) this would have beene honour and
 comfort to themselves: And their vertues and good life, would both have honoured the Religion professed in our Nation, And likewise have beene exemplary to others: But it now falleth out, That the poyson of Schisme hath corrupted all the former: They bring scan∣dall and dishonour to our religion: Their outward ver∣tuous deeds are thought to proceed from hypocrisie and blinde zeale: and they are rather scorned and contem∣ned, than honoured and imitated: And they themselves, in stead of receiving honour and comfort, are fallen in∣to disgrace, hatred, danger, and losse, and some of them into great misery. The remedy of the former evils must be these things which follow:
1 A true and plaine discovery of the falsity and de∣ceitfulnesse of Presbyterian principles: And the Rea∣der shall finde some passages in this ensuing Treatise, ve∣ry usefull and materiall for that purpose.
2 Divines must become studious, of pious and ve∣nerable antiquity: And in their judgement, and their doctrine, they must not vary from the same, unlesse evi∣dent and convincing reasons shall enforce them.
3 And there is one thing more, of great moment, to perswade people to live in conformity and unity of the Church: To wit, the holy and religious con∣versation of conformable men. When people shall ob∣serve conformable Ministers, diligent and industrious in serving God, and promoting the salvation of Chri∣stian soules, committed to their charge: When they be∣hold in them, peaceable, sober, and vertuous conversa∣tion: And that they are no lesse diligent in sowing the seed of grace, than Heretikes and Schismatikes are, in sowing tares: This will prevaile very much, to per∣swade them to honour the present Church, and the dis∣cipline thereof.
Now on the contrary, no one thing hath beene a grea∣ter scandall, and occasion of withdrawing many from conformity: Then the prophane negligence of some
 conformable Ministers: Then their losenesse of life: Their avarice and ambition, in heaping together Bene∣fices and promotions: And then a grosse neglect in dis∣charging their duty, either in their owne persons, or by entertaining and rewarding able and sufficient Curates.
Your Grace in your Metropoliticall Visitation, hath begun a good worke, in taking this into your religious consideration, and you have endevoured a reformation. GOD Almighty vouchsafe to give a blessing, and good successe to your pious intention, and that by your Gra∣ces authority, this scandall before mentioned, may be removed out of our Church.
There might also (my Reverend good Lord) be a very profitable use, of some private form of pastorall collation with their flock, for their direction and information in particular spiritual duties: such as was private coufessi∣on in the ancient Church. Now the Presbyterian Cen∣sors, upon their Paralogisme taken from abuse, have with such loud and impetuous declamations, filled the eares and prepossessed the mindes of many people, that they are exceedingly averse, from this sovereigne, and ancient medicine of consolation, prevention, and curing the maladies of the souleAugustan. Confess. Nos confessionē reti∣nemus praecipue prop∣ter absolutionem, quae est verbum Dei, quod de singulis, authoritate Divina, pronūtiat po∣testas clavium: Quare impiū esset ex Ecclesia privatam absolutionem tollore, Ne{que} quid sit remissio peccatorum, aut potestas clavium intelligunt, si qui pri∣vatam absolutionem a∣spernantur. Gerrard. loc. com. d. Paenit. privata coram Ecclesiae ministro cō∣fessio, quam auricula∣rem vocant, quamvit non habeat expressum ac speciale mandatū, ac proinde non sit ab∣solutae necessitatis, ta∣mē cum plurimas prae∣stet utilitates, & disci∣plina ecclesiasticae pars sit non postrema, pub∣lico Ecclesiae consensu recepta, ideo nequa∣quā temere, vel neg∣ligenda, vel abrogan∣da; sed pie, ac in vero Dei timore, praesertim ab illis qui ad sacram synaxin accedunt, u∣surpanda. Iuel. Def. Apol p. 2, Divis. ca. 7. pag. 192. Chemn. Exam. Concil. Trid. p. 2. pag. 221. P. Mart. loc. com. class. 3. cap. 8. Sect. 28. Zanch d. oper. Bed. pag. 757. King Iames Meditat. upon the Lords praier
.
Having now proceeded thus far, in declaring the scandall, which by the factious deportment of Pres∣byterian spirits hath been raised in our Church: and likewise having vindicated our mother Church from imputation of Novelty: I shall at the last apply my selfe to the subject of the Treatise following, and de∣liver the occasion, by which I was induced to handle this Question of the Sabbath.
A certaine Minister of Northfolke, (where I my selfe of late yeares was Bishop,) published a Tractate of the Sabbath: and proceeding after the rule of Presbyte∣rian principles, among which, this was principall: That all religious observations and actions, and among the rest, the ordaining and keeping of Holy-dayes, must
 have a speciall warrant and commandement in holy Scripture, otherwise the same is superstitious: Conclu∣ded from thence, by necessary inference, that the seventh day of every weeke, to wit, Saturday, having an expresse command in the Decalogue, by a Precept simply and perpetually Morall (as the Sabbatarians teach) and the Sunday or Lord's Day being not commanded, ei∣ther in the Law, or in the Gospell: The Saturday must bee the Christians weekely Sabbath, and the Sun∣day ought to be a working day.
This man was exceeding confident in his way, and defied his Puritane aduersaries, and loaded them with much disgrace and contempt. Besides, he dedicates his Booke to the Kings Majesty himselfe: He implores his Princely ayd, to set up his old new Sabbath: He admo∣nisheth the Reverend Bishops of the Kingdome, and the Temporall State likewise, to restore the fourth Com∣mandement of the Decalogue to his ancient possession: and professeth that he would rather suffer Martyrdom, than betray such a worthy cause, so firmely supported by the common Principles of all our new men, who have in preaching or writing treated of the Sabbath.
But while he was in this heat marching furiously, and crying in all places where he came, Ʋictoria, victo∣ria: He fell into an ambuscado, and being intercepted, he was convented and called to an account, before Your Grace, and the Honourable Court of High Commission.
At his apparance, Your Grace did not confute him with fire and fagot, with halter, axe, or scourging (as a certaine Hot-spurre, a lybelling disciple of Thomas Cartwright's, traduceth the Iudges of that honourable CourtMartin Mar-pres. Protest. 13. Besides whorish impudēcy, halter, axe, bands, scourging, and rai∣ling, our Bishops have nothing to de∣fend themselves withall.
) But according to the usuall proceeding of your Grace, and of that Court, with delinquents, which are overtaken with errour, in simplicity, there was yeelded unto him, a deliberate, patient, and full hearing, together with a satisfactory answer, to all his maine objections.

The man perceiving that the Principles which the Sabbatarian Dogmatists had lent him, were deceitfull, and that all which were present at the hearing (of which number there were some Honourable Lords of His Majesties Privie Councell, and many other persons of quality) had approved the confutation of his errour: Hee began to suspect that the holy brethren, who had lent him his principles, and yet persecuted his conclusi∣on, might perhaps be deceived in the first, as he had been in the latter. And therfore laying aside his former con∣fidence, he submitted himselfe to a private conference, which by God's blessing so farre prevailed with him, That he became a Convert, and freely submitted him∣selfe to the orthodoxall doctrine of the Church of Eng∣land, both concerning the Sabbath-day, and likewise concerning the Lord's-Day.
Now because this Treatise of the Sabbath was dedi∣cated to his Royall Majesty: and the principles upon which he grounded all his arguments, (being common∣ly preached, printed, and beleeved, throughout the Kingdome,) might have poysoned and infected many people, either with this Sabbatarian errour, or with some other of like quality: it was the King, our gra∣cious Master, his will and pleasure, that a Treatise should be set forth, to prevent future mischiefe, and to settle his good Subjects, (who have long time beene di∣stracted about Sabbatarian questions) in the old and good way of the ancient, and orthodoxall Catholike Church.
Now that which his sacred Majestie commanded, I have by Your Graces direction, obediently performed: and I shall now desire Your Grace, and all other Rea∣ders, to take notice of these particulars following:
First, I have with much diligence, weighed and examined those mens arguments, which ground the re∣ligious observation of the Sunday, upon the letter of the fourth Cemmandement; and I have proved by de∣monstrative
 arguments, that they are of no force. And therfore I have grounded it upon the uniforme practice and custome of the Ancient Catholike Church, which received the same from the holy ApostlesAug. d. Temp. 251. Dominicum diem Apostoli, & Apostolici viri, ideò religiosa so∣lemnitate habendū sanxerunt, quia in eodem Redemptor noster á mortuis resurrexit, &c. (Nota hîc sanxe∣runt, hoc est, sanctè & firmiter statue∣runt. Fr. Sonhi. de∣monstr. p. 4. ca. 4.)
.
Also touching the manner of keeping it holy, I have walked in the old and good way of pious antiquity, and I have made cleare remonstrance, that the Ecclesiasti∣call and Civill Lawes and Constitutions, of our Church and State, accord, and come fully home, to the ancient decrees, Canons, and Precepts of the holiest Gover∣nours of former times.
The keeping holy the Lord's-day, and of other Festi∣vals, ordained by the Church and State, is a worke of piety, a nursery of Religion and Vertue, a meanes of sowing the seeds of grace, and of planting faith, and sa∣ving knowledge and godlinesse in peoples mindes: and our blessed Lord and Saviour, being duly and religious∣ly served and worshipped upon the Holy day, imparteth heavenly and temporall benedictions, to the King, the Kingdome, the Church, the publike, the private, and to thr whole State.
Prophanation of the Lord'-day, and of other solemne Festivall dayes, which are devoted to divine and religi∣ous offices, is impious, and hatefull in the sight of God and of all good men, and therefore to be avoided by such as feare God, and to be corrected and punished in those which shall offend.
And there is one kinde of sacriledge, usually commit∣ted in our Kingdome, which had his beginning from the Presbyterians, and hath infected innumerable mul∣titudes amongst us: to wit, a prophane and shamefull neglect and contempt of the solemne forme of divine Service, appointed to bee duly used and frequen∣ted, by the publike constitution of our Ecclesiasticall and Temporall Lawes. Many of our Priests and Mini∣sters, being infected with the Presbyterian drug, of despising our Church-Service, do either mangle it, and
 transforme it, according to their owne phancy: or wholly neglect it, preferring their own devised formes before it: and our Lecture-men, and some others whom precise people, stile powerfull Teachers, doe seldome honour it, so much as with their owne presence: and whereas (if they were the men they desire to be estee∣med) they should not only honour it with their pre∣sence, but also with their action (not holding it a base office, to offer up to GOD in the name of the Church the sacrifice of publike prayer, thanksgiving, and wor∣ship) they in their Sermons and Lectures, and when they treate of Prayer, &c. at no time commend the use of it, nor declare the fruits and benefit of it, nor make it a necessary act of religion. And now lately, since I have been reading many English Pamphlets and tract∣ates of the Sabbath, I can hardly finde any Treatise wherein the use of the Common Service by the Mini∣ster, and the due frequenting thereof by the people, is once named among the duties or offices of sanctifying the Lords-day. Certainly, men doe not consider that it is a sacrilegious act, to rob God of such worship and ser∣vice as the Church and State have devoted to him: and why may not men rob God of his Church, and Church∣men of their Tythes, aswell as of his Service? but be∣sides this, it is a common injury to the whole kingdome, to the Kings Majesty Himselfe, his Gracious Queene, and lovely Children, to the Lord's, Nobles, Bishops, Magistrates, the sick, the whole, and to all estates of people, to be deprived of the publike suffrages of the Church, which amongst all religious and holy men, were ever esteemed as a common or universall Sacri∣fice, far more pleasing to GOD, (being offered up by the generall vote of all the Land, in an uniforme consent, as it were with one heart, and with one voice) then the singular and affected devotions of private spirits.
And now, most Reverend Father, having thus far pre∣sumed of your patience, in reading these former passa∣ges:
 I shall in the last place humbly intreat your Grace, to receive this Treatise of Mine, concerning the Sab∣bath-day, and concerning the Lord's-day, into your fa∣vourable Protection. Many things perswade mee to dedicate the same to your Grace: namely, Your digni∣ty and authority in our Church: Your religious care and affection, to reforme those evils of which I justly complaine: Your deepe judgement in matters Theolo∣gicall: Your reverent esteeme of venerable antiquity, and Your distaste of novelty: and lastly, Your long continued good affection to my selfe: all these have moved me, and some of them have obliged me to com∣mend these my labours to Your Graces Patronage. I am assured, Your Grace will lovingly accept this Treatise, because it tendeth to the publike edification of the Church: and if it shall be truly understood, and impar∣tially examined by such as reade it; it may be a meanes to settle the Sabbatarian Controversie, which ever since Th. Cartwright's unluckie dayes, hath disquieted both Church and State.

