



WHosoeuer loueth not the Lord Iesus, let him be Anathema maran atha, had in execration euen to the death. But I know that you haue loued him from your cradle, forsomuch as you haue bin no∣rished vp in the words of faith, and wholsome doctrine, which you haue continually imbraced. Wherefore, in him, whom you haue thus loued, (so long as you cease not to loue him) I also loue you as my soule, and tender your saluation as mine owne. The God, euen the father of our Lorde Iesus Christ, whom you serue, and who is blessed for euermore, knoweth that I lie not. And, howbeit, the preaching of the crosse is foolishnesse to them that perish: yet seeing it hath pleased God by the foolishnesse of prea∣ching to saue them that beleeue, you must suffer a little this my foolishnesse, which am gealous o∣uer you with a godly gealosy. Therfore! charge you before God, and the L. Iesus Christ which shall iudge the quicke and the dead at his appea∣ring, and in his kingdome, that you decline not
 to the right hād, nor to the left, neither to schism nor poperie, but hate them both, as hitherto you haue done, with a perfect hatred. And though you be yong in yeares, yet be not a child in vn∣derstanding, carried about with euery wind of doctrine by the deceit of men, and with crafti∣nes, whereby they lay in wait to deceiue: but fo∣low the truth in loue, and in al things grow vp into him which is the head, that is Christ. And so doing, assure your selfe, that hee which hath begun this good worke in you, will performe it, vntill the day of Iesus Christ. God the father of our Lord Iesus Christ, which according to his a∣bundant mercie hath begotten you againe vnto a liuely hope, by the resurrection of his sonne from the dead to an inheritance immortall and vndefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserued in heauen for you, blesse you and guide you with his holy spirit, that you may increase in wisdom in stature, in fauor with God and man, and so multiply his graces vpon you, that you may goe forward from vertue to vertue, from grace to grace, and grant that at the length we may meet together vnto a perfect man, and to the measure of the age of the fulnesse of Christ.

