



RIGHT WORSIPFVL,
THat which the Apo∣stle Paul speakes of a mans desire of the office of a Bishop, may bee truely spo∣ken of euery one who desires to gaine men to the loue of a good
 Cōscience, that he desires a worthy work. Yea it is the work which is, & ought to be made the scope & drift of the worthy worke of the Ministry. And therefore it is, that he, that desires the calling of the Ministry, desires a worthy work because of this worthy worke of bringing men to good Con∣science. A worke at which all worke and bookes, should spe∣cially ayme: Conscience is aVnicuique liber est pro pria consci∣entia, et ad hunc librū discutiendū et emendā∣dum omnes alii inventi sunt Bern. de Cons. booke, one of those bookes that shall bee opened at the last day, and to which men shall bee put, and by which they shall be iudg∣ed. Therefore to the directing, informing, and amending of this booke, should all other bookes specially tend. Yea Salomon seems to call men off from all other
 bookes, and studies to the study of this so necessary a point, the keeping of a good Conscience:Eccl. 1212 13. Of making many bookes (saith hee) ther is no end, & much study is a wea¦rines of the flesh, Let vs heare the cō∣clusiō of the whole matter, Feare God and keep his Cōmandements, for this is the whole duty of man. As if his ad¦vise tended to this, to neglect all studies in cōparison of that study, which aymes at the getting and keeping of a good Conscience. It would be exceeding happy with vs if this study were more in re∣quest amongst vs. Wee seeme to liue in those dayes fore-told by the Prophet, wherein the earthIsa. 11. 9. should be filled with the knowledge of the Lord. We are blessed that liue in so cleare a Sun-shine of Gods
 truth, but yet the griefe is, that through our owne default, our Sun-shine is but like the winter light, all light, little or no heate, and we make no other vse of our light, but onely to see by, not to walke and worke by. In the first re-entrance of the Gospell a∣mongstAntiqua sapientia nihil aliud quā facien∣da & vit∣da praecepit, et tunc lon∣ge meliores erant viri. Postquam docti prodi∣erunt bons desunt Sim plex enim illa et aper∣ta virtue t obscuram et solertē sci∣entiā▪ versa est, docemur{que} disputa∣re, non vi∣vire Sence. epist. 96. vs, how devout, holy, zealous, and men renowned for Conscience were our Martyres, and our first Planters, Preachers, and professors of Religion. They had not generally the know∣ledge and learning, the world now hath, nor the world now the Conscience they then had. There be now better Schollars, there were then better Men: they were as excellent for Devo∣tion, as our Times are for Dispu∣tation.
 It is an excellent sight to see such Christians as were the Romans, Full of goodnesse, filledRom. 15. 14 with all Knowledge. It is pitty that ever so louely a payre should bee sundred. Yet if they be parted, it is best being without that which with most safetie may be spared. A good Conscience is sure to doe well, though it want the accom∣plishment of Learning, and grea∣ter measures of Knowledge and Vnderstanding. But take Lear∣ning from a good Conscience, and it is but a Ring of gold in a Swines snout, or that which is worse, A thorne in a DrunkardsProu. 26. 9 hand. Learning is to bee highly apprized; Riches, Honours, and all other earthly blessings are vile to it. But yet though it take
 place of all other things, yet must it giue good Conscience the wall and vpper-hand, as that which is farre before it in worth, vse, and necessity. As Salomon of wisdom, so may it be said of good Con∣science, Shee is more precious thenProu. 3, 15. Rubies, and all the things thou canst desire are not to be compared to her. Gold and Rubies cannot so en∣rich a man as good Conscience doth, and yet alas the blindnesse of men, how willing are they in this case, with a wilfull pouertie? Not Rubies, but handfulls of Barley, morsels of Bread, and Crusts are preferred before the invaluable treasure of a good Conscience.
After the many worthy endea∣vours therefore of so many as
 haue bin before me in this work of laboring men to a good Con∣science: I haue adventured also to lend my weak strength to the same worke. If one or two wit∣nesses prevaile not, yet who knowes what an whole clowd may doe? Though Eliah and Elisha be the Horsemen and Cha∣riots of Israel, yet the Footmen doe their seruice in the Battell, and Apollos may without offence water, where Paul hath planted.
Now these my poore endea∣vours such as they are, I am bold to publish vnder your Worship∣full name, and to put them forth vnder your Patronage, entrea∣ting you to countenance that in a Treatise which you haue so long countenanced in the prac∣tise.
 None so fit to bee a Patron of a Treatise of good conscience, as he that hath beene a religious both professor, and protector of the Practise thereof. To haue a Naile fastned in a sure place, the An∣tiquitieIsa. 22. 23. of a long standing Name, and Family, to bee hewen out of the Quarry of the best Stocks of Parentage, to haue faire Lines, & a faire lot in outward possessiōs, to bee blessed with a fruitefull Vine, and Oliue plants, fairely growne & planted round about a man, all these are to bee helde high honours, and great fauours from the God of heauen. And with all these hath the Lord ho∣noured your selfe. But yet your greatest honour that hath given lustre to all the rest, hath beene
 your loue to the Truth, Religion and a good Conscience. Augu∣stine repented him that hee attri∣buted more to Mallius Theodorus,Dsplicit autem illic quod Mallio Theodoro, ad quem li∣brum ipsum scripsi, quā∣vis docto et Christiano viro plus tribui quam deberem. Aug. Retr∣lib. 1. cap. 2. to whom he wrot a booke, then he should haue done, though o∣therwise he were a Learned and Christian man. A man may ea∣sily ouershoote himselfe in the commendation of a good man, especially, if a great man. It shall suffice therefore to haue said so little, and that to this ende, that hereby the World may knowe the reason of my choice of your Patronage of this Treatise. It would haue beene an incongru¦ity to haue had the name of a person of an euill Conscience, prefixed before a booke of good Conscience. I desired a Patron
 sutable to my subiect. I presume the very subiect shall make the Treatise welcome to you; Be you pleased to affoord your acceptāce as I will affoord you my poore prayers, that the Lord who hath already set vpon your head the crowne of the elders, Childrens Chil∣dren,Prou. 17. 6. and one crowne of glory herePro. 16. 31. on earth, Age found in the wayes of righteousnes, would also in his due time giue you that incorruptible crowne of righteousnesse, and eter∣nall glory in the heavens, which that righteous Iudge shall giue to you, and to all those that in the waies of a good Conscience waite for the blessed appearance of the Lord Iesus.

