





Most Reuerend Father:
YOur Pietie, Zeale, Lear∣ning and Charity, is not onely knowne of those of this Kingdome, but al∣so of others in forraine Countries: for your
Grace, next after our blessed Soueraigne and the Prince, is not only a Chariot of Israel, a shining Lampe in the Court, an Elisha to the widowes and children of the Prophets; but also an Obadiah, and an Ephron to the Abraha∣mites Strangers, Pro∣phets and people per∣secuted, refuged into this Kingdome for con∣science sake. Which things, with many more producing noble ef∣fects, make your Grace to be of a sweet-smel∣ling sauour to God, to be in good fauour
with our most gracious Soueraigne, and to be admired, reuerenced, & beloued both of the English Nation, and strangers both heere and abroad. And that which among other things makes your Grace famous, is your munificence; which ap∣peareth not onely in your founded Hospitall at Gilford, but also in that Mausolean Con∣duit, which your Grace hath caused to be built in this City of Canter∣bury. A Fountaine, not fabulously sprung vp, as that of Thomas
Becket, who lying at his old house at Otford,
Lamb. per∣amb. of Kent. 375. see∣ing that it wanted a fit spring to water it, strooke his staffe into the drie ground, (in a place thereof now cal∣led Saint Thomas Well;) where water immediat∣ly appeared.
Fox, Mon. 5. A Foun∣taine, not as that of this Citie of Canterbury in the selfe-same Beckets time, fondly reported to cure all diseases by his meanes. For what disease was there be∣longing to man or wo∣man, which was not healed with the water of Canterbury?
Aqua Can∣tuariensis. But
this is a Fountaine na∣turally springing out of the earth, conueied to this Citie by pipes, cast into a great, strong and faire Cesterne with cost and expences; and that (as the two Histories, of Moses stri∣king the Rocke, and Ia∣cobs Well, painted on the Conduit, doe re∣present) for the vse and benefit of Gods peo∣ple, for the clensing of the streets, and for the quenching of the fire in time of danger. And these two emblemes may also fitly repre∣sent the water of Life,
which springeth from Iesus Christ the Rocke and Wel-spring of Life, which your Grace cau∣seth to runne in the House of God, vnder our dread Soueraigne, to the refreshing of the soules of the faithfull. This monument with others, among the which are your learned bookes, will remaine as lasting and euerlast∣ing testimonies and monuments of your Piety, Zeale, Learning, and Charity vnto the end of the world. The consideration of which things (ouer and be∣sides
my bounden du∣tie to your Grace, for the fauour you shew to our French Congrega∣tion) hath emboldened mee to dedicate this Translation to your Grace, and shrowd it vnder your protection: Hoping your Grace will accept of it, both for the matter, and for the Religious and Lear∣ned Authours sake, and the Translatours vnfei∣ned affection. Thus crauing pardon for my boldnesse, I beseech the chiefe Shepheard of our soules, to blesse with all kinde of gra∣ces
Spirituall and cor∣porall, your Graces person, estate, and en∣deuours; that as the rod of Aaron brought forth buds, and bloo∣med blossomes, and yeelded Almonds: So the Vine of Gods Church in this King∣dome, through the care your Grace hath ouer it, vnder so Religious a King, may bud and spread her branches more and more, and bring forth, and beare sweet grapes of Holi∣nesse, Piety, Repen∣tance, Obedience and Charity, to the glory of
God, the benefit and cōfort both of Church and Common-weale in this Kingdome, and to your Graces honour and saluation, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

