



My Lord,
AS you had nothing besides the naked amiablenes of the sub∣ject, to render these Sermons acceptable, so I have nothing but my Obedience to Magi∣stracy to preface their publi∣cation. Must I not by your eies see, & by your faith believe, these truths thus clou∣ded in their discovery, profitable? But seeing you Surprise me with an Order, Give me leave to fol∣low
your Order, further, then perhaps you thinke it leades me, and that is, to retort it back upon your own consciences.
Your commands (for such are your desires) (all superiours desires being commands enamel'd with humility) give a Solemn avouchment of the Truths you heard, and therefore if you do hence∣forth in the least depart from God, or preferre any thing, I speak the word againe, Any thing, before him, you transgresse not onely Gods laws, but your own, and such kind of Sinning against your own concessions, is more haynous then barely to sin against God.
Your order (Virtually) recommends these truths to others, I cannot sufficently assert, and therefore intreat you to enquire what will be the aggravation of walking contrary to them.
Iehosaphat sent his Princes to teach (that is, to encourage the Ministers to teach) in the Cities of Iudah, and by such Orders as these, you preach to the world, what is preach'd to you at Pauls.
Let me crave leave to be plain. You may easily be ensnared by casting your eye upon this subject; for, if you read no more, you have read too much: if you read on, expecting embroydery,
you lose your labour; if with neglect, your soules Either embrace such truths heartily, or abjure them speedily; be not deceived, God will not be mocked; the more gracious his condescension for acceptance, the more grievous his indignation for refusall; and your refusall of God can neither be more nor lesse, then a [Choise rejection] I beseeh you therefore, resolve upon something, and let not our resolutions come to nothing. As you are Chri∣stians, make Religion your businesse, that you may enjoy God; and as you are Magistrates, walk as be∣comes (if I may so speak, Earthly deities, as) those that are called Gods.
I do not charge you in the least, but humbly prompt your consciences to demand of you an Account: what have you done like Gods, and for God since you came into places of Authority? When you stood upon lower ground, did you not think magistrates might do more then they did? do you now do, what you then thought? If you say you have performed the commandment of the Lord; a by-stander wil perhaps reply, What mean then the Blasphemous swearing, the roaring drunkennesse, the [com∣mon] whoredomes, the rambling Sabbath-breaking? &c. may these Sons of Belial plead liberty of conscience? If you cannot reach those that
pull the crown from the head of Christ in way of Spirituall wickednesse: pray hold their hands, that would stab the heart of Christ by morall wicked∣nesse. If reason of state leave God to vindicate his own glory in matters of religion, let not Laws of state lye dormant at your doors for want of execu∣tion. If you cannot do what you would, do what you can: do something, & something which may proclame you [Deservedly-renowned Christian-Magistrates.]
No more words but wishes, that I could tempt you, or fright you into Communion with God. 'tis the very desire of
MY LORD and Gentlemen,

Apr. 11. 1655.
