


MADAME,
THis earth, as one hath said well, is but a moat of darknesse, and a lump of vanitie; yea all things under the Sun, saith Salomon, are but vanitie of vanities;
Ec. 1.2 Ec. 12.13 our only wisdome is to fear GOD, and keep his commandments, this is the whole duety of man, which should be our chiefest task.
But, alas, our divisions like harpies and horseleaches are ready to rent and tear in pieces the very heart strings, and to suck out the inmost blood, and last life of our dearly beloved mother the Church of Britain.
And now your La. who have hitherto win good reputation among the Saints,
Judg. 5.7 is heer desired to continue to be a Deborah, a mo∣ther in Israel.
It is a worthie and noble imployment to do any good for the well of Zion: your La.
Note. is a branch of that noble and ancient house of Glencarn, who in the first reformation, to their eternall praise, while many others like Issachar, a dull asse,
Gen. 49.14 Judg 5.23 did couch down betweene two burdens, came out boldly, to help the LORD against the mightie.

The Gunpowder papists are now in hopes with power and policie, craft and crueltie, to take GODS Ark prisoner, and to set up their Dagon.
Our refuge is to the Lord of hostes, who in the very turning of an hand, and clo∣sing of an eye, can dash down all their bloo∣die designes, as He marred the fox FAUX from fireing the powder.
How ever the matter go, Christ must be true, his servants must look for affliction; In the Text of these sermons, he saith un∣to them, Ye shall be betrayed by parents and brethren, &c. In this little valume I have done what I could, by Gods grace, to descry and decipher both Crosses, Com∣forts and counsell, for the well of Gods kirk in these bloody dayes.
Heer willing to acquit some part of my bounden duety towards your La. no lesse emi∣nant in goodnesse than in greatnesse,
2 Iohn. 1 I dedicate this little to speake in S. Iohnes words. Vnto the elect Lady and her chil∣dren, whom I love in the truth: That both your La. and your most noble Posteri∣tie, may ever be on Christs side, I humbly prostrate and powre out my soule, before the Throne of Grace and Mercie.

