



SIR,
I Was in some dispute with my self to whom this Dedication might be most proper: your Lady Mother, or your self;
Rom. 16.27. but it pleased God only wise to decide that Question, by transla∣ting her into Glory: and leaving you to enter upon your Parenta∣lia, among which this Sermon with your approbation and good leave, may be accounted, and passe
for one. It was preached by your Father's Will, but printed against my own. Pardon me Sir, that I tell you so: It is not that I was unwilling to raise my whole Posse, and offer my utmost Contributions to his memory (The adventure I made of my self in that great and solemn appearance at his Funerals, will assert me against that Suspiti∣on:) but because I was sensible of that Torrent of Inke whick broke in upon us during the late lawlesse, and scribling dayes, every one li∣censing himself to invade the Press, till we were become almost all Books, and no learning; inso∣much that if we had held on at that rate, that expression of Saint John had scarce been an Hyperbole with us,
Joh. 21.25. Even the world it self could not contain the Books that should be written. You cannot
then blame me, if I was so charita∣ble to my self, as to desire not to be listed among those Supernumera∣ries. Over, and besides all this: I looked on your self as the fairest Transcript of your Father's ver∣tues, out-doing all Copies that a pen could pretend to, and coming so near the Original, as might justly si∣lence, and Supersede all attempts of this nature: So that what is, or can be written, may be seen exemplified in your self with many advantages. And it is no small help to me, that where I am defective, and come short, I may remit those that know you, to look at you for their Repa∣rations. The world then having the best account of your Father in your self: these Papers, with the Escut∣cheons, and other their companions in duty for the Rites of that day, might well have gone into privacy
according as every one could get their share, and not have been sum∣moned to this Reviviscence, to stand a second trial, and submit to a fur∣ther, but it may be, not a more fa∣vorable sentence. But I have learn∣ed not to consult my self where you command, and have therefore given my self up to your obedience. Please that your Name may give life to this Sermon, the creature of your Fa∣ther's death: 't will encourage the Reader in the perusal, as it hath done the Writer in the Publication; for, the worth of it will more than abun∣dantly compound for the wants of,
SIR, 
