



Most gracious Soveraigne,
YOur MAJESTIES so loving acceptance of my former workes, pre∣sented to You the day before Your corronati∣on, emboldens me againe to intreat for Your Patronage, countenance, and gracious aspect towards this little piece of poesie full of most fruitfull matter.

In it Ye may clearely see the lives of most remarkable men in Scripture, and with them the lives of all the Kings of Judah and of Israel, with the uses which wee should make either of their life or death.
Note.Such things are needfull to bee considered by all men, but chiefly by Kings whose actions for the most part (whether good or bad) are put in Chronicles, the Registers of time, ad futuram rei memoriam; Where after ages beholding, what hath been done in such and such a Kings reigne, will freely, without fear, give out their verdict, concerning either their vertues or their vices, so that, while the memorie of the just shall be blessed,Prov. 10.7. the name of the wicked shall rot.
But mens sayings are of little mo∣ment, the God above with whom is no respect of persons will one day before the eyes of all the world,Act. 10.34. in a most open view let it be seene what
 every man hath done in his life: be∣fore his judgement seat all flesh that day must compeare.
In all the lives of the Kings of Ju∣dah and Israel, observe that the sinne of Idolatrie provocked GOD most: The basest idole of the world is the Idole of the Masse, a god of dowe,Ezek. 22 3. . which goeth to the draught: The Hebrews call idols Gilloulim, that is muck or doung: Beware of that new god of bread,Dij ster∣cores. for if it get place in Your Majesties Dominions, Yee need never looke for a sound and so∣lide peace, according to that saying, of Deborah, They choose new gods,Judg. 5.8. then war was in their gates; the Ark and Dagon will not faile to fight; Consider well these words, and make use of them for Your good, as Yee would wish to have the Lords blessing upon Your government.
O whence hath come such a fear∣full blood-shed in all Your three King∣domes? Whence is all this bloody war?
 the maine cause is, the new Go the idol of the Masse set up in Chappell,1 Kings 11.7. hard beside Gods Temple like that high place which Solomo builded for Chemos, the abomina¦tion of Moab, in the hill that wa before Jerusalem, directly for against Gods house which hee ha builded, for which doing afterwar the Lord made a rent in his King¦dome, whereof his posteritie got th least part.
O happie shall Your Majestie bee, if with good King Josiah Yee rene the Covenant of the Lord in all you Dominions, and put away the idola∣trous Priests, and take avvay all th high places, vvith all the monument of idolatrie, that so all your Domi∣nions may be pleasant and fruitfull, like the mount of Olives, vvhich for idolatrie lost its name,2 Kings 23.13. and vva called the Mount of Corruption.
O vvhat a contentment to GOD vvho made you a King! O vvhat
 a comfort to all your good subjects! O vvhat a good and vvhat a glory to your self! that it bee said in all ages following, that King CHARLES, (like a pearle in a ring) hath beene a blessed Josiah among all the Kings of Britaine.
Novv the Lord God of Gods blesse your Majestie, and make You a Defender of the Faith, as well in trueth, as in title, that in the great day of the LORD, vvith David, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah, and other gracious Kings, yee may stand before the Son of man, that great King, vvho hath vvritten on his thigh, The King of kings,Rev. 19.17. and Lord of lords.
From GLASGOW, the 28 of MAY, 1644.

