



Please your EXCELLENCE.
MOre then fifeteene hundred yeares ago Christs beloved Di∣sciple heard a loud voice, saying in hea∣ven. Wo to the inhabitants of the earth; the reason is subjoined,Rev. 12.12 for the Divel is come downe, having great wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a short time; his time is now shorter, therefore his rage is increased, for this cause hath he taken the Antichrist, the man of sin by the hand,2 Thes. 2.3 who with all his fol∣lowers breath nothing but crueltie.
It is storied of the mother of Do∣minicus,
 who after became a grea patron of Monks, that when she wa with childe of him she dreamed tha she had in her womb a wolfe, wit a burning torch in his mouth; suc indeed be all Babels beasts that cam out of the Antichristian den, t whelps of that great beast of Rom they are all Ravenous wolves,Mat. 7.15 th have nothing in their minde but fi and Gunpowder, to blow up Kin and Parliaments, and if that su¦ceed not; to make havock of all renting the head from the member even the King from his most faithfu Subjects, whom they at this time ( being the loyall Catholick Subject declare to be but traitours and r¦bels, as if the Fox would make t flock believe, that the shepheards d were their great enemie and did d¦prive them of many faire Prerog¦tives, but if he were in his place, th should have all according to the Good will and Pleasure.

This is the maine quarrell of Bri∣aine this day; Satan in great wrath with the forces of Antichrist are in he open field; The Lord is going to Battell against them, and he hath hosen your Excellence to be his Gide∣n; Heer is the Sword, even the Sword of the Lord, and of Gide∣on; I offer it to your Excellence, as eartily as ever Jonathan gave unto David his Sword and his Bow.1 Sam. 18.4
My alleagance to my dear Ma∣ster Christ, necessitates all my endea∣voures to help forward the Good Cause, both by tongue and pen; that man is happy of whom men may true∣ly say, that which Christ said of the Woman that powred the ointment on his head,Mark. 14.8 she hath done what she could.
This little book, even that which I could, is come to your Excellence to beg a look of favour; It is not from any presumption of its worth that it durst look so high; a lower patron
 might well have served higher medi¦tations; but love whiles maketh folke too forward; it made Mary to striv to get Christ in her armes when i was not lawfull to touch him.Joh. 20.17
Your Excellence loyaltie, courag and zeal, still levelling at Gods glory maketh you so dear to all his faithfu servants, that glad would we all b to have any thing that might be t you for a testimonie of our sincer affection towards you, A mite of love is better than a million of complements.
While in modestie I disparag this worke, as it is from m selfe, yet I can not in niceness altogether deny, but GOD hat made my penne to hit upon diver things, which may bring profit to the Reader: What ever th worke bee after it hath been both preached, penned, and printed if it bee not so precious as purple and blevv silke, vvhich the riche
 sort did affoord at the making of the Tabernacle, yet let it bee but like Goats-haire the poore mans gift, I vvith a most willing minde offer it to the Lord, vvho accep∣ted as vvell the poore mans pige∣on, as the rich mans ox for a Sa∣crifice:Lev. 12.8 This being such an offering for GOD, I humbly desire, that by the vvay it may get a favou∣rable glance of your Excellence eye, under vvhose patronage it may be respected in the going forth by your honourable authorising, though it come far short both of your Excellence desert, and of mine ovvne desire; the treatise is small, but it is an Earnest of more; that little I have, or am, is most sincerely at your Excellence ser∣vice, for vvhom the Urims and Tummims of Levi in this land, shall daylie bee presented before the Lord; our altars shall still reeke vvith the incense of hearty
 prayers for your prosperitie and hap¦pinesse.
While at the Battell of Ama¦leck, Joshuah fought in the val¦ley, Moses prayed on the moun¦taine;Exod. 17 11 So vvhile your Excellenc Gods Joshuah shall in the valle fight for GODS Israel again Papists, Prelats, and Arminians Satans black Squadrons, vv the servants of the LORD vvi climb the hill, and hold up ou hands by prayers unto God, s that your Excellence may boa Gods enemies, and say unto them as Abijah threatned the idolate of King Jereboams armie,2 Chro. 13 12 Be¦hold God himself is with u for our Captaine, and his Priest with sounding Trumpets, to cr alarme against you.
Novv Christ that great Jeho¦vah the Captaine of the Lord host, the God of Battels, protect you person, perfect your graces, prospe
 your vvayes, prolong your dayes, direct your armie, make you still victorious, comfortable to your friends,Cant. 6.10 terrible to your foes, as an armie with banners, that af∣ter yee vvith honour have finished your course,2 Tim. 4.7 and fought the good fight on earth, yee may get glory in heaven vvith all these faithfull Commanders, these noble vvarriours, these great Gene∣rals of Gods armies, Moses, Jo∣shua, Barak, Gideon, Jephte. Samson, and Samuel, and all others GODS vvorthies, vvhose names are vvritten in the Booke of life.

From Glasgovv the 27 of No∣vember, 1643.
