



Honoured Sir,
GOodnesse is the Honour of Greatnesse, and Grace is the Beauty of Goodnesse: Greatnesse without Goodnesse, is like a grossy body with a sluggards spirit, too heavy to beare its owne burthen: and Goodnesse without some Authoritative Greatnesse, is like a soule in separation, happy in it selfe, but it wants an organ to move in terrestrials. But he to whom God hath given gracious Greatnesse, is one that hath ten Talents, one upon whom op∣portunities wait to do his God Honour. And it
 is the greatest happinesse can betide a creature, to have an opportunity to throw his two mites, his little all into the Treasury of the Lords Glory. Our actuated habit of Love to Gods Church and Spouse, is the greatest way of honouring our God. The Bridegroom honours those that he makes his Brides Vshers: And it is the most endearing service wee can doe our Master, to have a care of his Lambs. Simon Peter lovest thou me? feed my Lambs: his Lambs in the Fold, which are his Church. Sir, God hath called you to this Honour; though not to feed, yet to provide their Shepheards a Crook. Alas! what shall wee doe? our Saviours Lambs stray and wander in dangerous pastures, and wee have no Crook to reduce them: we can only feed them when they please to eat: we have no hedge of Government to keep them in their pastures, nor Crook to reduce the wanderers: here is our mise∣ry! God hath made us watchmen; wee may give good counsell to the unlawfull straglers, but wee want our watch-bill to stay them if they will goe. Blessed be the God of heaven, that hath not only made you Honourable in the sight of men, but more in his owne sight, because zealous for his Bride. Christs Spouse in this Kingdome is in the wildernesse; and woe unto us that we can imagine the heart of any so hard as to contribute a vote to keep her there, much more to hedge up her way with thornes, that she cannot get out. At whose hands will the blood of those the wolves destroy be
 required? Blessed be the God of heaven, that hath given you an heart to wash not only your hands but tongue also of the blood of those that perish in this Kingdome for want of Government. I have here presented your Worship with a member of Christs Church; endeavouring to limn out the Spouse in her Hidden Glory: if she wants expected beauty, tis the Limners fault: she is truly Glorious in her selfe, and her Bridegrooms eyes; but her glory is hidden to the world. Is it not pity so glo∣rious a creature as this Spouse is in the perfection of her members, should want Order in her House? and bee prostituted to every one that hath wicked∣nesse enough to defloure her? May the number of those encrease thar are the friends of Sion, and the generation of those perish, that make it their de∣signe to lay yet more waste the City of God, already neare to bury her selfe in her owne ruines. It is alas! too true, Sir, and unhappy too, that God hath put weaknesse into your hands, though your heart longs to bee at Temple-work. Your selfe are in a wildernesse of Affliction, whiles you should and would gladly bee lending your hand and votes to help the Spouse in England out: Gods will must bee done, though wee bee patients. The Lord prosper the Nehemiahs that are at the work, and lessen the number of the Sanballats that hinder it; and in Elijahs absence double his spirit upon his Elishaes: and the Lord grant that in your wilder∣nesse of Affliction, you may lean upon you Beloved,
 and the Bridegroom grant such an happinesse to his Spouse, as to spare her friends life, that you may come out of your wildernesse of Afflictions, leaning upon your Beloved, and do your God more service by living to his glory, and contributing your dying Votes to the happinesse of his Bride: which is Sir, the daily prayer of

