


Madam,
I Must ingenuously confesse, it was my owne ease was the first inducement to me, to offer these unpolished meditations to the censure of the world, (whom I hear already saying, is Saul also among the Prophets?) having pro∣mised more coppies then I was willing to transcribe; But when that had raked the embers, something else blew the coales: I well knew that the Presse was so tainted, it would be a suspition of faction to be seene under it, and (if ever) now was the time to be a Foole in print: But when I con∣sidered the vanitie of my former, and the incertaintie of my latter, days I thought it was time to redeem the time, not only because my days were evil, but because my span might be almost measured out; And I thought if these meditations might not have the happinesse to shew some soule the way out
 of the wildernesse, Leaning upon its Beloved, yet they could not be denyed so small a blessing, as to keepe some Bookish eyes from dirtying themselves with poring in the excre∣ments of Factious brains and pens, (which present them∣selves in our unhappy dayes, upon every shop-board, to Athenian gazers) by busying them in these papers a little. After these thoughts had wrested my notes out of my hands, which at the first composure I had thought (like a dying in∣fant) should only have lookt upon the world, misliked it, and gone out again. My neere relation to your Honours house, told me it would be no good manners to speak of a wedding and not invite your Ladyship (especially being one of the Children of the Bride-chamber) to it. The truths here may appeale to your Honour, for a confirmation; and I doubt not but you will and can signe them from precious ex∣perience: having already Set to your Seale, that God is true. Nay, I dare be further bold to say that the marriage of the Lamb could not be consummate without you: And I was loth to present a Bride lame, to so glorious a Bridegroome. These sermons are but a Record of your Honours practice; and yet they are a prophecy of your Honours life too. The Bride of Christ is not past all her dirty way, when shee is espoused to her Bridegroome; She walks with him through dirty paths also: It is the way of heaven, not the way to hea∣ven, that is strewed with flowers and roses: He knew that told us, By much tribulation wee must enter into the Kingdome of God.
Mortality is but the Christians wildernesse, For why should the disciple bee above his Master, or the servant above his Lord? the Crowne of thorns was not made for Christs head only: and if there be written over our heads, in letters of glory, These are the heirs of heaven, what need wee care to hang here nailed to a crosse? The nailes of the
 crosse are sanctified ever since they pierced his sacred Limbs: A meditation of Christs agony, may bee a cor∣diall draught for a soule sick with afflictions.
If Christ walkt upon the Sea to us, let us gird our coats and walk also: Though Christ seemes to sleepe, yet our groanings will awaken him, for he taketh care that we perrish not. Though Christ shakes himself, as if hee in∣tended to shake off our hand sometimes; yet let us consider, it is because our hands are dirty, and not be so foolish to let go our hold; Christ may duck, but hee will not drowne us; He knowes the way out of the wildernesse, and will lead us right, if we will but leane: Though wee sit in darknesse and see no light, yet let us trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay our selves upon our God: we may be persecuted, wee shall never bee forsa∣ken: we shall come out of the wildernesse, leaning up∣on our Beloved.
I presume Madam, to present these sermons naked to your Honours hands, trusting your Ladyship will cover the imperfections with charity; they were buried, but if the Ghosts must walk, I thought it no wayes proper to put them on gayer clothes, let them walk in their winding∣sheet: If they will but tell a story of heaven to any they meet, and shew them the way, and learn them Christ, I will promise them to give them an acquittance for any other debt they owe mee: If they will but procure mee the Brides prayers, my reward is greater then my desert: If God will honour them to win a soule, his free grace shall have the honour of it; for here is nothing but I have re∣ceived from his Grace, and to it I owe all that I am.
Madam, were not my discourse of heaven and Christ, my Epistle might be tedious; but I am confident your Ho∣nour
 could be content to hear of your Bridegroome all the day long. The Lord grant your Honour yet more sweet∣nesse in his enjoyments, and fill you yet more full of his grace, till you shall come out of the wildernesse of mortality, leaning upon your beloved, into the pleasant Paradise of Glory, which is and shall be (Madam) the prayer of

