



Most Gracious Prince,
IT is reported in the Ecclesiasticall History, That when that admira∣ble Amphilochius (as Theo∣doret styles him) Metropolitan of Lycaonia,Lb. 5. c. 16. had supplicated the Emperour Theodosius; Ut Ar∣rianorum coetus ex urbibus eji∣cerentur, i. e. That the Congre∣gations of the Arrians, might e thrust out of the Cities; And that the Emperour (as thinking it somewhat an unreasonable re∣quest) had denied his suite; How that the said Amphilo∣chius was silent for a time; Excogitata admirabili arte: Having besought himselfe of another device, whereby to bring his purpose and designe to passe. And that was this; He comming not long er to the Court and presence of the Emperour; and sying Arcadius the young Prince (and lately designed Caesar) standing by him, Ipsum quidem
 Imperatorem de more salutavit, nullo honore habito filio, i. e. He saluted onely the Emperour himselfe, accor∣ding to his accustomed manner, giving no honour nor respect at all unto the Sonne. Which the Father observing, and sup∣posing it to be onely forgetfulnesse in Amphilochius: He puts him in minde of it, and bids him to approch neere unto his Sonne also, ipsumque osculari, and to greet him too, as well as he had done the Father. To which Amphilochius replies; That it was sufficient that he had tendred his re∣spect and done his duty to himselfe. Whereat the Emperour being moved, changes his former opinion; and thinks now, the neglect of the Sonne to be no lesse, no other, then an affront offered to the Father. Which alteration of minde, to∣gether with change of countenance; when Amphilochius had found to be in Theodosius: He unmaskes himselfe, Et propositum sui facti declaravit; by manifesting the drift of his former carriage. Nam cum clamore (as the Histo∣rian speakes) For even with clamour and lowd crying, He thus spake unto the Emperour: Itane fers graviter negle∣ctionem filii tui, &c. Doest thou so grievously and hai∣nously take the neglect of Thy Sonne, and art so vehemently inraged against those that shew themselves contumacious and contumelious towards him? Why then assure thy selfe that Almighty God hates likewise those that blaspheme and dero∣gate from the honour of His Sonne; yea, and is as angry and inraged as thou canst be against them that shew themselves so unthankefull and ungratefull to their most loving Saviour and Redeemer. Which speech and carriage of Amphilo∣chius, when the Emperour had well both observed and admi∣red, Legem statim scribit qua Haereticorum coetus prohiberentur; He presently decrees against the said He∣reticall Assemblies.
Now that which I would observe (most Illustrious Prince) out of this History to my present purpose, is no more
 but this. That whereas the neglect of doing Divine honour by Theodosius to the Sonne of God, occasioned the neglect of civill honour to be done to Arcadius, the Sonne of the Emperour: I inferre, that by the rule of contraries, all ci∣vill honour that can possibly be devised, is to be given to the Sonne of our Caesar, our Emperour, by whom so much divine honour is so readily and heartily yeelded to the Son of God. For who that is not supercilious and squint eyed towards his goodnesse, seeth not? or malitiously bent against his honour and greatnesse, acknowledgeth not; that our Christian and most Religious King, Defender of the true, Ancient, Ca∣tholicke and Christian Faith; honoureth the Sonne of God many waies? As first, in his Christian Lawes and edicts; and secondly, in his Christian life and conversation. In the former whereof, as he may be a President to all Christian Prin∣ces: so in the later, a patterne to all Christian people. So that we which are his Subjects, especially, if in the one we will not (or cannot in all things) obey him commanding; yet in the other, we should strive to imitate and follow him, prece∣ding and proceeding in the waies of godlinesse, and Religion before us.
Next in his reverent and zealous comportment of him∣selfe, as well in his publike as more retired devotions. As also in his Christian Imprese upon his Coyne (CHRISTO AUSPICE REGNO) professing therein to raigne and rule only by the conduct and guidance of this Son of God.
In all which particulars and many more, which might be enumerated, since our Gracious Soveraigne doth so far strive and manifest himselfe to professe to honour the Sonne of God: I say, that we ought all of us in our severall callings, to strive likewise in a thankefull remembrance thereof, to honour the Sonne of our Soveraigne: laying at his feet as prostrate before him, even our Persons, our Prayers, our paines, our wits, our wills, our works, our affections, our actions, our
 acclamations; yea, our lookes, our loves, our labours, and if need require, our lives also to doe Him service.
The consideration whereof hath thrust me forward (most Mighty Prince) though the meanest of many thousands of my profession in our Israel, which are ready to tender, some their gold, others their frankincense, and others their myrrhe, of all manner their learning and devotions and contempla∣tions in this kinde, to your sacred name) to come with my mite also, and to cast it into this treasury of your honour, to make the heape thereof a little the more heavy: not by the weight or worth of the offering; but by the zeale and true affection to your name and same, of him that brings it; who although I am a meere stranger to your highnesse by face: yet hope as a subject to your Royall Father, and a servant in the Ministery of the Gospell to your God, to finde so much inte∣rest in your Princely favour, as to patronize and protect this succeeding Discourse. Yet neither for the Authors, but the Subjects sake: nor the manner of handling, but matter con∣teyned in it. In which you shall finde a Weeke of sorrowes to our blessed Saviour, which shall procure a world of joyes to your Righteous soule: by being a meanes after all your joyes ended in this life, to translate you from a corruptible inheri∣tance and Title to a Crowne here, to an Inheritance and possession of a Crowne immortall, and which fadeth not away in the Land of the living. Which shall ever be the earnest and hearty Prayer unto Almightie God of

