



Precious Hearts,
IT is your honour above ma∣ny Professors in the world to seale in your sufferings the most refreshing and ennobling truths of Christ. Your life, which is bid with Christ in God, is that spark of glory, which hath alwayes attracted the most venemous envies of those men, who make the flesh their residence. Be confident of this, that did you live in your selves, you should live more quietly in the world; were you lower as Saints, you should be higher as Crea∣tures. Never expect to build peaceably upon earth, while you lay not your founda∣tion
in the dust: The carnall minde can∣not but bee enmity against that which is the Basis of your Principles, sutable to that expression of our Saviour, Joh. 17.14. The world hath hated them, be∣cause they are not of the world, even as I am not of the world. It hath ever been the policy of usupers, to keepe downe those which can justly prove their descent from the royal blood, lest they and their ill goen glory fall together: so those that have nd ivested themselves with the titles of the Saints, presently cotend for a rom in the seat of the scornful, to dispa∣rage and destroy those who can cleerly shew their communion with a higher blood than their own; where Christ doth most sweetly and clearly rign, there the flesh will most presumtuously & cruelly tyannize. How∣ever (Sts) though it be your Fathers pleasure, to alot you the vailey of the sha∣dow of eath for your flesh to walke in, whilest your condition is in its infancy, yet know that your glorious union with the Son of God shall be more than enough in
th pate  seure you: The world may out run you, & come first to the top of their glory, but suey  the end, the inheritance will be yours, their first shall be lost, and your last shall be first: Esau out-stles Jacob i the womb, and cons first into the world, and according to the signification of his name, he is a great doer, a cunning hunter he was; but Jacob that comes forth last, takes the game; Esau was the first-born, but Jacob goe away pos∣sessect of the birth right, and blessing also. Thus doth your Father deal with you to make your latter end in brightness to out∣shine your beginning: Neither will your God deny you bread here in the middest of famine: Heaven rains Manna in a wildernesse, the Rock gives water in the heat of drought, Believe it (you Gospel-Christians) your beloved shal be all to you in the want of all; that possession which he hath in you, will for ever entitle you, A Spring shut up, and a Fountain sealed, he will be in you an everlasting head for your supply to all expences in all conditi∣ons;
when the moisture of every thing be∣low him shal he exhousted by the creatures, which suck all they have from thence, even then, and so to eternity, shall Jesus Christ be to you in the height of his fulnes. I know nothing you have that is long-lived but Jesus Christ. Earth, more grosly carnall, and Heaven, more reinedly crnall, shall passe away, even the Kingdom of Heaven, so far as it is made up of forms and admi∣nistrations, shall wither and die; but the Kingdome of God within you shall never be shaken. That divine nature which hath swallowed you up, shall for ever fa∣tisfie you with variety of contentments. Let not therfore your hearts be troubled ye believe in God, believe also in Christ; you are satisfied, that the fulness of all things dwels in God, be also onvinced, that Je∣sus Christ, by his Fathers appointment, is made partaker of the same fulnesse: For it pleased the Father, that in him should all fulnesse dwell. Now, what ever Jesus Christ hath as Mediatour, you in your measure enjoy it; for it is the
great ordinance of God, that all the Saints should be sharers and partners with Jesus Christ, we are fellow citizens with him, and so interessed in the immunities and priviledges of the same Charter with him; that as in our first state wee had all which Adam had, so also in our second, we have all which Christ hath; Why then doth palenesse appear in your faces, and trem∣bling sit upon your lips? as if in the frowns of the creature all your felicity was buried. Oh remember you are one spirit with him, whose presence is a constant spring, in a vision of whose glory your beauty will be alwayes lovely. I leave it as my humble request to you, tha you would not forget your resting place: For the least ignorance of that will make you ap∣prehend every condition full of anxie∣tie: this was that which was the bottome of Israels misery, Jer. 50.6. They have, saith the Text, forgotten their resting place: Or, their place to lye down in, as the originall will bear it. If you make the creatures, or your ordinance priviledges,
your duties, or your own righteousnesse to be your resting places, the least disturbance in the pursuit of all, or any of these will be very grievous and distracting; but if the Spirit helps you to remember him to be your rest, who is the rest of God, trouble upon any of your enjoyments below him∣selfe, will not have an us comely i flu∣ence upon you. To see a man treting and vexing, that whilest hee was riding his journey, noises did keep him waking, would easily evince our reason to believe that this man had forgotten that his resting place was somewhere else: So to see you, whilest you were in your travell, disconten∣ted at that unquietness wherewith you are infested, would-bring you under this sus∣pition, that you had sergotten your resling place; Israel expected beds in the wilder∣nesse, when God had appointed Canaan to be their rest, & his was the ground of all their murmurings against Gods dispensa∣tions. Oh that the Spirit therefore would alwayes in the middest of sin and miserie, lead you to the rocke that is higher than
your selves or any thing you esteeme above your selves. Many, as they create troubles, so also create remedies, even such wch God never sealed: many times we sin, and then endeavour to make use of sin for a cure: we break a command of God, and then cal up∣on some duty or other blow Christ, to make up that breach; and thus we bring a double pain and vexation upon our selves. When a wound is made by a weapon, a contrary plaister applied, makes it more uncapable of cure then it wa before: So it is with all istempers in your soules, by reason of sin; if you look upon any beside the brazen Serpent, your distemper will returne with double vigour upon you. But certainly, one vision of Jesus Christ will hid defiance to the stoutest of your lusts, and all the powers of darknesse combined with them, and in an encounter wilmore than conquer them. The Host of Israel was very great, & well prepared for the battel, but if ever the day be won, David must come into the field. Our fastings and prayers appeare a huge Host, but they will rather gaze upon, than
ingage against an enemie, if Jesus Chris be not in the field; but the very cnte nance of Jesus Christ doth soon ill the e∣nemie & the avenger, and makes all the issue of sia in the soul, to orove abortive. The marrow of al this you have clearly laia open in the demonstration o the Spirit, in the following Sermons, which I am confi∣dent, to all that are led by the perit, wil be a ful vindication of the truth of Christ, and of the worthy Author from those bas aspersions cast upon both, by pride & igno∣rance. You shall sinde the sumne of this Work, to be the sole exaltation of the Lord Jesus in Saints and duties, and the deba∣sing and trampling upon all flesh that sha aspire to the seat of Christ, the reviving and encouraging of drooping hearts, by presenting Christ, not themselves, in al his accomplishments to them. Now, if the world shall haptize this doctrine Antino∣mianisme, the Lord grant that all the do∣ctrine preached throughout the world, may deservedly he caled by that name. Ye tha know Christ, be not afraid, notwithstand∣ing
all the censures of the world, to reade the book, and receive the truth; be assured it is not presented to thee as a bait, which is an  troduction to a snare, but if the Spirit of Jesus accompany it, thou wilt cer∣tainly say, as Christ did, I have meate to eat which ye know not of. I should ra∣ther cloud the work, then honour it, if I should proceed to a further commendation of it. I leave it therefore to the Spirit to make out the worth of it to the spirits of the Saints, and am concluded under this faith, that all the malice and carnall wis∣dome of this generation shall never be able to interrupt the course of it. As for the Author, though hee was never known to me, yet those works of his which I have per∣used, do encourage me to believe that whilst he lived in the world, he lived in God, and now his earthly tabernacle being dissolved he is taken up into that fulnesse which hee only saw in part whilst he lived here; and though whilst he was upon earth, it might he his portion with his Lord and Master to bee mocked and buffeted in the High
Priests hall, yet now sits with him  fruition of that glory for which e was the a susserer, what ow reeatins, but that ye which through the Spirit have tasted th sweetness of  Ministry in the same spi∣rit, look up to your Father, and neg of  that those who survive in the worke of the Gospel, may goe on where he left, & in the plentifull effusion of the Spirit, the glori∣ous truths of Christ may bee amongst th Saints, as the Sun in his height; and a∣mongst the rest, forget not him (though un∣worthy to be numbred with them) who i ambitious of nothing else, but to he

