



HAving finished (Right Wor∣shipfull) and made ready for the Presse this little Dialogue, I bethought me (sith the common manner of all that write any books in this age is to dedicate the same to one or other of great place) to whom I might dedicate thse my poor labours. At last, I did resolve with my self, none to be more fit then your Worship: boh in regard of some affinity in the flesh, as also be∣cause of those manifold good parts wherewith the Almighty hath endued you. Having therefore none other thing to present your Worship withall (in token of a thankefull heart for your courtesies shewed towards mee)
 behold, I doe here send unto you this third fruit of my labours published; most humbly beseeching you to take it in good worth: not weighing the va∣lue of the thing (which is of no value) but the simple and good minde and meaning of the giver. This work doth sharply reprove and evict the world of sin, and therefore is like to find ma∣ny deadly enemies, which with cruell hatred will most eagerly pursue it un∣to death. Zoilus also and his fellows, I know, will bitterly carp at it: there∣fore it slieth unto your Worship for protection, and humbly desireth to take sanctuary under your wings. Wherefore I humble intreat you to take upon you the patronage and de∣fence of it, that by your means it may be delivered both from the calumni∣ous obloquies of evill disposed persons, and also from the worlds malignity, so as it may take no injury. And con∣cerning this little volume, the sum of the matter of it you shall find it in the Epistle to the Reader. As con∣cerning the maner, here is no great matter of learning, wit, art, eloquence,
 or ingenious invention, (for I have herein specially respected the ignorant and vulgar sort, whose edification I doe chiefly aime at:) yet somewhat there is which may concern the lear∣ned, and give them some contentment. Whatsoever it be, I leave it with your Worship, beseeching you to give it en∣tertainment. And so I doe most humbly take my leave, commending both your selfe, your good wife, and your whole family to the mercifull pro∣tection of the everliving God.
From South-Shoobery in Essex, April 10. An. Dom. 1601.









