



My Lord,
SO many Reasons concur to frame an Excuse for my Dedica∣ting a thing of this nature to your Lordship, that nothing but the Quality of the Present can refute 'em. And I can scarce discharge my Conscience without freely owning it the Result of that Flame, which the repeated Instances of your Valour, unavoidably kindled in me. There's so much of the Hero in all your Ʋndertakings, that they can't but inflame the dawning, and revive the dying Courage: For Light must have its Reflexi∣on; the Sun and Heat are inseparable, and whate're it Touches it Warms. My Lord, Your Pen has testify'd your Contempt of Flattery: But all the World confesses there appears in Your Lordship something so eminently great, that it ex∣cludes the Possibility of it. And we may well return upon you, my Lord, what you once said of our Late ever blessed Queen; Your Soul is toucht with a Spark of that Fire, which warms the Hearts of Angels, and kindles Mortality into Desires that are immortal: It invests you with something so glo∣rious and divine, that we can never have Eyes enough to admire you, nor Tongues enough to praise you. And here, my Lord, you have drawn your own Picture, and none but your own Pen is worthy to describe You. But Providence has made You so eminently serviceable to his Majesty and your Country, that 'tis but our Duty to bring You those Lawrels which You have so much to your Cost, and for our Security, deserv'd. When Dan∣ger appear'd emphatically itself, and needed no Imagination to enlarge it; when Death stood with his Dart almost visible, and Heroes too much discover'd the Man, and recoyl'd at the Ap∣prehension;
then there appear'd in Your Lordship that Peculi∣arity of Soul, that Spark of Fire, which urg'd you on to out∣face Destruction, and even terrify the King of Terrors: Then You did in the highest sence Virtutem extendere factis. We see in You that , that , which is so observable in some Souls, that we question our Alliance to them, and not improbably fancy them of a sublimer Species. And since the Antients rank'd those who were above the ordinary Level among their Divinities, why may not we think there is some Discri∣mination, tho not corporeal, yet perhaps spiritual, between them and quotidian Souls, that they have some peculiar Tincture of Divinity, and are a Kind of , a Mixture of Natures? But now, My Lord, perhaps I'me guilty of too much Flame and Digression: But if ever any Consideration can give Rise to such a Thought, 'tis when I think upon your Lordship; and I can't but incline to the Opinion, and almost maintain it, when Your Lordship's Actions are such strong Asserters of it.
But, My Lord, I have many Reasons that plead for my Dedi∣cation of this ensuing Concern to Your Lordship: Not only the Quorum pars magna fuisti, and your being so signally eminent in this Action, an Action which silences the loud Encomiums of Boileau, and transfers the unwilling Praises design'd for Lewis upon his Majesty King William, as Mr. Motteux has happily done, and makes the French Academies subservient to the En∣glish Glory; Not only that You have formerly honour'd the Muses with Your Inclinations: But, my Lord, You have before You a Muse educated in your own County, recreated in the same; ev'n in your own Groves, drawing the same Air, and which saw how happily the Ʋniversity of Cambridge discover'd her Judg∣ment, when she chose Your Lordship her Representative, and so willingly seconded the Inclinations of the rest of the Kingdom. I question not, but that Illustrious Academy will be eager to send her Muses to congratulate Your Lordship's Safety and Ho∣nour; amidst whom I hope you will pardon the perhaps too for Zeal of

Trinity College, Cambridge.
