



MADAM,
GOD hath sent mee lately a visitation, e∣nough to hum∣ble me, and make me
 keep my Chamber, not to disable me (I praise him for it) in any fa∣culty of my body or minde. Which therefore I esteemed my self ob∣liged to imploy to the best service of God and your Ladiship, since I am called to that ho∣nour in your noble House to discharge those two services in one. And I have endeavoured that my retirement should make some amends for the discontinuance of mine attendance. Whilst your Ladiship exprest so much charity and ten∣der
 care for my recove∣ry, I spent some thoughts upon a care proper to my place, to give to your de∣votion what help lieth in me, that when you pray you may ever meet God, whom many times wee misse when we go about to seek him by prayer.
Truly we ought to ob∣serve with our best care what may be the reason why so often either wee finde no return of our prayers, or finde a re∣turn of displeasure in∣stead of comfort. As for the perverse and hard-hearted, who yet
 take upon them to pray, the blinde man healed by Christ saith, John 9.31. That God heareth not sinners, and hee saith right, for he means impe∣nitent sinners.
But what have I to do with them that are without, speaking now to your godly soul en∣dowed with Gods fear and love? Why then are the prayers of them that love and fear God so lit∣tle effectual many times? The main cause is the wandring of their thoughts when they are about that holy duty.
 For it is no wonder that God granteth not what we ask when we think not what we ask. And it were a wonder if that Holiest of Holies, being spoken to without atten∣tion, did not resent so great a contempt which we would not use to our inferiours. Since then the wandring of our thoughts is the cause of that great evil, what is the cause of that wan∣dering? Indeed the prime cause is the incapacity of our low carnal nature to comprehend the infinite God; who being invisi∣ble
 and immaterial doth not help the minde with any image proportionate to the sense and imagina∣tion; without which it is very hard for the un∣derstanding to fix his thoughts. And that de∣fect in our nature is made worse by this de∣fect in our duty, that we make our addresses to God having not conside∣red before what we are going about, what God is, and what we are.
And as the best things may be of ill use, the saying of prayers by heart so necessary to many peo∣ple,
 as uncapable to frame prayers, yet with∣out an especial good heed will give more license to the wandering of our thoughts: For words setled in the memory by long custome will come to our tongues end before they enter into our mind; and such is mans weak∣nesse that things most or∣dinary are least heeded.
For a help against these inconveniencies, I have here set down mo∣dels of prayers for every day of the week, and two for the Lords day. And before every prayer I
 have set a Soliloquie guided by a text of Scri∣pture. That diversity of prayers may help to stay your attention, and more yet, the Soliloquies that usher them.
For because we use to fall on our knees with our mindes full of the businesses and companies from which we come, it will be a wise course to take time to meditate a little, and recollect our thoughts before we be∣gin to pray. And because many times we are no more fit to speak to our selves of God then to
 God, your Ladiship shall find here Soliloquies rea∣dy made.
For the several dayes I have chosen different subjects, and such as con∣tain in this smal number the whole duty of the Christian, and laid them in the order that I thought fittest to set a conscience in a good frame. For otherwise I intend not to tie devo∣tion to certain dayes; the prayer for Munday being alike good for Tuesday.
To these prayers your Ladiship may adde ac∣cording
 as your necessity or discretion shall sug∣gest. Which that you might freely do, I made them not overlong, so that one Soliloquie with the prayer will not hold you above a quarter of an hour.
I know your Ladiship useth other good helps, to your own more parti∣cular aspirations to hea∣ven. And I presume not hereby to make you de∣cline any form or devout custome where you have found edification. But by using these sometimes the other will become new
 to your Ladiship, and variety will make them more acceptable and pro∣fitable.
One counsel I humbly crave leave to urge upon your godlinesse, that you never set your self to pray without some fore∣going meditation, either of your owne good thoughts, or anothers made ready to your hand. To which end, I have in the end of this Week of Devotions ad∣ded a preparatory Soli∣loquie for any kinde of prayer. For there being such an immense distance
 between God in heaven and man upon earth, it is almost impossible for him that prayeth, to fix his minde newly come from worldly businesses upon his Father which is in heaven, except hee make before a Bridge of meditation between these so distant shores.
Here also your Ladi∣ship shall finde a prepa∣ration for the holy Com∣munion, although you want not the labours of others that have worthi∣ly meditated upon this subject, whose good ex∣ample ought not to slack∣en
 the diligence of other Divines, but encourage their industry. And the more this duty is oppos'd or neglected by others, the more it concernes us to attend it with devotion and diligence.
Though there be bet∣ter helps abroad for the practise of piety, these may bee more effectual with your Ladiship, be∣cause they are your dome∣stical goods, and produ∣ctions of your charitable care of my health, which provoked my endeavours to take this care for the health of your soul.

Yet by these helps of devotion I do not so much intend to ease your medi∣tation of a labour, as to stir up towards these sa∣cred duties the rare abi∣lities of your brave mind, blest with a gracious di∣sposition to godliness and good works. Of which I could say much, but that it is not the duty of my place to praise it, but to labour to encrease it.
For that end I humbly present these Meditati∣ons as Handmaids to your Ladiships devotion, beseeching God to assist them with his vertue
 from above, that you may be strengthned with might by his Spirit in the inner man, growing every day from grace to grace, and finally from grace to glory. I rest
Madam

From your House at Yoghall, Febr. 20. 1653.
