



Dear Friends,
ADAM in Innocency and Integrity was in a state of perfect friendship with God, of beau∣tifull conformity to His Image, and of sweet∣ly Comfortable Communion with him; But alace! he continued very short time in that excellent state; for the entering in of sin, by his Transgressing the Law and condition of the Covenant of works, quite brake off the friendship, utterly disfigured and defaced the conformi∣ty, and altogether interrupted and put a stop to the Com∣munion: He having thereby run himself and his Posterity under a forfeiture of that desireable state, and of all the Precious Priviledges annexed to it, under which himself and they had lyen Eternally, had not God in the depth of
 his infinit wisdom, and in the exceeding and unsearchable Riches of his free Grace and Mercy, devised and found out a way for taking off that forfeiture, By sending his Son made of a Woman, made under the Law, to Re∣deem them that were under the Law; who according to the Covenant of Redemption treated and Transacted, finally concluded and agreed betwixt Jehovah and him; having made a most costly, but a most Compleat Satisfacti∣on to Provoked Divine Justice for the debt of the Elect, In whose room, for that end he did surrogat and substitute himself, as their Surety and Cautioner, hath reestablished the friendship, restored the Conformity, and recovered the Communion: of which Glad tidings of great joy Pub∣lication is made in the Preached Gospel: the Tabernacle of the Ordinances whereof is reared up amongst men, that thereby God the Lord may dwell among them: These Ordinances in their institution and nature being means of Communion and fellowship betwixt God and men: A∣mongst which Divinely instituted Ordinances, that of the Lords Supper beareth expressly the name of the Com∣munion, because, often and ordinarily the greatest mea∣sures and highest degrees of Communion with God in Christ attainable by sojourning and militant Saints here on Earth, are win at in the Participation of that Ordi∣nance, the great pledge and love-token of our dieing Lords dearest respect to his Disciples and followers, calling and oblidging them, in the use thereof, to a Solemn Commemo∣ration of him and of his love, and to a Publick and a∣vouched Declaration of his Death till he come again: Therefore is it beyond all other Gospell. Ordinances, as it were, railed about with such injunctions, Cautions, and warnings; with such terrible threatnings, with such in∣timations of Atrocious Guilt, and with such denouncia∣tions of formidable Judgements against unworthy Com∣municants,
 Thunder and Lightnings (as it were) being spoken against such. The desirable deceased Author of these few following Sermons Preached at Communions, used at such occasions to endeavour, through Grace, to rouse and work up himself to such a Divineness of frame, as very much suited the Spiritual state and Majesty of that Ordinance, greatly fearing lest himself, or any of the People to whom he dispensed the same, should fall under the grievous Guilt of the Body and Blood of the Lord; then, in a manner, his face shone, as being in the mount of Communion and fellowship with God, and at some of those Solemn and sweet Occasions, he spake some way as a man that had been in Heaven, Commending Jesus Christ; making a Glorious display of the Banner of free Grace, holding forth the Riches of it very clearly and convincing∣ly, and bringing the offers thereof very low, wonderfully low; So that in hearing some of these Sermons. Particu∣larly that on Matth. 22. I was made to think, that the Rope or Cord of the Offer of Salvation was let down and hung so low to sinners, that those of the lowest stature a∣mongst them all, though but as Pygmees, might have catcht hold of it, who, through Grace, had any mind to do so: and so home, so vehemently and urgently pressed, on so sweet and easie terms to be embraced, that I have been sometimes made to wonder how the hearers could re∣fuse or shift them: But there is no saving Belief of this re∣port made by Prophets, Apostles, Yea or by Blessed Jesus himself in his own Personall Ministrie, but where the arm of the Lord is Revealed, No man can or will (in∣vite, beseech and Perswade who will, if it were not only men, but even Angels,) come to the Son except the Father that sent him draw him; There is no moving here without a pull of Ommipotencie; none are nor can be willing to yeeld themselves to Christ, till the day of his
 Power Pass on their hearts; till then, they will sit the most pressing calls of the Gospel, but then they can sit no longer, they must, they will rise then, and run after him, they will then (as the word signifies) make a free will Offering of themselves to thim, however inexortable and inflexible they had shewed themselves before, they will then make an absolute, entire, universall, unexceptioned and Irreversible Surrender and Resignation of themselves to him, to be at his dispose, to be guided and saved by him in his own way. I know, the Remembrance of those Com∣munion Sabbaths, High Sabbaths, and other ordinary Sabbaths and week days, wherein you Sister, and other Serious seekers of God in Glasgow in particular, heard the joyfull sound, walked in the light of Gods Counte∣nance, and Rejoiced in his Name all the day, Living in a Holy croud of Precious Gospel-Ordinances, and hav∣ing, as it were, the Heavenly Manna of the Gospel fal∣ling abundantly about your Camp every day, making you think and say, that it was good to be there, is this day sweet and Savoury to you, and helps you in a good mea∣sure, to keep up a suitable and due esteem of fellowship and Communion with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ, which is commended and indeared to your Souls and to the Souls of others of the Lords People, by the choice, rare, excellent and non-such Nature and Proper∣ties of it, It being found by you all, Priviledged with ad∣mission to the enjoyment thereof, in your experience to be: First, most Real and no Chimerical fancy, or a thing that hath no being but in the deluded imagination of the Person; and truly (saith the Apostle John. 1 Jon. 1.3. Our Fellowship is with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ: It hath most reall effects, though Spiritual: Gracious Souls being more lively affected with them, then their very external Senses are by the rarest and most
 Remarkable Objects: And no doubt, the more Spiritual any thing is, It hath in it the greater reality, and work∣eth the more Powerfully and efficaciously; It is uncontro∣vertible and quite removed from all reach of rational de∣bate, that God is the greatest reality, and by Proportion Communion with God, Whereby nearest and closest Ap∣proaches are made to him, must be very real: marvellous are the effects of this Communion, and that your Souls know right well, as the Psalmist speaketh Psal. 139 14. in another case. Secondly, It is an Awfull Fellowship and full of dread, It impresseth the Soul with a deep, yet kindly veneration of the Glorious Majesty of the great and Holy God, Who (as it is said, Psal. 89. vers. 7.) Is greatly to be feared in the assemblies of his Saints (where they are admitted to fellowship with him) and to be had in reverence by all that are about him; When Jacob was admitted to very near Communion with him, Gen. 28. He saith, vers. 16. Surely the Lord is in this place, and I was not aware: and vers. 17. It is said of him, that he was afraid, and said, how dread∣full is this Place, this is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of Heaven: Familiarity here breeds no contempt, nor is it waited with any neglect or forgetfulness to keep due distance. Thirdly, It is a deeply humbling and Holily Self debasing Fellowship, as appears in Abraham, Gen. 18. who being, as Gods speciall friend, admitted to talk with him at an unusuall and ex∣traordinary rate of Familiaritie, Yet interlines, (as it were) his discourse, almost in every period of it, with deeply self debasing acknowledgements of his being but dust and ashes, and deprecatings of Gods anger for his taking upon him to speak to Him, betwixt whom and him∣self there was so infinitly vast a disproportion: so the Prophet Isaiah, when he hath that Glorious Vision of the
 Majestie of God, Chap. 6. and hears the Seraphims, those purely intellectuall Creatures, having their faces co∣vered with their wings, as not being able to behold the Brightness of the Glory of the most absolutely perfect Ho∣liness of God, crying, in a transport of admiration, each to another. Holy, Holy, Holy, is the Lord God of Hosts, the Earth is full of his Glory, he saith, Wo's me for I am undone, Because I am a man of un∣clean lips, and dwel in the midst of a People of Pol∣luted lips, for mine eyes have seen the King the Lord of Hosts: So also Job, non-such in his time, ac∣cording to Divine testimony, when he is admitted to un∣usual nearness to God, saith Chap. 42. I have heard of Thee by the hearing of the Ear, but now mine Eye se∣eth Thee, wherefore I abhore my self and repent in dust and ashes: The nearest approaches to that light wherein there is no darkness at all, make the clearest discoveries of the most eminent Saints their unworthiness, nothingness, and vileness. Fourthly, It is a Transforming Fellowship, and assimilats the Person Priviledged with admission to it, to Him that is conversed with, and with whom Fel∣lowship is attained unto: there is no real Communion with him, but the result of it is some lineament of further likeness to him; We all (saith the Apostle, 2 Cor. 3.18.) Beholding the Glory of the Lord as in a Glass, are changed (or transformed) into the same Image, from Glory to Glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord: Communion with and conformity to God have mutual in∣fluence and Reciprocall force each upon other: the more Communion with him, the more likeness and conformity to him, the more likeness to him, the more Communion with him: litle Communion with him makes litle conformity to him, and litle conformity to him cannot but be attended with litle Communion with him. Fifthly, It is a wonderful
 Fellowship, a fellowship that even sometimes transports, in a manner, the Soul admitted to it, especially in any more then Ordinary way or measure, into a sort of Rapture and extasy of Admiration at it: Thus it did David, 2 Sa. 7.18. Who (saith he) am I, O Lord, and what is my Fathers house, that thou hast brought me hitherto? and Solomon, who being very near to God, in that So∣lemn prayer of his at the Dedication of the Temple, saith, 1 Kings 8.27. But will God indeed dwell with men on earth? and as it is, 2 Chron. 6. vers. 18. But will God in very deed dwell with men on Earth? And in∣deed it is no great wonder that it be greatly wondered at, that the Infinitly great and Holy God who inhabiteth Eternity, and the High and Lofty one who dweleth in the High and Holy Place, and is surrounded and attend∣ed there, with an Innumerable Company of Angels, & of the Spirits & of Just men made Perfect, all of them shin∣ing in light and burning in zeal, none of them wearying to do him service, should humble himself so far and stoop so low, so very low, as to dwell also (an Emphatick also) with sinful, though humble and contrit Creatures, who dwell in Cottages of clay and whose habitation is in the dust, that he who is of purer eyes then that he can behold iniquity without detestation and abhorrency, should yet humble himself not only to Behold, but with delight to dwell and keep fellowship with them, who are in a great measure unholy, and have so much of that dwelling in them, which his Soul hates; that the Glorious Persons of the dreadful and adorable God head should come and make their abode with such, in whom so great a Remainder of stinking unmortified Corruption hath still its abode; that infinitly pure and perfect light should have fellowship with them in whom there is so much darkness. Sixthly, It is an estranging fellowship from all Idols, and what
 ever is displeasing to God and estranging from him; Ac∣cordingly Ephraim being brought near to him, saith (Hos. 14. v. 8.) what have I to do any more with Idols? and the people of God supposed to be in a good Spiritual frame and near to him, say, Isai. 30 22. to every Idol (which they cast away as a menstruous Cloth) with Indignation and abhorrency, get thee hence: and David being admitted to very near Communion with God, Psal. 6. saith v. 8. To wicked men by whose company he might have been estranged from him, depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity, for the Lord hath heard the voice of my weeping, the Lord hath heard the voice of my Supplication: And indeed it is Highly suitable and congruous, that it should be so, for what agreement hath the Temple of God with Idols? and Believers are the Temple of the living God, as the Apostle affirms 2 Cor. 6.16. Seventhly, It is a heart quickening and reviving Fellowship; Therefore he is said, Isai. 57. vers. 15. To dwel with him that is humble and of a contrite Spirit, to revive the Spirit of the humble and to revive the heart of the contrite one. Eightly, It is a heart-staying, Calming and composing fellowship, it husheth into si∣lence and drives away disquieting, Perplexing and ex∣cruciating fears; And therefore saith the Psalmist, when near to God, Psal. 3.56. I laid me down and slept, I awaked, for the Lord sustained me, I will not be afraid of ten thousands of People that have set themselves a∣gainst me round about  and Psal. 4 8. I will both lay me down in Peace, and sleep, for thou Lord only mak∣est me dwell in safety: So Psal. 27.13, 14. Ninthly, It is a heart chearing, refreshing, and Rejoicing fellow∣ship, the refreshing and joy that result from fellowship with God, do quite surpass and transcend the joy that the men of the world have in the enjoyment of all their earthly
 Pleasures; Lift thou up (saith the Psalmist in the name of the Godly, Psal. 4.7. In contradistinction from and opposition to those many who cry, who will shew us any good? debasing, and in a manner, brutifieing them∣selves, as if they had not rational and Immortal Souls ca∣pable of enjoying God the chief good, the only Object suit∣ed Compleatly to satisfie their most inlarged desires) Lord lift thou up the light of thy Countenance upon us, for thou hast caused more joy of heart to me, (to wit, thereby) Then when their Corn and Wine abound: And Psal. 89.16. those who walk in the light of His Countenance are said to Rejoice in his name all the day: Thus, when he Prays, Psal. 43. For admission to fellow∣ship with God in his publick ordinances (to which he had gone with others of his people, with the voice of joy and gladness, as they that kept Holy days, as he telleth us in the Preceeding Psalm) he promiseth in that case, that he will go unto the altar of God, unto God his exceed∣ing joy, the gladness or joy of his joy, the very heart and Soul of his joy, or the Cream of it, as some translations render the word; there is reality, Solidity, strength and Efficacy, in that joy; it is heart-joy, while as in the very midst of the carnal joy, jollity and mirth of natural men arising from the greatest affluence of worldly pleasures and enjoyments, their heart is sorrowfull, as Solomon saith: there is no solidity in it, it hath not a bottom: if they would but a little retire within themselves and ask for a reason of their laughter, mirth, and jollity, it would instantly evanish, and their hearts would die within them as stones; it's kept up to their delusion and ruine, by their abstracting from, and non-reflecting upon the unsoli∣dity and irrelevancy of the Grounds thereof: but the more the grounds of this joy of the Godly be reflected on, considered and searched into, they are found to be the more
 able to bear the Highest Superstructures of their joy. Tenthly, It is such a fellowship, that whatever measure of it be attained by sojourning Saints, It wakeneth desires, sharpeneth appetite, and stirreth up kindly longings for more, and yet more of it, even till it be compleated: Thus Moses the man of God, and his great favourite, whom he knew face to face, when admitted to very much familiar fellowship with him, and is told, that he had found Grace in his sight, that he knew him by name, And that at his earnest desire his presence should go with him, Exod. 33.12, 13, 14. Yet saith he to the Lord, vers. 18. I beseech thee shew me thy Glory: So Holy Job Gods darling, whose candle shined on his head, by whose light he walked through darkness, and on whose Tabernacle the Secret of God was, Yet with much Holy longing, cryes, Chap. 23.3. Oh that I knew where I might find him, I would come even to his seat; and comforts himself amidst all his Sorrows with the assured hope of the fully Satisfieing sight and enjoy∣ment of his Redeemer at the latter day: So likewise the Spouse in the Song, who had often been brought into the Banquetting house, having the Banner of her beloveds love spread over her, whose left hand had lain often un∣der her head, and whose right hand had emraced her; who had often sitten down under his shadow with great delight, and found his fruis sweet to her taste: whose Spike∣nard did send forth the smell thereof, while the King sat at his Table: who had frequently found by the kisses of his mouth, his love to be better then Wine, and to whom he had often given his loves in the Vineyards: Yet cryes in the conclusion of that High Song, make haste (or flee) my Beloved, and be thou like to a Roe or to a young Hart on the mountains of Spices: So was it also with David the man according to Gods heart, who had much
 sweet Communion with him in his wandrings and wilder∣ness condition, in Caves and Dens of the Earth, and had often seen his Power and his Glory in the Sanctuary: Yet pants and breaths after more fellowship with him, even as the chased Hart doth after the water brooks, and cryes, when shall I come and appear before God? Psal. 42. So in like manner, was it with the Apostle Paul Christs great Minion, who beside all the good dayes he had in dis∣pensing Gospel Ordinances, in planting and watering Churches, in converting and edifieing multitudes of Souls, in his triumphing, by making manifest the savour of Christs knowledge, had been ravished into the third Hea∣vens, caught up into Paradise and heard there unspeak∣able words, that were not lawful or possible to be uttered: Yet as if he had never been with him, desired to be dissol∣ved and to be with Christ as best of all, and groans with∣in himself, longing to be absent from the Body and pre∣sent with the Lord: And thus was it, finally, with John the Divine, the Beloved Disciple, who had often lyen in his sweet Masters bosom, and could confidently say, Truly our Fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, closeth his Revelations with that Holily Passionat desire, Even so come Lord Jesus.
Dear Friends, let it be more then ever your great work, and business, to keep your selves in case and capacity to enjoy his blessed company and Fellowship: And in order to this end. 1. Study to keep your selves through Grace as chast virgins to Christ Jesus, as your one Husband, let him be to you as the loving Hart and Pleasant Roe, let his embraces satisfie you at all times, and be ye always ravished with his love, and beware of embracing the bo∣som of a stranger, let him be to you as a bundle of Myrrhe lying all night betwixt your breasts, be for him and not for another, so shall he be for and with you, resting in his
 love and rejoycing over you with singing. 2. Touch no unclean thing, hate the very garment spotted with the flesh, abstain tenderly from all appearance of evil: O defile not those Temples of the living God, of the Holy Ghost, which Temples ye are: let no unclean thing be harboured or to∣lerated there, nothing that may provoke him to leave or loath his dwelling and Temple, nothing that may make his abode in them grievous, unpleasant, lothsome, or wearisome to him. 3. Let all his Ordinances, and duties of his worship be high in your esteem, and much commend∣ed and even endeared to your hearts, as means of Com∣munion and fellowship with him: O be much in love with the habitation of his house and the place where his Ho∣nour dwels; let his Tabernacles be very Amiable to you: these are his haunt, and let them be yours. 4. Be∣ware of all sinfull dalliances with Idols, whereby the Soul is estranged from Communion with God, for there is no agreement betwixt the Temple of God and Idols: from love to fellowship with him and from zeal to his Glory, bid them all, with indignation, be gone, saying to them, what have we any more to do with Idols? and as to a men∣struous cloth, get you hence. 5. When He hides his face, withdraws his presence, and suspends you from fel∣lowship with him, be troubled, arise, shake off laziness, sloth and security, be Holily restless, and go the round (as it were) of all Commanded duties, till you find him, seek him diligently in the night watches on your bed, go forth to the streets and broad places, go to the watch men, and seek him whom your Souls love: you will have gone but a little and you shall find him, and when you have found him, hold him and let him not go, do not awake nor raise him, till he please. 6. Study to be very humble, tender and contrite of heart, to be poor in Spirit, constantly sensi∣ble of your Spiritual poverty, emptiness, wants and
 indigencies; and to tremble at his word; at commands, lest they be not suitably obeyed; at threatnings, lest they be executed, at promises, lest you seem to come short of them; for it is in persons thus qualified that he delights to dwell, and it is to such that he loves to look, as is very clear, Isai 57 15. and 66.2. 7. Love, prize, improve, and, as ye have accesse, study to keep up (as you Sister in Particular are helped through Grace to do beyond many) the Communion of Saints, those excellent ones of the earth, in whom, next to his own blessed self, all your delight should be: in Communion with those Saints, Communion with the King of Saints is readily attained, it being there that he Commands the Blessing, even life for evermore. 8. Be much in the lively exercise of Faith in, and of love to the Lord Jesus; and be Spiritually precise, strict, exact, accurate and punctual in obedience to all his Commands, from Principles of Faith and love; and Christ and his Father will love you and come and make their abode with you, as he promiseth, John 14.21, 23. O! desir∣able Guests and worthie of all possible welcome, of all ready and cheerfull entertainment: follow hard after him, constantly and closely pursue conformity to him, and Com∣munion with him: It is but a litle, and the conformity to him shall be compleated, and you likened Perfectly to him, according to creature capacity; and the Communion with him which is now but in Part, (as all the spirituall priviledges and enjoyments of the People of God, while upon earth, are) shall be fully perfected, shal be Imme∣diat without the intervention of the Comparatively dark Glass of Ordinances; even to seeing him face to face, and as he is; and shall be eternally uninterrupted without the least cloud or moments Ecclipse; now it is a Cloud & a clear day, a sun-blink and anone a shower, rara hora, brevis mora, a rare hour, but quickly gone; It shal not be so
 then. O desirable and delightsome day! O sweet, singularly sweet and solacious day! O Rare and Ravishing day! let all other dayes pass and hasten away, and let that Glorious day come; Even so come Lord Jesus and tarry not. I am
Beloved Christian Friends, and dear Sister,


I heartily wish that this mite of service may be acceptable to the Saints, it being not improbable, that it may be the last service of this kind, that I shall have ac∣cess to do them.

Feb. 4. 1685.
