



MADAM,
YOu have all the Right in the world to this Trifle; for 'twas first penn'd by your Commands, & is now by them made thus more legible: whose Name then should it wear but yours, whose only Patronage is enough to pro∣tect it, could any thing that is yours want Protection?
Nothing but your VVill to have it so could have made me come so near the Presse as to make use of an iron pen: for I am certainly assured it cannot bear a publick scrutiny; nor is there any thing here fitted to the Pallat of the Times, or that will relish a severe Reader.
My Comfort is it has past your Approbation, which is all it asked, and has received no advantage from the Presse, but security from the errours of Transcribers, (if any could be found so vain:) and this I had some Rea∣son to be solicitous of, having given it so many blemishes and imperfections, that nothing but one intire Blot could cure.
The few Copies I suffered to wear this character, and
none of those Voeniall, secures me from all but mercifull eyes; and if it were possible for me to hear it commended, would secure me from vain glory too.
I remember my Lord of Cherbery having sent divers copies of a Book he printed to severall eminent persons beyond Sea, and receiving thence as many gratulatory Complements, was told by our excellent Selden, if He would know what people thought of his Book, He should suffer it to ly on the Stall, and be sold by the Stationer for eighteen pence or two shillings apiece. Indeed every Book an Authour gives is a Bribe, and the Recei∣vers Testimony made thereby rather his Civility then his Judgement.
'Tis an old observation, that those Philosophers who wrote the most severe Tractates in contempt of glory, still prefixed their names to those Pieces, as loth to lose the glory of being such Contemners. You, who are the seve∣rest Self-denyer in the world, have taught me another les∣son, & this very Dedication may serve for a Testimony of that virtue in you, and that desire of it in me. For upon what other score can you bear with so triviall, and (to you at least) so uselesse a Piece? Or upon what other ac∣count could I wrap my Name in a Disguise, and de∣cline the publick Honour of being known so devotedly yours?
How beneficiall any thing in these following lines may
prove to others I cannot prophesie; to you I am sure it is very unnecessary, who have already out-done, and out-liv'd all that hath been, or can be said of Friend∣ship.
When I have said that, I need not mention your other Virtues: for in my Notion of Friendship they are in∣cluded. I dare not so much as name them here, least you should think me (though You would be the onely Person of that opinion) a Flatterer, which I hate as much (if pos∣sible) as I do Hell, or love Heaven and the VVay thi∣ther, which is an Endearment and Ʋnion with Lucasia, and the being constantly and eternally
March 30. 1654.

