



Right Worshipful,
PLato accounted him not worthy the name of a Phi∣losopher, that studies not to know God. Divines go far∣ther, and account him not worthy the Name of a Man, that studies not to fear and serve him. To do
this, is totum Hominis, the whole of Man;
Parisiens. totum Officii, totum Conatus, totum Fae∣licitatis. In Scripture, this Fear of the Lord is often cal∣led the beginning of Wisdom; be∣cause an awful Reverence of the Divine Majesty in our Hearts, makes us industriously careful to know his Will, and to do it. And these Phrases are frequently cou∣pled together, To fear the Lord, and walk in his Ways, Deut. 8.6. and Chap. 10.12. This holy Fear of God will make Men meek and humble, and careful in all things to walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing: It will command our Thoughts, bridle and govern our Tongues, and regulate all our Actions. This will quicken us to holy Devotion, and reduce all our devotion to Practice.
In all Actions, St. Bernard would have us put these three Queries,
An liceat, an deceat, an expediat; Whether it be lawful, whether it be that which becometh us to do, whether it be expedient to be done. All our actions in passing pass not away, for every good Work is a grain of Seed for Eter∣nal Life. We should say with Xeuxes, that famous Painter, Aeter∣nitati Pingo, I Paint for Eternity.
It is very necessary for us to follow the Counsel of our Savi∣our, and work whilst it is Day. A long Night will shortly cover us with its shadow, in which we shall neither have ability nor opportu∣nity to Work.
Much Honoured in the Lord,
We have at this present many Books which eccho one another. This Age is as fruitful in Words, as barren in Works; enclining to speak much, to do nothing: Yet in matters of Devotion, one can∣not say too much of that which
we can never do enough. I pre∣sent you with this Sacred Diary; I hope it may be useful to you to carry it in your Hands, as the Clock which a great Prince wore in a Ring: It strikes every Hour of the Day, and agreeth with ho∣ly Scripture and Reason, as Dials with the Sun. By frequent read∣ing it, and doing what it directeth, you shall the better know what this Treatise is. For my part, I should not have been so bold as to make an offering hereof unto you, did I not perswade my self, that you would have less regard to the Hand that presents it, than to the Affe∣ction which renders me,
Sept. 18. 1679.

