


I Have now spent forty five yeares in the Study of the Lawes of this Land being my profession, under and by the conduct of which Lawes this commonwealth hath flouri∣shed for some ages past in greate splendor and happinesse (jam seges est ubi Troja fuit) The great and full body of this Kingdome hath of late yeares fallen into an extream sicknesse, it is truly said that the cause of the disease being known, the disease is easily cured. There is none of you I hope, but doth heartily wish the recovery of our common parent, our native country (Moribus antiquis statres Brittannica) I call God to witnes that this discourse of mine hath no other end then my wishes of the common good: How farr I have been from Ambition, my life past, and your own knowledge of me, can abundantly informe you, and many of you well know, that I ever detested the Shippe-mony, and Monopolies, and that in the beginning of this Parliament, for opposing the excesses of one of the Bishoppes, I lay under three Excommunications and the Examination of seeventy seven Articles in the high Commission Court. His sacred Majestie: (God is my witnesse) made me a Judge in the parts of Wales a∣gainst my will, and all the meanes I was able to make; and
a patent for my place was sent me for the which I have not paid one farthing, and the place is of so inconsiderable a benefit that it is worth but 80. l. per annum when paid, and it cost me every yeare I served twice as much out of mine own estate in the way of an ordinary and frugall expence. That which gave me comfort was that I knew well that his Ma∣jestie was a just and a prudent Prince.
In the time of the Attournyshipps of Master Noye and the Lord Banks, they were pleased to make often use of me, & many referrences concerning suits at Court upon that oc∣casion came to my knowledg, & as I shall answer to God upon my last accompt this is a truth, that all or most of the referen∣ces which I have seen in that kind (& I have seen many) were to this effect, That his majesty would be informed by his Coun∣sell if the suits preferred were agreable to the Lawes, and not inconvenient to his people, before he would passe them. (what could a just and pious Prince do more?) Gentle∣men: you shall finde the Cause and the Curse of the present great distemper in this discourse, and God prsoper it in your hands, thoughts, and words, as the Case deserves.
Hold to the Lawes, this great body recovers: forsake them, it will certainly perish. I have resolved to tender my selfe a Sacrifice for them as Cheerefully, and I hope (by Gods assistance) as constantly as old Eleazer did for the holy Lawes of his Nation.

