



REƲEREND SIRS,
IT is certainly an obligation of divine Pro∣vidence, and a favour which all my services cannot come into the least degree of deserving, that it hath been pleased to permit the Persecu∣tors of our Churches, and the enemies of the Faith we professe, to set upon, both by indictment, and by printed books, the Declaration I had made with all the syncerity of my heart. The seed which is sown must endure the nipping frosts and the injuries of the aire before the grain can come to maturity. Roses are not gathered with∣out some danger of the prickles they are inviro∣ned with. Lillies do many times grow among herbs of evil scent. It shall ever be honourable to me, to suffer upon the account of vertue, even flames. The Lord of glory was nailed to the
 crosse between two thieves. The servant is not greater then his Master, nor the Ambassadour more considerable then he that sent him; as it was necessary that Jesus Christ should suffer, and so enter into his Kingdome, so is it but just, that through many tribulations I also should en∣ter into the Kingdome of Heaven. These words of the great Apostle I hear perpetually ringing in my ears, if we suffer with him we shall also reign with him; and when all is rightly sum∣med up together, it will be found, that the suf∣ferings of the present time amount to nothing in comparison of the glory that is to be revealed in us.
I had before some resentments of the powerful∣nesse of celestiall Grace in my happy conversion; but now, I am to acknowledge the finger of God, and the operation of his divine spirit in my perse∣cutions. That which makes my soul as it were overflow with serenity and satisfaction, and fi∣xes it in a firme and immoveable confidence, is, that the eternall God, who hath begun his work in me, will also bring it to perfection, to his greater glory, and that you, Reverend Sirs, who are the salt of the earth, and the light of the world, will afford me so much the greater de∣monstrations of your affection and tendernesse, the more you find me haed by the enemies of Je∣sus Christ and his Truh.
It is the main design of the Jesuits to make the
 world believe that the disgraces they brand me with are marks of ignominy; but if you will but be pleased to consider their intentions, examine the informations they have put in against me and the causes thereof, and require thereupon the judgement of our Pastors and Brethren of Ro∣chel, who have been eye-and ear-witnesses of all the proceedings that have passed, you will think my disparagement glorious, and the pretences of my adversaries malicious and criminal. One of the most religious, and eloquent Ministers of the holy Gospel there hath already written in my vin∣dication, with no lesse truth then earnestnesse; and his answer hath been highly approved, by the defeat of my Enemies. I should have par∣doned Beaufe's the contumelies he had belched forth against my reputation, by an obstinate re∣solution I had taken to be silent: but those, who look on the glory of God as what is most conside∣rable in my conversion, do conceive me obliged to speak.
I therefore vindicate my self against a pre∣tended Religious man, who seems to have made it his main businesse to do violence to the funda∣mental maximes of the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, and tramples on the lawes of charity, whereof the Scriptures are full. The Canons of the Church of Rome declare a Clerk irregular, for having con∣tributed any thing to the execution of a malefa∣ctor. And yet Beaufes, giving himself out to
 be a Priest and Clerk of the Society of Jesus, makes himself a Judge of life and death upon me in his book, pronounces and signes the sentence of death against me, and racks his wit to find out new torments, to make my departure hence the more cruel and insupportable.
His accusation is, that I have celebrated their Masse, after I had engaged my self in the design of my Conversion, and did not forbear preach∣ing in their pulpits, even while I was in treaty with the Reverend the Ministers of the reforma∣tion, to find out some safe course to make a pub∣lick profession of the Faith, which I had already embraced in my heart. This enrages and exas∣perates the man so farre, that he turns a prodi∣gall, and spends on me, without the least re∣gret, all the injurious figures, and all the scan∣dalous termes which his imagination can furnish him with. In every page he finds out some new clawes to fasten on me withall, I am, in his judgement, a Judas among the Apostles, and a Deil in the house of God. The words exe∣crable, detestable, abominable, are too gen∣tle to make any deep wounds; nay, he employes the malice of his wit, and makes all his Rheto∣rick sweat again, to find out such as are more stinging and more venemous. Not thinking i enough to thrust in one or two into every period, he musters up thirteen or fourteen altogether, a when he sayes, page 25. This man was vaine
 proud, envious, refractory, hypocriticall, sa∣crilegious, perfidious, desperate, a prevarica∣tor, an impostor, carnal, treacherous, world∣ly-minded, &c. In a word, he does as much as lies in his power to make me the object of an universall persecution, and it shall not be his fault, if the particular animosity of the Jesuits, passe not through all the Christian world for the publick cause.
I am not to learn, that the Law of Grace, un∣der which we now live, does not require an eye for an eye, nor a hand for a hand, as that did, which God had given from amongst the thunder and lightning. Nor am I ignorant on the other side, that the Christian Lenity whereof you make so great profession, and that mildnesse and mo∣desty which distinguishes you to be true Pastors different from those wolves and hirelings, may haply oblige you to disapprove these refutations, as such as betray too much gall and Satyre. But I shall entreat your Reverences to give me leave, without prejudice to the Law of Jesus, to do, in my own defence, that which nature teaches the very creatures, God forbids not, and reason al∣lowes in the prudent. I do not desire the death of Beaufes, as the reward of the crimes he hath committed, though he wishes nothing so much as mine, and that for no other reason then that I have done a good work; no, I heartily forgive him, and blesse the wounds whereby he endea∣vours
 to assassinate me. But since necessity hath forced me to take up arms for my owne just de∣fence, it cannot be expected I should answer so exactly, as that I should return flowers and com∣plements, for calumnies and invectives. If there∣fore, when I oppose my buckler to the stones he casts at me, their recoyling hurts them in the tenderest places, the mischief caused thereby is to be attributed to his insolent and inconsidera∣ble attempt, since that God neither forbids nor hinders the effects proceeding from a rationall resistance.
I should have answered him in terms suffi∣ciently civil and obliging, had my calumniator any way deserv'd an honourable treatment: but civility exasperates him, and mildnesse irritates him; he is much of a nature with the canthari∣des, converts into poyson the juice of the fairest flowers, and experience hath convinced all the faithfull at Rochel, that he grows so much the more insolent against the truth, by how much the Pastors endure his extravagances with the greater modesty.
I therefore humbly beseech your Reverences not to take it amisse, if, being to refute a furious and inconsiderate man, I do not confine my self to a scrupulous reservednesse; an over-ceremo∣nious observance and respect would prejudice the purity of my cause, and might raise difficulties among the simple. I ought not, nor indeed can,
 without great danger, flatter an enraged mastiffe, whose teeth, where-ever they fasten are venemous. If I discover many passages of his life, as occasion serves, whereat he may be troubled, I assure you that the worst I shall do, will be simply not to flatter him. I could never approve that irratio∣nall custome of the Persians to whip their Sove∣raigne's robe, when he had offended, without touching his person; no, it is but just every one should beare with the penalty inflicted on him for his crimes, and detractors ought to endure the truth when it is told them.
Were I cited to a higher tribunall then yours, it would certainly be lawfull for me, to do what the holy Spirit allows by the mouth of David, Be angry, but sin not, and to follow the advice of the Wise man, Answer a fool according to his folly. But if notwithstanding all I have said, my discourse seem too sharp to you, be pleased to remember, that I have lived too long among the Jesuits, and too short a time among you, to be dismantled of those passions, which are garrison'd and fortifie themselves in persons of that Society.
I therefore most humbly make it my suit to you, that you would, without prejudice, read my Apology, and that with a spirit of love towards a person who dedicates it to your Reverences with the greatest submission imaginable. And you will find that I signe an eternall bill of divorce from them, and that, since I have discover'd such truths
 to the world, I am oblig'd out of a consideration of my own safety, ever to look on them as the impla∣cable seekers of my life. This demonstration of the sincerity of my conversion, and the obligation there is of my perseverance, shal be a certain ear∣nest-piece of my reall and hearty embracing of our Religion, as also of the respects I owe you, as being
REƲEREND SIRS,

