



High and Mighty Lords,
THe engagement I conceive lyes upon me to endeavour the safety and preservation of a State, which de∣rives its soveraignty immediately from God the Supreme Disposer of Sove∣raignes, and the miraculous acquests of your victorious Swords, obliges me to cast at your Lordships feet, a sort of dangerous persons that lurk incognito in your Dominions, and a parcell of hor∣rid Tryators, dressed up like Saints, to the end that in your presence they may,
 to their confusion, have the long robe of their hypocrisie stripped off their shoulders. You need onely consider Looks to be satisfied they are your E∣nemies, since they are Jefuits, and the bare discovery of their crimes, to con∣clude them such as ought to find as little shelter in your Provinces as Tyrants and persons maliciously resolv'd to poy∣son any that ly in their way.
The Republick of Venice, looking on them as a publick contagion, banished them their Territories in these imperi∣ous terms, Be gone, carry away nothing with you, and never returne again. In England many of the Society have come to pub∣lick execution (as Garnet &c.) not in effigie, for pretended Sacriledges; but really and in person for manifect crimes of high Treason. France thrust them out her bosome, so to provide for the safety of our Kings, and the infallible Parlement of Paris which had passed the Act of banishment against them, have had since occasion enough to curse the repeale of it, when they bewayle the
 untimely death of the greatest King in the world. Nay your Highnesses did not long since cause the Rector of their Colledge of Maestrich to be executed for apparent conspiracies. And your ancient Ordinances, passed with no lesse justice then prudence, forbid them upon pain of death from coming into any place under your jurisdiction.
But if these authentick Provisions made against them be not a sufficient intimation to raise a jealousie of them, in all those that have, in the severall parts of the earth, the oversight of the publick weale, this impartiall Treatise which with all possible submission, I lay at the feet of your Highnesses, can doe no lesse then justifie and confirme, by new proofs, the judgements of the Re∣publicks that have condemned them; and open their eyes, who at this day do, as your Lordships, manage the common Interest, that so they may take into consideration both the mischievous∣nesse of their actions, and the impurity of their lives.

I speak nothing by conjecture, as a stranger to their wayes, but all I pro∣duce is from my own certain know∣ledge, as having lived among them. The charges I put up against them, are not for some triviall miscarriages; no, the crimes I lay at their doores speak wic∣kednesse in the excesse, unlesse it can be imagined, that coyning is a frivolous fault, or to obstruct the prosperity of their Soveraign, is an innocent piece of Gallantry. If your Highnesses will be but pleased to afford your great minds so much remission from your weightier affaires, as to peruse these few pages, which I presume to present you with, there you will find, not without hor∣rour and astonishment, the inhabitants of Gomorrha revived, and the highest parts of Sodomy acted o're again: you will find, with no small indignation, such unnaturall subjects, as shall make bonefires, to expresse their satisfaction at the calamities of their Prince. The lamentable cryes of an infinite number of little children, made away by them,
 to satisfie their cruell avarice, will no doubt pierce your hearts; and the Tem∣ples defiled by their abominable unclea∣nesses will kindle your zeale into a holy exasperation against the sacrilegious prophaners thereof.
It is not hard for me to foresee the dis∣pleasure which the enemies of the light are likely to conceive at the freedome I take to dragg out of their darknesse to appear before a knowing and criticall age, a sort of unsuspected crimes; and that the partisans and creatures of that Sect will conclude I have in me more fire then flegme, and that it speaks ra∣ther my indiscretion then my zeale to enter the lists, alone, against so many enemies. But Truth, my Lords, which is stronger then any thing of man, forces me to speak, and the welfare of your State requires as an acknowledgement of the obligations I owe you, this tri∣bute of my fidelity, since I cannot but confesse my being and life the effects of your liberalitie and the protection of your armes. The noise which my Ad∣versaries
 have made, hath raised me out of the lethargy I was in, and their ma∣licious prosecution against me hath for∣ced from my mouth, what I had resol∣ved should otherwise have been smo∣thered there. Both divine and humane right commands me now to disturbe my own quiet, and the concernment of Gods glory puts me upon my own vin∣dication.
I come therefore to blowes with them, precisely in that Countrey where I have known them, and remove not the seat of the war into Spain to defeat them there, nor yet into Italy to engage them there. I make my owne party good where I am set upon, and the same Pro∣vince, which hath pretended to put in an Endictment against me, shall have the shame to be brought upon the SCAFFOLD, for the crimes it is guilty of: The armes I make use of against them in this Book, are no other then what they themselves have put in∣to my hands▪ the wounds they shall
 give their own reputation will fall upon them so much the more deservedly since that they have without any reason egged me on, and forced me upon a ne∣cessity to beat them.
Did but the one halfe of Europe con∣curre with my judgement, and the other were onely distrustfull, that these con∣scientious Hypocrites are prejudiciall to Common-wealths, the other parts of the World, that have not yet heard a∣ny thing of the Jesuits of Gascony would haply make some difficulty to give cre∣dit to my discourse; but the experience the world hath of the disturbances and conspiracies they are guilty of in all Countries, will be a perpetuall confir∣mation of the truth of those they are charged with in Guienne. For those no∣ble and triumphant Provinces, I have this to say in particular to your High∣nesses, that these are the men who make it their businesse to bring an odium on the Allyances which the greatest Mo∣narchs contract with you; these bring
 it into dispute, whether it be not law∣full to break the faith they have sworn to you; those are they that conclude all that fight under your Banners damned; nay, if it lyes but in their power, the glory of your triumph shall be buried in dishonour, it being their greatest de∣signe onely to doe mischief, and their maine intention to betray the United Provinces.
They have their Emissaries in your Territories, and there met so considera∣ble a number of them lately at the pub∣lication of my DECLARATION as might make a just Assembly at the Hague, to consider whether it were fit to answer me. These ravenous Wolves disguised like sheep, wander up and down both within and without your Ci∣ties, to devoure the Inhabitants thereof, and will still be seeking out their prey, if your seven-arrow'd Lyon do not teare them in pieces. They will shortly have their Conventicles among us as frequent and numerous as they have had for some
 years past in England. Fifty of them clad in severall habits, having met to∣gether at a Councel in London deputed a publick Agent to Rome. The presumpti∣on they are guilty of may well engage them in such attempts here also, and by that means make that advantageous peace, whereby even your Frontiers en∣joy their quiet, subservient to the carry∣ing on of a war in Religion; and this seems to be the principall aime of these enemies f your State, and what they so much the more dangerously do insinuate, when they put the rebellious into hopes of Paradice for their re∣ward.
The multitude and varietie of the crimes wherewith I charge them, and prove them guilty of, both in this and the other Treatise, will give you such an idea of them, as must needs put you up∣on thoughts of preventing these inconve∣niences. I take off their faces the veils of their hypocrisie which hid their de∣formities, and bring them upon a Scaf∣fold,
 that they may be the more com∣modiously seen in their ignominy. If the incomparable moderation of your spi∣rits conceive my manner of proceeding somewhat too violent, I beseech your Highnesses to pardon it, as proceeding from the zeale of my Religion, and to consider, that, after their bloody prose∣cutions upon my change, I neither could nor ought to have any tendernesse for them, without leaving innocence under oppression, and declaring my conversi∣on blame-worthy.
The indignation which swells them so much against me, hath made them stark mad, and the rage they are in at my conversion hath put them upon such courses, that they think fire and sword ordinary things to persecute me withall. If the DECLARATION of my Faith, lately made, with all Christian modesty, not casting the least dirt upon them, hath stung them so, as that they endeavour my death for it, what will the SCAFFOLD do upon which I
 now bring them, and the advice I have given your Lordships to beware of their traiterous attempts? No doubt but they will use all the means possible to compasse my destruction, that is, will go on suitable to what they have alrea∣dy begun. But, my Lords, I yet live through the infinite mercy of God un∣der the security of your Lawes, and your particular protection over me, which I humbly implore may be my buckler against the persecutions of all my Adversaries.
If therefore your eminent Lordships will be pleased to remember a persecu∣ted Wretch, who hath his pen constant∣ly in hand, and his thoughts alwayes ta∣ken up to vindicate himself against those that pursue him to death, upon no other account then that he is enter'd into the same communion with you, as all our Brethren of France can satisfie you, I shall ly secure under the shelter of your Palmes, and, under the Authori∣ty of your glorious Name, shall be not
 onely couragious but invincible, making it my perpetuall suit to the Lord Jesus for whose sake I suffer all things, that he would both here and hereafter crown your Illustrious Highnesses with all blessings, as I am obliged by the qua∣lity of,
My Lords,

