




Honoured and Beloved Brethren,
AS the subject Matter of the fol∣lowing Discourse is in defence of the true Apostolical Scripture manner of Divine Service, and of the Spiritual Worship of God, which you have owned and suffered for, and in which thrô the Grace of Christ you still continue, and as it tends to the mu∣tual Peace and Unity of the Churches; so I hope that my Work and Service herein will find the greater acceptance with you.

And seeing it hath graciously plea∣sed God to preserve you so stedfastly in the Truth under the greatest Trials and Sufferings of our Age, it is to be ho∣ped that the Errors of some Persons shall never corrupt your Minds from the Simplicity that is in Christ, in any part of Divine Worship, or to offer your Praises to God in such humane Forms, and after such a manner, as we have no example for, nor can be any ways warranted from the Word of God: And that those Churches which have had a watchful eye against the finest∣spun Errors of their Day, will not be now lull'd asleep by any among them∣selves, to suffer the bringing in of such a humane Tradition as is utterly incon∣sistent with their professed Principles, and to their Practice in other parts of Divine Worship; but that they will labour to have Oil in their Vessels with their Lamps, that so when the Bride∣groom cometh, they may be ready to enter into the Joy of their Lord. For though this Error is dearly fondled by some Christians, and as it is observed mostly by such among us who have not well digested those things which they
have received; yet of about an hun∣dred Churches in England, according to the best and strictest Information I have received, I hear of but seven or eight, and those are in and about Nor∣folk, Suffolk and Essex, one of them lately in London, and but four or five of all those Churches in South-Wales, which own the Doctrine of Personal Election and final Perseverance; and but two of all those Churches that are for the general Point that practise such formal Singing in the publick and con∣stant Worship of God with the Mini∣stry of the Word. Some few also there are that use it at the Administration of the Lord's Supper: To whom and to all others in particular of my Christi∣an Brethren, that herein differ from the Body of the Churches, and are decli∣ning from the Truth and Spirituality of Gospel-Worship, I humbly present that which the Lord hath convinced me of through the Light of the Holy Scriptures, to remove the Mistake you are under concerning Singing. And truly the Sense I have of the sad Ef∣fects of this apostatizing Principle in some Christians, if it should grow and
increase among us, and the unwearied Endeavours of some Persons to lead us back to such Traditions of Men from which we were clean escaped, with the Love I have for the Truth and Sim∣plicity of the Gospel, are the only Mo∣tives of my appearing in this Work or Service.
And it is matter of Grief and La∣mentation to many Christians, that while the Lord is saving his Church and People, and is drawing of us with the gracious Cords of his Love, that any should be departing from the Truth and Purity of his Worship, which af∣ter so clear a light and recovery of it from the mists and darkness of Men, is now called in question amongst our selves.
And it is somewhat marvellous to consider, that some Persons who are stu∣dious and understanding in the Holy Scriptures, should not see their Practice to be opposite to the positive Command of Jesus Christ, through whose know∣ledg others that are weak are made to sin. And that any should be so cold in their Love and Affections to Christ, and so indifferent in their Obedience
unto his revealed Will, as that they should rather trust to others for what is truth, than to take the pains to search the Scriptures for satisfaction from a good Understanding within themselves, whereby they follow the Dictates of Men more than the Precepts of Jesus Christ.
But forasmuch as humane Forms of Worship do naturally proceed from a carnal and worldly Spirit, we may then fear that some Christians (ex∣cepting others that err through a mis∣taken Zeal) having left their first Love, begin to cast off their first Faith, and to turn unto Mens Traditions, of whom and to whom, we may say, as the Apostle did to those who were turning again to the weak and beggar∣ly Elements of the Law, O foolishGal. 3.1, 3, 4. Ga∣latians, who hath bewitched you, that you should not obey the truth? — Are ye so foolish, having begun in the Spirit, are ye now made perfect by the Flesh? Have ye suffered so many things in vain, if it be yet in vain? And is it a small and in∣different thing with you, how and in what manner you worship God, and offer your Praise unto him? Have ye
not as much reason to observe the Rule of Christ in praising, and giving Thanks, as well as in Prayer, Baptism, and other Ordinances in the Church? If any should tell you, that because Prayer and Baptism are commanded by Jesus Christ, therefore you must use Forms of Prayer, and Infants-sprinkling, will you not say to them a∣gain, That the Conclusion is not ratio∣nal? For though these are commanded, yet the manner how these Ordinances are to be performed, whether in and through the Gifts and Graces of the Holy Spirit, and by dipping, or by hu∣mane precomposed Forms, and sprink∣ling, is not left to our own Wills, but are also shewed to us in the holy Scrip∣tures, which are the Rule for the man∣ner of performance of all the essential Parts of Gospel-Worship. And if any should further say, that Infants sprink∣ling is not expresly forbidden in the Scriptures, and therefore it may be u∣sed by us: will you not make reply, that though it is not forbidden in such express words, yet there being but one manner of Water-Baptism commanded by Christ and his holy Apostles, whose
Precepts and Examples therein we are bound to follow, it is a sufficient War∣rant for our practice of it, and to ex∣clude the form of Sprinkling as a sinful Practice, in that it changeth the Ordi∣nance, and maketh void the Command of Christ, through Mens Traditions? And therefore if you will not reject your Manner and Forms of Singing, from the observation of the Command and Rule of Christ for the manner of Praising God, which is contrary to your Manner and Forms, I see not how you can escape the battering and confound∣ing of your own Profession in other things.
Do ye provoke the Lord to jealousy?1 Cor. 10.22. are ye stronger than he? Hath he not said, What things soever I command you,Deut. 12.32. observe to do it: thou shalt not add there∣to, nor diminish from it? And have we not divers instances of his sore Displea∣sure for breaking his Rule of Worship, as in Nahab and Abihu,Lev. 7.11, to 19. who for offering of strange Fire, died before the Lord? And might not some have thought it a small matter to have eaten of the Peace or Thank-offering after the First-day, or of the Vow-offering, if any of it
had been left on the Third-day? but we see how great an Offence it was to make so small an Addition to God's Ordinance, as that it should not be ac∣cepted, neither should it be imputed unto him that offereth it: it should be an Abomination, and that Soul should bear his Iniquity.2 Sam. 6.6. Moreover, We read how Ʋzzah lost his Life for touching the Ark of God, because that they sought him not after the due order; and how Ʋzziah the King for med∣ling with God's Ordinance,2 Chron. 26.16. 1 Chron. 15.13. and burn∣ing Incense before the Lord, contrary unto his revealed Will, was smote with Leprosy unto his dying Day. But notwithstanding these Old Testament Examples, and the Word of Christ which saith, In vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Command∣ments of Men; yet some there are a∣mongst us, that dare adventure to break the Commands of Christ in their Vo∣cal-singing together in the Worship of God, contrary to the Rule of Worship and Institution of Jesus Christ.
And therefore, seeing that their Practice is charged with the guilt of Sin; yea, and of such a Sin as indan∣gers
the well-Being and Peace of the Church of Christ, and the bringing of God's Displeasure upon us: I hope they will be awakned to a serious Con∣sideration of what is proposed to them herein, as the Mind and Will of God: And surely if they were truly sensible of the natural Consequences of such a Practice of formal Singing, that the introducing of it into those Churches that have been established on contrary Principles, is the ready way to divide and break them into pieces, and that those Persons who should be instru∣mental therein, would be looked upon as the Troublers of the Churches, and may be justly charged with Schism, it would be a Bar to their zealous promo∣ting of it.
And it is rational to believe, that if such formal Singing should be admit∣ted and imbraced by the Churches, it would lay such a Foundation for other formal and carnal Worship, that if it be followed in its natural Tendences and Consequences, it will greatly in∣danger our reformed Separation, and make it easy for us to glide into the National Way of Worship. And there∣fore
whatever our mistaken Brethren may think of themselves, as if they were reforming the Gospel-Church, and restoring the Primitive Worship of God therein; yet the holy Scrip∣tures witness against them, and I be∣lieve that they will be found in this matter Leaders to Apostacy, and Defi∣lers of the pure Worship of God with Mens Traditions: Which that the Lord may graciously prevent, and pre∣serve the Churches in Peace and Union, and in the mutual fellowship of the Gospel, and that they may flourish and grow in Grace, and in the Knowledg of Jesus Christ, and become a great Mountain, and fill the Face of the whole Earth, is, and shall be, the Pray∣ers of your unworthy, but affectionate Brother and Servant to his power, in Jesus Christ our Lord.

