



Courteous Reader,
TIme is one of the most preci∣ous Herbs in the Garden of the World; so that there is nothing more precious; and yet by most men, there is no one thing more slighted: Wherefore, if I shall here give thee the fruits of a lit∣tle redeemed time, think not hardly of me, but let it have acceptance with thee; I must confesse, that I am the most un∣meet

of many, which this Age doth af∣ford, to write or speak of things of so great concernment: Yet I suppose this will be granted by all men rational, that he which hath but a little strength, and improveth that to the uttermost, to doe good withall, is more acceptable in the sight of God and sincere-hearted men, then he which hath ten times the strength and useth it not. And although in me there is the least Candle that ever God enlightened, yet I shall not put it under a Bushel; and although I have but one Talent, I will not hide it in a Napkin; it's true, the Candle of the Lord cannot burn with a more dim light then in my selfe. (Though a little truth liveth in me, yet clouds and darknesse are round about me.) So that I have but a little of the Spirit, in abundance of weaknesse; Wherefore if any of the glory of Christ break forth, in the ensuing discourse, let him have the glory, who hath chosen the weak things of the World to con∣found the wisdome of the wise; and

although these things be not broug forth in the painted Dish of Human Learning, varnished and coloured over with the wisdome of man; yet if the fruit be good in the taste, though the Tree be not so beautiful in the eye, reject no the fruit for the Trees sake, but rather consider that which is most unpleasant in the eyes of men, is for the most part most pleasant in the sight of God; for man is apt to love that which God ab∣hors, and to abhor that which the Al∣mighty loves.
For this Treatise, as much as in me li∣eth, I have avoided the crying up of any party or opinion, and endeavoured to own truth, and deny untruth wheresoe∣ver it is found, either in noble or ignoble, old or young, weak or strong, learned or unlearned; wishing with my whole heart that there were but only these two names under Heaven to know the sons and daughters by, viz. Saints and Sinners; for there is but light and darknes, heaven and hell, truth and errour, sheep and

wolves. But the muddy waters of Baby∣lon have run so long in the channels of our understanding, that it hath blinded our judgements and disordered our affe∣ctions.
Understanding Reader! the things that I have written of are many, the method which I have observed is fami∣liar and plain, the rule which I have en∣deavored to walk by is the word of truth, the end I have aimed at is the glory of God, in the good of his people; and wherein I have come short of my end, at∣tribute that to my weaknesse, and not the truths asserted. The fore named conside∣rations have enflamed my desires, and winged my endeavours to cast in this mite also into the Cabinet of thy soule. And although I have met with some dis∣couragements already, and do suppose I shall have many more when this comes to publike view: Yet if any man doe reap any spiritual benefit by it, though I may suffer reproaches for it, I have not lost my end in it: I have endeavoured

according to the measure of light and strength that is in me, to speak the words of truth and sobernesse unto thee. But that I might not spin out my Epistle beyond the staple; I will endeavour to give thee a brief sum of what I have written, and leave the farther enlargement of these things to every one that shall reade this book: I have written these things, not as so many Infallibilities, but under corre∣ction, with submission to beter judgements I have given mine, and that, I hope, with∣out a preingaged affection, honouring the things of God, as well in those under one form, as those under another. And as in every place, and amongst all sorts of people, he that feareth God and work∣eth righteousnesse is accepted of him; so I would endeavour to love any, in whom I see the least appearance of Christ, let them go under what name or notion the Prince of darknesse and his children please. The sum of what I have hereafter written, in brief is this; First, I have laid before thee the several Temptations

that doe surround thee on every side; next I have exhorted thee to put on all the ar∣mour of God to defend thy self, and of∣fend thy enemies, and that thou might∣est so doe, abide in the Doctrine of Christ, which is a City of Refug, and then love in the will of God, which is the strong Castle of content; Improve thy power whether natural or spiritual for him who gave it thee, n whom are all our springs, from whom are all our supplies; yet let our omissions and commissions be charg∣ed upon our selves, that God may be true and every man a liar. There is darknesse in the Prophets, and grosse darknesse in their Flock; and but a little light in any of the Saints. A few words to the preiended Ministery, with a brief Epistle to the World, whom they have deceived, with a discovery of them, and how thou mayest easily know them; Of our fall in the first-Adam, and of our recovery by the second-Adam: The glorious state of those restored; the deliverances they have al∣ready had are great, and greater then

these be at hand; onely, the Saints be too suddain in their expecting these deliver∣ances. These with many other particu∣lars are laid before thee, and commended unto thee: Now although these things are not brought forth in the golden dish of humane Learning, painted and varni∣shed over with arts, parts, and wisdome of man, but in an earthen vessel; yet de∣spise not the meat for the dishes sake. Remember that Christ called those men Scribes, Pharisees and Hipocrites, because they looked so much upon the outside, and so little on the inside; even so now, in these dayes most of the sns and daugh∣ters of men, doe looke more upon gifts then upon Grace, upon Law then upon Gospel, upon the forme more then upon the power of godlinesse; viz. If a man come and speak with the tongue of men and angels, the people are presently say∣ing as once was said of learned, eloquent, yet wicked Herod; it is the voice of a God, and not of man: but if another come unto your Assemblies, though well grown

in grace, yet if he doth not equal you in natural gifts, you say he is an illiterate Mechanick, &c. But if I might be thought worthy to advise you, I should beseech you to call no man ignorant, whom God hath taught; nor no man learned, that hath not been taught at the School of Christ.
Grace is more excellent then Gifts, yet both in their places are good: Gifts do adorn the outward man, and Grace doth beautifie the inward: The outward man may be adorned, and the inward man be left naked: And I think experience in these dayes doth abundantly prove it; and for my own part, if I am censured for it, I doubt not but I shall consider I am not better then my Master, for his doctrine was despised, and that of the learned, and well may mine: but I hope thou wilt try me before thou judge me, lest I should say to thee, as it is said to some in the same case, Pro. 18. 13. He that judgeth a matter before he heareth it, &c. But I hope better things

of thee, though I thus speak. So I wi hold thee no longer in the porch, but in∣vite thee into the house, and such as I have I will set before thee, desiring thee to taste of every dish, before thou dost spend thy judgment of the feast: For what is wanting in the first Course, may be made up in the second; and if there be not such varieties as was expected, yet let it have acceptance with thee, see∣ing it is according to my ability. 1 Pet. 4. 10. As every man hath received the gift, so let him administer the same. Thus do, and thou wilt engage him, Who is,

