



SIR!
HAving had the Ho∣nour to be employ'd in a Negotiation be∣tween an English Gentleman and the Ancient Brittons, I was not only upon the Borders, and (as it were) the Limbs
of Wales, but have travell'd through the very Bowels of the Country; in which Journey there did salute me so many occurrences worthy of obser∣vation, that I could not for be a Description of them and from presenting you with the (as I may say). Wallo∣graphy of my Voyage.
I make bold to imitate one Alexander of Greece, who sti as he went dragooning abo the World, describ'd the wa∣drings, and (as it were) theTom Coriat. was a  Tra∣vellor, who in King▪ James his time beat upon the hoof abo two or three thousand miles, and return'd ho as very a Cox-combe as he went out. See  Travels call'd his Crudities. Tom Coriatism of his Expeditions; only
in this I shall differ from him, whereas he gave only a bare Image and Portraicture of the Country, I shall draw the Cha∣racter of the Inhabitants, and shall not only express in a Map or Table the meer Picture of the Place, and tell you that here stands one Town and twenty Miles off stands ano∣ther, but my Design is to give you a Narrative of what I ob∣serv'd concerning the Nature of the (1) Soil, and of the (2) Inhabitants, their Origi∣nal, Persons, Diet, Apparel, Language, Laws, Customs, Policy, &c.

But what need I go so fa as Macedonia for a Pattern seeing we have so many Pre∣cedents at home? For one tell us in Octavo that he hath been at Constantinople; ano∣ther that he hath been at Vi∣enna; a third that he hath been in Spain; and why may not I tell the World in a little Book that I have been in Wales? When a Fellow hath either a Maggot in his Pate or a Breeze in his Tail, that he cannot fix long in a place; or perhaps when he hath enti∣tled himself by some misde∣meanours either to the Pillory or Gibbet, to disinherit himself
of his deserved Right, he flirts into Holland, or is transport∣ed into some Forreign Coun∣trey; where conversing a lit∣tle while, he thrusts into th' World the History of his Ad∣ventures, he varnisheth over his Banishment with the Name of Travel, and stiles that his Recreation which was indeed his Punishment, and so dig∣nifies a Ramble by the name of Journey. He tells what Wonderments have surpriz'd him, what Fragments of An∣tiquity have amaz'd him, what Structures have ravish'd him, what hills have tir'd him; in a word, he is big with Descri∣ptions,
and obliges you with the Narrative of all his Obser∣vations and Notices; seeing every one almost that hath bu untruss'd in a Forreign Coun∣try, will have his Voyage re∣corded, and every Letter-Car∣rier beyond Sea would be thought a Drake or a Candish I thought with my self wh may not I have the liberty o relating my Journey, and o communicating my Observati∣ons to Mankind. I must con∣fess my Pilgrimage was no far, but perhaps it was che∣quer'd with as great variety both of Pleasure and Peril a a longer Progress; neither are
my Remarques very solemn and stately, but yet they were such as gratify'd my curiosity, and pleas'd my humor as well as the Observations of longer Jour∣nals.
Such as they are. (Sir!) I humbly crave leave to devote them to your Perusal, as the most signal Testimony▪ of that venerable Esteem I have for you. I wave your Panegy∣rick, and forbear to Rhetori∣cate or to descant in your Praise. You are too Copious a Subject even for the most Transcendent Oratory. I list not to display your Personal Accomplishments, which are
so eminent and conspicuous al∣ready in the World. I kno an Attempt of that Nature would be too great a Violence to your Modesty, and I am sure too hard a Task for my Capacity. My present Busi∣ness (Sir!) is to put this lit∣tle Book into your Hand, and to desire you to Honour the Author in accepting, and to Divert your self in reading of it; for possibly you may find so much Comody in this Walk, as may dispose you to smile away an hour in the per∣usal of it. The Relations are not common and ordinary, and perhaps as pleasant as they
are rare and unusual. I do not know that any Travellor jogging in the same Road hath given the same Account of Things, or hath made the same Descriptions which I here present you with; so that my Remarques are spick and span new, and if they are ridicu∣lous, they are not unlike the Persons upon whom they are written. For the Welch Peo∣ple are a pretty odd sort of Mortals, and I hope I have given you a pretty odd Cha∣racter of them, and so I think I am pretty even with them for Oddness. A Taphy is ob∣serv'd to be a Trickish Ani∣mal,
that hath a Vein of Jac∣puddinis running throu all his Actions, and therefore I thought it not improper sprinble here and there some what of the Blew-jacket, a to Merry-Andrew my Pr∣grass a little farther as I we with jocund Observations, th the History might be agreeab to the Matter it Treats So that if a Welch-man is Jest, as all the World  count him a Living Pun,  walking Conundrum, and breathing Witticism; Th have I made one Joke up another.

I am not unsensible that Pa∣ers of another Nature and Complexion are more agreeable  that Character you bear in he World; Machiavel and Malvezzi, or some discourse of be Maxims of Policy, would e a more sutable Subject for ur Contemplation: But (Sir!)  pretend not to instruct you for he Parliament-house, but to irect you by the Fire-side.
Now for the Conclusion of ll; If there are any Good Things in Wales, the enjoy∣ment whereof is worth the wish∣ing you, I pray Heaven to rown you with the Fruition of hem: But possibly it may be
a Province not much crowde with Blessings; may you the∣fore Flourish in the Affluen of good English Mercies; m you always possess good Engli Riches, Health and Honour and all other Happinesses an Prosperities of our own N∣tion!
I am,
(Worthy Sir!)

Helmdon, Octob. 24. 1681.
