



I Have presum'd (tho' I knew at the same time how hainously I trespass'd against You in doing so) to inscribe Your Name to the following Collection of Letters. As You were no stranger to that Excellent Per∣son, whose Pieces Composes, by far, the most valuable part of it, so I was satisfy'd that every thing, from so Celebrated a Hand, wou'd be acceptable and welcome to You; and in that Confidence, made bold to give You the Trouble of this Address. My Lord Ro∣chester has left so establish'd a Reputation be∣hind him, that he needs no officious Pen to set out his Worth, especially to You, who were ac∣quainted so perfectly well with all his Emi∣nent Qualities, that made him the Delight and Envy of both Sexes, and the Ornament of our Island. In every thing of his Lord∣ship's writing, there's something so happily express'd, the Graces are so numerous, yet so unaffected, that I don't wonder why all the
Original Touches of so imcomparable a Ma∣ster have been enquir'd after, with so Pub∣lick and General a Concern. Most of his other Compositions, especially those in Verse, have long ago bless'd the Publick, and were receiv'd with Ʋniversal Delight and Admi∣ration, which gives me Encouragement to believe that his Letters will find the like Re∣ception. Tho' most of them were written up∣on private Occasions, to an Honourable Per∣son, who was so happy in his Lordship's Ac∣quaintance, with no intention to be ever made publick; yet that constant good Sence, which is all along visible in them, the Justice of the Observations, and the peculiar Beau∣ties of the Style, are Reasons sufficient, why they should no longer be conceal'd in private Hands. And indeed, at this time, when the private Plate of the Nation comes abroad to relieve the present Exigences, it seems but just, that since the Dearth of Wit is as great as that of Money, such a Treasure of so good Sence and Language, shou'd no longer be bu∣ried in Oblivion. With this difference, how∣ever, That whereas our Plate, before it can circulate in our Markets, must receive the Royal Stamp, must be melted down, and take another Form; these Ʋnvaluable Remains want no Alterations to recommed them;
they need only be taken from the Rich Mines where they grew; for their own Intrinsick Value secures them, and his Lordship's Name is sufficient to make them Current.
As for the Letters by other Hands, that make up this Volume, some of them were written by Gentlemen that are wholly stran∣gers to me; and others belong to those that are so much better known in the World than my self, that I can say nothing upon this Oc∣casion, but what falls vastly short of their Me∣rit. But I cannot forbear saying something of Mr. Otway's: They have that Inimi∣table Tenderness in them, that I dare oppose them to any thing of Antiquity: I am sure few of the present Age can pretend to come up to them. The Passions, in the raising of which, he had a Felicity peculiar to himself, are represented in such lively Colours, that they cannot fail of affecting the most insen∣sible Hearts, with pleasing Agitations. I cou'd wish we had more Pieces of the same Hand; for I profess an intire Veneration to his Memory, and always look'd upon him as the only Person, almost, that knew the se∣cret Springs and Sources of Nature, and made a true use of them. Love, as it is generally manag'd by other Hands, is either raving and Enthusiastical, or else dull and languishing:
In him alone 'tis true Nature, and at the same time inspires us with Compassion and De∣light. After this, I will not venture to say any thing of my own Trifles that bring up the Rear. Some of 'em were written long ago, and now huddled in haste; the rest had a little more Care and Labour bestow'd upon them. If they contribute in the least to your Entertainment, which was my only Design in publishing them, I have attain'd my Ends: I have some others by me, which I may, per∣haps, publish hereafter, if these meet with any tolerable Success.
I need not (and I am sure I cannot) make You a better Panegyrick, than to acquaint the World, that You were happy in my Lord Rochester's Friendship, that he took plea∣sure in Your Conversation; of which even his Enemies must allow him to have been the best Judge, and that in the Politest Reign we can boast of in England. The Approba∣tion of so impartial a Judge, who was in his Time, a Scourge to all Blockheads, by what Names or Titles soever dignified, or distin∣guished, is above all the Incense that a much better Hand than mine can presume to offer: Shou'd I put out all the Dedication Sails, as 'tis the way of most Authors, I cou'd soon erect You into a Great Hero, and Deli∣verer;
and tell how often You have trium∣phed over inveterate Distempers, and restor'd the Sick to that only Blessing, that makes Life supportable. I cou'd tell how, by Your single Merit, You have baffled a Faction form'd a∣gainst You with equal Malice and Ignorance; I cou'd tell what marks of Munificence You have left behind You, in the Place that was honour'd with Your Education; and how ge∣nerously ready You are to serve Your Friends upon all Occasions. But after all, the highest thing I will pretend to say of You, is, That You were esteem'd, and valu'd, and lov'd by my Lord Rochester. 'Tis true, as there never was any Conspicuous Merit in the World, that had not (like Hercules) Mon∣sters to encounter, so You have had Your share of them; but, Heaven be prais'd, Your Ene∣mies, with all their vain Endeavours, have only served to fix Your Interest, and advance Your Reputation: Tho' I know You hear of nothing with more uneasiness, than of the Fa∣vours You do; yet I cannot omit to tell, and indeed I am vain upon it, That You have con∣descended so low, as to divert those Hours You cou'd steal from the Publick, with some of my Trifles, that You have been pleased to think favourably of them, and rewarded them. For all which Obligations, I had no other way
of expressing my Gratitude but this; which, I am afraid will but inflame the Reckoning, instead of paying any part of the Debt: But this has been the constant Ʋsage in all Ages of Parnassus, and, like Senators that take Bribes, we have Antiquity and Ʋniversality to plead in our Excuse. But I forget that You are all this while in pain, till the Dedica∣tion releases You: Therefore I have nothing but my Wishes to add, That You, who have been so happy a Restorer of Health to others, may ever enjoy it Your Self, that Your Days may be always pleasant, and Your Nights easie, and that You'll be pleas'd to forgive this Presumption in

