



Dear Brethren and Friends,
THe Providence of God is not unaptly compared to the wheels of a Clock, which albei they run variously, yet they agree harmoni∣ously to the producing of that end, to which they are appointed; and therefore notwihstanding the affairs of this Nation, have for some time had a contrary motion to the general expectation of the people of God, which probably hath been the cause of all the flaggings, and secret murmuings and repinings among them▪ as though the Lord had forgot∣ten to be gracious, or to perform his peromises; yet if we search narrowly into the mind and ill of Jehovah, we shall prove no better by our incre∣dulity, than the Disciples of our blessed Saviour, Luk. 24. 25. i. e. fools and and slow of heart, to believe all that the Prophets, and the Lord Jesus and his Apostles have spoken shall come to passe in the last dayes; as for instance, the present Apostacies of the Army, and several of the foolish (though) virgin Churches in this Nation, (in point of external ordinan∣ces) i. e. those that have lately subscribed their approbation of this pre∣sent Government we now live under, to be of God, and such as ought to be complied with, as the Saints have formerly done to the Governments of Heathen Potentates, (without the least consideration of the prohibition which the Lord Jesus hath made and appointed against the worship of the Beast and his Image, o that receiveth his mark in his forehead, or in his hand or his Name, or number of his name, and that under the pain and penalty of drinking of the wine of the wrath of God powred out without mi∣xture into the cup of his indignation, and that they shall be tormented wih Fire and Brimstone in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb, and that the smoak of their torment shall ascend up for ever and ever, and that they shall have no rest day nor night, who worship the Beast and his Image, &c. Rev. 14, 9, 10, 1.) hath doubtlesse been a great stumbling block in the way of Gods people, o what they are now in expectation of: and therefore to the end that all men may see and know, that the present Government runs paralel with the Beast, and that
 the sa pro, (one presumptuously) are guilty of the aforemen∣tio punishs or so doing wil appear,
1. From the ingagement of the Army against the late King, and his Mo∣narchy, as one of the ten horns of the Beast, guilty of the blood of the Saints.
2. By the joynt con of those very persons whom it is to be feared have now presumptuously worshipped the Image of the Beast, &c. witnesse their preaching, praying, fasting and fighting against that Government, the image of which they now so much hug and im∣brace, and are now grown so shamefully impudent, as to declare the same to be of God.
3. By the Descent of the present Government from the fall of Adam, i ha∣ving run through the veins of all the Idolaters and Tyrants that have been unto this day, as in the ensuing Treatie will appear, and that by the Testimony of the Grand new at Docour of the times Mr. John Owen, who hath been very much assisting unto me in the proof thereof, as you will also find.
4. By the clear Testimony of Mr. Tillinghast in his Epistle to his late Book titled the Knowle of the times: so that the apostacies of the afore∣named person and persons (if rightly used) may rather conduce to the great advantage of Gods people, and to the strengthening and confirm∣ing of the faith and confidence of those that hold fast their integrity, i. e. that the Great day of the Lord is at hand, and that judgement is now be∣gun at the house of God, that the Lords fire is now kindled in Sion, and his furnace hating in Jerusalem, that the Refiners fire is now melting a∣way the tinne and drosse from s jewels, that the Fullers sope is now scowring up the garments of the Saints, making them white and clean (i. e. by a pure and unspotted life and conversation, that they may now be as a City set upon the top of an hill, or as a Candle put into a Candlestick, to give a light to the inhabitants, that they may approve themselves chil∣dren of the light, and of the day, that their light may so shine before men, that they may see their good actions, and so be a means to stir them up to glorifie their Father which is in heaven) for our blessed Saviour hath foretold that it shall be in the last dayes, or time of his coming to judge∣ment, as it was in the dayes of Noah, Mat. 24. 37. &c. at which time it is clear from Gen. 6. that there hapned a very great apostacy in those persons, who went under the Notion of the sons of God, v. 2. by means of which the sins of that world became ripe for judgement, every imagination of
 the thoughts of their hearts being then evil, and that continually, v. 5. and therefore seeing the said Prophsie is now so evidently fulfilled before our eyes, both in reference to the Army (onely a few cordiall and thrice noble Commanders, who rather than they would become a reproach and scandal to what they had so publickly declared for, or an occasion to the enemies of God and his Christ to blaspheme, have disserted their imployment and commands in the Army, as Major General Harrison, Colonel Rich, Co∣lonel Okey, &c. and some like noble Heroes now prisoners for their disrellish of the present apostacis of the army, as Major General Overton, Colo∣lonel Allured with several others upon the like account) as also of the now worse than Merosh Churches afore mentioned, who have been far from helping the Lord against the mighty, as that quite contrary-wise, they have helped the mighty against the Lord, by their new strengthening the hands of the adversaris of the truth, to persecute the faithfull followers of the Lamb; and therefore to the end, that all that hear or shall hear of these their Diabolical actions, may henceforth learn to take warning by them. I have writ these lines, as also tht they may learn with the indu∣strious Be to gather hony from that gall of itternesse, and bond of iniquity, those poore souls have involved themselves in, by such their conederacy against Christ and his Government, (as by this Treatise will appear) as also that the faithful witnesses of the truth may be hereby incouraged to act for Christ, as the other have done for Antichrist, for God; as the other have done for the Devil, being such as are probably of that number, that will erelong cry, Lord, Lord, have we not fought in thy name? and conquered in thy name, and preached in thy name, and baptised in thy name? and yet shall receive for answer, Depart from me, I know you not, &c. Such, whose dam∣nation slumbereth not, witnesse the present Hurlyburlies among them, all their affairs lying as it were in a Chaos of confusion, and doubtlesse will do e∣very day more & more, untill his Government be set up whose right it is to govern the whole world by his Holy, Just and Perfect Laws and Ordinances contained in the Scriptures of truth, which if once imbraced by the people of this nation, will, I dare be bold to assert, free the Inhabitants therof from these following burdens and oppressions they now (Asse-like) ly under, Gen. 49. 14. 15. i. e.
1. Of the charge of a standing Army, (and so it may be at liberty to fight the Lords battels against his adversaries in forreign parts, upon the Lords account, and spoil of their enemies, and not like Drones to live upon the labours of the industrious Be, (or High-way-men to rob one another)
 which at the rate of 120000 pounds per mensem, according to the Souldi∣ers Moneth of 28 dayes, will save 156000 pounds per annum, or nere upon.
2. From Excise, and the vast charge thereof.
3. From Customes, especially of our own nation, and the great charge thereof.
4. From the vast charge of Lawsuits.
5. From Tithes, and several other things of like nature, and therefore worthy to be seriously considered, not onely b those, who do really and cordially desire the promotion of the Law of God, as they do the good of their own souls, as do the fifth Monarchy-men (and not of any carnal de∣signe, as is falsely suggested of them by the enemies of the truth) but also of the self-interested men [Not that I urge this Royal Law or Government in the least upuon a carnal account, but that carnal men may see what benefit there is to be had under the shadow of it] of this nation, who are in love with their money in that what one way, what other, it would in a short time double their present estates by saving thse annual expences, which are scrued from them, lit wil also concern younger brethen to ruminate hereof; for whereas it is the Custome of this Nation, to make the elder son a Gentleman, &c. and the rest half beggers, this Just and Righteous Law doth alot the eldest son a double portion, and the rest to have all equal portions, Deut. 21. 17.
6. By advancing this law, we do thereby own Jehovah to be our God and Legislator, which now we cannot, but are such in a Civil sence, as (the Apostle saith,) are without God in the world.
7. By promoting the law, all the vst civil breaches of this Nation would be made up, for by covenanting to be conformable to this Government, we shall theeby be all made Brethren, and so should forget all former injuries▪ and also it would be a fair way to make us one in a spiritual Relation) which otherwise will never be done.
8. By exalting this law, we shall be freed from the Curse which we now lye under, For cursed is every one that continueth not in the words of the Law to do them, Deut. 37. 26. and John 7. 49. This people that know not the Law are ac∣cursed.
9. By magnifying of this Law, we shall have Justice done speedily, and upon all occasions, as well upon small as great matters, Judges being ap∣pointed in all the gates of the Cities in the Nation. Deut. 16. 18. to do Ju∣stice and Judgement without wresting, Exod. 23. 6. Deut. 24.. 17. without unrighteousnesse Levit. 19. 15. Without respect of persons, Deut. 1. 17.
10. By submitting to this Law men shall not be condemned to Prison, &c. before they be heard, Deut. 9. 15. John 7. 51. as is the practice of the pre∣sent Governours of this Nation, and which I can speak by experience, having been formerly kept by their means seventeen weeks a prisoner, ha∣ving not a word to say unto me, either before, or during my imprison∣ment, being never called before any man, or examined or charged by a∣ny during that time, or at all, but only told me I might be gone: and now again, they have also kept me fiteen weeks, knowing not in the least wherefore, not yet having been called or questioned before any, so that they have been more cruel than the Pagan Romans; for Festus thought it a thing unreasonable, (and consequently Brutish) to send a prisoner, and not withall to signifie the crime laid against him, Acts 25. 27.
11. By exalting this Royall Law, every knowing man may plead his own cause, it will be laid down so plain, and stated so clear, in the words of the Text, and therfore needs not to be seven years apprentice to Moses, as that blasphemous Rabshakeh, Needham hath scoffingly spoken of Moses and the Law. Who then that is rational, would not rather forsake those mud∣dy streams of Justinian, Gratian, and other blind and ignorant men, (and such as the Prophet saith, turneth the needy from Judgment, and taketh away the right from the poore, that maketh widows their prey, and rob the Faherlesse, 1 Sam. 10. 2.) for those pure streams of Justice and Judgement that cometh out from God, and riseth in him; who would not, that looks upon himself as a Christian, rather submit to that judgement that is Jus Di∣vinum, than that which is a Traditional Jus Humanum, from all the Ido∣latrous and Tyrannical Governours that have been in the world.
12. What Liberty would this Law bring to this Nation, what freedome from expence, from unjust imprisonment of mens persons, from being de∣ceived in their causes, and from being overborn in their Judgments by delay of Justice, whereby potent adversaries have great advantage given them to corrupt Judges, hinder Justice, and get false witnesse, many guil∣ty persons by this means scaping unpunished, and many innocent persons undone (by imprisonments) in their estates, families, and repute among men, which would not be done, had we but Judges, as at the first, and Ru∣lers as at the beginning of the Common-wealth of Israel, i. e. Men fearing God, and hating covetousnesse, and valiant for the truth, to put this Holy, Just, and Perfect Law in execution, not fearing the face of any, knowing
 that the Judgement is the Lords, the accomplishment whereof, that the Lord would in much mercy hasten, is the earnest desire of him, who is now a prisoner at Lambeth for the Testimony of the truth as it is in Jesus, which he is ready to vindicate with all that is near or dear unto him.

