


TO THE RIGHT VVORSHIPFVLL, the Lady Barrington, Wife to Sir Francis Barrington; the Lady Eliott, Wife to Sir T. E. the Lady Barnardiston, Wife to Sir Nathan. B. and Mris Ioanna Mildmay, of Tarling-hall in Essex; the ioy of the justified, in Christ the justifier, wished.
WHen first I consulted with my selfe, vnder whose protection I might send abroad these Sweets of Sion, [THE SPOU∣SES SPIKENARD, and MYSTI∣CALL MYRRHE] my thoughts fell (Right Worshipfull) vpon you foure. And, after some conflicts with inward cauills, I did resolue to make bold with all your names; and so much the rather, both because, in another Treatise sent forth with this, I haue made as bold with your Worshipfull yoake-fel∣lowes: as also in regard, the matter handled in these Ser∣mons is such, as be vsefull to your soules, as well as any of theirs, who are true members of that CHVRCH, and by faith made one with that SPOVSE, whom the whole Booke of Salomons Songs, (out of which I haue cull'd these Sweets) in a most sweete, and heauenly streine
 doth treat of. I dare say, that were it not for the Authors wants, here you should finde, and meete with that, which would be both for direction, and consolation; Directi∣on in your carriage, in respect of what you owe to Christ; consolation, for your conscience, in regard of what you reape by Christ. For I am sure, that parcell of Scripture, vpon which these Meditations are, doth afford such Rules, such comforts pregnantly, plentifully. In it we haue Christ his loue, the Church her loyaltie. Christ his loue vnto his Church, sitting as a King at Table with her, communicating his grace, and fauour vnto her, in the Ornaments, and Ordinances wherewith he hath endu∣ed her. The Church her loyaltie vnto her Christ: first, presenting him with her Box of Spikenard, her faith and good Workes: secondly, praysing him for his Bundle of Myrrhe, the pardoning of her sinnes, the refreshing of her soule: thirdly, professing shee would neuer forget the greatnes of his loue, and would endeuour to keepe the sence of his kindnes. This loue of that great husband I wish you the sweet of, with a daily encrease of it, more and more. This loyaltie of the Spousesse I doubt not but hath beene yeelded by your Worships ere now, to Christ the head. The blessing vpon these labours, I craue of God; the Patro∣nage, the acceptance, of these endeuours I beg of you. Which (RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL) may I but obtaine: GOD, for that his blessing, shall haue my prayses, YOV for your acceptance shall haue his prayers, who is

