


LIttle children and youth, I am debter to you als, and am taught by Iohn, 1 Ioh, 2 12, 13. the Disciple whom our Saviour loved: to pay this debt by writing. I Dedicate there∣fore this little booke to you ioyntly: where in▪ you my little babes, may see the mer∣cies of God in forgiuing your sinnes for Christs name sake; and may learne euen in the milke to know, and knowing to call God Father. Wherein likewise you young men, may, as out of the Lords armory, haue weapons ready fitted to your hand & vse, wherewith ye shall overcome that wic∣ked one. And if ye receiue by faith this doctrine, and let it abide in you, to loue it to obey it, you shall encrease your strength; and the better with stand future assaults, in all of them, being more then Conque∣rours.
For, in the first part, yee haue orderly framed in words of Stripture, the whole body of divinitie, which we are to beleeue
 concerng the Gospell of our Lord and Sa∣viour Iesus Christ, after a familiar way of Catchising: no one matter of opinion mix∣ed therewith, but onely fundamentall truthes; layd downe so that all Heresies-now being, or formerly rooted, or that may hereafter spring vp, as tares amongst the wheate, are cut off; not by humaine wit and Schoole distinctins: but by divine word & holy writ. here you haue much, yea all in a little, yet without obscurity. Here ye have that faith which ever was held & professed vniversally in the Church: as will be manifest to the iudicious that are acquaintd with Scripture, with Councels with the autheniqe Creeds, with the pub¦like confessions of christian mn & Chur∣ches. The truth I dare boldly ay, the ene∣mies themselues being iudges. In a word: yee haue here the heads of Doctrine, which in euery particular in the audience of the Congregation of Kingston vpon Thames, was with feare and trembling (being part of full three years laboures their) discoursed off at larg; shewing in all and every point, the Harmony of both Testaments, the vn∣tiyng of difficulties and knots in them, by way of explication, the wiles of Satha and the flesh, beguiing vs of the fruite of such
 knowledge and beleife in deeds, while our mouthes professed the same in words, the conclusions profitable and famous which depend upon such prime truthes. And last∣ly, the Instrctions, consolations and re∣proofes which these doctrines afford us, for the reformation of heart and life.
In the second part, I present you with the rules of holy life, whereby you are taught as the truth is in Iesus, to put off con∣cerning the the former conversation, the old man which is corrupt accor∣ding to the deceitfull lusts, and being renewed in the spirit of your minde, to put on the new man, which after God is created in righteovsnes and true ho∣linesse. Here I haue diuided the precepts of the Gospell: from those of the Law, to avoyd confusion: that they are distinct is a thing not hitherto heeded, yet (as to them will appeare that consider it without pre∣iudice) most certaine. The words of Christ haue as much force to bind, as the words of the Decalogue or ten commandements.
Likewise the voyce of Repentance, is no voyce of the Law; and so of the rest. That I haue cast them into ten, is not out of any superstition of the number: nor any conceit of mine that there are iust ten, but onely to




 help memory; they also fitly arising to that number, and or ought I see, the whole comprehended. I haue in the margent set two different marks upon certaine answers or phrases in those answers, by which I would haue you to take notice of your estate before God. If those or any one of those graces or priviledges bee manifest vpon your hearts wrought by the word, which are signed with this signe  being that Ange∣licall mark, Ezek. 9. 4.  they proue you actually the children of God. If the sinnes or kind of offending be yet found in you which is marked with that marke  the first letter in the word Let∣zim Pl. 1. 1. signify∣ing scorn¦ers.  you are unregenerated and wicked sinners, and remaine sch till you wash them a∣way by true repentance, and Faith in the Lord Iesus.
Take these & digest them thorough∣ly, yea eate them up; as reached forth to you from God, thogh by the unworthy hands of a meane Labourer in Gods Vn∣yard: whose prayr is, that you may increase in wisdome and stature, and in favour with God and man.

