


MOst High and mighty, and most gra∣cious Lords, I doe present vnto your Excell: and by you vnto all faithfull Inhabitants of these vnited Prouin∣ces, the description of the Christian decease of the Illustrious and High-borne Prince, Maurice of Nassau, Prince of Orange, &c. Both, whose life and death, shall be of immortall memory. This is a small matter in regard of my selfe and my labour, but very great in respect of that great Prince, who doth here speake his last words, in a matter of
 greatest moment, and who doth here fight the greatest fight that can befall, and so doth finish the greatest worke that can be done on earth, and after his labour is ended, wee see him goe from misery into ioy and rest, leauing the whole world in a tumult of vnrest. It hath beene alwaies held a commendable custome to make knowne the last words and actions of great personages, that it might serue for an ex∣ample vnto others: therefore all impartiall people shall vn∣derstand, that it is more then reason, to publish and make knowne vnto the world, the last words and deeds of the High-renowned Lord, the Prince of Orange; especially since it is both of high and low so much desired and longed for, that all true-hearted people (who haue receiued the spi∣rit of impartiality, may iudge, whether among all the words of his Excell: any be to be found, that are not very religiously spoken, and ought of euery of vs to be followed. We may well say, the Lord hath loued this Prince vniill the end. In his life he hath made him a patterne of all heroicke and Militarie actions, and Politicke wisedome: in his death hee hath in an extraordinary manner made him an obiect of his mercy, and an example of Christian Piety and Godlinesse. In his life time he gaue him the victorie ouer his bodily and out∣ward enemies, and at his death he made him extraordinarily victorious, triumphing ouer his spirituall enemies. So gui∣ding him by his holy spirit, that with an extraordinary reso∣lute courage, hee did despise all earthly things, saying many times:
I will not be troubled with any worldly matters.
So that leauing the world, and the heauy burthen of his weighty affairs together, he did wholly apply himselfe to fight this spirituall fight: as wisely and couragiously as euer hee did in temporall combats. For in all his spirituall actions he
 did most looke at that, whereat we most stumble, when wee haue to doe with the Lord, Our Sinnes, which being put quite from vs, wee obtaine free accesse vnto the Lord, yea, we become familiar with him, as the child with the father. Blessed is he that getteth the practise of this; In this worke his P. Excell: hath followed the steps of the most Valiantest Champions which haue beene among the people of God. As, Dauid, Daniel, Esay, Ieremy, and others, Whereof we haue speciall examples in the Psalmes, where we see that Gods children hauing to doe with God, doe so of∣ten looke vpon their sinnes, and so humble themselues there∣with, that thereby afterwards they come to receiue in their hearts a filiall faith, feare, and obedience. His P. Excell: did know that our spirituall enemy, which wee beare about vs, was ouercome, and that death had lost her sting, and hell her victory. This enemy, Sinne, we doe ouercome: First, by true repentance, and doe hate him as our deadlyest enemie; Secondly, when we by true faith, cast them vpon the shoulders of that vnspotted Lambe Iesus Christ, who can only beare them, & carry them away; & thirdly, when on the contrary we become louers of righteousnes, and whatsoe∣uer is acceptable vnto the Lord. These three perticulars may euery one finde that is any thing experienced in holi∣nesse, that the Holy Ghost hath in aspeciall manner wrought in this Prince. His Excell: knowing that there is but one way to heauen for the greatest potentate, and the meanest sub∣iect, hath not flattered himselfe, nor sought to iustifie his sinnes, but hath, as one of the least of Gods seruants, with an humble hart and vnfained repentance, confessed them be∣fore the Lord, and hath, in true faith taken his refuge onely to Iesus Christ, in whom his soule found rest. And thereunto hee so often declared his hearty desire, to serue the Lord bet∣ter
 then he confessed to haue done, as the Lords great bene∣fits vnto him did require.
And this is the speciall mercy of God, which all good christi∣ans may boast of, that the Lord (who knew the good desire of his Excell:) hauing freed him from all worldly hinderances, for a crowne vnto all his laudable deeds, hath suffered his Excell: to vse such a solemne and holy action as this is, not onely for the rest and saluation of his owne soule, but also for the edification of all good christians. And therefore I doe not without cause say once more that the Lord hath loued this Prince vnto the end. For I do from my hart confesse that in all the times I visited his Excell: His Excell: did so be∣haue himselfe, that I did not once goe from him, without be∣ing edified, not doubting but it will doe the like to all good christians that shall happen to reade it. Wherefore I doe comfort my selfe, and doe praise the Lord, that within this my weakenesse of body, wherewith I did not thinke to haue done any more publike seruice, he hath so strengthned mee, to doe this spirituall seruice vnto this famous Prince, and through him vnto all good people in generall, who I trust in their sorrow, which without doubt they haue for the losse of this Valiant Champion, will finde themselues comforted, when they shall heare from his Excell: mouth so many Christian speeches, and shall see him dye the death of the Righteous. Whereby I hope, (that we may so say) hee shall haue left and pronounced a blessing ouer the church of God, and this state. As also in perticular vnto his Excell: Il∣lustrious successor, which we with true repentance (according to the example of his Excell:) will expect from the merci∣full God, beseeehing him in the meane time, for Christ Iesus sake, mercifully to pardon our crying sinnes, and plentifully to powre into our hearts the grace of repentance, and not
 yet leaue his Heritage, nor to let the Rod of his affliction to lye too long vpon our backes.
This may comfort all good Christians in their affliction, who at this present liue in griefe and persecution, that this fa∣mous Prince did beare such affection vnto them, saying, when he heard any good newes from abroad:
That will be good for gods children.
Which his Excell: declared likewise to beare vnto the church of God, and to the preseruation of the true religion, (which he hath sufficiently shewen vnto the whole world by many actions) agreing with that which the Lord Embassador of his Maiesty of Great Brittaine, Sir Dudley Carleton was pleased in his speach to relate vnto your H. Dignities from the very mouth of his P. Excell: which his Excell: also was pleased to communicate vnto mee, which words were these.
These be two great Maximies, the preseruation of the reformed Religion, and the warres against Spaine.
Vpon which two heads his Excell: did meane that the wel∣fare of the countries depended, I haue in this relation ex∣actly set downe the very words of his Excell: as hee spake them, which when I came home I set downe vpon a peece of paper, and haue conferred them with those that were pre∣sent when his Excell: spake them.
That which I spake, I haue set downe as I thought best for edification, at the first visitation I did not intend to haue troubled his Excell: so much, as hauing experience of the disability of a sicke person, but his Excell: detained mee, partly with extraodinary attention hee had to here the word of God, and partly with his questions which hee propounded. The other visitations were not so long in regard his Excell:
 grew euery day more weaker and weaker, and therefore when hee could not speake any longer, wee betooke our selues vnto prayers, expecting a blessed end.
I thought good to direct this worke vnto your High and Mighty Dignities, with whom his Excell: during the time of his gouerment hath conuersed, who are witnesses of his lau∣dable actions, and partakers of his immortall praises: and who his Excell: hath instituted Executors of his Princely will and testament, soe that of right it doth belong vnto your honours: and without doubt, not onely this, but also the per∣ticulars of the religious decease of this most excellent Prince will be pleasing vnto your honours, with whom your High∣nesses haue euer liued in such a neere correspondencie, and haue yet by your honnors Committies, (namely by the Hono∣rable Lords, Henric of Essen, from Gelderland, Nicholas van-Bouckhorst, Lord of Nortwich, from Holland, Rienck van-Burmania, from Freesland, Assueer van-Harsolte, from Ouer-Isse) visited and remained with his Excell: vntill his end. Concerning your P. Excell: Gracious Lord, who hath a speciall interest in this labour, as being the onely brother vnto the deceased Prince, whom hee hath loued with a brotherly loue, (as is manifest) and besides, heire of his Princely dignity, and his successor in that great and waightie calling, being a little before his Excell: death, to the comfort and ioy of his Excell: and vnto all true christians, vnited in matrimony with the Illustrious Princesse Amelia, Princesse of Orange, Countesse of Solms, who, with her Excell: the Princesse of Portugall were both together with his Excell: the day before he dyed, and were witnesses of his Princely and christian carriage. Wherein her Excell: did take such pleasure, that she did ioyfully glory therein vnto the other Lords, saying, That it was a blessed thing for euery
 Christian, to dispose himselfe so well at the time of his death. The like did her Excell: the Princesse of Portugall your Excell: sister, That such a christian carriage came from God, and was his gift, which the Lord Agathius, Lord of Dhona, rehearsed vnto me from the mouth of her Excell: Your Excell: shall not onely finde in this relation the christian and religious decease of this worthy Prince, but also that which may serue your P. Excell: and other Lords, for an example of imitation, and comfort, in the matter of saluation, being of more value then all the transitory goods of this world.
Therefore I doe humbly beseech your high and mighty P. Excell: graciously to accept of this my meane labour, and I will pray vnto the Almighty God, to preserue your High and Mighty P. Excell: in vnion together, to gouerne you with his Holy Spirit, and so to blesse and prosper you, in this time of trouble of the whole christian world, that you may happily and couragiously preserue the free liberty of the Gospell in these countries, and so to supply the places of the deceased Prince, and Count William, &c. who are now both at rest with the Lord, and herewith I turne my selfe to the relation of that which happened before and at the death of his Excell: Remaining euer more

At the Hage,
the 16. of May, 1625.
