



GENTLEMEN,
SEeing they that liue vnder you for their estates and bodies, are vnder my cure and care for their soules, you will giue mee leaue (nay thankes I am sure) to be as carefull for the better part as
 you I hope are and wil be for the worse: You know it were a shame to you, if they could iust∣ly say they were not able to liue and eate their bread vnder you their Lords: and more were it to me their Pastor, if they wan∣ted either the Milke, or the Meate fit for their soules.
To this end seeing I finde, that Catechising is the life of Preaching, and such a meanes of knowledge as without it all preaching is to little purpose, I haue heere drest them their first dish, euen a mease of Milke (the old, plaine and good meate of our forefathers) I meane this short and easie Catechisme: Not as making a new one, for hat were a needlesse presumpti∣on but as a helpe to vnderstand that good Catechisme giuen
 vs already in the Common Prayer Booke.
Now seeing your experience in your families, and mine in the whole Parish hath found the benefit of Catechising to be so extraordinary, wee haue cause to acknowledge the godly wis∣dome and care of our Church Gouernours in commanding the performance of that duty in euery Parish: which if it were duely obserued ouer all the Land, I dare say, where there is no Preaching the want would be lesse hurtfull, and where it is, the benefit much more aboundant. And let it worke in you a care, Gen 18. not onely as good Abrahams, to command your families, but (seeing you are here Magistrates and Lords) like zealous Dauids, Psal. 110. to take order that your people
 and tenants doe frequent this godly exercise, which by Gods good blessing shall by mee, or my sufficient Deputy bee conti∣nually kept vp, as the time and season of the yeare will permit. This will make our Sermons at home, and our Exercises abroad much more profitable and ef∣fectuall, your Seruants and Te∣nants more faithfull to God, and more seruiceable to your selues. And when they finde them∣selues mercifully delt withall by you their Land-lords for their bodies: and good proui∣sion, both of Milke and strong meate for their soules: Their Iob. 31. 20. Loynes (as Iob saith) shall blesse you, their hearts loue mee, and their soules and all within them shall praise God for vs both: and their Neighbours about
 them shall say. Blessed are the people that be in such a case, yea thrice happy the people that haue the Lord for their God. Now praying that both you and I, and they that follow vs may striue to deserue this ho∣nour, and enioy this comfort; and our people receiue this double blessing by vs,

