


WHat hath beene the drifte of my doctrine sen god placed mee a∣mong you, wel∣beloued in Christe Iesus, yee cannot be ignorant, seing with out excellencie of wordes and all curiositie, in moste plaine sorte ofter my familiar maner, I shew you the Testimonie of God, esteeming, not to knowe a∣nye thinge among you, as the A∣postle
sayeth, saue Iesus Christ and him crucified. For the whilk purpose this daye seauen yeare, to wit; the 16. day of Nouem∣ber 1595. the firste time I spake among you, I made choise of this place of Scripture follo∣wing, to bee as a ground of that doctrine whilk thereafter I minded to builde thereupon, during our continuance toge∣ther at gods pleasure. The place was this, as ye remember. The people that sate in darknesse, sawe great light. &c. Mat. 4.16. First, I opened the true meaning of the place, obseruing some per∣tinent notes therupon. There∣after I made some vse thereof by applycation to you for that present, as a people by the sea-coaste, long sitting in no lesse darknesse, then did they of Ga∣lile,
that dwelt by the lake of Genazareth, whilk was to them as a sea: shewing therewithall the greate mercie of God to∣warde you, in offering to you that day the light of his gospell after sik a rare manner, so that rightly it might be saide ouer a∣gaine of new, A people that sate in darknesse, hath seene greate lighte. Last, after all this, I gathered some general grounds of Chri∣stian religion out of that place, as first. The miserable blinde e∣state of man by nature, without Christ. Secondlie, the moste comfortable light of saluation in Christ. Thirdly, that men re∣ceaue Christ his light by faith wrought by the holy Spirite in the preaching of the gospell. Fourthly, the end, that walking in that light of Christ, we may
glorifie him that hes transtated vs out of darknes into his won∣derful light.
Heerevnto in the afternoone the same daye, I added these words of Christ: Behold, I stand at the dore and knock, if any man heare my voice and open the dore, I will come in to him, and suppe with him and he with mee. Reuel. 3.20. To serue as a spurre to exhort you to the cheerefull embraceing of so comfortable a ghuest, whilk mooued the whole pa∣rish present, so at that time and long thereafter, that as the A∣postle speaketh of the Galathi∣ans, I beare you record that if it had beene possible, ye would haue pluck∣ed out your eyes & haue giuen them to me. Though nowe and then to some I be-come an enemie for speaking of the trueth. God
graunt them amendement that offend of simplicitie and not of malice. But we must not bee offended, though one part on∣lie, of the foure parts of ground that the seede of Gods worde lights on, (& seeme for the most part to receaue it,) bee fruitful, for Sathan is a busie Bishop; and persecution & cares of the world with fleshly pleasures, ar not soone ouercome. But with this sorte of people at this pre∣sent I haue not to doe, but on∣lye with you who obey from the hart vnto that forme of do∣ctrine, wherevnto ye were de∣liuered. Whilk yee know hes e∣uer bene according to the fore∣said groundes. For the better keeping in memorie whereof, I haue thought good to put them in writ in diuers formes,
and set them to printing for your vse as ye see, that nothing bee wanting that maye further the sounde grounding of you, according to your meane ca∣pacitie, in the true Christian re∣ligion, so farre as in me lyeth. Wherefore it rests, that yee bee not slouthful in exercising your selues, & your families, in read∣ing, learning, and practising heereof. Fare-well in Christ. 16. Nouember. 1602.
