



BEing (Right Honorable) to send this litle Description of New Ie∣rushalem vn∣to print, (tho∣ugh far from being done in print) I pondred to whom I might with expediencie dedicate the same. At last, I set downe my rest on Him, who was in the publique place where I preached, then preeminent: Who also heard both the Sermons, and therewithall did both times with Ho. curtesie receaue the Preacher home to Table. All this to your Ho. selfe.

And in verie troth, I know not well to whom rather it appertaineth: seeing, besides the former respects, the Lord hath made you (next vnder her Ma∣iestie) chiefe Ouerseer in our Ho. Ci∣tie, for cherishing vertuous acts, and for pruning and cutting off all trans∣gressions from the same.
Transgression is two fold: either th whereby Religion is abused, or that which transcendeth Humain equitie. God and Man are made one in Christ, nor should Religion and Righteousnes be sundred, though distinguished. The first is by God his Ministers to be prea∣ched: The second by Maiestrates to be proclaimed: and the breach of both, by their Sword to be punished.
What need of a sharpe sword and of a two edged word there is, let the rank growth and impudent cariage of Impietie and Iniquitie testifie that. Easie salues are for easie sores, but Fistulaes must be bitten, & Gangrenes be pared off. I need not signifie to your
 Lo. somuch what vnrighteousnes ouer∣flowes (euery Court and Session rings that Alarum) as what false coine in Religion daylie is dispersed by Roma∣nists, Brownists, Anabaptists, Arrians, Familists, and such like factions. These that counterfait the Q. coine, are pu∣nished accordingly: But for adulte∣rating, clipping, and flat changing of Christes coine (the precious written-word, stamped with Gods image) how litle this is looked vnto, & how seldom, and then also how slenderly corrected, it is able to make the heart of Gods subiect to bleed.
As the sword and word are for pro∣curing subiection vnto Maiestrates: so much more be they ordained for cau∣sing obedience vnto God, Duetie to earthly powers, it should lead vs (as by the hand) to that duetie which we owe vnto the Prince of Princes. Else, while we liue to Man, whose breath is in his nosthrils, we dye to God, whose breath doth kindle the fire of Tophet.

In lighting Ierushalems torch, I therwith disclose false lights & sleights wherby Babels marchants would vt∣ter their painted wares. Looke how I drew it at first for helping mine owne memorie, so I sent it to the examina∣tion, and so it was returned authorized to the presse. And that falleth out to be the same that was preached for sub∣stance, howsoeuer some other Acci∣dents drew in some other particular discourses, not so necessarie the presse.
Besides the two Sermons, I haue ad∣ioyned a Brief of that I purposed then also to haue deliuered. All I present, and yet all that nothing to the sacred Texts desert. As I could, I haue done, and so in all holie dutie I remaine,

