



NOT without iust cause (in my iudgement) did that renoumed lawgi∣uer of the Lacedemo∣nians, amonge other things ordeine, that all parents should not only frequent the publike banquets themselues, but should alwayes bring with them their children thither, that there they might the better learne to obserue, what fashions, manners and v∣sage were best beseeming, and holden

most praise worthy, where the reuerent account of the presence of their betters, might be as a bridle to hold them with∣in the boundes of modestie; and the be∣holding of the glorious rewards of such as deserued wel, & the open contempt, reproches and shame with the sharpe punishment of dissolute and euill dispo∣sed children, might terrifie them from vice, and anymate them to labour gree∣dylie to be holden vertuous. If the like assemblies were now houlden among Christians, where children with mirth might learne good manners, and togi∣ther with the refreshing of their bodies might learne with quicke & wise sayings to exercise their wits aswell as their mē∣bers with actiue feats, I thinke it would prooue to youth a way very profitable: For Example I hold to be the most for∣cible schoole-mistres that can be, touch∣ing manners. Now hauing of late hap∣pened vpon a litle book in French con∣cerning childrens manners, I hauing more laisure than I well liked, thought good to expell my languishing ydlenes,

by translating, and (in places needfull) correcting, this treatise, which I haue intituled an A. B. C. or the first schole of good manners. Much more suffici∣ently (I confesse) this argument deser∣ueth to be handled: but all good & ver∣tuous manners be as most louing sisters: who so is daily conuersant with some of them, cannot long be vnacquainted with the residue. And that childe that will lay fast hold on Diligent obseruation, and be ruled thereby as by his Paedago∣gue he shall attaine in good tyme to the knowledge and vse of al good manners.
This treatise (good master Edward) I haue dedicated to you, not as though you needed any such instructions; for I am assured that you know and daily practise, mo and better than here are prescribed. But for that I esteeme you alreadie a patterne of vertuous good manners in the view of many other, I haue thought good, to make you a pa∣trone of this little schole, wher the rude & ignorant may (if they will) lerne some forme of fashions, by reading & practi∣sing

that here is proposed.
Now the Lord the Author & fountaine of all goodnes, vouchsafe so to powre his graces vpon you, that you may pro∣fit and prosper in al your vertuous inde∣uors, and so apply your self in husband∣ing this spring tyme of your Adolescen∣cie, as when you are growen to a per∣fect man, you may gloriously reape the happie haruest of your labours, to your owne good, and the comfort of all your freends.

