



YOu vvill perhaps maruell (right honourable and vvorshipfull in Christ) that I taking occa∣sion to speake somevvhat, by this late and fearefull example of Gods iudgement: do dedi∣cate this pore & suddain labor vnto you, as though it should more concern you then others. I professe that I do it aduisedly, and my reason is, because it most concerneth you, & such as are in authoritie. For vvho are more spe∣cially bounde to looke vnto the obseruation of the lavves of God, then the magistrates, vvho are set vp as conductors and leaders of the peo∣ple, in steede of God? And although you may say that this thing happened out of your iurisdiction
 whereby you might seeme to be cleared: yet for∣asmuch as they that resorted, vnto this prophane spectacle (and vvere iustly punished, vvith their ovvn transgression) vvere of your citie, & you did not restraine them being vnder your comman∣dement: this transgression must needs also reach to you Is it not a lamentable thing, that after so long preaching of the Gospell, there should bee so gteat prophanation amongst vs? that Theaters should be full, and churches be emptier that the streetes should be replenished, and the places of holy exercises, left destitute? I vvrite not this sim∣plie but in respect, and by comparison. For I knovv that Churches (thanks be to God) are fre∣quented? But vvhat is this in respect of the mul∣titude? VVhy shoulde not holy places, in respect of their holy exercises be more frequented, then these places of abuse, that vndoubtedly prouoke Gods heauy displeasure? For admit that the thing it selfe vvere a recreation, lavvfull by the vvorde of God: yet vvho vvill graunt it vpon the Lordes Sabboth? vpon that day of rest, vvherein our ex∣ercise should be in spirituall and holy vvorkes. If you say that this thing belongeth, not vnto you: because that Parris garden, is out of your iuris∣diction: yet vvhy are these men suffered to bring their Beares into the citie, that thereby they may gather your company vnto them? It vvere duety in you to hinder these, and to take order, that none of the citie should repaire vnto such places: Nay further, you oughte to prouide that at the time, when by the law of the lande, all are com∣manded to resort to publique praiers and reading
 of the vvord of God in the church, the same word may be also expounded vnto them: so shoulde you both keep the people committed to you of God vnder her maiesty, frō vvicked abuses of his holy Sabboths, which prouoke his wrath against the Citie: and also procure them to be godly ex∣ercised, to their encrease in all obedience to her maiestie and to your own authority. But I would▪ to God your selues vvere not examples of this disorder▪ For if there be any market, or peece of a Fayre, falling out vpon the Sabboth, or on the sa∣terdaye afore, any other tryumph, Shooting, or shew of actiuity to be shewed in it: you spare not to doe it lesse vpō this day then vpon any other. And though preachers haue cried out, frō time to time, for the reformation of such prophanation, yet there hath beene litle of no amendment at al. But I beseech you, euen in the bovvells of Christ, as you haue receiued the glad tidings of your sal∣uation, & do make profession of it: so learne novv at length to put it in practise. Be not vnprofitable hearers of the worde of God any longer, nor dull beholders of Gods iudgements, neither shut your eares vvhen God crieth oute by them so loudly, that their sound goeth not onely throughout the land, but also euen throughout the vvhole vvorld, least you be made also to feel them. God hath spo¦ken to vs many wais, his frowning coūtenāce hath appeared by this long & lingering visitation, both here and elsevvhere: by this vnseasonable wether, and by this present iudgement, that is yet so green and fresh in memorie. I am sure if you lacke anye necessary help and assistance, for so good and god∣ly
 a vvorke, you may be, and shal be supported to the vttermost. But hither to neither the vvorde of God by the ministery, and voice of the preachers: the godly and noble aduise of their honours, the vnspeakable benefite, & comfort of youre selues, your Citie, and all youre vviues and children, nor the sundry iudgementes of God following one a∣nother, and threatning more to come, could yet be able to stirre you vp to any such worthy due∣tie in this behalfe, as the Lorde no doubt requy∣reth at your haundes. VVherefore I beseeche you in time, euen in Gods feare: consider vvhat belongeth vnto your peace, and according to the places, wherein God hath set you, be vigilant and diligent for your owne good. It shall be no profit vnto others, the gaine shall be yours, many disor∣ders shall be stopped, manye ignoraunt & erring mindes instructed and reclaimed; God shall bee serued, the prince better honored, your selues o∣beied, & euery one ranged to keep a happy course towardes heauen. Novv the Lorde Iesus establish your hearts in his trueth, and giue you a svveete feeling and taste of his exceeding mercye, that vvith true iudgement you maye discerne his iudgements, truely turning vnto him, & fearing vnder his hande, that in the end you may be sa∣ued. Amen.
Fare you vvell this eyghteenth of January. 1583.

