



IT being my hap (right Worship∣full) to be abroad of late, more than vsuallie I am, it was also my chaunce to heare more than otherwise I knewe, (for mine owne part till then,

I did but knowe you ex facie.) And that which then I heard, it being spoken by some of good credit (if not great calling) em∣boldened me to doe what now you see a dooing: for bethin∣king my selfe to whom I should dedicate what your Worship sees here following, that good report which I heard of you, both for sinceritie in Religion, and integritie in conuersation, made mee to resolue my selfe vpon you. For well I knowe those two good qualities would fit this simple peece of worke, made more for the profit of ma∣ny others, than the praise of a∣ny one. If I be too bolde with your Worship, hauing no ac∣quaintance

with you, pardon me of your pietie. Neither did I purpose to offend you willing∣lie, neither doe I thinke this way to hurt you hastilie: If I bee no bolder than I may, take well in worth what is done, of your courtesie: neither is it vnfitting you to defend, what is commit∣ted to your patronage, you be∣ing a Knight; nor vnbeseeming me to seeke your patrocinie, I being an inferior person. For the first, a sworde was giuen you, for the second, a tongue was giuen mee. As I vse that now, so I pray you (if neede be) vse you the other hereafter: as I haue heard, you haue done well in the field. As I wish, doe

also wel for the faith: that which I commend to your Patrocinie, (though I speake not to com∣mend it) is nothing I hope re∣pugnant therto. If it may please your Worship to deigne it the reading, you shall soone finde whether I falsifie or no. In labor (the prouerbe is) there is no losse. In this it may be there will be some gaine. If so, your good shall not be my griefe. I would what is done might benefit you, & any: that I might haue some∣what the better hope, I commit it to your Worship to patro∣nize. Oft the Patrone of the thing, workes good for the thing. Whatsoeuer your Wor∣ship procures for this, account

it as purchased to your selfe. If it may proue any thing, & worth any thing, I shall be nothing so∣rie, whosoeuer else be somthing glad. If it will proue nothing, or as nothing, so your Worship be contented, I shalbe nothing dis∣contented. While that is a wor∣king, whatsoeuer it be I wil make bold to leaue this which you see with you, and so humblie for this time take my leaue of you. The welspring of all blessings so blesse your Wor▪whilest you are here, as wel and euer blessed you may be when you goe hence.

