


My Lord,
WITHOVT endangering the least suspition of Complement, I belieue I may craue your pardon for this Dedication: And as others vse in modesty, of necessity I must suspect my Boldnes. But Truth which I here vindicate from Imposture, disdaines to shadow it selfe in Ceremony, most resplendent in its naked lustre. And forced by that, I addresse this Worke to you, who haue hitherto with so much art endeauo∣red to clowd it. I know the pride of human iudgment slights all the threatnings of hereafter punishment, when confession of mistake is required: And often by the opiniated, Obstinacy in error is esteemed Resolution: which makes me in some degree despaire that fruite,
these labors otherwise might haue hereafter gathered. Moreouer your Lo. is so glorious in your Challenge, and your Grand Imposture proclaimes it selfe so inuin∣cible, that iealous of my owne inhability, I feared I might repent my courage, if I entertained the Combat. But from my Weaknes I drew Confidence, and called to memory, how small an arme confounded the proud boast of the huge Philistian; and by how childish a wea∣pon he was hurled downe to what he built on, earth; and forc't to acknowledge himselfe dust, and vanity.
Take not therfore your owne height by the Eminen∣cy of that Title you beare, or Reputation of your much learning, which is your Guilt, not Ornament. Nor mea∣sure me by my humble Vocation, for I haue vowed to be ambitious of no higher; or by the obscurity of my Name, since I can easily forgiue the present Age, if it know me not; and Posterity, if it forget, I was. Neither had I now entred into this publike Quarrell, had not your bold defiance to all of my profession prouoked me to disco∣ner how little integrity there is, where it is most vaun∣ted. At first, a pious Curiosity laboured only my owne Satisfaction: That it now appeares abroad, is the Charity I owe my Countrey: And that it swells to this Volume, is the fault of your many, and I feare, too wil∣full mistakes.
Consider, my Lord, how many soules are imbarked with yours; for whose wrack at the last day you must stand accomptant. And though a pleasing gale hath blowne gently on you, yet no wind but driues you on towards Iudgment. There the sincerity of action, not the fallacy of language shal preuaile: there no enforced Argument, false Citation, or cunning Distinction shal be able to iustify Vntruth. There heresy shall stand con∣founded,
and they who maintained it (rackt by their owne Consciences) cry out; Behold where the Saints are enthroned in glory, raised thither by Humility, & Obedience to the authority of that Church, which if Truth it selfe speake truth, is Infallible; by resignation of theirs to the diuine will, and cooperating to the merits of the great Mediator: But we mad men made a moc∣kery of their wisdome; & to take the blemish from our loose behauiour, discredited the value of good works: We presumptuous in the vanity of Wit, opposed the di∣uine Truth; and to destroy the Monarchy of S. Peter & his Successors, proclaimed liberty to euery Rebellious Doctrine: We listened to the suggestions of a priuat Spirit; and seduced by that, contemned a long recea∣ued, and vniuersall Verity: and therfore iustly now is our portion darknesse, and our inheritance eternal fire.
I doubt not but the holy Spirit often whispers these thoughts into your soule: but Pride keeps the gate of the hart fast shut. Moreouer if we looke not streight on heauen, without squinting on temporall respects; con∣sidering your fat reuenue, and your Lordship, I may well be thought to inuite you to your losse. But who, that hath regard to Safety, despiseth not the flatteries of Wealth, and Honour, when he meditates on the Treasures of the Eternall? And why shold I vtterly de∣spaire, though you haue erred willfully, that the Al∣mighty Mercy may reclaime you; if ignorantly, that when you heere find how much your iudgment hath betraied you, you will penitently submit, and make much satisfaction by your great example?
S. Augustine thought it no dishonour to his Iudg∣ment, to be ouercome by Truth, and rather then loose a Soule, forsooke an Heresy; which, as all others, had an
age to florish in. Nor is his Humility, a scandall to his Learning, or was his Change, Inconstancy: whose Vo∣lumes carry that reputation, that euen Sectaries, who want his vertue for Obedience, endeauour to wrest his doctrine, for Defence. Here may your Lo? learne in∣struction: whom to accompany in an humble Conuer∣sion, will be more safety and glory, then to perseuer ob∣stinate in a proud mistake. If the cunning, and art of your many Writings enamour you, throw away the vnhappy dotage, though in them Hope flatters you, that your memory may hereafter liue. Safer far, to haue no Name with the succeeding Age, then to pre∣serue it in the infamy of a spurious Issue. And belieue it, when the Soule wilfully imbraceth Errour, it com∣mits the worst Adultery; what-euer is ingendred by such conceptions, being both illegitimate, and mon∣struous.
Looke vpon the opinions of them, who liue seuered (if they can be said to liue who are dead to grace) from the Vnity of the Church; and confesse, how little con∣stant Errour is to it selfe. That Innocency from Lust, which so many of your Writers affirme impossible to preserue, your owne single, and (I hope) incorrupt life hath approued possible: for vnlesse you will endanger your selfe to a Censure in the high Commission, you must acknowledge, flesh and bloud may be kept in or∣der, by the spirit. But what discouers the bodies of all Churches, which oppose the Catholike, most missha∣pen is the diuision among your selues; now and euer so apparent, that I dare confidently auerre, were there a Councell called of all those you reckon yours, his Ho∣linesse might suspend his Censure, each one of you prepar'd to pronounce the other, Heretike. And for
your Lo.p, though reputed most Orthodoxall, vnlesse you quit that most reuerend Title, which is your honor to make good, I suspect, you would by the Maior voyce be condemned, without the guilt of any other crime: though Truth and all Antiquity teach vs, that Episco∣pall dignity hath euer bene most eminent, and necessa∣ry in the Church, and ought to be held in veneration, where lawfully conferred, not vsurped.
But I feare, I keep no good time, when I strike on this harsh string: I will not therfore further afflict your eare. Let me only intreat, and if possible, preuaile with your Lo.p, to cast vp the accompt of those many yeares you haue numbred heere on earth. And if you haue prouided a Marble hereafter to inclose your dust, looke not on the flattering Epitaph, which betrayes the Reader: but listen to the silent sad Oratory, in which it pleads to you your condition. It tells you, that eue∣ry path of life, how crooked soeuer in mans purposes, leads streight to death: That all the pompe of wealth, and honour (for acquisition of which he doubts not often to stake a Soule) is but an euening shadow, soone to be lost in an euerlasting darknesse: That youth doth oftentimes breake promise, when it proposeth length of life; but that age is frantick, if it hope long to hold out against the assault of death.
It therfore imports your Lo.p, who opprest with yea∣res bow downward to the graue, seriously to looke in∣ward, & turne your sight frō those vanities which haue hitherto bewicht you. For pardon me, if to pride & va∣nity I ascribe a long continuance in error: and that I want credulity to thinke, an able Scholler can belieue Vntruth, though for the designes of his owne Ambi∣tion, he obtrude it to the world. May your Lo p take,
courage, and gaine an entire Conquest ouer Sense, by subscribing to that Church, in which only is safty, and which your many vnlucky Labors haue slaundered, not iniured. So signall a Conuersion will add ioy, and triumph to the Angells; and make me, who haue bene hitherto your Aduersary, not Enemy, hereafter,

