



RIGHT Wor∣shipful, the Apo∣stle Paul hath told vs, That In the last dayes shall come perillous times, For men shall
 bee louers of their owne selues, couetous, boasters, prowd, cur∣sed speakers, Disobe∣dient to parents, vn∣thankefull, vnholie, without Natural affe∣ction, Truce-brea∣kers, false accusers, in∣temperate, fierce, no Louers at all of them which are good, tray∣tours, heady, high-minded, Louers of pleasures, more then
 louers of God, hauing a shew of godlinesse, but yet denie the po∣wer thereof: And they are the words of our Sa∣uiour himselfe: that as it was in the dayes of Noah, So shall the comming of the Son of man be. And againe, vvhen the Sonne of man commeth, shall hee finde Faith vpon earth? When were these perilous times Saint Pe∣ter
 speaketh of, if not now? When was there the like securitie? When gaue men themselues ouer to their owne hearts lust more then now? By the which then wee see that we are they, Vpon whom the ends of the world are come: and that wee must all shortly be called to accompt for these things: The Ni∣neuites fast and repent, the Publicans do feare
 and quake, when Io∣nas cryeth to the one, and Iohn to the other of iudgement to come. A∣hab is humbled, and Felix trembles, when from Elias and Paule they heare of death and Judgement: yet alas, where is the man among vs, that thinkes of these things? Doe not men crie, Peace, peace, till destruction come vp∣on them, as the Tra∣uell
 vpon a woman with childe: Shee thinketh not of the paine vntill it come, and they thinke not of this day of recko∣ning till it come. This is the security of our Age: so that we may now looke for an end to be put vnto these sinnefull daies: for vvhat are they but the fore-runners of that last and dreadfull day? The Lord make vs wise be∣times, that we may think
 of that Great Assise, and the account that we are then to make. I haue heere endeauoured in a weake measure to vnfold the Doctrine of the day of Judgement, the which J here present vnto your Worship, in regard of the demonstration of my vn∣fained thankefulnes for your extraordinary kind∣nesse bestowed vpon me: As also in regard of the great affection, and good
 deuotion you beare to the Truth: Accept therfore I pray you, what is heere offred vnto you, and take in good part my indeuour therein: so I humbly take my leaue, Resting

