



THE wonderfull varietie, and diuersitie of opinions and iudgements amongst the Philosophers concerning mans sum∣mum bonum, or chiefest happinesse in this life, is not vnknowne to your Honour, and other lear∣ned men, how that some said it did consist onely in ver∣tue, othersome in beautie, othersome in honour, other∣some in wealth, othersome (and that no small summe) in pleasure, and some in a certeine mixture, or medlie of all these. It were needlesse to reckon vp in this place all their idle fansies, & fond dreames about this one point. Howbeit, I would certifie the simpler sort of this thing, how that all of them erred, and wandered in bywayes, how that euerie seuerall sect and familie of Philosophers shot farre wide of the marke. For, as S. Paule testifieth: Rom. 1. 21. They became vaine in their thoughtes, and their foolish heart was full of darknesse. When they professed them∣selues to be wise, they beecame fooles. We Christians, that haue bene trained vp in Christes schole, haue lear∣ned

a better profession of our Maister, and Sauiour Ie∣sus Christ. We know, and are taught so to say, that God 1. Cor. 1. 20. maketh the wisedome of the world foolishnesse. We are instructed, and so we stedfastly beleeue, that the one∣ly true felicitie of this our life, and the true happinesse of this our age, standeth in the publishing, and preaching of Christes Gospell, which is to the Iewes a stumbling blocke, to the Graecians foolishnesse, and to the Papistes new learning: but in deede the power of God to the sal∣uation, and the wisedome of God to the instruction of as many as are called both of the Iewes, Graecians, and Papistes. This glorious Gospell of our God was first preached here on earth by our Redeemer, and Sauiour Christ himselfe: then, after his ascension, it was carried into all partes of the worlde by the Apostles, and their successours, with such successe, that Christes spirituall kingdome was by the scepter of his worde enlarged farre and wide. Which thing the deadly enimie of man∣kind Sathan greatly enuying, & knowing that the flou∣rishing state of Christes kingdome would be the decaie, and downefall of his, laboured by all meanes possible, to beare downe his scepter, and scepter bearers by force and violence, which thing he after a sorte brought to passe, by raising vp the ten bloudie persecutions against the Christians vnder the ten Tyrantes, or Emperours of Rome. But the Diuell, seeing that this his former poli∣cie would not preuaile, & seeing that the Christians the more they were tormented for their faith, the more they grewe, and multiplied, deuised to deale no more by vio∣lence, and bloudshed: but chaunging himselfe into an Angel of light, sought meanes how in time of peace he might withdrawe men by little and little from the true Religion of Christ, to the counterfeit and hypocriticall religion of Antichrist. This craftie counsell, and pestilent practise pleased the subtile Serpent well, which wrought

this effect, that it eclipsed, and diminished the fulnesse, & beautifull light of Christes kingdome, which was onely mainteined by the sworde of the spirit, that is to say, by the worde of God. And because he might the more ea∣sily leade the people out of the way of trueth, his pur∣pose was wholy hitherto bent, to ouerwhelme the can∣dle vnder the bushell, to darken the light of the Gospell, which he brought accordingly to passe, by corrupting, and infecting the Priesthood with the glorious pompe, The originall of the Pope and po∣perie. and vanities of the worlde, with the wanton delightes, and vaine pleasures of this present life. Then, euen then, he set Antichrist of Rome in his royall seate as his vicar, The Pope setled in Sathans seate, not in Saint Pe∣ters chaire. and lieftenant generall, there to rule, and reigne as God of this world in the children of vnbeliefe, bewitching them with strong delusions, that they shoulde beleeue lies, that all they might be damned, which beleeued not the trueth, but had pleasure in vnrighteousnesse. This is that man of sinne (by which is ment not one particular 2. Thes. 2. 3. 4. 9. 10. Daniel. 7. 5. man, but a succession of men, as by the beare in Daniel is not ment onely one King of the Persians, but a succes∣sion of Kinges,) this I say is that man of sinne, and that aduersarie that exalteth himselfe aboue all that is called God, or that is worshipped: so that he doth sit as God in the Temple of God, shewing himselfe that he is God. This is that wicked man, whose comming is by the ef∣fectuall working of Sathan with all power, and signes, and lying woonders, and in all deceiueablenesse of vn∣righteousnesse among them that perishe, because they receiued not the loue of the trueth, that they might be saued. By this meanes Sathan lulled (as it were) the worlde a sleepe, for the space of these seuen hundred yeeres last past. Now some man will maruell much how the Pope should growe to such an vnbridled authoritie, as he hath gotten. Surely we can assigne no other cause but this: such was the will of God, and such was the

depth of his secrete iudgement for the contempt of his Gospell Was it not, I pray you, reuealed to S. Iohn, that Apo. 17. 2. 4 the purple whoore of Babylon shoulde make all the Kinges and Princes of the earth, and the inhabitantes thereof to drinke of the golden cuppe of wine, full of the abhominations, and filthinesse of her fornication? The verie beginning, and foundation of Antichristes kingdome was laied euen in the Apostles time. For S. Paule writ to the Thessalonians, that the mysterie of ini∣quitie 2. Thess. 2. 7. began then to woorke: but it was then hindered by the brightnesse, and puritie of doctrine receiued in the Primatiue Church. Afterwardes it grewe vp by de∣grees, and specially by three steppes. First, by the great Flowe the Prima∣sie or Popedome of Rome grewe vp. errors of the heretikes in the East Church, which Chry∣sostome doth call the armies of Antichrist. Secondly, by the lamentable contention, and emulation amongst the Christian Bishoppes in the Orientall partes. Thirdly, by the superstitious deuotion (for I will not call it liberall donation) of Princes, and Emperours. For, after that the wicked parricide Phocas, Emperour of Constanti∣nople, Phocas, who had murdered Mauri∣tius the Emperour was the first Pope maker, for before that time the Pope was not ta∣ken for the vni∣uersall head of the Church, nor yet for Christes vicar. had geuen the Primasie, or name of vniuersall Bi∣shop vnto Boniface the third, the Popes authoritie, or rather tyrannie increased excedingly. Then they sought not onely to be Lordes within themselues, but also to be aboue all higher powers: yea, aboue the Emperour himselfe. This kingdome of Antichrist from that time forward grew mightily, specially vnder the Emperours of Constantinople: and namely, vnder the Emperour Constantinus Pogonatus or Barbatus: and vnder the Emperours of Germanie Henries, and Frederikes. Now in this time of darkenesse it is much to be maruelled, vnto what vile slauerie, and thraldome. Emperours and Princes were brought by the Bishop of Rome. Some of Emperours brought by the Pope into shame full slauerie. them, being resolutely persuaded by the Romish Clear∣gie, that the Pope was Christes vicar, & vicegerent: yea,

halfe a God, refused no Popish subiection. One waited at his gate barefoote, and barelegge: another was tied fast with chaines vnder the Popes table, there to picke vp crumbes like a dogge: another suffered him to set his feete vpon his necke: another held his stirrop, when the Popes holinesse vauted vpon his horse: another was thrust into a Monasterie, and made a Monke. In such slauish subiection were Princes in those dayes. Then in The true Churche of Christ hath not alwayes bene in a visible go∣uernement. deede the Churche of Rome, the whoore of Babylon, was gloriously in open rule: but the true Churche of Christ was not in any visible gouernment, no more than it was in the time of Elias the Prophet. And this was, that the Scriptures might be fulfilled and founde true, which say, that there should be an Apostasie, or defecti∣on 2. Thess. 2. 3. Mat. 24. 12. Apo. 13. 15. from the faith, that is, a generall reuolting from true Religion: that iniquitie shoulde haue the vpper hand: that no man should haue the libertie of his life, but he that should take vpon him the character, or mark of the beast. O wofull, and lamentable times. O most miserable, and vnhappie dayes. And yet the Papistes at The common crie of Papistes at this day, which call vs to their holy whoo∣rishe Church of Rome. this day crie with open mouth most impudently, The Catholike church, The Catholike Church, saying, that it hath alwayes bene to be sene at Rome. They tell vs with shame inough, that the Pope can not erre, that his faith is Catholike, and pure without all blot, or blemish, and that if we beleeue iumpe as he beleeueth, we shall surely be saued. But we will neuer beleeue Antichrist, nor run to Rome (albeit sometime a faithfull citie) to inquire af∣ter our faith, and Religion. We wote well, that now it is, and hath bene a great while, the sinke of all sinne and iniquitie in the world, the verie seate, and habitati∣on of Antichrist himselfe. We will not haue that proude Italian Priest to be our Doctour, and generall Schole∣maister, a man made of all abhominations, and whore∣domes. We will not lay the foundation, or ground∣worke

of our faith vpon the glorious name of any mor∣tall man whatsoeuer. We see the end of all Poperie to be ignorance. We see they derogate, and detract all from Christ and his Passion, and attribute their saluation to Masses, to mens merites, to Saintes prayers, to Pilgri∣mages, to vowes of virginitie, to their owne good wor∣kes, and to a thousand other trifling toyes. We see they preferre mens traditions, & inuentions before the truth of Gods word. We can shewe, if neede be, at what time, and by which Popes euerie parcell of Papistrie was de∣uised. He that will make a true Anatomie of it, and ex∣amine it from point to point, shall finde, that it tendeth wholy to gaine, and no whit to godlinesse. To be short, we knowe by the Scriptures of God, that their Religion which forbiddeth marriage and meates, is a doctrine of Diuels. This was the miserie, and infelicitie of former 1. Tim. 4. 1. ages, in which times notwithstanding God had his Church, though not alwayes subiect to mans senses: in which ages God raised vp euermore some good men, which inueihed bitterly against the Popes intollerable In euerie age some withstoode the Popes pro∣ceedings, though they had not such light of the trueth as we haue now. pride, and tyrannie, as namely Hilarie Bishop of Vienna in Fraunce, Paulus Cretensis, and Iohannes Lampeon, both Bishoppes denied his supremasie, the Church of Rauenna in Italie, would not acknowledge the Pope for her head. Nilus Archbishop of Thessalonica writ a lear∣ned booke against the Popes primasie. Afterwardes in Italie, yea euen in Rome Arnoldus Brixianus, an elo∣quent man, oppugned stoutely the Popes primasie, and tyrannie. Counsels, and Synods condemned the Popes supremasie, after whom God raised vp here in England a valiant, & stoute souldier Iohn Wickleffe, and in Bohe∣mia Iohn Hus, & Hierome of Prage, with many others, as histories record and witnesse.
But at the length, when it pleased the great good∣nesse, The happinesse of this age gene∣rally. and riche mercie of God, to take compassion on

the world then drowned in darknesse, he renewed the heauenlie light of his Gospell, by which Antichrist of Rome should be reuealed, and by little and little vtterly destroyed. Then he raised vp mightie Capteines to make warre against that spirituall Pharao, whom he appoin∣ted like Moses, and Aaron, to safe conduct vs out of the land of Aegypt, out of the house of bondage, out of the sorowfull seruitude of Poperie, in comparison of which, that Aegyptiacall slauerie was great libertie. To this end and purpose he raised vp in this most happie, and blessed age, sundrie learned Diuines, as namely, Martin Luther, The best learned Diuines of this our age. Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Caluine, Peter Martyr, Bu∣cer, Bullenger, Gualter, Theodore Beza, Chemnisius, He∣mingius, Riuius, Zanchius, Daneus, Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Hooper, Bradford, M. Iewell, M. Nowell, M. Iohn Foxe, with infinite others both Englishmen, Scots, Frenchmen, Germanes, Italians, Spaniards, and Danes. Surely this the happie age, which Chrysostome fortold, speaking of the last times: Ad nullam rem fugient, nisi ad Chrys. vpon the 24. of Matthaew. Scripturas: alioqui incident in abhominationem desolationis. Then (saith he) will they flee vnto nothing, but vnto the Scriptures: otherwise they shall fall into the abhomina∣tion of desolation. To whom agreeth S. Hierome, wri∣ting vpon the Prophet Nahum. And Gregorie prophe∣sieth Hierom vpon Nahum. Gregorie vpon Iob. plainely of our time thus: Ecclesia post eosdem dies, quibus deprimitur, tamen circa finem mundi grandi praedica∣tionis virtute roborabitur: The Church (saith he) after those dayes, wherin she is depressed, and holden downe, shall for all that about the end of the worlde be streng∣thened with the great power of preaching. Which thing is come nowe to passe in these dayes, as we may see, how that the preaching of the Gospell hath greatly preuailed against all the raging persecution of the Papistes: the Lordes name be praised for it. As oft as we thinke vp∣on this Gospell, we dare auouch, that these latter times

are better times, that this age is a golden age. For if Ari∣stides the iust was called Graecorum foelicitas, that is, The happinesse of the Graecians, we may more worthily call Christ our felicitie: and if the age, wherein he liued, was called Aureaaetas, that is, A golden age, because iustice flourished in it, verelie we may more iustly call this our age a golden age, because the glorious Gospell of God shineth nowe most clearely in the eyes, and soundeth most shrilly in the eares of all Israel. O that men would therefore praise the Lorde. O that men would acknow∣ledge Psal. 107. 15 before the Lorde his louing kindnesse, and his wonderous woorkes before the sonnes of men. Thus we haue seene the chiefest happinesse of this our age, to be the preaching of the Gospell of God amongest vs. A part also of our happinesse at this day may consist in the Our age happie for that nowe all good learning flourisheth with the Gospell. garnishing of good learning, which is come to a won∣derfull ripenesse. I pray God that for our vnthankful∣nesse it decaie not. And not onely liberall artes, and sciences excell nowe more, than euer they did, by reason of Printing (which as wise men say is of all Gods externall benefites one of the greatest) but also Manuall or Mechanicall trades are come to such a perfection, as the like was neuer heard, or read of before. But because there is no great doubt of this, which our aduersaries also doe confesse, I will stand no longer vpon it.
In the happinesse of this our age, the Lord in his ma∣nifold Of the happi∣nesse of England specially. mercie hath made vs Englishmen most happie of all other nations vnder the Sunne. For first, whereas be∣fore we sate in darknesse, and in the shadow of death, he hath blessed vs with the light of his holy Gospell, so that now we are a people set at libertie, to the end we should . Pet. 2. 9. shewe foorth the vertues of him, that hath called vs out of darkenesse into his maruellous light. Secondly, he hath blessed vs with a gratious, and a religious Prince, a Phoenix amongst women kinde, vnder whom we haue

had the Gospell in great peace these twentie yeares: the Lorde frame our obedience to it in all holinesse, and blesse our Souereigne with a long, prosperous, and zea∣lous reigne ouer vs. Thirdly, the God of all peace hath blessed vs with a straunge, wonderfull, and miraculous peace. For we sit here quietly, when as all the worlde beside (almost) is in an vprore. Our Halcionij dies, our calme and peaceable dayes doe farre surpasse and excell the ciuil peace, either of Solomon in Israel, or of Augu∣stus in Rome. Fourthly, God hath blessed vs with mar∣uellous prosperitie, and plentie of all things, such as our enimies enuie at.
God graunte that England may bee thankfull for all these spirituall, and temporall blessinges: and that Italie, Spaine, France, Flanders, and other nations, may in his mercie bee partakers of his Gospell, and of our peace with the fulnesse thereof, rather than in his iustice so to punish vs, as to make vs againe companions of their spirituall darkenesse in the last place, and greatest measure. This most happie state of ours, forreigne na∣tions doe enuie, and specially Papistes, who haue ban∣ded them selues together in an holie league (as they tearme it) to roote out Gods Gospell from amongst vs, and to bring in againe Mariana tempora. But, the Lord The Papistes gol∣den day shall ne∣uer come I trust to hinder our happinesse. bee thanked, their Kalendar doeth fowly faile them: their golden day (or rather bloud red day) in their Ru∣bricke is not yet come: I beseech almightie God, who is able to confounde their deuises, and wicked practises against his Churche, that it may neuer come.
Your Honour is not ignorant, howe that there bee some, whose wisest parte in them is their hoarie haires, who so highly aduance, and commend the former ages, that like vnthankfull wretches, they vtterly mislike, and discommend this our age, wherein we liue. In this con∣sideration I thought good to oppose, & set this booke

of Riuius against them, entreating of the happinesse of this our Age: whiche Argument, as I thought it woulde bee most acceptable and gratefull to your Honour: so I now am bold to present it vnto your fauourable protection, as a seale and sure testimonie of my louing duetie towardes your Honour, not doub∣ting but that you will mightily mainteine, and defend the happinesse of this our age, against all malicious Pa∣pistes, carnall Gospellers, and wrangling Sycophantes. This I trust you will doe, being enabled (as you are) not onely with great learning, but also with great authori∣tie, which your Honour hath well deserued. The Lorde giue vnto you, as he did vnto Solomon, an vnderstan∣ding heart to iudge aright & to discerne betwixt good and bad, betwixt happinesse and miserie. The Lorde keepe and continue your Honour safe, and sounde, that you may be still a stay vnto Religion, a god∣lie wise Counseller vnto your Prince: finally, a fauourable Patrone, and friendly Mae∣cenas to all good learning, and learned men.

