


WHere as of la¦te dayes ye haue wryten vnto me to prouyde you some booke, trac¦tyng in Englysshe of the descrip¦tion of the Sphere of the world Nowe at the laste I come in, wt myne answere, whiche euen as it shal not altogyther lyke you, So I trust (yf ye haue a respect to my beneuolence) It shall not vtterly myslyke you. I walked my self rounde aboute all Pou¦les churche yarde, from shop to shop enqueryng of suche a treac¦tyse
neyther coulde I here of a∣ny yt eyther wrote of this mati∣er proposely, nor yet occasionaly. But what trowe you dyd I than by my fayth syr, I returned bac¦ke euen the same way (but won¦drynge moche at the happe) and asked agayne for the same wor∣kes in latyn, wherof there were .iij. or foure of sondry Aucthors brought, and shewed vnto me, a¦monge all which (for the breuy∣te and playnes) I chose Proclus his doynge. And this a Goddes name entended I than (for thac complyshement of your wyll) to traducte into the Englyshe ton∣ge.That was M. Thomas lynacte. But wolde God that he whi¦che translated it into the Latyn had taken so moche payne, for his countrey sake as to englishe the same also. Englyshe was his natyue tonge. Greke and Latyn
as well knowen where as Eng∣lyshe to me of late yeares, was wholy to learne, the Latyn not ta¦sted of, the Greke not once harde of, whom although euen at this present I might rather and true lye with lesse reproche denye to haue any knowledge in at all, than to professe the perfect phra¦se of any of them three. Why than shall I attempte for any mans pleasure to go aboute to translate a Science vnknowen, out of a tonge vnknowen, into a tong no better knowen vnto me. Surely I am very loth to do it. But yet because perhaps ye be so perswaded that I can do som what therin and paraduenture wold take it for vnkyndnes that I wolde not take in hande, to proue the feyct to the vttermost of my power? I wyll therfore
wrest it rather than truely tur∣ne it, and that for lacke of far∣ther connynge I can do none o∣ther, that you may be assured, yt yf oughte be well done in this matier, it floweth out rather of the vehement loue and feruente affection that youre manyfolde demerytes hath most depely en∣graffed in my hart, than of any lernynge that I alredy was en∣dued withal. Moreouer I know well that you stamer somwhat both in the Latyn tonge and in this science also, and so do I in settyng forth of the same, wher fore you shall better vnderstand me than a perfecter doer therin. And where you ar els excedyng¦ly well sene in all Geometrycall Deuyses, where you excell in all humaynefabricature and where you farre passe all other men in
vnyuersall knowledge, fyne and subtyle practice in all the Ma∣thematicall sciences, yet beyng almoste Ygnoraunt (for the sel∣domnes of the science) in the spe¦culacion of the wonderful, good¦ly and dyuine fabricature of the world do so feruētly desyre some knowledge therin, I can no lesse but further you therto to the vt¦termoste of that small smatter that I haue. Promessynge far∣ther that yf I perceyue you to profectē any whytte therby I wyll (GOD wyllynge the same) be more earnestly dylygent herafter in perusyng my sayd attemptes.
Thus fare ye well. 
At Thames Inne, in Houlborne.
Anno dūi. 1550.
