



THe Booke of the holy Scri∣pture (Right Worshipfull) is as the Princely Prophet Da∣uid
 calleth it,Ps. 119 125 A Lant∣horne to our feet▪ and a Light to our Paths. The Elect of God are therein enlightened, and taught of God, through the inward operation of Gods Spirit:Iohn 6. the know∣ledge thereof hath beene deare and pretious vnto the Godly. Paul, that sanctified Ʋessell of the Lord, did esteeme all things else but Dung in comparison of it.Phil. 3.8. Moses
 regarded not the plea∣sures he might haue en∣ioyed in king Pharaohs Court,Heb. 11.24 in comparison of this: And Dauid pre∣ferred the Office of a Dore-keeper in Gods house,Psal. 84.12 before the chie∣fest Pallaces heere be∣low. This was that that Salomon the wisest did ayme at especially,1. Reg. 3.5.9. ha∣uing his choice of many things offered him from God: and no maruell
 though the children of God do prefer the choice of it before all other inward things whatso∣euer, because our Saui∣our will teach vs, that the knowledge thereof will bring a man to Life Eternall:Iohn 17.3. Jt will safe∣ly conduct a man to God his kingdome, and make him decline from the by-waies of sinne and error, which leade to destructi∣on. Heere is Milke for
 Babes, and strong meate for men of riper yeares: so that none that are in∣uited to this Feast, but may finde some refresh∣ing. Yet notwithstan∣ding, that this is the ex∣cellencie of the holie Scriptures, and that this hath beene the choice of God his seruants in all ages, to prefer the know∣ledge of it before all things, and to conforme theyr liues thereunto:
 The Papists, the mali∣cious ennemies of Gods truth, will notwithstan∣ding shew themselues to be of the Serpenticall broode,Gene. 3.15 euer treading on the heele of God his church, euen with their Templum Domini:Ieremy 7. Templum Domini: the Church, the Church, as if the church-Keyes hung euer at their gir∣dle. These their paynted shewes of piety and ho∣linesse,
 hath caused ma∣ny to stagger in the way of godlinesse, who haue not taken deepe roote in christian profession. Let such, with a single eye, reade ouer these two ser∣mons, where they shall finde a Fold pitcht for all Christ his Sheepe: The true church made knowne from the flockes of his Companions: which, howsoeuer they come with, Iesus, Iesus,
 in their mouthes, yet doe deny the power of godli∣nesse, seeking vtterly to extinguish the light of Gods truth, that it may not shine vnto men. In∣deed, a palpable darke∣nesse hath yet ouerspread all the Dominions of that Romish Pharaoh, more palpable then the darkenesse of Aegypt, but the Truth shall pre∣uaile, maugre the spite and malice of Anti∣christ,
 and all that blou∣die Crew: And the Bright Beames of the gospell shall dispell those foggie mists of Poperie, and Jgnorance: when the pride of the Whoore of Rome is once at the height, and the measure of her iniquitie is once full, according to that of Sainct Iohn in the Reuelation: Shee is fallen, shee is fallen, euen Babylon that
 great Citie, &c. God put it into the hearts of all christian princes, to rise vp against her,By sup∣pressing of Poperie. that their warre with them may assure them of a peace with themselues, and with their Lord God. For, how dange∣rous they be vnto a chri∣stian common-wealth, e∣uen theyr hellish At∣tempts do shew. Ney∣ther is it an error in pra∣ctise, as many would
 beare men in hand, but it is an error in doctrine, teaching, yea and main∣taining it, that they may safely kill, and take a∣way the life of a christi∣an Prince, that will not yeelde and subiect him∣selfe vnto the Pope of Rome.Therfore traitors to Christian Princes in action or affection, and so much the more dan∣gerous to be sufferd. And no mar∣uell then, though they can not endure the ma∣nifestation of God his Word, which is a Lant∣horne vnto our feete,
 and a Light vnto our Paths, directing vs to heauen: For this Light, if the Pope did not smother it, euen little children in the Streetes would long ere this haue cryed: Fie vpon them, fie vpon them. Jt is my care, both in publike and priuate (out of my small reading) to disco∣uer, as much as in me li∣eth, the mysterie of Ini∣quitie, and to lend one
 blast to the sounding of that Horne,The word. that shall at last shake downe the walles of this Iericho. Jt is the old and ancient Doctrine of Faith and Repentance that I heere intreate of: As for the plainenesse of the man∣ner of deliuery of it, I do trust you will acknow∣ledge that the power of the spirit is best seene in weakenesse: and that plainelinesse do best an∣swere
 a straight and e∣uen Leuell: the eui∣dence of the spirit is best seene in plainenesse.
J haue presumed to prefixe your Worshippes Name vnto this small Worke: Jt shall (by Gods good blessing) in∣crease your loue vnto the truth and gospell of Ie∣sus Christ: A zealous professour whereof you haue shewed your selfe to be these many yeares:
 and worke in you a fur∣ther detestation of Po∣perie. As you haue be∣gun well, so proceed, and let your workes be more at last then at first: Be still for God in all his wayes, and God will be still for you in all your waies: aduance him still, and hee will aduaunce you. Thus I adde this poore Mite to the trea∣surie of the Church, as∣cribing the Patronage
 to your selfe, the vse to the world, and the suc∣cesse of it to God. I pray God to keepe you in his holy feare, and fauour, vnto the end: and so re∣maine

