


THat which so often heeretofore The rage and madnesse of the Papistes is now reuealed, God be praised for it. I haue desired, and besought in prayer of our most gratious, and omnipotent God to come to passe, to witte, that the Papistes might at some time or other, bee so euidently manifested, and dis∣closed to the whole worlde, and to all mortall men, of what na∣tion soeuer, to this end, and purpose, that the complaintes of our men against them might not seeme any whit vndeserued on their behalfe: that now at the length I doe both incredibly reioyce, that I haue by the singular benefit of God obteined, & also render vnto the immortall God as greate thankes as I can for it. For, when as certeine of the Papistes now of late dayes did painte out old superstitions with such deceiptfull shadowes (as it were) and counterfeite collours, that euen Papistrie is no∣thing else but painted hypocri∣sie and double dissimulation, with which they haue deceiued the vniuersall worlde. the very wisest, much more the foolish, and vnwarie multi∣tude, was by that meanes brought into errour, verely I feared to what issue the matter would grow vnto at length: yea, and I was greatly affraid, lest that they, which haue a good while agoe bene reclaimed from impious superstition, to the godlie, and sincere worship of God, and to the pure religion of Christ, being by little, and little bewitched by the writinges of our ad∣uersaries, woulde againe (like blinde men) rush headlong, and fall backward into their former darknesse of ignorance, & er∣rours. For certeine men haue now begonne with no little care and cunning, to set a faire glasse vpon old superstitions, and with comelie wordes to cloake and couer the faultes, and vices of the Papistes.
But now at this day, seeing that our aduersaries doe shew Craftie conuey∣ance discouered and detected. foorth euidently and plainely, without dissimulation, what

they goe aboute, what they looke at, what they ayme at, what they shoote at, and seeing that now wee may almost feele, and groape (as it were) with our handes the fond counselles, and wicked practises of the vngodlie Papistes, I doe see there is no greate daunger, and I thinke that wee neede not to feare so much any more, lest they can induce, and bring any man here∣after so easily into errour, vnlesse hee bee starke blinde, & out of his right wittes. For who now doth not see, that the aduer∣saries of sounde and wholesome doctrine, doe endeuour to take quite away, to pluck out of all mens heartes, yea after a sorte to burie wholy, and altogether to ouerwhelme the very sacred, and holy religion of Christe? For thus they teache Ad verbum, Woorde for woorde, I will put nothing to of mine owne. That faith (say they) by which a man doth stedfast∣ly Diuelishe decrees of the Papistes made in their Tridentine coun∣sell. beleeue, and assuredly trust to haue his sinnes forgiuen him for Christes sake, and to possesse euerlasting saluation, hath no testimonie, or witnesse at all in the Scriptures, yea it is cleane against it. What else? If any man shall say, that the iustify∣ing faith is nothing else, but a stedfast trust in Gods mercie, pardoning our sinnes for Christes sake: or that, that only confi∣dence is the meane, whereby wee shalbe iustified, let him bee accursed, Item: If any man shall say, that to the obteining Anathemata Pa∣pistica sine omni fundamento doctrinae. of saluation, it is necessarie for euery man to beleeue assuredly, and without all doubting of his owne infirmitie, that his sinnes are forgiuen him, let him bee accursed. What, is there any more of this stuffe? Yea: If any man shall say, that a man is absolued from his sinnes, and iustified, for that he doth cer∣teinly beleeue, that hee is absolued, or that no man is truely iustified, but hee that doeth beleeue himselfe to be iustified, and that our absolution, and iustification is fully perfected, and finished onely by this faith, let him bee accursed, I tremble, and quake to rehearse such deuilish decrees of vngodlie men.
They will haue faith to bee onely a simple credulitie, and a VVhat the papists haue euer taken faith to be. bare knowledge of the historie of Christ, and not also a stedfast

trust, and beliefe in Christ, as S. Paul in all his Epistles vnder∣standeth it. They woulde haue vs continually to doubte of the good will of God towardes vs. They denie that a man is iusti∣fied only by trust, and beliefe in the mercie of God, pardoning our sinnes for Christes sake: that is, they denie that a man is iustified, Gratis, freely (as S. Paul saith) euen by the grace of Ephe. 2. 8. 9. God, and that without woorkes. They denie that faith is ne∣cessarie for all men to the obteining of pardon, and remission of their sinnes. They denie that faith is alwayes necessarie to absolution from our sinnes: that is (to speake more plainly) they denie that wee ought necessarily to beleeue the Gospell. For, I pray you, what other thing is absolution, but the voice Absolution, what it is. of the Gospell, sounding by the minister of the Church, by which voice that remission of sinnes, promised to the penitent in the Gospell, is priuately, and particularly applied to euery mans conscience. And seeing that our Sauiour Christ, in the Gospell of S. Marke, flatly commaundeth both, namely to re∣pent, Mark. 1. 15. and to beleeue the Gospell, beholde heere the intollera∣ble boldnesse, or rather impudencie of our aduersaries. For they very willingly graunt the one, that we ought to repent: but verily they doe so stoutly denie the other: namely, that The Papistes de∣nie, that we ought to beleeue the Gospell. wee ought to beleeue the Gospell, that is, the preaching of forgiuenesse of sinnes, that they accurse, and condemne euery one that affirmeth this to bee true. Christ saith: Credite E∣uangelio, that is, Beleeue the Gospell: but these men say quite contrary: If any man (say they) shall affirme, that in absolu∣tion of sinnes wee must beleeue the Gospell, let him bee ac∣cursed. Now what an absurde thing also is this their Ana∣thema? If any man shall say, that if grace bee lost through sinne, faith also is alwayes together lost with it: or that, that faith, which doth remaine, is not a true faith, although it bee not a liuely faith: or that hee, which hath faith without charitie, is not a Christian: let him bee accursed.
Here, to be briefe, they affirme that adulterers, manquel∣lers, extortioners, and such like, (whome S. Paule denieth euer

to be heires of the kingdome of God) persisting still in their Ephe. 5. 5. sinne and wickednesse, may conceiue some hope, and trust of their saluation, and may promise vnto them selues, that God for Christes sake, will be mercifull▪ and fauorable vnto them: for that is it which we call, To beleeue. If this their assertion VVhat it is to be∣leeue. be true, then surely the Apostle S. Paule is in an errour. But if it bee impietie to graunt that the Apostle erred, then they them selues doe erre, and are deceiued, and doe manifestly teach a falshood. In the meane while (such is the miserable blindenesse of those mens mindes,) they doe not see, and per∣ceiue how that they speake contraries. They doe denie that Contrarieties in the doctrine of the Papistes. there is any liuely faith in heinous sinners, and wicked offen∣ders, Ergo it necessarily followeth, that their faith is a dead faith, such an one as the Diuels also may haue in them, accor∣ding as S. Iames witnesseth. How therefore can that faith Iames 2. 19. be founde true, which is dead? Here I doe beleeue they will coyne, and bring foorth out of their owne braine (as Iupiter brought forth Minerua out of his head) a new definition of faith. But let vs briefly haue a viewe also of other of their Diuelish decrees. The Catholike Church (say they) doeth Traditions of the Church of Rome. reteine, and receiue whatsoeuer the chaire of Peter hath gi∣uen out, doeth giue out, and shall giue out concerning faith, and religion. Hereby you may easily vnderstand, how greate the credite of the Church of Rome, and the authoritie of the Apostolicall seate is amongst them. Let vs proceede on for∣ward to the rest. Ecclesiasticall constitutions, (say they) con∣cerning Ecclesiasticall constitutions. fastes, feastes, and abstinence from meates, and many other thinges, doe bind a man in conscience to obserue, and keepe them, Etiam extra casum scandali, yea without the case of offence to any. This is a hard saying. But what follo∣weth? Christ (say they) doeth giue, and graunt many thinges Merites and in∣tercessions of Saintes. vnto vs here on earth, through the merites, and intercession of Saintes, which otherwise he would not bestowe vppon vs: Wherefore they doe verie holily and religiously, which with a deuoute pietie, and godlinesse doe visite those places, which are

dedicated to them, and which by this meanes seeke for helpe at their handes. Here you see that they doe allowe prayer to the deade, and Pilgrimages, instituted for religion, and deuo∣tion sake. What say they else? The vse of images (say they) is VVoorshipping of images. acceptable, and gratefull to God, and we doe well to fall downe flat before them, calling vpon the Saintes whome they repre∣sent. These verely are plaine, and euident inough, neither neede they any larger explication. Let vs therefore goe on forward to the rest. We must firmely, and stedfastly beleeue Purgatorie. (say they) that there is after this life a Purgatorie for soules departed, in which is payed the punishment, as yet due for sinnes. Notwithstanding they may be succoured, and holpen by the sacrifice of the altar, by prayer, by fasting, by almes deedes, and by other workes of the liuing, as also by indul∣gencies, that they may the sooner by that meanes be deliuered, and set free from thence.
Now verely that appeareth plainely, which I saide in the beginning, what the aduersaries, and enimies of the Gospell goe about: namely to take quite away at once all faith, all godlinesse, all holinesse, all religion, yea the pure and sincere The drift of po∣perie. seruice of God: finally, to burie and ouerwhelme Christ him selfe, the authour of mans saluation: also to thrust vpon vs their owne vaine dreames, the foolish, fantasticall, and doting deuises of men: yea doctrines of Diuels (as the Apostle calleth 1. Tim. 4. 1. them) to the end that we should herafter direct all the actions of our life by the rule, and squire of the Popes will, nothing at all regarding either what God willeth, and commaundeth, or what he prohibiteth, and forbiddeth vs to doe: whome the Papistes plaine Epicures. Papistes (because they are flat Epicures) doe neither wishe to be mercifull vnto them, nor feare him when he is displeased with them. But let vs render immortall thankes vnto God, the eternall father of our Lorde and Sauiour Iesus Christ, which hath suffered the follie, and madnesse of the Papistes to be so manifested at this day, that no man now can doubt any more, what opinion, and persuasion all of vs ought to haue of

them. For they are indeed deceiuers of mens mindes (as S. Paule saith vnto Titus) and men that turne away from the Tit. 1. 10. 2. Tim. 3. 8. trueth: yea verely (as the same Apostle saith vnto Timo∣thie) men that resist the trueth, as Iannes, and Iambres with∣stood Moses. But they shall preuaile no longer. For as the Iannes and Iam∣bres Magicians. madnesse of those Magicians was then euident to all: so the madnesse of the Papistes is now reuealed to all men. For as they are indeed, so they are also accounted of all men, seducers, Phil. 3. 18, 19 and deceiuers, the enimies of the crosse of Christ, Epicures, which haue their bellie for their God, which minde earthly thinges, which bewitch men, that they may not beleeue the trueth. Wherefore, seeing that this madnesse of the Papistes is now manifested to all men, no man can doubt, but that no Christian ought to haue any societie, and fellowshippe with A Christian ought to haue no societie with a Papist. such kinde of persons. And if perhaps any man heretofore hath doubted of it, let him now verely cease to stand in doubt any more, knowing the impietie of their doctrine, by which they labour to ouerthrow quite from the foundation our Christian Common wealth. Fooles they are, and mad men, which (with the Giants) wage warre with God him selfe, and hope to haue The Papistes make warre vp∣on God Prou. 21. 30. good successe in the matter, seeing that it is moste truely spo∣ken of the wise man, There is no counsell, nor wisdome against the Lord. But that I may come now at the length vnto that, for which I haue spoken these thinges, of the follie, and mad∣nesse Our duetie it is thus. of the Papistes: we ought woorthily all of vs to giue as greate thankes to the immortall God, as wee can either con∣ceiue in minde, or vtter in woordes, for the renewing of Ec∣clesiasticall doctrine, and for the disclosing of almost innume∣rable errours, superstitions, and vices, commonly tearmed a∣buses. Now, what kinde of errours, and how great haue beene heretofore in the Church, if any man be ignorant of them, he may with a litle labour coniecture what they are, euen out of the bookes, which the enimies of the Gospell haue written, out of which wee haue brought foorth these few for a shew. They doe not vnderstand at all what faith is, what the Gospell is,

what absolution is: finally, what Christ is. They teach that Certeine errours of the Papistes. men ought onely to beleeue whatsoeuer the chaire of Rome hath deliuered out in tradition, doth deliuer out, and shall deliuer out.
They will haue men to make choyce of meates (contrarie to the doctrine of the Apostle,) yea without the case of offence, 1. Tim. 4. 4. They doe allowe, and wonderfully commend to all men in∣uocation vpon dead Saintes, which thing commeth very neere to idolatrie. They doe approue woorshipping of images, Pilgri∣mages Places of pilgri∣mages to holy places, as to Rome, to Treuirs, to Compostella, and such like. They doe confidently affirme, and hold, that there is a Purgatorie, from whence indulgencies, and pardons may release, & deliuer vs. And who can rehearse the whole rable of those doctrines, which they teach, all which are full fraught both with impietie, and superstition? Who hereafter will not maruell, and wonder at the blindnesse of the Papistes in this so happie an age, in which after most grosse, & mistie darkenesse of errours (wherein we went all astray) there is re∣stored by the great bountifulnesse of God a certeine light vn∣to the world? Indeede all Gods benefites bestowed vpon vs, ought to excite and stirre vs vp to be thank full vnto him: but yet that principall, and singular benefite of God in instauring the doctrine of the Church (than which there could no grea∣ter That singular be∣nefite of God in instauring the doctrine of the Church passeth all other. gifte be giuen to men on earth) I say that onely benefite is it, which of all other wee ought chiefly to maruell at, which we ought moste to celebrate, and for which, before all thin∣ges, wee ought to be thank full. And the greater the blind∣nesse of the enimies of the Gospell is, so much the more verely doe they owe vnto the immortall God, whose eyes of the mind God hath opened in this age, to acknowledge and behold the trueth, and veritie. But in this felicitie, and happinesse of our age, great and incredible is the ingratitude of men to God at The ingratitude of this age to God for their happinesse. this day, which I am constrained to confesse not without great sorrowe, and griefe. Of which argument, and matter I haue within these fewe dayes last past compiled a booke, be∣ing

happely moued, and stirred vp thervnto by the absurditie, and impietie of a certeine writing, which the enimies of the Gospell published abroade in Printe: which booke of mine (most deare friend) I thought good to consecrate, and dedi∣cate vnto you, though it be vnpolished, and written Extem∣pore: and that for these two causes, both for to declare my good will towardes you, and also for your famous godlinesse to∣wardes God, and singular care of Christian religion: which zeale, and feruent affection I doe againe, & againe pray from my hearte vnto God, that he woulde daily more, and more augment, and encrease in you. The sonne of God our Lorde, and Redeemer Iesus Christ, keepe and preserue you with all yours, safe and sounde. Fare ye well. From Misena, vpon S. Martines day. The yeare from the com∣ming of the worde in∣to flesh. 1547.
