



SIR,
MAny of the good and bad affecti∣ons of the minde, are easily dissem∣bled, onely Loue with her Neighbour-Ʋertues, Dutie and Gratitude are no Hypo∣crites. The Ancients faigned the three Graces to be naked, that their beauties or deformi∣ties
 might not deceiue Opini∣on; and painted their Gemini Amores, Children also desti∣tute of apparrell: shewing vs, that true desire is simple, open, and vehement. I speake partly out of speculation, but more by experience. The many fauors by which I stand obliged vnto you, are growne to so great a sum, that I being bankrupt in cōceit, do in the vehemency of my dutious good will, sincerely professe the debt, and wanting other meanes of satisfaction, I tender this poore pittance my acknowledgment. Qui gratè beneficium accipit,Sen. lib. 2. de Ben. pri∣mam esus pensionem soluit, saieth the woorthiest of the Stoikes: Other paiment your generous mind cannot expect, nor my meanesse offer. I should
 entreat pardon, if I seem som∣what ambitious, thus publike∣ly to professe my thankefull Passions; but the generall ap∣probation which attends your merit, in the frequent imploy∣ments of your profession, and iudiciall executions of your place, is known to all: Hence I am confident, that so faire a minde cannot want Candor & Humanity, without which Goodnesse (if it can be with∣out them) is rather awfull thē amiable. I might to confirme my selfe (if I did doubt) tell to my selfe those many your more priuate and domesticall Ʋertues, which attract the loue and affection of your friendes and followers; but of these I will rather meditate, thē discourse, knowing that you
 affect no other Theater for your worth, then your own con∣science. My chiefest intent in publishing these Papers, is the good of others; And it may be, that these imperfect Reso∣lutions and Meditations in the practise whereof my owne soule hath profited, may be a∣uaileable to some. For wee see, that an Empirike hath now & then, that hap in curing a dis∣ease, which a learned Artist wanteth. But howsoeuer my weaknesse may depriue mee of this fruit, yet shall these leaues remaine as a proofe and te∣stimony (which are my se∣cond aymes) of your kindnesse, and my thankefulnesse.

E. Lucan: ad Pisonem.

— Accipe nostri
Certus, & hoc verè complectere pignus amoris,
Quòd si digna tuo minus est haec nomine charta,
At voluisse sat est, animum non verbula jacto.


Ah! take in gree, trusting my kind intent,
This, (ah! smal this) my true loues monument;
And if this worthlesse page be now too base,
That in these blots your name should haue a place.
Yet well to will is all, and that's in me,
In that my vaunts, not in these papers be.


Accept my heart; and here at ydle houres
Read me, as you haue made me, wholy YOVRS.


