



MOST gratious Soue∣riange,
Licke as in the time of sicknes, it is a misery, to be wholly destituit of Phy∣sitians; Also is it in the daye of heavinesse (Zepha. 1.15. of anguist Ier. 30.7. of tribulation 2. Esdr. 16. vers. 66.) of trouble Esay 22. 5. To haue no Comforter Lam. 1.21. No Physition Ier. 8.22. So that there might be sayde, I looked for some to haue pitty on me, but
 there was none. Psal. 69.20. I streched out my hands, and there was none, to com∣fort me. Lam. 1.17. They haue heard, that I morned, but there is none to com∣fort me vers. 21.
Nevertheles the childeren of God sometimes want ont∣warde comfort, yet they ne∣ver wāt the comfort of the Lord there God; For his mercy, comforteth them. Psal. 119.76. In like maner hath the Lord in former ti∣me comforted his People, and he hath redeemed Ie∣rusalem. Esay. 52.9. He is the Lord God, and in that great is his mercy towards
 them that feare him. Psalm. 103.11. For vnto them he spea∣keth, I, even I am he, that comforteth you. Esay 51.12. As one whome his mother comforteth, so will I com∣fort you, and ye shall be cō∣forted. Esay 66.13. There∣fore most Gratious Queene, I am assured that your Maje∣stie in this (the which is the highest and most excelent comfort) can haue no want: for your Majestie keeps the wayes of the Lord, neyther doe you wickedly against your God. All his lawes are before you, and you cast not his commandements from you. Psal. 18.21.22. Ney∣ther
 wants your Mtie for the present Godly comforters, the which saye vnto your Mtie. Be you stronge, feare not. Esay 35.4. The Lord is with you. Iudg. 6.12. Beholde your God cometh, he will saue you. E∣say 35.4. Neverthelesse that Christian feelinge which I haue suffered concerninge the lose of your Mties sonne Fridericus (for it touched my hert) forceth me in this Dialogue te comfort your Mtie 2. Cor. 1.4. The which I haue also done, in six Ora∣tions in Latine, dedicated vnto his most Royall Mtie the Kinge of Bohemia, your Lord. I hope it will please
 your Mtie, accordinge vnto your accostomed goodnes, and gratious favour, to ex∣cept this my on desyred ser∣vice. Which althoug' it may seeme on timely, yet I haue till this present defer∣red the same, accordinge to the rules of the best Physi∣tions, whoe in a vehement flux of Phlegma praescribe not a present remedie, but much rather vse outwarde application, sufficient to di∣gest the Humor: Alsoo must we be silent when the grief is fresh, till the grieued in proces of time be more apt to admit true and touch∣ingh Consolation. There¦fore
 I moste humbly be∣sech your gratious Majestie, to take it soo: Which bein∣ge done, it will bringe gre∣at joye vnto me, and shall alwayes remaine your Mties most affectioned servant, whoe will not cease contin∣ually to pray vnto God, for your Mtie, and yours. Ephes. 1.16. In Haerlem.

