


GReat is the Lord, & great is his po∣wer: his wisdome is infinite, and his greatnes is in∣comprehensible. The Lord delighteth in them, that feare him, & attend vpon his mer∣cie. Hee hath exalted the Horne of his Saintes, and taketh pleasure in them. For his Loue is euerla∣sting, and his mercie endureth for euer. The Lord is gracious and mercifull, he is righteous in all his wayes, and his mercies are ouer all his works. He is rich in grace, and aboundeth in goodnes. Hee spa∣red not his owne and onely Sonne, (euen that Sunne of Righteous∣nes,
 which shineth in vs with the beames of his grace, and doth en∣lightē vs with the light of his Spi∣rit) but gaue him for vs all to death, & hath by him cleansed vs from all vncleannesse, and made vs vnto himselfe a royall & holy Priest-hood, that wee should offer vp vnto him spirituall sacrifices, and shew forth his vertues, who hath called vs out of darknesse into his maruellous light.
O the wonderfull loue of God vnto vs! His mercy is great aboue the heauens. For hee hath troden downe our sins. His louing kinde∣nes is exceeding great towards vs. For he hath made vs his Priests: he hath clothed vs with righteousnes, and hath annoynted vs with the oyle of gladnesse. Hee hath made vs his Kings: hee hath set vs in the Throne of grace: hee hath put a
 Scepter of righteousnesse into our hands, and will one day crowne vs with the Crowne of glory. This ho∣hour is, and shalbe to all his Saints. What shall we now render to him for these his benefits towards vs? I will offer (saith Dauid,) a sacrifice of Psal. 11. 6. 17. Psal. 146. 2. praise vnto thee (for thy fauours) & will call vpon the name of the Lord. I will praise the Lord during my life: as long as I haue any beeing, I will sing vnto my God. This we should all performe, but you rather then ma∣nie others, because the Lord doth drawe you to it with moecords of loue then he doth the most. Some furtherance thervnto you may re∣ceiue by diligent reading and exa∣mining this third part of our Trac∣tate concerning the loue of Christ vnto vs; which I dedicate vnto you, for no sinister or base respect, but to testifie my desire of the con∣stant
 growth of those Christian ver∣tues, which haue begun to shyne and shew themselues in these your younger yeares, that growing in grace, and in the knowledge of Iesus Christ, you may be partaker of his glorie. Thus assuring my selfe of your kinde acceptance of these our labours, I cease to de∣teine you longer, and leaue you to him, that neuer lea∣ueth his, but guardeth them by his grace for euer.

