


COnsydering wtin my self, moste redoubted Prince, ye vnspeakea∣ble & exceding great mercy, of our mooste boūteous heauēly fa¦ther, whych so plēte∣ously hath now at this present, sente a∣mōg vs, ye most pleasaūt, & ioyful light of his holy & sacred woorde, yt sens the byrth & natiuitie of oure Lorde, & saui∣our Iesus Christ, it was neuer in thys illustre & florishing realme, so purely & sincerely preached, as it is now in our tyme, set forth to the great cōfort & cō∣solatiō of our poore wretched cōscien∣ces, which so lōge haue bē detēted & hol¦dē captiues in ye thicke darknes of mēs traditiōs: I haue a good cause to won∣der, & meruail at ye īgratitude, & vnthāk¦fulnesse
 of manye and sundrye folkes, whyche, in thys moste gracyous tyme, that saluatyon is so frely, in the word of God, and holye scryptures, offered euerye where vnto them, yet to theyr vtter vndoynge and destructyon haue rather to stycke to the dregges of men∣nes dreames and deuyllysshe inuen∣cyous of Antichriste, than to embrace the ioyfull tydynges of thee Gospel, where onely they maye fynde reste too theyr poore wearye soules. Chryste the euerlastynge wysedome of the father doeth crye oure there sayinge:Math. xi Come vnto me, all ye that laboure, and are laden, and I wyll ease you. And yet these madde and bewytched persons wyll in noo wyse harken vnto hym, but moste wretchedly labouryng and sweatynge, vnder the intollerable bur¦den, of Antichriste tradycions, do wyt¦tynglye, and of all obstynate purpose and mynde, renne head longe into per∣dytyon, folowynge in it theyr blynde guydes, whyche doo yet at thys pre∣sente, contrarye bothe to gods worde and the kynges moste godlye procedin¦ges, leade them into all kyndes of de∣uelysshe erroure.
One of the princypall causes of the blynde¦nesse yt yet now a day¦es rayg∣neth amō∣ge the peo¦ple,These blynde guydes, I saye, are the, that poysone the symple and yg∣noraunt
 people and are causes of their vtter vndoyng and destruction. Then wyl they not suffre to come into thee ryght way, and to folow the for goin∣ge lyght of the gospell, of oure sauy∣oure Iesus Christe, whose doctryne and worde, they perswade these poore ygnoraunte and blynde folckes to bee playne heresye, and that they, whych now preache, set forthe, and bryng vn∣to theym, the gladde and comfortable newes of saluatyon, are moste perny∣tyous heretykes, whyche goo aboute, to bryng all men, from thee olde and auncyent relygyon, that was sette vp, alowed, and establysshed, by the holye fathers of the prymatiue churche, in to a newe kynde of relygion that they inuented them selfes out of their own braynes, thereby too take awaye and banyshe from amonge men thee true worshyppynge of the lyuing God.The vn∣godly per¦swasyons of the pa∣pistes. Are not (wyll these Antychristes say) thoroughe thys newe learnynge, all lamable ceremonyes, dryuen out of the churches? where bee nowe thee holye Saynctes become, that ye, in al youre afflyctyons, and trouble were wonte too flye vnto. As for thee holye and blessed Sacramente, of thee Aultare they haue moste vngodlye plucked it
 downe. Within a while (syth that they haue also put downe that most holy & sacred Masse) they wyll leaue no God at all vnto vs. Beware, take hede too your selfes, good folkes, herken not vn¦to them. We waraunt you, they shall not continue longe. Wythin there two or thre yeares and lesse, ye shall see all thinges clene altered and chaunged.
Those and many other lyke thinges, doo these rauenynge wolues, and false Prophetes, not only whysper in mens eares, but also most boldely (as though they feare nether God, nor King) blow out abroade, among the louing subiec∣tes of thys Realme. I tell the truth, I lye not (god shall beare me recorde of the same). Not longe a goo, I was in communication wyth one of the chie∣fest ringe leaders of that vnlucky com∣panye (whose name I do here witting¦ly passe ouer) whych is a man of great learnynge, and in the Philosophie and doctrine of Aristoteles, moste conninge and experte. Thys man after that we hadde reasonned a whyle in matters of Relygyon, sodeynlye brake forthe wythe these wordes: No, no, sayde he, (and called me by my name) sette your harte at reste, I doo not doubte, but that wythin these two or thre yeares,
 al these felowes, that now are busyest, and mooste earnest, in settinge forthe of thys heresye (for so dyd he cal the prea¦chinge of the gospell, that is nowe v∣sed amonge vs) shall be gladde to re∣cante euery one of them, as faste, to cal backe theyr erroniouse opinions, and to saye: tongue thou dyddest lye. Now moste myghtye Prince, yf thys man, not wythstandinge the Kynges procea¦dinges, and other godly actes, set forth by the Kinges moste honourable coun∣sayll, to thee vtter subuersyon of false doctryne, vngodly traditions, and Ido¦latrye, and agayne to the mayntenaūce of true relygyon, durste be so bolde too haue soche talcke, and communication wyth me, whom he knewe ryght well, though that I haue but very smal lear¦ninge and knowledge (how beit I do moste hyghely thancke god, that he of hys goodnes dyd vouchesafe, to directe that lyttle yt I haue, to his glory) yet to be most earnest, in ye defence of this true doctrine & religion. What wil both he, and other of ye vngodly fact, do among thē, whō they know to be both vnlear∣ned & weake? Truely they wyl vtterly subuerte thē. They wyl make thē, that whē thei heare of christ, & of his gospel, they shall stoppe theyr eares & crye out
 wyth the vngodlye multytude of thee Iewes, sayinge: Awaye wythe hym, crucyfye hym. Marke ye thys, o ye Christyan Magystrates (whose parte and duetye it is, to beware and take heede, that thee people commytted vn∣to you, doo not fall agayne into darke¦nesse and ygnoraunce).math. xxi Luke. xix marke. xi When oure Sauyoure Iesus chryste, Kynge of all Kynges, and Lorde of all lordes, made hys solempne entrye into Hieru¦salem: howe ioyfully with songes and hymnes was he receaued of thee com∣mune people? Blessed be the kyng (say¦de they) that cometh in the name of the lord: Peace in heuē, & glory in the hig∣hest: But wtin a while after this poore symple and ygnoraunte people, that thus so ioyfullye receaued oure sauy∣oure chryste, beynge moued and per∣swaded by the hyghe pryestes,mat. xvii Luke. xxiii Ioh. xviii marke. xv. scry∣bes, and Pharyses, dyd preferre that thefe and shamefull murtherer Bar∣rabas vnto hym, whome a lyttel why¦le before they called Kynge, desyryng of Pouryous Pylate, wythe a loude voyce that thee sayde rebelle and cru∣ell murtherer Barrabas, shoulde bee lette loose vnto theym, and that Iesus shoulde be delyuered vppe, for too bee crucyfyed. In lyke maner nowe a
 dayes, it doethe happen and chaunce here amonge vs. For when thee Gos∣pel and gladde tydynges of saluaty∣on, are by honeste and godlye menne preached and sette forthe vnto thee good folckes of thee contreye: it is a greate wonder and maruayle too see, howe gredely the moste parte of them do receaue it, noo lesse reioycynge, at those ioyfull newes of heauen, than thee multytude of thee Iewes, dyd at the comynge of theyr Messias. But as soone, as these false prophetes (thee true preachers beynge departed from thence, into soome other place) are come amonge them, and haue shreuen theym a whyle, they are made a thou¦sande tymes worse, than they were a∣fore thee hearynge of thee Gospell. These rauenynge wolues are so ar∣med wyth hypocrysye, with blaundi∣loquence, fayre speakyng and flattery, that it is a thynge impossyble, for the poore symple folkes of thee contreye, whyche are noseled in the olde super∣stition of theyr forefathers, that they shuld at any tyme wythout the specy¦al grace of god, beware and take hede of them: yea manye witted and lear∣ned persons that are not yet stronge, stedfast, fyrme, & sound in the fayth, at
 oftentymes by them ouerthrowen and clene subuerted.
The na∣mes of the hygh lear¦ned Papi∣stes, whose learninge consysteth onli, in phi¦losophye & prophane disciplines ar hurtfullWhat shall we saye? thee names of them are noisome and hurtful. Which thing we do se now a daies to be most true. I know some, which yf they were a lyttel otherwyse handeled, or some what more strayghtly loke vpon, but euē halfe so moch, as they dyd loke vp¦pon vs, when they bare rule and were in high auctoritie, hauing those lawes in their hādes, which (no man, of what degre soeuer he was bearing open hys mouth against thē) they had made thē selues. We shuld se, & that shortlye, al those shyres, that haue not yet receiued the worde, to come merelye, & wythe a lusty corage, and ioyful hart, vnto thee trueth and gospel, which are noe on∣ly letted and stopped, by ye glorious na¦mes and titles, of soch high renowned persōs.Reade my boke that I made a∣gaynst the lybertins & rebelies. Wel, it was not for nought (as I haue often sayd, and now I say it a¦gaine) that those godly kinges, which in times past dyd put down al ydola∣try, & superstitiō, setting vp again, wtal godly studye & dylygēce,iii. Regu. xviii. iiii. Reg. x iiii. Regū. xxiii, the true wor∣shipping of the liuing god, did slaye & kyl vp al Baalles priestes, & false pro∣phetes of groues, & hille altars. Why¦che thing truly they did, because that
 they shoulde not brynge the people a∣gayne into errour. Nor let anye man thynke here, that it was cruelly done, no more, than when a rottē remember is cutte of, from the bodye, leste that it shoulde infecte al the whole. Is it not (I praye you) moch more expedyente, that .viii hundrethe and .L. false pro∣phetes, shoulde bee kylled vppe, by so∣me Helyas, thā that al the whole Is∣raell shoulde perysshe. Iudge ye all, that haue anye wytte in youre heads. Howe be it, it is not my wyll,What mo¦deration must be v∣sed in roo∣ting out of ye papistes that a∣nye man shoulde be murthered or put to death, onelesse it be wt the sworde of the spyrite, & as the lorde speaketh him self by the prophet, saying: I wyl smy¦te the earth wt the rode of my mouth, & wt the breath of my lippes,Esaye. xi wyl I slaye the vngodly, I wold wishe, yt all suche persōs shuld be allured & won, by chari¦table meanes, yt they myght perceiue & se, yt moch more gētylnes is shewed vn¦to thē, then they haue afore times she∣wed vnto vs, & agayn that ye magystra¦tes, doo seeke onelye for theyr amende∣mente, and saluacyon of theyr soules, and not for theyr chestes and coffers. Neuertheles, yf they be obstynate & stubborne, or goo aboute some tumulte and nouatyon of thynges, or elles
 hynder styll the people, & kept thē back frō the truth of the gospel, & frō Christ, the commen sauiour of al mē: let them hardely feele that the Magistrate bea∣reth not in vayne the tēporall sworde. In dede, it is tyme that some of theim be tyed vp shorter, syth that thei be not afrayed,The bolde threatenin∣ges & sha∣meful lyin¦ges of the papistes. to threaten vs, (& that, to thee great abashmēt of the weaker) that fo∣renne Princes, yf we do not shortely re¦cant, & come agayne to the olde fashiō, wyll inuade, & come vpon tis noble & florishing Realme. Yea, say they (whē they be vpon theyr ale benches, and in corners,the cōmu¦nicatiō of Papistes vpon their ale bēches and in cor∣ners, wher they dare vtter oute theyr poy∣son. where they thincke, they may vtter out soche doctryne) the proudeste of them all, meaning the head rulers & magestrates, through whose vigilante care, true religiō hath ben restored, and set vp agayne, be in doubte, what they may do. They trēble & quake for feare, yf they do but heare ones, that noble & most redoubted emprour, named. They do almost crepe into a mouse hole, whē they heare daylye, howe he handeleth theyr brethren in Christe beyonde thee sea. They woold geue (yea marye wold they) thousande thousandes, that thee holy and blessed Masse, had neuer bene put downe by thē. They woulde fayne haue it vp agayne, yf they knew, howe
 they myght do it handsomely, and not to theyr shame and rebuke.
Soche is theyr communication a∣broade, among the symple & ignorant people, and that of late. It is no mer∣uayle then, that the moste parte of thee louinge subiectes of thys Realme, do yet bothe abhorre, and vtterlye refuse the wholsome doctrine of theyr salua∣tion, sythe that so many false Prophe¦tes, are yet suffred, to be among them, and so fewe faythfull Pastours pro∣uyded for, and sent vnto them. For true¦ly, thys is one of the chiefeste causes of the blyndnesse of the people,Another cause of ye blyndnesse of the peo∣pe. and that they are so easely seduced, and brought into erroure, by false Prophetes, that dayelye and hourely come vnto theym in shepes clothynge. They lacke trewe Pastours. They wante faythfull tea∣chers and guydes. Theyr watche men are all blynde, they haue all togeather no vnderstandinge,Esay. lvi. they are all domme dogges, not beynge able to barke, they are slepye, sloggysh, and lye snortyng, they are shamelesse dogges, that be ne∣uer satisfyed. Theyr shepehardes in lyke maner, haue noo vnderstandinge, but euery man turneth hys owne way euery man after hys owne coueteous∣nesse, wyth al hys power. How (I be∣seche
 you) can the people, hauyng such blynde bousardes too theyr guydes & pastoures, get anye vnderstandynge or knowledge? How shall they dyscerne the false prophetes, from the true pa∣stoures and faythfull minysters. They trulye, as yonge innocente babes, wyl embrace poysone, for wholesome mea∣te, and take vppe a scorpyon for all egge. But nowe, whome shall wee blame mooste chyefelye, for thys? Thee Bysshoppes? thee Kynge and hys honourable Counsaile?Marke & waygh the se thinges o ye Prin∣ces of thee world, and hygh prela¦tes of chur¦ches, lette thē not be forgotten. forsothe, yf there were anye suspycyon, that anye forenne prynce or nacyon, wolde invade thys Realme: by and by shul¦de in all thee haste, and wythe all dy∣lygence, watche meane bee sette oute, in all thee portes and vttermooste pla¦ces of thee countreye, too espye out the commynge of thee enemyes, and to geue warnynge thereof. And why so, A praye you? because that the louyng Subiectes of thys Realme, shuld by theyr sodayne comyng & arryuing, ta¦ke no maner of harme in theyr goodes & bodies, How moch more then. syth yt so many cruell and myghty enemyes, do alwayes wythout ceassing, and in∣termission, be set vs rounde about, en∣deuourīg thē self, both night & day, wt
 all their myghte and power, to spoyle vs, of that moste precyous Iewell, that christe hym self the onely begotten sō∣ne of the father,We ar al∣wayes in peryl & ieo¦pardye to be spoyled by our gho¦steli enemy¦es, of that precious iewel that christ hath purchased vnto vs. hath wyth the shedyn¦ge of hys dere bloude, purchased vnto vs, and so to murther most myserablye both our bodyes and soules, hauynge besides that theyr espyes, euery whe∣re here amonge vs, so masked and dis∣guysed in shepes clothynge and skyn∣nes, that they can scarsely be knowen, from oure frendes and wel wyllers: oughte true and faythful watche men to be sent out into al corners? to bee a∣poynted and set in al places? O prepo∣sterous, peruerse, and ouerthwarte iud¦gement. In thynges that are transito¦ry, and fade away lyke the grasse, yt is to say, in thynges yt belong to our cor∣ruptyble bodyes, and thee preseruaty∣on, or sauegarde of the same, wee are most diligēt & careful, but in thynges that belonge vnto thee soules, whyche are immortall, and neuer dye, but af∣ter thee deathe of thee bodyes, bee alwayes, eyther in excedynge greate ioye, or elles in paynes and tormen∣tes vnspeakeable, yea, the bodyes at ye daye of iudgemente, being vnyted and ioyned agayne vnto theyr soules,
 shall be partakers of eyther of theym: it is impossible to tell, howe carelesse & negligente we are. Whych thinge, be∣sydes all other argumentes, maye bee proued by thys. In all thee townes of warre, of thys Realme, stronge gar∣risons, (as it is moste conueniente and mete) are sette, noble and valiant Cap∣taynes, and faythfull, or trustye watch men are appoynted, nothinge is lefte vncared for, that maye be for the saue∣garde of those fortes and townes: But nowe home many paryshe churches in England,Churches are ye wat¦chinge or espyinge towres of the kingdō of Christe. whych Churches, by ryghte maye be called, the watchinge or espy∣inge towres of the euerlastinge Kyng∣dom, of oure heauenly Kyng and saui∣our Iesus Christ, are prouided of true and faythfull watche men? Not scarce¦ly one amonge .xl. hathe a true pastoure or minister,The cuse why parys¦she Chur∣ches are not prouy∣ded of true and fayth∣ful ministers. and why? Thys is one of the causes why. Lordes and gentilmē, haue all most all the lyuinges of Chur¦ches in theyr handes. And as longe as they maye gette syr Iohn lacke latyn, to serue theyr cure vnder them, for a lyt¦tle or nothinge, that is to saye: for .vi. or viii.li. a yeare, where as they theyr selfe, receaue and take yearely vpon it, some lx some .C.li. some more, some lesse, it wyll neuer be, that they shal set
 godlye learned men in them. O mercy∣ful god, what meane the heade rulers, and gouernoures of thys worlde (here I do vnderstand Kinges, Emperours, hyghe Prelates and Bysshoppes) whome the scryptures and woorde of god do call, pastoures and shepeherdes of thee people? What aunswere shall they make vnto hym, that is thee pa∣stoure of all, when he shall requyre oute of theyr handes, thee bloude of hys dere boughte shepe, that dyd pe∣rysshe, and daylye doo perysshe, tho∣roughe theyr neglygence and fawlte. My mynde abhorrethe too remember, howe horryble and greuous punys∣shementes are prepared for theym. God, of hys mercyfull bountuousnesse graunte, that oure noble and souerai∣gne Lorde thee kynge, and all hys ho∣nourable counsayle, for thee dyschar∣ge of theyr conscyences, maye shorte∣lye see an order in it, that all thee pa∣rysshes thoroughe oute all Englande and other of thee kynges dominyons, maye bee prouyded of true pastoures and mynysters.
In the meane season, that thys shal bee a doynge, too fence and arme thee louynge subiectes of thys Realme a∣gainst those rauenynge wolues yt come
 to them in shepes skinnes, I haue here, accordyng to the lytle, that I can doo, translated out of latyn into Englysh, a boke, whyche maye ryght wel be cal¦led: Thee ymage of bothe pastoures, sette forthe by that most famous cler∣ke Huldryche zwinglius Bysshop of Tigure, and called by hym Pastoure. It is a verye profytable and necessa∣rye booke, and moste worthye, not one∣lye to bee translated into all tongues, but also to bee hadde and reade in all thee Churches of Christendome.The dyui∣sion of the whole worcke For there fyrste and formoste the con∣gregacyon shall see, thee true and faythfull pastoure, mooste lyuelye de∣pycted,What is contayned in the first parte. and sette oute in hys owne coloures, whyche are taken oute none other where, than oute of thee chestes and coffers of thee holye and sacred scryptures. Whereby, anye man shall learne, howe farre from all voluptyes and pleasures of thee flesshe, thys of∣fyce and vocatyon is. For who so e∣uer taketh thys mynysterye and func∣tyon in hande, muste continually with out ceassing & intermissiō, warre, stry∣ue, and fyght, agaynst all fleshe, and al the power and strength of it, agaynste his owne patentes, kynsefolkes, bre∣thren, and systers, yea against his own
 selfe, and al the concupyscences, and lu¦stes of hys owne flesshe, agaynste all pompe and pryde of thys worlde, and all the myghtye Prynces of it: Fynal¦lye, what soeuer, is in anye maner of thynge, repugnaunte vnto god, he shal professe and declare hym selfe, an o∣pen enemye agaynste it. Thee con∣syderatyon of whyche thynges,Yf a man doth admy¦nister suffi¦ciently the office of a Pastour, it is the ve¦ry worcke of god and not of mā. doeth playnelye teache vs, that too admini∣ster thys greate and peryllous offyce, worthelye and suffycyentelye, is thee verye worcke of God, and not of man∣nes strengthe. To doo it, I saye, tru∣lye and syncerely, it commethe not of manne, but onelye of God, whych ge¦uethe vs strengthe, too beare so heauy a burden. In thee seconde parte,What is contayned in the secō¦de parte. the rauenynge wolues, whyche beynge clothed in shepes skynnes, doo coun∣terfeyte thee true shepeheardes, are descrybed and sette forthe to thee eyen of thee congregatyon, and in a ma∣ner, shewed wythe thee fynger. For, there anye manne shall see, theyr wyde gapynge mouthes, theyr shar∣pe teethe (wherewythe they alwayes threaten slaughter and murther) and woluysshe pawes (for thee shepes skynnes, wherewythe they haue dys∣guysed theym selues can not hyde all
 thynges) to appeare out. To be short, all the congregatyons and churches, that are not yet prouyded of true my∣nysters, shall by thys lyttel boke (yf it be trulye perused and reade) learne, in the meane season, too dyscerne and knowe thee true and faythfull pastou¦res, from thee deuelysshe rauenynge wolues, be they neuer soo masked and dysguysed. Whych truely, wyl be noo smalle helpe vnto theym afterwardes (when true pastoures, shall thoroughe thee fatherlye care of oure souereyn lorde the kynge, and hys honourable counsayle, bee sente vnto theym (too come vnto the true relygyon, and god∣lynesse.A prayer vnto God for to sen∣de true & faythfull Pastours. O mercyfull pryeste, and chye¦fe Bysshoppe Iesus Chiyste, vouche∣safe (wee beseche thee) of thy bountu∣ous mercyfulnesse, to sende oute, true and faythefull labourers, into thy ho∣lye harueste, for too breake and dystry∣bute thee breade of thy holye worde, vnto theym, that hunger for it. Vou∣chesafe also, o mooste true and fayth∣full shepehearde, to strengthen, wythe thy holy spyrite, all preachers and tea¦chers, yt thou haste sente, and dayly do sende, to fede thy dere boughte flocke, too thee intente that they maye bolde¦lye and earnestlye sette theyr soules
 in the defence of thy holye worde, and for their shepe, agaynst all the threate∣nynges, and false enterpryses, of thee rauenynge wolues and false prophe∣tes that goo aboute too seduce and bryng vs oute of the ryght waye, for theyr belyes sake, throughe theyr false doctryne. And that they maye so teache and declace vnto vs, thy holye lawe, and Gospell, that we beyng tau¦ghte and edyfyed, maye daylye more and more magnyfye thy godlye ho∣noure.
Now I haue shortly declared and shewed, the chyefe and pryncypal cau¦ses of thee blyndnesse, that yet at thys presente, raignethe amonge thee sym∣ple and ygnoraunte people, and what moued me too translate thys golden booke, and mooste excellente worcke. Whyche trulye, yf that godlye Nehe∣mias, thee reparatour of Hierusalem were amonge vs, I woulde haue dedi¦cated vnto hym, and too none other. Sythe then that youre grace hathe bene a verye Nehemias vnto vs (for, thoroughe youre vigilaunte care, the true Hierusalem, whiche is the Chur∣che that was all couered wythe thee rubbisshe of Antichristes tradityons, is now at this presente, newe builded
 vp agayne) I coulde do no lesse, but to dedicate it vnto your grace. And thou∣ghe it is not so eloquentely and fynely translated, as manye, yt were natural∣ly borne and brought vp in thys coun¦treye, myghte haue done it: Yet not wythestandynge, haue I a good hope, that youre grace (suche is your Pryn¦cely gentylnesse) wyll take it in good worthe, not so muche consyderyng the thinge it selfe, as the beneuolent hart, that it comethe from. The Lorde kno∣wethe howe greate a loue and affccty¦on, not onelye I, but generallye all true Christyans, doo beare vnto you, and that, for the excedynge great zea∣le that youre grace, hathe had alwayes to true relygyon and godlinesse. This loue and affectyon, was ryght wel de¦clared and manyfested, by thee teares and daylye prayers of thee faythfull, when that euerlyuyng and almyghty God (who alwayes chastyseth theim, whome he louethe) dyd suffre youre grace to be tryed, wythe thee fyre of trouble and afflyctyon. As then, all thee whole congregation of thee faythfull dyd withe mournynge tea∣res, make earneste intercessyon and prayer vnto almyghtye God, for your graces delyueraunce: so nowe I doo
 mooste humblye beseche hym, that is the auctoure of all good thynges, that he vouchesafe of hys goodnesse and mercye, so wythe hys holye spyryte too rule, guygde, and gouerne you, in all youre wayghtye affayres, withe that most gracyous Ladye, your true louing spouse and wyfe, that what soeuer youre grace shall thinke or do, may be to the glory of god, to the cōmune weale of this Real∣me, & saluacion of youre soule.

