



MADAM,
England your natiue soil, once so much celebrated throughout all Christendom for an Istand of Saints and Angels, is novv censured, euen by its ovvn Parliament, as a Nursery of Atheism and Heresy, and therfore that great Represen∣tatiue of the Nation is no less so∣licitous
for a cure, than sensible of a disease so dangerous and destructi∣ue not only to the soul, but to the bo∣dy politik of the Commonvvealth. And yet either our misfortune or their mistake hath renderd all reme∣dies hitherto ineffectual. This Trea∣tise, MADAM, composed by Mr. Thomas Barton (vvhose Vvit must be admired so long as there vvill be any in the vvorld) vvas found vvith his Geometry in Hol∣land (vvhere he had designed to print both) and bestovvd upon me by one that understood not the En∣glish language, nor the ualue of his Present. In my iudgment 'tis one of the best Antidotes against the spiri∣tual plagues vvervvith England is infected. I publish it under your Ladps patronage (and beg pardon for
doing so vvithout your Knovv∣ledge) because you are not only a perfect Pattern of that ancient Faith and Virtue vvhich it asserts, but a particular Instance, and a conuincing Proof, that Heresy and Atheism haue not so vvholly chan∣ged the nature of old England, but that euen novv it produceth Angels.
I Knovv, MADAM, these Tru∣ths vvill offend your modesty and Humility, your greatest care being to conceal your natural and super∣natural Gifts, and to eclipse to the eyes of men your spiritual exercises and deuotion, feigning to be as vvell pleased vvith the vvorld, as the vvorld is vvith you. But that vvhich hath exalted you aboue the vvorld, and (I hope) vvrit your na∣me
in the book of life, is your extra∣ordinary Charity. You are not in the list of those vvho hope to be saued by charitable indiscretions; No, MADAM, Prudence directs your almes as vvell as your other actiōs: Humor hath no share in your di∣stributions, Vanity no influence upon your liberality; partiality no suffrage in the choice of the poor you relieue. You stretch your piety to the support of merit (vvheresoeuer it is) iniured by Fortune; and to the de∣fence of Virtue oppressed by perse∣cution. And though you do it vvith so great caution as to disguise su∣pernatural Charity vvith that no∣ble ayr of generosity, so natural and peculiar to your self; yet your deuo∣ut design is discouered, and your re∣vvard before God, as vvell as the
relieued persons obligation to you, infinitly multiplied. Pardon me, MADAM, if I trespass upon your Reseruedness, and choose rather to incurr your Ladps displeasure, than concurr to preiudice Mankind, by depriuing it of so great an encou∣ragement to Virtue as the Knovv∣ledge of your perfections. I speak, MADAM, of those hidden in your soul, not of those vvhich shine outvvardly, and can not be con∣cealed, as your matchless beauty, and charming graces. These, MA∣DAM, are but fading and falla∣cious Ornaments that set out Mor∣tality in a deluding dress, vvith gay and liuely colours, vvhich a litle tyme vvill deface; the sad fate of the greatest beautyes, as vvell as of the fairest flovvers.

I need not inculcat this Truth to your Ladp. tis so deeply printed in your soul, that others are odious to you, if they but touch upon any of those rare qualities vvhervvith Nature (by straining its povver to the utmost) hath made you a Mi∣racle of itself, and plac't you in the vvorld as a Model, not to be imi∣tated, (much less paralelled) but to be admired, euen by those most emulous and enuious of your ovvn sex vvhich fancy themselues ought to be adored by ours. But that vvhich most surpriseth the vvorld is, that so enuied a Miracle of Na∣ture as your Ladp. could neuer yet be censured or obserued of hauing any Kind of inclination to be admired or applauded. This is a Miracle of Gods grace, and an effect of that
natural modesty and eminent ho∣nor vvherby you alvvayes haue preserued your unspotted reputa∣tion in the tvvo most dangerous Courts of Christendom; to both vvhich you are in this particular the best example, as in all other things the greatest Ornament. This auersion to your ovvn prai∣ses is the only reason vvhy I da∣re not mention the great Antiqui∣ty and high Alliance of your il∣lustrious Family, the most pro∣per and usual Ingredient in all Dedicatories. I should uentu∣re though to say somthing of your acute VVit, profound iudgment, agreable humor, gracefull utteran∣ce, becomming behauior, and dis∣creet conduct, but that these are abuious and obserued by all the
VVorld, and particularly by the greatest Court and best Iudge ther∣of; vvhich giues your Ladp this Character, That you are an exact English Beauty, naturaly adorned vvith all the graces of France, and an abridgment of the purest per∣fections of both Nations. But be∣cause euen this authentik and un∣deniable Testimony is not grate∣full to your Ladp. and that it is impossible to speak any truth of you vvithout commending and offending you, I am forc't to cut off a long Panegyrik of your de∣serued praises, and conclude vvith this one (vvhich I hope vvill not be offensiue) that you are the only person vvho thinks you are unvvorthy of that litle I haue sayd heer, or that can
command me to say no more but that I am vvith all reality and respect,
MADAM, 
