



MY LORD,
THAT I presume to lay these following Papers at Your Lordship's Feet, is out of the high Veneration I have to Your Lordship's Great Conduct and Good∣ness (in which Your Diocess have been so long happy) and out of that deep sense of Duty, which will always make me en∣tirely
 submit to Your Censure and Correction, whatever Mea∣sures I shall take for the Good of that Church, to whose Ser∣vice You are pleas'd to design me.
And how can it be, but that upon this occasion I should propose and endeavour something more than ordinary for the Good of the Place I am going to? For tho' indeed the Glory of God, and the eternal Happiness of the Souls of Men are Considerations sufficient at any time to animate Christians to such Attempts, as shall conduce thereunto; yet when Provi∣dence places such Governours at the Helm in Church and State, as being of a Publick Spirit, do themselves most vigo∣rously pursue such Blessed Ends; and being easie of Access, do with the utmost Candor and Condescention (of which truly Noble Excellencies, Your Lordship is an extraordinary Ex∣ample) give ear to the Overtures of Inferiour Persons, upon the same Designs; it seems as if God did then intend to be propitious to the Undertaking.
Now, my Lord, the whole Aim of what follows is to make a provision for the implanting such Measures and Degrees of Christian Knowledge, as it is requisite every one who professes Christianity, should be acquainted withal, and that the Minds of Men may happily be deliver'd from that Ignorance wherein lies the strength of Satan's Kingdom.
Knowledge is the fairest Ornament of the Soul of Man, and whosoever is endowed therewith, let it be of what kind so∣ever, fails not of Respect amongst all sorts of Persons; but
 especially Knowledge is then valuable, when it is in things of the greatest Moment and Consequence. And that the Know∣ledge which I have endeavour'd in these following Papers to provide for, is such, is too evident to need Proof or Illustra∣tion. For why? It is a Knowledge that is conversant about the greatest Objects, viz. God and our Selves; and that about the grandest and most concerning Truths relating to those Objects. It is a Knowledge to which the most considerable of other Sciences are some way or other Appendent and Sub∣servient: But above all, it is the only Knowledge which can Conduct us safe through the Mazes and Labyrinths of this World, to our Rest and Happiness in the other.
Nor will the Advantages to Mankind of such a Design as this be less conspicuouus, if we look upon the contrary Evil from which it tends to deliver the Minds of Men, viz. Igno∣rance of Divine things. For why? The Power of the Prince of this World, is by no other Character so muoh known, as by the Title of the Kingdom of Darkness. And what Sins and Miseries are there, which this Ignorance and Darkness is not the fruitful Parent of? It were enough to set Ignorance out as the most dreadful Evil, to say that it is the cause of all those Slavish, Barbarous, and Savage Superstitions that are in the World.
But alas, it is not of one single Sin, or sort of Misery that Ignorance in Christianity is productive; but it is the na∣tural Parent of all those fearful Crimes, and outragious Wick∣ednesses that are committed upon the Face of the Earth, and
 when it once prevails over a whole People, it is so fruitful in Misery also, that the State of such Men becomes a per∣fect Emblem of Hell, as will easily occur to the Observation of any that are at all acquainted with the state of the World, so as to be able to compare one People with another, with respect to their Knowledge of God and Religion.
For Instance, let but any one compare the People of this Nation, amongst whom (praised be the infinite Goodness of Heaven for so invaluable a Blessing) the Light of the Go∣spel shines with a Meridian Brightness; if we do but compare these with the Naked Indians, the African Cannibals, or rather with the Georgians, a Degenerate Race of Christians in Asia,Sir John Chardin's Travels. amongst whom the No∣tions of God and Religion are in a manner quite extinct; and amongst our selves there are some tolerable degrees of Humanity, Honesty, and Goodness; whereas the others are so much worse for Bloodshed, Lust, Cruelty, Revenge, and whatever Brutish and Savage Man∣ners, than Wolves, Bears, and Tygers; inasmuch as being Rational Creatures, they have greater Cunning and Capa∣city of doing Mischief one to another, than those Bruits have.
And indeed in any part of the World we shall find that proportionably to the Increase or Decrease of Christian Know∣ledge, do Vice or Vertue make their Advances respectively; so that as on the one side innumerable are the Miseries and horrid are the Sins, the Barbarities, Cruelties, Perjuries,
 Murthers, Adulteries, and whatever other Violations of the Laws of God, Nature, and Nations, that proceed from the bitter Fountain of Ignorance of the true Nature of God and Religion: So unspeakable on the other side would be the Be∣nefits consisting in Justice, Mercy, and Peace; in Piety to God, and well order'd Affections as to our selves, were but the World throughly enlightened with the Knowledge of God, and the true Nature of pure and undefiled Religion.
And now if we consider these things, how strange is it there should be those amongst us, who, as much as they owe their Security and Happiness at home, to the Influence that Religion has upon our Publick Laws and Private Actions; yet are perfect Enemies to the propagation thereof abroad. But yet it is not to be wonder'd, that some should hate the Light, it is because their Deeds are Evil. I shall say no more to 'em, but that the Day will come, when they will find their Omissions in promoting, or rather their Obstructions to the Progress of Christianity, the most terrible part of all their Accounts.
But God be prais'd, as Lukewarm in Religion as this worst of Ages is, I must not forbear to acknowledge it to the Honour of some, that they have already shew'd themselves to be of a contrary Spirit by their Liberal Benefactions to our present Design, by whose means we have been able to lay a good Foundation to our Parochial Libra∣ries, and to send some over already into MARY∣LAND.

And as our Success is in a great measure owing to the Liberality and Countenance given to the Design, by several Great Men of Your Lordship's Order; and by Your self in particular; so that God may long preserve amongst the rest, so great a Patron of Learning and Religion, so firm a Pillar of our Church, and so great an Orna∣ment to Your Sacred Order, shall be the Hearty and Devout Prayers of,
My Lord,

