



MADAM,
I Beseech your Honour to believe me telling you, that I have been these thirteen years (ever since I had the happiness to know your Ladiship) watching an opportunity, as to let your Ladiship know the sense I have of the obligations you have been pleased to lay upon me; so to let the world know the honour I have for your Ladiship, growing up from my first observations of you, which was in your Ladiships near approaches to, and in your state of Wi∣dowhood. I then observed, Madam, that your Ladi∣ship (like the child of so Honourable and pious Parents) had very early entertained just, noble, and most ho∣nourable thoughts of the living God, which had produ∣ced in you as early a choice of him as your God, and of his ways, as your ways, with a zeal beyond the propor∣tion which could be expected from your years. Having therefore perfected the following Discourses, I congra∣tulated my self, when I had thought of your Ladiship as a fit person to entitle to them, and the rather, because your Ladiship (having not yet seen many years) shall I hope have many days to observe the motions of Di∣vine Providence, both as to Polities and Persons; and from thence both to conclude, how true those few Ob∣servations are which I have made, and to give some more eminent Divine, many a subject more of this na∣ture from your own observation. Madam! in the few years you have yet lived, you have seen as many, and as quick, and inexpected rotations of Providence; as
the like number of years have at any time as yet pro∣duced, or are like to produce; and yet the wheel seems to run nimbly, and a further multitude of years may add to your Ladiships wisdom in this thing. I crave leave most humbly to recommend to your Honour, as the observation of Issues, so the confirmation of Di∣vine Promises, and Threatnings in the fulfilling of them. I doubt not but your Ladiship will every day see, that it is that God who cannot lye, who hath commanded his Ministers at all times to say unto the righteous, it shall be well with them, for they shall eat of the fruit of their doings; and to say, Wo unto the wicked it shall be ill with them, for the reward of their hands shall be given them. If Madam! the actual Providence of God at any time seemeth to look another way, it is but keeping your patient foot a while at the Promise, and Providence (like the Bee) will come home to the word of Promise or Threatning, bringing along with it a body laden with honey, to reward the godly and righteous man, and a sting to smite and pierce those through who have wrought wickedness, and provoked a jealous God. Our blessed Lord (Madam) tells us, Joh. 17.3. That it is life eternal for men to know God, and Jesus Christ whom he hath sent. The promise or predication in the proposition of that Text, makes it evident that by the knowledg of the Father, and Jesus Christ, is meant more than the bare comprehension of the nature and things of God in our understanding (as indeed knowledg and most other terms of sense do ordinarily signifie in Scripture, the Greek complying with its elder sister the Hebrew, which hath a great penury of words) so that to know God and Christ in the true sense of that text, is not only in our understandings to comprehend what may be, and is necessary to be known of God; but to
adore, love, fear him, believe in him, to chuse him for our God. In short it comprehends all those acts of our minds which are either just consequents, or may rationally be inferred as duties from a just understan∣ding and due comprehension of him; but in regard according to the workings of our reasonable natures those acts will not, indeed cannot be exerted, without a praevious apprehension of him proportionable to what he indeed is, and so as to make him an adequate object for our affections, a just comprehension of God in our understandings is necessary, in order to those o∣ther acts of internal homage, wherein the Creature standeth indebted to his great Creator. So that Solo∣mon, Prov. 19.2. did but conclude rationally, That the soul should be without knowledg is not good. And the great Apostle of the Gentiles askt but a reasonable question, Rom. 10. How shall they believe on him of whom they have not heard?
All Knowledg comes into the Soul either by the Ex∣terior senses, or by reasoning and discourse; or thirdly by Divine impression and revelation. The two former are the more ordinary; the latter, a rarer and more ex∣traordinary means of knowledg, in these latter days, since God hath spoken to us by his Son.
I speak of Knowledg strictly taken for the compre∣hension of things in our understanding, for if we take it in the large sense even now mentioned, neither sense, nor reason, is a sufficient mean to it.
By sense we can directly comprehend nothing of God, for who hath seen him at any time? he is an Incorpo∣real, immaterial substance, and cometh not under the cognisance of any sense, nor indeed can we so know any spiritual being; but in regard the effects both of him who is the Father of Spirits, and of spiritual beings
that are creatures are sensible. Our Senses afford us oft∣times an auxiliary help, from which our reason draw∣eth just conclusions concerning God, from Principles which it at first it establisheth by the help of sense. For example, That the World is, and Man is, are matters of sense. Now Reason concludes, Nothing (unless a first being) can be the cause of its own existence. Hence it gathers there must be a God, a first being, and a first cause. Again, when Sense hath shewed us Man a reason∣able creature, Reason works and tells us, He that made this noble Creature must needs be more noble, more rea∣sonable, more excellent.
What we know then of God must needs be from Reason or Revelation. Reason brings us in knowledg, by raising Conclusions from Principles. These Principles are of two sorts, Philosophical, or Scriptural. I call those Philosophical Principles, which reason as it now resideth in us justifieth, and which without the help of the Word of God are allowed by all; or the most of men, especially if cultivated by any ingenuous education, be∣ing either common natural principles, or such as are established by studies upon deliberate thoughts, with the help of sense, and improvement of discourse and ratiocination. Thus Reason will tell us that there is a God, but one God; That he must be the first being, the first cause, more excellent in the perfections of his be∣ing than any creature; and an hundred things of a like evidence. Or else it concludeth from revealed Princi∣ples, (having first a sufficient evidence, That the holy Scriptures are the word of God, who cannot speak falsly.) These Principles now are such propositions as without the surer word of Prophesie we could never have had any just evidence of: Such now are the Doctrines of the Trinity, The Incarnation of Christ, The Personal union
of the Divine and Humane Nature in him; and many others.
In the discovery and justification of such Conclusi∣ons as Reason gathereth from the first sort of Principles, lyeth the work of a Philosopher as a Philosopher. In the discovery and proof of such Propositions as are partly evidenced from Reason, but more fully from Scripture, lies the work of a Christian Philosopher.
In the discovery, proving and applying of such Pro∣positions as have their Evidence partly from Reason, and more fully from holy Writ, or as cannot be at all concluded, unless building upon Scriptural foundations, but are founded in Scripture, and may be illustrated im∣perfectly from reason, and shewed not to be improba∣ble nor unreasonable, lyes the work of the Minister of the Gospel, who is to convey the knowledg of God to his people. And the true reason why some even of these silver Trumpets (which belong to the Sanctuary) give an incertain sound, is because neither the Princi∣ples of natural Reason, nor Revelation, appear to all men in the same light. We say, The best Philosopher is not as yet born. Our age tells us how generally Princi∣ples of Philosophy are exploded (and it may be some of them justly too) which we when we were boys thought to lye very near Demonstration; and doubt∣less in the next age something now admitted, will be judged as faulty. It hath pleased God to subject our understandings to this vanity. Now we having no way (unless God would from Heaven speak to us) to know any proposition of Truth, but from the exercise of our Reason concluding, either from Principles purely na∣tural, or from Propositions of Revelation in Scripture, every one naturally judging himself obliged to believe, according to the evidence he hath from his understan∣ding,
there must and will be different apprehensions until (which will never be) men have all either the same degrees of Natural Reason, or Scriptural know∣ledg; which will be advantaged if there be any who think that all Propositions are to be weighed by the bal∣lance of Natural Reason, and that the holy Scripture as to the sense of it must come into that scale, and make but in-weight giving only an auxiliary help to the Evi∣dence of the most sublime Propositions of truth. Nor is there any help for this. The Church of Rome (which your Ladiship knows pretends to wondrous Miracles) hath indeed devised a palliating cure for this, setting up an Infallible cheat to judg of all Controversies, and by fire and faggots, and all barbarous cruelties, and inhu∣manities forcing men to acquiesce in the Decisions of that ridiculous Judg. But in the mean time mens Con∣sciences apprehend themselves before one who is no Judg in the ease, and the sore festreth and rotteth to the bone; for the Pope can make none to alter his mind. And a little reason might tell the Quacks of that Colledg, that if it be not in the power of a man to believe what he hath a mind to believe, it is much less in the power of a foreign power to compell him to it.
The Protestant cure is certainly more humane and reasonable, yea and more Apostolical too. They set forth sums of sound Doctrine, to which they only annex that of the Apostle, Phil. 3.15. Let us therefore (as many as be perfect) be thus minded, and if any in any thing be otherwise minded God shall reveal even this un∣to you. Only Protestants require (as the same Apostle directs) Rom. 14. That if any hath a particular faith, (different from that of the Church wherein he liveth) he should have it to himself before God. Thus the Know∣ledg of God is acquired from his word, reading it, be∣ing
Catechised out of it, hearing it opened, and prea∣ched, by the comparing of spiritual things with spiritu∣al; by the use of reason and discourse in the Velitation of Questions arising from the seeming contradictions in Holy Writ, &c.
But there is also another mean of Divine Knowledg, that is by his exterior works, by which much of the Knowledg of God is gained, improved, and encreased. These works are either of Creation, or of Providence. Creation was the work of the first six days, from which God hath ceased long since, but the things created re∣main, and much of the Knowledg of God is to be gain∣ed from thence, by the help of sense, which sheweth us the things, and reason which helpeth us to conclude, that there being so many noble effects, there must be a first and more noble cause; there being so many ex∣cellent Beings, there must be a first and most perfect and excellent Being. Nothing created could give an Existence to it self: Hence the Apostle telleth us, That the invisible things of God from the creation of the world, are clearly seen from the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead, Rom. 1.20. So that they are without excuse, because that when they knew God they glorified him not as God.
For the Book of Scriptures we (blessed be God!) have it in our Vernacular Tongue, we have means to teach us to read, we have Catechisms, and Confessions of Faith, containing the Epitome and substance of them, we have the various labours of holy and learned men, to make us to understand them; scarce any thing seem∣eth to be wanting to this age for the gaining of this excellent knowledg by this mean but persons giving themselves up to Reading, Hearing, Meditation, Christian Conferences, and Prayer.

For the Book of Creation methinks it is like a great Bible in some Religious Gentlemans Hall, that lyes al∣ways open; we cannot move a step in the world, nor lift up an eye to Heaven, but our eye is upon one page, or another of it. If men will not read the Wisdom of God, in the sagacity and wisdom of some Creatures, nor the power and greatness of God in the greatness and power of others, and so for other perfections; it is not because they want means, but because they want an heart to seek after God: as to this there is no want of any thing, but a wise contemplation of them, and a rational concluding from the perfections of the effects to the greater excellency and perfection of the first cause and being. The Book of Creation will learn us much of the nature and admirable perfections of the Divine Being. The Book of Scripture will learn us more of it, and instruct us in sublimer Mysteries than Reason could discover: The Doctrine of the Trinity; the two Natures united in the Person of the Mediator. They will tell us of Gods Covenants, of Christs per∣formances of the Covenant of Redemption, of the Will of God to be done by us, and the Will of God to be done unto, and upon us, in his Promises and threatnings. The Apostle sums up all, when he tells us they are able to make the man of God wise to salvation, throughly fur∣nished to every good work.
But there is yet another Book which is less obvious to the eye of sense, than the Book of Creation is, and to the eye of Reason too, and upon which fewer Com∣mentaries have been wrote, than upon the Books of holy Scripture, that is the Book of Actual Providence. A Book in which much of God is written, and from which much of God may be learned; but it is common∣ly taken for the Vision of a book that is sealed, which is
given to one who is learned, with a command to read it, but he saith, I cannot, for it is sealed. Some (more bru∣tish than the Heathens) deny any such Book, dreaming of the old Pagan Fate, or blind Fortune.
Others will allow it in part, but will have much of it spurious, dreaming that the World is like a Clock, which once set in order and wound up, goes alone without further use of the Workmans hand. Others will allow Divine Providence a more universal influ∣ence, but yet love not to hear of any Specialties of it. Some again highly conceited of their own reason, will subject the Providence of God to their rational Con∣clusions. Few or none make any observations upon the motions of Divine Providence; though certainly no∣thing more conduceth to true Spiritual wisdom. Others stumbling at some difficulties relating to the motions of Providence, either wholly deny it, or form to them∣selves strange Ideas of God, which no way agree to his most holy and perfect essence.
This Madam! hath encouraged me to attempt some∣thing both to recover the Actual Providence of God, from the Atheism of this age, and the groundless pre∣judices which vain men have taken up against it; and by it to recover for God, that just Fear, Faith, Love, Patience, and other homage, which both the excellen∣cy of his being, and of his holy working calleth for. And certainly, Madam, if learned men have thought it worth their while (as some have done) to give the World a rational account of Divine Offices, of the Modes and circumstances of Ecclestastical constitutions in Rites and Garments, Liturgies and Ceremonies, &c. It must needs be a noble work, to undertake to give the world a Rational of Divine Operations. Such espe∣cially which seem to be the hardest Chapters in the
book of Providence, and least easie to be understood; and indeed this was my original design. But while my thoughts were exercised in this, my work grew upon my hand, considering especially the Atheism of the age in which we live, together with the circumstances of the Church and people of God in most European parts of the world, and the particular temptations I have obser∣ved attending many, and those very excellent persons. I was further drawn on by the pleasantness and useful∣ness of the subject in all, but especially in evil times, and the apparent tendency of it to make men fear, and love, hope and trust in, and with patience to wait upon God. These things, Madam, made me resolve to open the Doctrine of Providence more fully, though not in its full compass, and latitude (resolving always to carry along with me the capacity of those to whom I spake or wrote.) I was, Madam, the more encouraged in this from my observation, that amongst the many excellent Books with which this age doth abound, there are fewer of this Argument than any other. Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick (a great Divine) treats in two or three Sermons about the Specialties of Providence, and the late eminent Bi∣shop Wilkins hath in a short Tract learnedly and piously discoursed the symmetry and beauty of it. Another in a larger Discourse called an Introduction into the Doctrine of Providence, hath made and a little enlarged upon several Observations upon the motions of it. I project∣ed and have at last finished a fuller Discourse than any of these (though possibly much more imperfect so far as they did discourse this excellent argument) and resolved to divide my discourse into three parts, which accor∣dingly I have done.
In the first Part, Madam, after two Preliminary Dis∣courses; the first concerning Gods Predeterminations,
(where I had no mind to meddle with any present Con∣troversies, that was not a popular work,) the second concerning Creation; Your Ldiship will find me plain∣ly discoursing of the Nature of Providence, in the noti∣on in which alone I intended to speak to it. There I have from Scripture and Reason proved, That there is a con∣stant care of God extended to the whole Creation: That the Creature stands not in its own strength, nor moveth meerly from a principle within it self; nor is governed meerly by its fellow-creatures in a superior order, much less acteth casually, or under the necessity of any fate; but is under the daily inspection, government, care and in∣fluence of the first cause, its great Creator, who both preserveth and governeth it. There I have shortly shewed the particular acts by which God preserveth and go∣verneth created Beings in their several capacities: A point, Madam, of inexpressible use, to possess us of a true notion of God, of our daily dependencies upon him, and (consequently) our duty toward him. David saith he was fearfully and wonderfully made; we are fearfully and wonderfully preserved.
In the second Part I have discoursed 1. Of the Spe∣cialties of Providence, more especially to the Church, and to every individual soul that loves and fears him, shortly opening wherein they lye, and shewing the rea∣sonableness of it. 2. Then I more shortly discourse the unsearchable things of it; for Madam, who dare pre∣tend more than to shew a part of his ways? Who can by searching find out God? Who can find out the Almighty to Perfection? This I have done to check curiosity, and keep off good people from vain guesses and Prophetical conclusions without bottom. 3. From that the dis∣course will lead your Ladiship to consider the duty of a good Christian, in the observation of the motions of
Providence, and the advantage from it resulting to an observing soul. To help my Reader in this I have made several observations upon the motions of Providence. Some of which lie plain enough to every eye, all I think are justified enough from Scriptural and other instances, only perhaps the reasonableness and justice, and wisdom of God in them, is not or hath not been so obvious. Others (possibly) have not been so remarked, and are little more than recommended as probationers for a good mans observation.
There is, Madam, a great variety in the methods of an infinitely wise God by which he ordereth the Uni∣verse, and particularly that people in the world which he hath set apart for himself, In the same work Gods Providence moveth not at all times in the same method, or by the same means, yet in many things the motions of Providence have much uniformity if we wistly ob∣serve them.
And as from the reading, and observation of the Syntax and construction used by Authors in several lan∣guages, Grammarians have made their observations, from whence they have formed Rules, few of which are yet without their exceptions: so from the observation of the motions of Divine Providence in the world; the reading of the Sacred History, and considering what the great God hath been doing, and is doing in the world; considerate Christians may gain a great know∣ledg of God in his ways, and give a very probable con∣jecture, if not form a certain judgment, both what God is about to do, and what Israel ought to do. For (saith the Wiseman, Eccles. 1.9, 10.) the thing which hath been it is that which shall be done, and there is no new thing under the Sun. Is there any thing of which it may be said, see this is new? it hath been already of old time which was
before us. The Sinners of the world are but acting over those lusts of hatred to God, malice, revenge, cruelty, luxury, which their forefathers perished in acting many years ago. And the Saints in the world are but making the same defence, fighting the same good fight, finish∣ing the same course which Abel began in the Old Testa∣ment, and was carried on by Elijah, Zachariah, and all the Prophets, by John Baptist, and the Captain of our Salvation; and Gods motions of Providence will appear much the same: as to circumstances of time and place, &c. they may alter, but substantially they must be so, because of the certainty of the word both of promise, and threatning. The study of Actual Providence (for which the Historical part of the Scripture which we count most useless, is of great use) is a noble study, and the observation of the daily motions of it, is highly conducive to make us spiritually wise, and to help us to understand the loving-kindness of the Lord, both towards his Church, and individual souls which love and fear him. I have, Madam, been something large in these observations, but yet how little a portion of Gods ways have I here displayed? I shall yet think I have done a great work, if I have but set an example to some other Divines of greater parts, knowledg, judg∣ment and observation, to carry it on, for doubtless, many more observations might be made, which would both much increase our knowledg, and direct our practice.
In the third and last part of my Discourses, Madam, I have endeavoured to expound some difficult Chapters in the book of Providence, and to deliver the name of that glorious God, whom we serve, from those prejudi∣ces, which nothing but the lusts of men have raised in the world against him, and his righteous ways. To re∣concile
the ways of Divine Providence both to those Propositions of truth, which lye plain in the word, and to those Promises and Threatnings which are the Indi∣cations of his will in that word, both with reference to Saints and Sinners.
I think, Madam, I discern two great Errors in the world: 1. The Judgment of Truth. 2. Of the love and hatred of God from motions and issues of Provi∣dence. Hence because God in his Providence hath or∣dered the Production of Men and Women, giving them life and being, and his Gospel to be preached in their hearing; so as they are externally called to repent and to believe, men conclude, There is no election of persons, That Christ hath died for all and every man; That every man hath a power to repent, believe, love God, hate sin, &c. And I wish a modest denial of Divine Truths were the worst: but we are fallen into a rude and ill manner∣ed age, when every puny hath boldness enough to say, If this be so, then God is an impostor, and mocks and deludes, he is unjust, cruel. I tremble to recite it; when-as the truth is, it is neither so nor so. Let what will be con∣cluded concerning these Propositions, no such thing will follow. I have, Madam, endeavoured to reconcile these Providences of God to the truth of these Proposi∣tions, which some invidiously charge with such conse∣quences, and to let these bold men understand that God is equal, his ways equal, and admirably corre∣sponding with those notions of truth so much distast them; only they are ignorant, and do not rightly judg concerning a righteous God.
The second Error is more common: The judging of the love and hatred of God from his Providential dispen∣sations to us. Hence are our temptations to call the
proud happy, to bless them whom the Lord hath cursed, and because they are rich and prosper; and as to our selves, to charge God foolishly, as if either he did not deal justly or kindly with us, because we are tempted or afflicted more than others, or because we are devour∣ed by wicked men.
I have, Madam, attempted to remove these stum∣bling blocks out of the ways of Gods people, and to reconcile both these motions of Providence, and all its motions in the dispensations both of first and fur∣ther grace, to his Wisdom, Goodness, and Holiness, and to our reason; as also to reconcile Gods Providen∣tial permissions of sin, and sinners, his punishment of one sin with another, to the purity and holiness of God; and to deliver Gods Providential dispensations of this nature from the usual and ignorant imputation, that this is to make God the author of sin; what I have done of this nature, I leave to your Ladiship, and every sober Reader to judg. The whole, Madam, was composed for popular discourses. Those that dwell in Kings houses may be allowed perhaps to cloth their Discourses in the soft raiment of fine and delicate words. It was not so fit for me who was to speak of great things to a plain people, and whose design was that of S. Paul, not to have the faith of those to whom I spake, stand tottering upon the wisdom of men (which varieth much in individuals) but in the power of God. I am far from thinking these Discourses perfect in any part of them. I have laid the foundation, God raise up wise and master-builders to superstruct. If I mistake not, the foundation I have laid, is not upon the sand, and uncertain bottom of humane reason, but upon the Apostles and Prophets, Christ himself being the chief corner stone.
Madam, I most humbly beg pardon of your Ladiship and
noble Husband, for no further taking notice of him in this Epistle. I had not, when I wrote it, knowledg enough of him to entitle me to such a presumption; I now so far know him, as to let me know he will not be disgusted at what is offered to your Ladiship; and to assure me, he is one who owneth and adoreth Divine Providence; and if he had no other motives, I pretty well am assured also that its dispensation towards him∣self in disposing such a Lady to his bosom, and making him such a Father in our Israel, by your Ladiship, as he is, and I trust shall further be, would be sufficient. I most humbly beg, Madam, all the Blessings of Heaven and Earth upon him, and upon your Ladiship, and all those whom God hath given you, and crave the ho∣nour to subscribe my self,
May 1. 1678.

