


Noblest Lady,
IF it were nothing but the daily En∣gagement I stand in to that root of which you are a branch, and to your selfe as a Member of
 this Family, It were enough I trust, to claime a pardon for this Dedication, and I might rather seeme to deserve a check for my so long negli∣gence, than my present pre∣sumption: But the sutable∣nesse of the subject in these sheets, is such, that I dare be confident, you will be plea∣sed not only to patronize but also practise it, in what you see it yet leading you further to perfection. It holds out un∣to you a precious Example of one that began so soone to live to God, that she is alrea∣dy living with him. (Lady) It is a record of the life and
 death of one (not unknown in her latter dayes unto you) one far below you in re∣spect of birth, and greatnesse, while she was here, but in∣finitely more above you now: And of one, who (I dare say) thirsted not so much afrer your greatnesse then, as you doe after her grace and glory now. What vanities are the excelling things of this life? They have a scantnesse in their fulnesse, a glut in their enjoyment, and a short time to live. The greatest riches is in the truest poverty, and to be nothing is to be most. I am confident (Noblest La∣dy)
 that you have in some measure learned, not to call the Proud, Blessed; nor think that true happinesse consists in worldly greatnesse. It were sweet if we could learne to eye the creatures as God eyes them, and judge them grea∣test that are most gracious. How the world valued this deceased Saint, I know not: Sure I am it was done unto her, as God useth to do to them whom he delighteth to honour. Why should not we look as God looketh? and not judge the Peacocke better meat than the Partridge because he hath gayer feathers. Read here
 (Noble Lady,) the love Christ beares to his Lambs, and learne from hence, what it is to seeke the Lord early. How many of Gods precious ones, attaine not so much peace in threescore, as she had in thirty yeares? We use to say, more worke is done in two houres in the morning, than in the rest of the day; She set out early to seek him, and she quickly found him whom her soule loved. She quickly redeemed her lost time, because she had not lost much. A young Saint, and an old Devill, is Satans slander of the way of the Lord, which
 (the Wise man saith) is strength to the upright. Learne hence also (Noblest Lady) the benefit which you will in time reap from your be∣gun practice of seeking the Lord in secret. How often did this removed Saint meet with God, when she was alone in the Mount? God speaks his mind more freely to us, and so we may also do to him, when he and we are alone. Let those whose God is their pleasure, or bel∣ly, spend the time in paint∣ing and dressing, which you are better spending in seek∣ing the face of him who will
 be found of them that seek him. You will find your face will shine more than theirs; and what but this hath made it already to doe it? I cannot but thankfully admire the goodnesse of God, which hath already so taken off your Infant-yeares from the Vanities of youth, and I trust fully perswaded you of the truth of that which the world cals Heresie, That those are most excellent, who are most holy. The follies of dres∣ses and paints, and dances, are so far under Religion, that they are below a spirit that is but truly Noble: And I (re∣joyce
 to say it) below yours. (Lady) we are not sent hither to eat and drinke, and rise up to play; we needed not a rationall soule for such sensuall emploiments. You will (yea I dare say you have) found more sweetnesse in an houre spent with God, than in ma∣ny spent in such company as doe no good, and such dis∣courses as administer no grace to the hearers. Pursue Inte∣rests and designes, as Noble as your spirit is: remember al∣wayes that it is a designe too base for a divine soule to pur∣sue Creature-Contentments. Why should we court the
 world that is made for our servant? and wait upon a va∣nity, that will Weary us to serve it, but never satisfie the expectation of them that pur∣sue it? Goe on (Rarest Jewell) to make Religion your busi∣nesse, and above all, be much in seeking God: You have the key of Heaven if you have but the gift and grace of pray∣ing. Let it be your designe now as much to excell the Saints as it hath been hither∣to to excell the companions of your age; pursue it as your worke to get as much love from Christ, as you have ho∣nour from the witnesses of
 your accomplishments. Let not your ambition rest in indea∣ring your selfe to creatures; but as you are already the crowne of your noble Pa∣rents, and the honour of those that labour for your soule: so still goe on, and rest not till you be a jewell set in Christs diademe. As you have been a Noble Example to this Family, in teaching them, it is no dishonour to learne the Principles of Reli∣gion, (by which as I dare say your humilitie hath excelled the most of your Equals (if not in age yet in greatnesse) who too usually can be con∣tent
 to be ignorant so no body knowes it) So you have also discovered more perfection of Knowledge at thirteen, than the most can boast of at threescore. So now haste on to perfection, and labour to excell as gloriously in a strict walking with God. Remem∣ber (Noblest Lady) those that walke nearest the Sun have most light and heate: Perfect the joy of your Noble sur∣viving Parent. And to this end, Let me humbly crave that you would continue to make the word a light unto your feet, and a lanthorne to your paths. Let your eyes be
 often upon it, and let it be Sit tibi vel oratio assi∣dua, vel le∣ctio, nunc cum deo lo∣quere nunc deus tecum, ille te prae∣ceptis suis instruat, ille disponat, quem ille divitem fe∣cerit, nemo pauperem faciet. Cypr. in Ep. 1. ad Donatum. p. 9. your Eye. Saint Hierome prai∣seth Marcella (a godly wo∣man of his age) that he could never come to her, but she was asking him somewhat about the Scripture, and had so high an opinion of her, that he sayes if himselfe had any doubt, he would aske her judgement. O let not much reading there be a wearinesse to your flesh! They are Gods Counsels, and may well be our Counsellors. Walke with God in their light, write your lines by that rule. Read often, and with judgement, alwayes carrying your heart
 with your eye: You will find a glory, a majesty, a mystery, a depth in those lines, which you will never be weary of fadoming, though you shall never be able to find the bot∣tome. I here presume to offer to your hands an Example, which I am sure your good∣nesse cannot despise for the meannesse of it; She is now more Noble than you, and in this happier, that she hath al∣readie been in Heaven a yeare before you. (Noblest Lady,) your opportunities are more; your talents of Time, and Parts, are greater. Outstrip all Examples, and goe on to be
 as unparallel'd a president of holinesse to others, as you are of other Excellencies. Now the God of Grace fill you with his fulnesse, and be unto you both in life and death advantage, and preserve you, the crowne of your surviving Noble Parent, the Glory of your Sex, the Comfort of your Noble friends, the conti∣nuer of the Religious name of your Family, and the joy of his Saints: Which is and shall be the continued prayer of him, who is ambitious to be accounted,
Noblest Lady,

