


My Lord,
'TIs not of to day, that those, who leave the party of Error, to embrace Truth, find them∣selves exposed to the Persecu∣tion of the World; And it is not of to day neither, that they have need of dowerful Protectors, to defend them against Injustice.

 Your Lordship knows, that St. Paul had no sooner the title and the quality of a Man newly Converted,Act. 9. but presently he saw himself Forsaken and Persecuted of all the Earth. He doth but lose his la∣bour, in alledging to the Jews the Motives of his Conversion, in Disputing against them, in Confounding them;  the Jews are not yet for all that, less mad, or less furious against him. These wicked men do still imagine, that the Motives, which have obliged Paul to leave the Religion of his Fathers, for to embrace the Purity of the Gospel, are no others but the Inconstancy of his mind, or the desire of Novelty: And in that perswasion, they look upon him as a Runaway, and an Apostata; they lay wait for him;Ver. 23, 24. they frame Plots and Conspiracies to kill him; and think that they cannot render to God Almighty a ser∣vice more Religious, than to bind them∣selves with a solemn Vow, saying;Act. 23. v. 12.14. That they would neither eat nor drink till they had killed Paul.
St. Paul is obliged to run away;Act. 9. v. 25. he must go out of Damascus over the Walls, to avoid the fury of his Enemies; he must retire to Jerusalem, that he might be more safe; and there St. Paul, though a
Chosen Vessel, has the trouble to see, that the very Disciples shun his society, that they are all affraid of him,  and that they will not trust him, because that they are suspitious, least his Conversion should be counterfeited, imperfect, and dissimu∣lated. And for that reason, he must have recourse unto one of the Apostles, to be his Protector, to present him to the Disci∣ples, and declare unto them after how mar∣vellous a manner,  God had been pleased to accomplish his Conversion.
This was the condition wherein St. Paul was reduced, after his Conversion; and it is also, my Lord, the very same condition, in which a man newly Converted, is reduced now in our Age.
On the one side, those whose party he doth forsake, become his most bitter and most irre∣concilable enemies, they threaten him with nothing less than his entire destruction and ruin; and were not their vows and pernicious designs restrained by the severity of Laws, we should see presently the Tra∣gical consequences of their indiscreet and Passionate Zeal.
On the other side, a great number of those, who do profess the Purity of the Gospel, do not trust him, they avoid him,
they are affraid of him, for the same rea∣sons for which the Disciples were affraid of Paul; they are affraid, least he should not be truly and throughly Converted; they are affraid, least his Conversion should be interressed and imperfect, or at least they are affraid that it should not be everlasting, and least after having stayed some while amongst them, he should return to his Errors, and become once more the Persecutor of the Gospel and of the Truth.
In this condition, what will become a man newly Converted? For those, whose Errors he has forsaken, and who do per∣secute him without Mercy or Charity, he doth direct his Prayers to the Ever∣lasting God, for their Conversion, in the very time when he is the most unmercifully persecuted by them; he lifts up his hands to Heaven continually, to acknowledge, that the sins, which he has committed, are the only causes, which draw upon his head all these Persecutions. But for those, with whom he doth profess the same Faith, he has need, as well as St. Paul, of a powerful Protector, to be his advo∣cate, to speak in his favour, and make known to all the People, that his Conver∣sion
is not an effect of Interest, of Incon∣stancy, or of Necessity; but that it is the Work of God, and an Effect of his Mer∣cies.
Though, by the Grace of God, it is almost three years, since I professed the Purity of the Gospel, yet I may for se∣veral reasons be accounted in the number of those who are newly Converted; and in that condition, I find my self reduced to the same fortune, to fall into the hatred and detestation of those, whose Errors I have forsaken, and to find in a great many Protestants coldness and repug∣nancy, when they shall know that I have formerly professed Error, and Per∣secuted those, who embraced the Purity of the Gospel.
I am not so ignorant, how far the Zeal and the Passion of Men reach in matters of Religion, as not to excuse my Enemies; I forgive them with all my heart, and I pray God, that he will be pleased to enlighten them, and give them the knowledge of his Truth.
I am not so unjust neither, as to con∣demn the Prudence of the Protestants: I acknowledge that they have reason to mistrust me, since that others have
deceived them; and, as I have not the vanity to think my self more perfect than St. Paul, so do not I think them more guilty than all the Disciples, and all the Saints, who dwelt at Jerusalem, who mistrusted this Apostle, and were af∣fraid least his Conversion should not be sincere.
It is in this condition, that I acknow∣ledge that I have need of a powerful Protection, and it is to crave yours, my Lord, that I come with this humble Dedication.
The Disciples were satisfied, when one of the Apostles presented them Paul, and told them the Wonders which Grace did work in his Conversion: have not I all the reasons in the World to think that all those who do profess the Purity of the Gospel, will be satisfied also, and that they will consider me as a true son of the Church, as soon as they will hear that the motives of my Conversion appear in publick under your Lordships Protection?
He who presented St. Paul to the Faithful, was an Apostle, who pecu∣liarly rejoyced in the Increasing of the Kingdom of Christ; he wasActs 11.23. filled with Heavenly satisfaction, when he saw the
effects of the Grace of Christ, in the hearts of the People, who were Converted to the Gospel:Vers. 24. He was a good man, and full of the Holy Ghost and of Faith. It is in abridgement, the Pane∣gyrick, which the Holy Ghost made of all his Virtues. It is that which caused the Apostles to be satisfied with St. Paul, and to consider him, as a man tru∣ly Converted; since that he was pre∣sented to them by an Apostle, whose Faith, Zeal, and Virtue, were so perfectly known to them.
And have not I reason to hope, that the true Protestants will consider me as a man truly Converted, when they shall see, that it is you, My Lord, who re∣ceive me into the Church; You, to whom God Almighty has granted a peculiar Gift of Discerning of Spirits. You, who have no greater joy in the World, than to see the Divine Operations of Grace, in the hearts of those, who lived for∣merly in Errors. You, who take so much care of those, that are newly Converted; who maintain so openly their interests, who take your delight in bringing them up, in keeping them, as young Plants where∣with God is pleased to adorn his Church,
notwithstanding all the enemies of the Propagation of the Gospel. You, whose In∣tegrity stops the mouths even of all those, who (being the Enemies of the Church of Christ) are become your Enemies. You, in fine, My Lord, whose Zeal and Faith appear every day so generously, When there is something that concerns the Interests of God, the Glory of Christ, and the Purity of his Holy Word. Have not I reason, said I, to think that all the Faithful will not doubt of the sincerity of my conduct, as soon as they shall know, that it is You, My Lord, who receive me into the Church, and that you have been pleased to receive me likewise into your Protection.

