



Madam!
IT is no mean priviledge to be born of godly Parents, and such who are stedfast in the faith; for although Grace be no more (ex traduce) by tra∣duction from our Ancestors then our souls, but both immediately from God, yet (besides the benefit of their prayers) their Godly examples, and their Religious care in the education of their children, have (by Gods bles∣sing) a wonderful influence in moul∣ding their hearts towards Godliness. The fairest Gem in Solomons Crown
was the special care which his Parents had to teach him to know God and his Law. It was Timothies great ad∣vantage that his Mother and Grand∣mother were so famous for Religion. In this great Priviledge few persons of your rank are greater sharers then your self; Sir Fran∣cis Knollys Knight of the Garter, Treasu∣rer of the hous∣hold and Councel∣lor to Q. Eliz. Your Grandfather, an Exile (with his Family) for Religion in those bloody days of Queen Mary, and an eminent Instrument in that happy Reformation in the time of Queen Elizabeth, whose name is yet eminent in Forain parts, and no less precious at home for his many good services done to the Church of God. Sir Fran∣cis Knol∣lys. After him your late dear Fa∣ther, of whom I may say as the Epistol. lib. 2. Learned Zanchy saith of William Lantgrave of Hessen, that he was (Optimi parentis, Optimus filius) the most Religious Son of a most Re∣ligious Father, who was the greatest Countenancer of Religion, and che∣risher of Religious men in those parts
all his time; whose pains and purse were never spared sor their encou∣ragement and defence, even in the worst of times, as is yet very well re∣membred with thankful hearts by ma∣ny who bless his memory. The pious labors of divers eminent Ministers of Christ, Dr. Twist Dr Tho. Taylor. whom he cherished under his wing, give the world a taste how much it owes to his memory. How great his care was to instruct his children in the Faith, may be seen by their car∣riage in the Church of God, when they were grown up to riper years. Witness him who whilest he lived, Sir Fran∣cis Knol∣lys your brother. was [deliciae humani generis] for his candor, sweetness, courtesie and love to goodness, the delight and love of all that had the happiness to know him. I heartily desire that there may be the like Religious care taken for the education of that In∣fant upon whom that Estate is descen∣ded, that he may tread in the steps of his worthy Ancestors, and inherit
their vertues as well as their possessi∣ons! Your Ladiship might be my next great instance, who have so well im∣proved those Principles of Religion instill'd in your education, that your Piety, Charity, and Religious Govern∣ment of your Family (I may call it in the Apostles Language, The Church in your house) may be a pattern to Poste∣rity, which will not readily be taken out. I must not take in all that might be spoken, but consider what your La∣diship will be willing to hear: Who in this, as in your whole course, have proposed your Saviour for your exam∣ple, who when he had done any great work commanded them not to publish it. It is much more delightful to your Ladiship to do good, then to hear of it when you have done it. What the benefits and advantages of instruct∣ing Families are, I have endeavored to manifest in this following Exhortati∣on, and being importuned to communi∣cate it to mine own charge, I have taken
the humble confidence to put it under your Ladiships name; for which at∣tempt I the rather hope to gain your pardon, because all that is said here, is but a transcript of your own practice in your Family. You will finde it plain, (so are the people for whom it is mainly intended) but I hope honest, and sutable to the minde of God. So God may have glory, his people commit∣ted to my trust advantage, and this small testimony of my thankfulness for the many real expressions of your fa∣vors may finde acceptance at your hands, he hath his ends, who is
Madam,

From my study in Tredington this 7 of De∣cember 1658.
