



BEloved, What is here presented to Publick view is yours: for looking to the poor-Penman, as Relating to you: to the external moving Cause, as arising firstly & freely from you, to the End & use as centering in you, to the reason of the Publishing therof, as resting with you, and the care & costs, as to that end expended by you: It must not otherwise be determined but YOƲRS. Which being so, you have saved me the labour, of prefacing on behalfe, either of this so necessary & fruitfull an exercise of Catechising, or of this present draught: or of pub∣lishing it. The present encumbrances of our new-be∣gining you know to have declined me till of late, from the former, and mine own inabilities much more from the latter, as being rather desirous to have made use of some others labours that way, or at least-wise to have acted mine own feeble apprehensions in a more private manner amongst our selves. But God hath moved your minds, first to see, and seeing to cause, as it must be as it is. I shall add only a word or two touching use; 1. The Scripture quotations in the margent, are so severed by those distinct marks as it is not hard to discern to which answer they per∣tayn 2. They are orderly set down (for the ge∣nerall) as they relate to the several sentences or parts
 in the answers. 3. Where more then one, are mentioned to the same purpose, it is not without spe∣cial cause, and may serve for help of memory, when we may have occasion to branch out such a subject, into its particulars. 4. profitably you may re∣duce Promises to their proper heads in the Lords Prayer, and Dutyes or faylings to their proper places in the Decalogue. As for the annexing of these with the Doctrine of the Sacraments, by way of Ap∣pendix, It is because the same will more suit with such capacities as are allready entered, then such as are but in their enterance. I say no more but this, If now you & yours, (as is hoped) shall gain any Spiritual fruit by these poor weak Travells of mine, I have my desire: and no small encouragement, in the midst of many wilderness-discouragements. To His Blessing therefore I commit both you & yours, who is the God of all Blessing: and Rest

Chelmesford this 25 of 1. mo: 1657.
