



IF ever any times, these now require, that as the A∣postle willeth us, We earnest∣lie contend for that Fayth, which was once delivered to the saynts;Jude 3. considering both the subtiltie
 and sedulitie of the Enemies of the Trueth, whose subtiltie & working in a Mysterie, as it should make al men the more warie; so their sedulitie in se∣duction (lyke that of the Pha∣risees of old) should make all the LORDS Servants on the Watchtowre more watchfull and diligent. That while as the envyous man is so bussie to sowe Tares in their Ma∣sters Field, and draw men frō the Trueth, they be not found slack and sleeping in sowing good seed, and keeping men with the Trueth.
This the Glorie of GOD requireth at our hands, wher∣of we should be zealous, This the command of CHRIST enjoyneth, whose Sheepe we we ought to feede and guard
 them from disguysed Wolves who come to devoure the Flocke, This the danger of our Church in these sad times craveth and calleth for. With this also doth our calling and consciēce burdē us, if ever we looke for the approbation of good & faithful servants. And to do this, the pittie that we ought to haue on many poore soules, should stimulat us, who like these who followed Ab∣solon in the simplicitie of their heartes, are slielie seduced, craftilie captivated, & cruel∣lie soule-murdered, by these devouring Wolves, in sheepes cloathing; of whom the A∣postle fore-warned Act. 20.29. Who with the Pharisees of old, pretend Moses Chayre, and the infallibilitie of their
 Church, being in the meane while, not Apostolick, but Apostatick, not Pastors, but Impostors, not Leaders, but Misleaders, not Priests of Be∣thell, but of Babell, and lyke that Beast in the Revelation, tho horned like the LANB, yet speaking like the Dragon. And as it was said to Peter by the High-Priests Mayde, Their speech bewrayeth them, that tho they pretend to be for Christ, yet they serve Antichrist.
Of such, for GODS people to be aware, it is not only our part to fore-warne,act 20.29 as Paull did the elders of Ephesus, or to stand armed our selves, with the builders of the Walles of Jerusalem, but also for con∣vincing of errour, & defence of the Trueth, to arme & fur∣nish
 others out of the Lords Armorie of holy Scripture, whereby they may be both guarded from errour, & their feet guyded in the pathes of Trueth.
For which end these paines that I haue taken, Right Ho∣nourable, I haue Dedicate to your Honours: whom in like loue of the Trueth and incou∣ragement both of Gods Ser∣vants, and others that are Re∣ligious in the bounds where yee liue, as yee are exemplar, So I beseech God you may continue to be Patrons and Paterns of pietie, Which doubtlesse shall tend in end to the procuring in Mercie of Gods blessing both on you & yours heere, and to your Eter∣nall happienesse heere-after;
 Which shall bee the heari wish of

