




Honoured, and Beloved:
ALthough the separations, rents, and divisions, together with the Distem∣pers and Distractions lately made by our Brother Lamb, and some few others, from, and in, the Church, were of a very sad and dangerous import, threat∣ning not to leave one Stone of Gods Building upon another, which should not be thrown down; yet, God, (whose onely prerogative it is, to bring Light out of Darkness, and Good out of Evill) hath graciously produced a very comfortable, or∣derly, and regular settlement out of that Chaos and confusion, in so much, that as the false Do∣ctrines concerning the necessity of Circumcision unto Justification (as some now speak little less of Baptism, and that according to their way and man∣ner) introduced by false Apostles amongst the






Churches, in the first plantation of the Gospel, did occasion severall Epistles to be written by the Apo∣stle Paul, and others, for the vindication and clea∣ring up of the truth, as it is in Iesus, not only in that particular, but also in many other Truths of rich and high concernment, and a firm establishment of the Churches in the Doctrine of Faith, towards God, and love amongst the Brethren: Even so these late and unhappy differences (through Gods bles∣sings and goodness) have had the like success a∣mongst you, setting both Pastor and people upon a diligent and studious inquiery into, and discovery of the Truth, and establishing them therein. So that out of this Eater hath come Meat, the weak are made strong, and the strong stronger; they that seemed to stagger, do now stand, and the feet of them that stood are now established, none being in such danger (as formerly) to be turned out of the way: but those things which formerly hindred be∣ing removed out of the way, Faith and love, Piety and charity, will (as they do) go on and prosper, yea run and be glorified in the midst of you; you did lament and mourn, but your sorrow is turned into joy. God hath taken away your Sackcloath and Ashes, and girded you with joy and gladness: The foundations of your building did seem to be removed out of their places, and the pillars thereof did tremble; but the Highest himself hath establi∣shed you, and will guide your feet in the way of truth and peace. And as for our brethren, have they stumbled (indeed at ceremonies, as the Iews did) that they should fall? God forbid. But if through their fall establishment be unto you, shal not their restoration belife from the dead? And let every one
of us that stand, take heed least we fall. If we pon∣der the pathes, of our feet, our wayes will be established:
Prov. 4.26. Though I am not able to add unto your spirituall stature, or increase in knowledge in the business in controversie, who are so richly instructed here∣in, and that very lately by our honoured and be∣loved Pastor, and others; yet if I do but put you in minde of the things which you know, after mine own wonted Dialect and plain manner, (be∣ing moved hereunto by some of your selves) I doubt not its Christian acceptance with you; and who knowes whether God may not make five loaves and two fishes, (I mean a little of mean fare) to be as a feast of fat things unto you. My hearts desire and prayer unto God for you all is, that henceforth none of you may stumble and fall,
Isa. 8.15. 2 Coll: 8. 2 Tim. 3.6, 2 Pet. 2.3. 2 Cor: 11.20: and be broken, and snared and taken; that no man may spoyl you (as sheep-stealers, snatching you away from the fold or flock of Christ) nor take you prisoners, nor make merchandize of you, nor bring you into bondage, but that you may florish in the Courts of the house of our God, running without weariness, and walking on with∣out fainting; that it might be with you yet after many, and many years to come, as it was with Moses in his old age, whose sight did not was dim, neither was his natural strength abated; that as you have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so ye might walk in him, rooted and built up in him, and e∣stablished in the faith, as you have been taught; that your hearts may be comforted by daily re∣freshings from the presence of the Lord, beeing knit together, yea rooted and grounded in love, increasing still with the increasings of God, and
thriving in all riches of spirituall understanding, to the perception and acknowledgment of the mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ, that every one of you may be made up of God amongst his jewels, and be found on the right hand of Jesus Christ among his sheep at that great day, and may live and reign with him for e∣ver, and ever. Amen. So prayeth,

Septemb. 24. 1655.
