



MADAM,
'TIS truly observed, That Worldly Greatness without Virtue and Good∣ness is nothing else but the vigour of Vice, having both mind and means to be uncontrollably vicious: But Nobi∣lity joyned with Virtue renders the person truly Honorable; the true stamp of Nobility and Honour being upon the minds of men, who are not so much to be valued by the grandeur of their outward Estates or Titles, as by their in∣ward Goodness.
Virtue and seriousness in Religion is com∣mendable in all persons and at all times, but

more especially in persons of Your rank and qua∣lity at this time and in this Nation, wherein alas, Atheism, Scepticism, Drollery, and all manner of Prophaneness aboundeth amongst those that would be thought to excel all others in Wit, and Courage, and Gallantry, and who should give a far better Example to their Inferiors.
This Atheism and Irreligion which now aboundeth hath been partly occasioned by the uncharitable unchristian heats and animosities of men of contrary Opinions and Sentiments in matters of Religion; together with those great Scandals (which we can never sufficiently la∣ment) that have been given by some Professors of the Gospel in these Nations: Hence men of proud spirits and corrupt principles have taken occasion to doubt and question all kind of Religion, and to look on it only as a Political device and invention, which doth no further oblige than the Humane Laws of several Countries do au∣thorize it. But though these common Scandals have been the occasion, yet the true ground at the bottom of such mens prejudice and sce∣pticism is the strictness and purity of the Chri∣stian Religion, (which of all Religions is the most holy and spiritual) and which they find lays too great a restraint upon their exorbitant Lusts and carnal Passions.
To be good in bad times, to be virtuous and

pious in an Age wherein Vice and Wickedness is so generally countenanced and practised; This, Madam, adds a great lustre to your Goodness and Virtue; And indeed your greatest Interest and Happiness (which I doubt not but you are sensible of) consists in being truly serious and religious; this is the whole Duty of Man, to fear God and keep His Commandments: Ec∣cles. 12.13. The serious practice of Religion is that which every considerate person after all his other disquisitions will find to be his chief Interest, and that which doth deserve his ut∣most care and diligence: This is the whole of Man, or as the Septuagint reads it, this is all; this indeed should be the great Design of Man, as being most profitable and advantageous to him.
Go on, Madam, in the strength of the grace of God, and add Virtue to Virtue, that your last days and last works may be your best days and best works; and that you may practically confute the Atheists of our times, who walk and talk, and live and die as if there were no God in the World, no certainty, no seriousness in Religion: These persons are under a Judi∣cial Blindness, desperately rebelling not only against the Light of Gospel-revelation, but against that Light of Reason which is in them: God has given them Reason and Understanding,

Eyes that they might see, Hearts that they might understand; but they wilfully shut their Eyes against that Light of Reason, and so by the just Judgment of God it is taken from them, and they given up to blindness of mind and hardness of heart, and to the greatest Spiri∣tual Plagues and Judgments.
'Tis to be admired, seeing there are such convincing Reasons and Demonstrations, even from the Light of Nature against Atheism and Infidelity, that there should be any such Crea∣tures upon the face of the Earth as these A∣theists and Scepticks; when certainly there are none such in Hell, for the Devils them∣selves believe and tremble, so that in this re∣spect they are worse than the Devils; And though they pretend to be the Wits of the Times, yet for my part I am of opinion with the Noble Mirandula, That there is no Atheist in the World that is in his wits; the rational Souls of such Monsters being sunk down into meer sensuality and brutishness. Plutarch that grave Moralist, [Lib. de Superstit.] stiles Irreligion a kind of stupor, whereby men are as it were deprived of their senses: And that it is an exceeding improper thing to ascribe true Reason to those who do not ac∣knowledge and adore the Deity. And Cicero that wise Philosopher and Orator [De Nat.

Deor. lib. 2.] saith he can hardly think that man to be in his right mind who is destitute of Religion. And again, why should any one stile such an one a Man, who by what he sees in the World is not convinced of a Deity and a Providence, and of the Adoration which he owes to that Deity. And the SatyristJuv. Sat. 15. speaking of Religion and the sense of divine things, saith,
— Separat hoc nos
A grege multorum, atque ideo venerabile soli,
Sortiti ingenium Divinorumque capaces.
'Tis this which doth distinguish us from brute Creatures, that we have Souls capable of di∣vine impressions. So that such persons have no just pretence to Reason who renounce Re∣ligion, or turn it into meer Scepticism.
But however some men for a little time may offer violence to their Reason and Consci∣ence (whilst they prosper in this World) yet when they are once alarm'd by a violent Sick∣ness or some other great affliction, which at one time or other they shall be expos'd unto, then will the sense of a Deity, and of Eter∣nal Wrath and Punishment seize upon them, with so much the greater force and power,

which they shall never be able to shake off:
Hi sunt qui trepidant, & ad omnia fulgura pallent.
We may truly say of the Atheists of our times as Plato doth of Tyrants, If any per∣son could but see thorowly into their Souls, he should find them all their lives full of fear, guilt and torments.
Pectus inuste deformant maculae, vitiisque inolevit Imago.
Doth now (saith an excellent Author) the conquest of Passions, forgiving of Injuries, doing good, self-denial, humility, patience under crosses (which are the real expressions of Piety) speak nothing more noble and gene∣rous, than a luxurious, malicious, proud and impatient Spirit? Is there nothing more be∣coming and agreeable to the Soul of Man in exemplary Piety and a holy well-ordered con∣versation, than in the lightness and vanity (not to say rudeness and debauchery) of those whom the World accounts the greatest Gallants? Is there nothing more graceful and pleasing in the sweetness, candor and ingenuity of a truly Christian temper and disposition, than in the

revengeful implacable Spirit of such whose honour is fed by the blood of their Enemies? Is it not more truly honourable and glorious to serve that God who commandeth the whole World, than to be a slave to those Passions and Lusts which put men upon continual hard ser∣vice and torment them for it, when they have done it? Were there nothing else to commend Religion to the minds of men, besides the tranquility and calmness of spirit, that serene and peaceable temper which follows a good Con∣science wheresover it dwells, it were enough to make men welcom that Guest which brings such good entertainment with it; Whereas the amazements, horrors and anxieties of mind which at one time or other haunt such who prostitute their Consciences to a violation of the Laws of God and the Rules of rectified Reason may be enough to perswade any rational person that Impiety is the greatest folly, and Irreligion the greatest madness.
The wisest and greatest of men in all Ages, at or not long before their death, when freest from worldly designs and sensual delights, have owned that God and His Truth which they did not embrace and acknowledge as they ought to have done in their lives; and the nearer death did approach to them the more serious were they in Religion, and did disclaim and

abandon those Atheistical and irreligious courses wherewith they or some of them had been for∣merly entangled.
Nimrod the Founder of the Assyrian Mo∣narchy, when carried away by Spirits at his death (as Annius in his Berosus relates the Story) cryed out, Oh one year more, Oh one year more, before I go into the place from whence I shall not return!
Ninus that great King next from Nimrod save Belus, at his Death left this Testimony; Look on this Tomb, and hear where Ninus is; whether thou art an Assyrian, a Mede, or an Indian, I speak to thee no frivolous nor vain matters: Formerly I was Ninus, and lived as thou doest; I am now no more than a piece of earth: All the Meat that I have like a Glutton devoured, all the Pleasures that I like a Beast enjoyed, all the beautiful Women that I so notoriously abused, all the Riches and Glory that I so proudly possessed, I am now deprived of: And when I went into the invisible state, I had neither Gold, nor Horse, nor Chariot; I that wore the rich Crown of Gold, am now poor Dust.
Cyrus the Persian left this Memento be∣hind him to all Mankind, (as Plutarch and others tell us;) Whosoever thou art, O

O Man, and whence-soever thou comest, (for I know thou wilt come to the same condi∣tion that I am in) I am Cyrus, who brought the Empire to the Persians: Do not, I beseech thee, envy me this little piece of ground which covereth my Body.
Alexander the Great, who conquered the World, was at last (as we find in Plutarch, Curtius, and others) so possessed with the sense of Religion, that he was under much trouble and anxiety of spirit, and look'd upon every little matter as portentous and ominous; so dreadful a thing (saith Plutarch) is the con∣tempt of God, which sooner or later filleth all mens minds with fears and terrors.
Julius Caesar who Conquered so many Na∣tions, and at last subdued and possessed the Roman Empire; could not Conquer himself and his own Conscience, which troubled him with Dreams and terrified him with Visions, put∣ting him upon Sacrificing and consulting all sorts of Priests and Augures, though he found com∣fort from none; in so much as a little before he died he was as heartless as the ominous Sa∣crifice was that he offered, professing to his most intimate Friends, That since he had made an end of the Wars abroad he had no Peace at home. The like may be said of Tiberius Caesar, Nero, and other Roman Emperours.
Hadrian the Emperour celebrated his own Funerals, carrying before him his Coffin in triumph when he lived, and when he was a dying cried out lamentably, Animula va∣gula blandula, quae abibis in loca? Ah poor Soul whither wilt thou go? what will be∣come of thee? Thus the greatest Princes have (especially near their latter end) a deep sense of Religion, of the Souls Immortality, and their Eternal estate in another World. Nor did ever any Prince, Captain or Law-giver go about any great matter but at length he was glad to take in the assistance of a God, as Numa, Lycurgus, Solon, Scipio and others.
Titus and Nerva two Roman Emperours, had such serious thoughts, and were so sensible of a Deity in the Government of the World, that neither of them (as the Historian saith) was ever seen to smile or play.
Septimius Severus that Victorious Roman Emperour, having had experience of the va∣nity of this Worlds Riches and Greatness, said at his Death, I have been all things, and it profiteth me nothing.
Charles the Fifth that Famous German Em∣perour, after twenty three pitch'd Battels, six Triumphs, four Kingdoms won, and eight Prin∣cipalities added to his other Dominions, resigned all these in his life time to his Son, and betook

himself to a retired life, and to his private De∣votions: This great and wise Prince had his own Funeral Celebrated beforre his face, and left this Testimony of the Christian Religion, That the sincere profession of it had in it those sweets and joys which the Courts of Princes were strangers to; grounding his hope and assurance of Salvation upon the sole Righteousness and Satisfaction of Christ his Mediator, and not upon his own Works; and to this purpose divers little Papers were written by him and found imme∣diately after his Death, as is Recorded by an Author who wrote the Life of Don Carlos his Grand-child.
Philip the Third King of Spain, lying on his death-bed the last of March 1621, sent thrice at Midnight for Florentius his Confessor, who gravely exhorting him patiently to submit to the will of God, the King could not choose but weep, saying, Lo now my fatal hour is at hand, but shall I obtain eternal felicity? at which words, great grief and trouble of mind seising on the King, he said to his Confessor, You have not hit upon the right way of healing; Is there no other Remedy? Which words when the Con∣fessor understood of his Body, the King replied, Ah ah, I am not solicitous for my Body or tem∣porary Disease, but for my Soul.
Cardinal Wolsey that Great Minister of

State, who for some years gave Law to England and to other Nations, poured out his Soul in these sad words; Had I been as diligent to serve my God as I have been to please my Prince, He would not have forsaken me now in my gray Hairs.
Sir Francis Walsingham that great and wise Statesman, towards the latter end of his Life grew very melancholy, and wrote to the Lord Treasurer Burleigh to this purpose; We have lived enough to our Countrey, to our Fortunes, and to our Sovereign; it is now high time we begin to live to our selves, and to our God: In the multitude of Affairs which have passed through our Hands there must needs be great miscarriages, for which a whole King∣dom cannot make our Peace. Hereupon some Courtiers being sent to divert Sir Francis, Ah, said he, while we laugh all things are serious round about us; God is serious, when He preserveth us, and hath patience towards us; Christ is serious when He dieth for us, the Holy Ghost is serious when He striveth with us, the Holy Scripture is serious when it is read before us, Sacraments are serious when they are administred unto us; the whole Creation is serious in serving God and us: They are serious in Heaven and Hell, and shall a man that hath one foot in his Grave jest and laugh?
Sir Philip Sidney (his Son-in-Law) that brave accomplish'd Knight whom Queen Elizabeth call'd her Philip, and the Prince of Aurange, his Master, whose Death was lamented in Verse by the then Kings of France and Scotland, and by the two famous Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, repented at his death of writing his Pembrokes Arcadia, and would have com∣mitted it to the flames himself to prevent the kindling of unlawful heats in the youthful Rea∣ders of it; leaving this farewel amongst his Friends, Above all things govern your Wills and Affections by the Will and Word of God; In me behold the end of this World and all its vanities.
Sir John Mason, Privy Counsellor to several Princes, upon his death-bed spake thus to some of his Friends, I have seen five Princes, and been Privy Counsellor to four of them; I have observed the most remarkable Occurrences in Forein parts, and been present at most trans∣actions for thirty years together; And I have learned this after so many years Experience, That Seriousness is the greatest Wisdom, Tem∣perance the best Physick, a good Conscience is the best Estate; and were I to live again, I would change the Court for a Cloister, my Privy Coun∣sellors Employment for an Hermit's Retire∣ment, and the whole Life I lived in the

Palace for one Hours Enjoyment of God in the Chappel; all things else forsake me besides my God and my Duty.
The Lord Henry Howard that Learned Earl of Northampton being troubled with Atheisti∣cal thoughts and suggestions, put them all off with this Consideration, viz. If I could give any account how my self or any thing else had a being without God, how there came so uniform and so constant a consent of Mankind, of all ages, tempers and educations (otherwise differing so much in their apprehensions) about the being of God, the Immortality of the Soul, and Religion, I could then be an Atheist! And when it was urged that Religion was a State-policy to keep men in awe, he replied, That could not be true, for the greatest Poli∣ticians have sooner or later felt the power of Religion in the grievous lashes of their Con∣sciences, and the dreadfulness of their apprehen∣sions about that state wherein they must live for ever.
Cardinal Richlieu that great Politician, after he had governed the Affairs of Europe many years together, confessed to Peter du Mou∣lin, a Learned Minister of the Reformed Church in France, That being forced upon many irregularities in his life time by that which they call Reason of State, he could not tell

how to satsifie his conscience for several things, and therefore had many Temptations to doubt and disbelieve a God, another World, and the Immortality of the Soul, and by that distrust to relieve his aking Heart, but in vain; for so strong (said he) were the apprehensions of God in his Soul, so clear the impressions of a Deity upon the frame of the World, so unanimous the consent of Mankind, so power∣ful the convictions of his Conscience, that he could not but taste the power of the World to come, and so live as one that must die, and so die as one that must live for ever. And being asked one day why he was so sad, he an∣swered, Monsieur Monsieur, the Soul is a serious thing, it must be either sad here for a moment, or be sad for ever.
Cardinal Mazarine his Successor, who had for several years managed the Crown of France and the greatest Affairs of Christendom, dis∣coursing one day with a Sorbon Doctor concerning the Souls Immortality and Mans Eternal estate, he wept, repeating that Emperours saying, O my poor Soul, whither wilt thou go? and immediately calling for his Con∣fessor, he vowed ten Hours of the Day for De∣votion, seven for Rest, four for Repasts, and but three for Business; saying one day to the Queen Mother, Madam, your favours have

undone me, and were I to live again, I would be a Capuchin rather than a Courtier.
Salmasius that great Scholar, whom the Learned men of his time never mention without some title of praise and commendation, left this World with these words in his mouth, Oh I have lost a world of time, that most precious thing in the World, whereof had I but one year longer to live, it should be spent in David's Psalms and Paul's Epistles; Oh Sirs! speaking to his Friends that were about him, Mind the World less, and God more; all the Learning in the World without Piety and the true fear of God, is nothing worth: The fear of the Lord that is wisdom, and to depart from evil that is understanding.
The Learned Grotius after many Publick Embassies and Imployments managed and per∣formed by him at home and abroad, and after his many elaborate Writings in Divinity and other Sciences, having taken an exact Survey of the Hebrew, Greek and Latin Learning, concluded his life with this Protestation, That he would give all his Learning and Honour for the plain Integrity and harmless Innocency of Jean Vrick, who was a devout poor man that spent eight Hours of his time in Prayer, eight in La∣bour, and but eight in Sleep and other neces∣saries. And complaining to one that admired

his astonishing Labours and Industry, he uttered these words, Ah vitam perdidi operosè nihil agendo: And to another Friend that desired him (according to his great Wisdom and Learning) to shew him briefly what he should do, he gave him only this direction, Be serious.
Persons of great Estate and Dignity in this World must expect nevertheless to meet with great crosses and disappointments, (of which doubtless your Honour hath had and will have more and more experience in this vale of tears.) Now as the Sacred Scriptures do abundantly furnish us with grounds and motives of Patience and submission to the Will and Providence of God in every condition and under every dispen∣sation; so there are divers Heathen Moralists who have from the Light of Reason and moral Prudence propounded many excellent Argu∣ments and Considerations to perswade us there∣unto; Especially Epictetus, who though lame and old, sickly and deformed, poor and under servitude (being a Slave to Epaphroditus one of the Roman Courtiers) yet was he an excellent Philosopher, and a man of a most noble and generous spirit; some of whose excellent Say∣ings to this purpose I shall here recite.
This wise Moralist speaking of the unreason∣ableness of murmuring at any cross Events whatsoever, hath this passage, [Dissertat. lib. 3.

cap. 26.] What reason have I (saith he) to fight against God? Why should I desire things not desireable? He that gave hath power to take away, and why should I resist? This would not only be great folly in me to oppose one that is much stronger, but great injustice likewise to fight against a Benefactor: We have received all that we have and our very being from Him, and why should we take it so heinously if He be pleased to resume something back again?
And speaking further of the reasonableness of mens resigning up themselves to God's disposal, he saith, Quis vero es tu? aut unde venisti? aut quare? Do you consider what you are, and whence you came, and upon what business? Did not He give you a being in the World? endue you with such a nature? put you into such a condition wherein you should be subject to His government and disposal? Did not He appoint the time, and place, and part which you are to act upon the Theatre of this World? And this is properly your Business, to apply your self to the fittest means for performing the part allotted to you; and not to take upon you to murmur or repine against it, for it doth not belong to us to choose our parts, but to act them. Would it not better be∣come us to go off the Stage with adorations and praises of God, for so much as He hath

permitted us to hear and see, rather than mutining against Him because we had no more? And in another place he suggests this Consideration, That our condition whilst we are in this World is militant, wherein every one is without reluctancy to submit to the Orders of his great Captain or General in whatever He shall appoint; whether or no it be to dig in the Trenches, or to stand upon the Watch, or to fight: Every man cannot be a Commander, and a Common Souldier is to obey, not to dispute, or offer Counsel; If thou maist refuse the condition or work assigned thee, why may not another do so too? And according to this, what Order could there be in the World?
And again; If God would have me (saith Epictetus) to be sick or poor, I will be content to be so; whatever Employment he will de∣sign for me, I will not decline it, and whatever He would not have me be or do, I will be against it likewise. And in another place he hath this excellent passage; If I had been made a Night∣ingale or a Swan (saith he) I should have em∣ployed the time of my life in such a way as is sutable to the condition of those Creatures; but being made a Man, capable of serving and worshipping that Deity from whom I had my being, 'tis but reason I should apply

my self to this, as being my proper work and business; and therefore hereunto will I devote my self, as to that Employment to which I am chiefly designed: I am now as to the condition of my Body, lame and old, and under servitude: Yet still he concludes it to be his Duty wholly to devote himself to the praises and worship of that God who was the Author of his being.
That must needs be much more desireable (saith this Heathen Moralist Epictetus) which is chosen by the wisdom of God, than that which I choose; A reluctancy against the di∣vine Will is the ground of all irreligion and Atheism in the World. Why may not a man refuse to obey God in what He commands, as well as to submit to Him in what He inflicts? and then what ground can there be for any pretence to Religion? We should all of us (saith he) conform our minds to the Will of Providence, and most willingly follow whi∣thersoever He shall lead us, as knowing it to proceed from the best and wisest contri∣vance. I do in my Judgment more consent to that which God would have, than to that which mine own inclination doth lead unto; I would desire and will just so and no other∣wise than as He doth. And in another place; Use me (saith he) as Thou pleasest, I do fully

consent and submit to it, and shall refuse no∣thing which shall seem good unto Thee: Lead me whither-ever Thou wilt, put me into what condition Thou pleasest; Must I be in a private not in a publick station, in poverty not in wealth? I will not only consent to it, but make it my business to Apologize for it, to justifie and maintain before all men, such Thy dealing with me to be most fitting and advantageous to my condition.
To the same purpose another Heathen Mora∣list (to mention no more) Antoninus [Lib. 10. cap. 25.] saith, That man is to be esteemed a Fugitive and an Apostate who runs away from his Master: Now the great Law-giver who governs the World is our common Master and Ruler, and His Will is the only Law we are to submit unto; And therefore for a man to be angry or grieved because things fall not out according to his desire, what is this but re∣volting from the supreme Governour of the World, and declaring enmity against Him? And again; If God (saith he) do not take particular notice of, and care for me and my affairs, why do I at any time pray to Him? And if He doth exercise a special Provi∣dence towards all Events, no doubt but He doth consult well and wisely about them; nor would He suffer any hurt or prejudice to

befal me, unless it were for a greater good upon some other account; and in this I ought to acquiesce. And in another place; (saith the same Author) I refer every thing that befals me to God, as the Contriver of it, by whom all Events are disposed in a wise Order.
Now what are these great and excellent Sayings of these two wise Philosophers and other grave Moralists (that might be mentioned) but the same in effect with those divine Sayings in the Sacred Scriptures: Psal. 25.10. Job 1. 15, 17. and 2.10. Exod. 34.6. 1 Sam. 3.18. Lam. 3.22, 39. Job 5.7. and 34.31. and 40.4. and 33.12, 13. Psal. 39.9. and 8.4. and 94.12. and 118.18. and 119.75. 2 Sam. 15.26. Isa. 45.9. and 64.8. Heb. 12.5, 8, 10, 11. Prov. 19.3. Rom. 8.28. and 9.20. 1 Cor. 10.13. and 11.32. 2 Cor. 1.5. Rev. 3.19.
Religion (to use the words of a late Learned BishopDr. Wilkins Bi∣shop of Chester.) hath a firm and deep foundation in the Nature and Reason of Mankind: But yet we must not so exalt Reason or the Principles of natural Religion, as to derogate in the least from the necessity and usefulnss of divine Re∣velation, or to extenuate the great and un∣parallel'd Blessing and Benefit of the Christian Religion and the Doctrine of the Gospel of Christ, which though it transcends, yet it is

not contrary to the Dictates and Sentiments of Reason; For it is but reasonable that we should acquiesce in the Testimony and Autho∣rity of God the supreme Being, who neither can nor will deceive us.
We should not despise any of those Ad∣vantages (saith the grave Au∣thor of The whole Duty of ManCauses of the De∣cay of Christianity, cap. 9. pag. 255.) which may improve our Reason, exalt the Man and depress the Beast in us; Yet sure we shall derogate very impiously from Christ's Prophetick Office, if we allow not Divinity to be the supreme and noblest Science, such as is to be served and attended, not regulated and governed by those inferiour: But that just order seems now to be inverted, Di∣vine Learning is brought down to Humane, and the simplicity of Christian Doctrine so perplexed and confounded with Philosophical Niceties, that Plato and Aristotle are be∣come the Umpires of our Religion, and we must go ask Heathens how far we shall be Christians. Those deep things of God, (as the Apostle calls them, 1 Cor. 2.10.) and of which he pronounces the Natural man an incompetent Judge, are yet brought be∣fore that Tribunal, subjected to be scanned by Rules of Art; but alas our Line is

too short to sound those Depths. Thus far he.
Madam, This Book (which is Dedicated to Your Honour) treats of the Right Use and Abuse of Reason in Divine matters: There are two extremes which men are apt to run into; some ascribe too much to Natural Light and Reason in Religious concernments, and others ascribe too little. As we should give to God the things that are God's, and to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, (according to that saying of our Blessed Saviour, Matth. 22.21.) so we should give to Faith the things that belong to Faith, and to Reason the things that belong to Reason. And herein, Madam, You may meet with some Passages in this Trea∣tise (if You please to peruse it) which may by the Blessing of God minister some Light and Direction to You.
