



WHereas I intended to have presen∣ted these plaine and simple Ser∣mons, to the patronage of some of my friends, who were pleased to owne and favour mee in my sufferings; without any apology for my selfe, or any vindication of the truths which I have delivered. I am now by weighty reasons en∣forced to alter my resolutions: And my se∣cond thoughts doe appear better unto me then my first. ()
I have beene lately aspersed by the hands of two and fifty who professe themselves the Ministers of Christ; as a man heterodox and unsound in my principles, concerning the the Law and Justification by free grace. Wherefore it seemeth probable unto me, that if I should bring my friends upon the Stage to
patronize mee in a publique way, while I lye under the reproachings of so many, I should wrong those, whom I desire in thankfulnesse to respect and honour. And if I should ven∣ter these Sermons into the world without any Apology for my selfe, I might prove more injurious to my selfe, then these can be unto mee. Besides this, I doe apprehend that some tender-hearted Christians when they shall read the name of the abused Author, now made infamous unto them by the hands of so many Subscribers, may either be affraid to read what I have printed; or if they shall read it, an uncharitable prejudice may rob them of the fruit and harvest of their reading.
For these and other reasons, I have ushered in these Sermons into the world with a short Apologeticall answer to their Charge. And have made choise of thee as an Umpire and Judge between my accusers and my selfe. And truely thou art the fittest man that I could sin∣gle out from the men of the world, to do me this service of love; whether I looke upon my selfe, or my Antagonists.
First, If I looke upon my Antagonists, thou art not within their gun-shot, or censure, and so thou canst not not be damnified by me, 1 Cor. 2.15. The spirituall man judgeth all things, yet he himselfe is judged by no man.

Secondly, If I looke unto my selfe, thou art the fittest, and only man for mee. For thou wilt not deale rigorously with me. Thou wilt juge mee by the law of love, liberty and cle∣mency, Jam. 2.12. And when I seriously con∣sider what weakenesses, frailties and infirmi∣ties have discovered themselves in my flesh, e∣ven in those things (whether in praying, preaching, or writing) wherein I desire to be most spirituall; I dare not thinke of any o∣ther Judge. Thou wilt be more favourable then the Synod at Westminster unto my way and manner of preaching and expressions, which I made use of five or sixe yeares since; considering that I then had not beene many moneths in the Schoole of Christ. Thou wilt be more indulgent unto this booke which now sheweth it selfe to the world, then the whole Assembly of Sion-Colledge Divines, conside∣ring, that at this time I have been but the time of an Apprentiship in the Schoole of my Savi∣our. I neede not make an Apology for my selfe before thee, to tell thee, that these Ser∣mons were never intended for the Presse by the deliverer of them: but brought thither by the skilfull hand of one professing the Art of short-writing. Thou wilt willingly of thy selfe pardon the method and immethodical∣nesse
of them, and repetitions in them; de∣ligting thy selfe with the naked truths of Christ contained in them.
I need not excuse the plainenesse of speech and want of worldly hetorick which is in them. In thy judgement, plaine preaching  not to plead for a pardon, but doth deserve commendation. The phantasticall preaching of some men of our times, with , metaphysicall  words, excellency of speech and  cannot please thee, because they are displ to Christ, and derogate from the glory of his Crosse, 1 Cor. 1.17. 1 Cor. 2.1. Thou knowest that these things are more usefull for the spreading of msterier of un∣godlinesse covertly and , the publishing of the soule saving  of the Lord Jesus, And a fitter dresse for the whore of errour and falshood, then a cloathg for the chast Virgin of Truth. That I may speake  heart to thee, I know that thou wilt in all things be so favourable unto mee, that I am rather willing to humble my selfe at thy feete, then to justifie my selfe before men. I doe therefore willingly confesse, that I who am rather confident of thy avour, then defirous to implore it, doe looke upon my selfe as the
vilest of those who ever made any addresse un∣to thee; when I consider my sinsulnesse, be∣fore I was convinced of sinne, my unrighte∣ous righteousnesse before I came into the light, and my praevarications and aversions from God, since I received his light. Augustine composed a small booke, which hee called his Confessions: in which he doth spread forth his follies unto the world before his Conversion: But should I set downe all the follies, vanities and wickednesse of my youth, a great volume would not hold them: And it is easier to write large volumes of them, then to bring them within the narrow limits and borders of an E∣pistle.
That I may therefore passe these by, as God hath passed them by in his grace, never to call them to his remembrance against meany more: I doe now acknowledge, that by the reason of variety of inward temptations; since I have looked towards Religion, I have beene in my owne apprehension a meere Proteus in Re∣ligion. I have beene zealous for the workes of the Law, that I might be made a righteous man, being ignorant of him who is the end of the Law for righteousnesse for every one that believeth: and was then as loathsome a sinner to the eye of God, as I was a righteous man
to the eyes of the world. I have suddenly lept from Pharisaisme to the profession of the Gos∣pel in a carnal way: and have then been ready to thinke that I could never be a true Gospel-professour, unlesse I did take some liberty be∣yond the allowance which I now apprehend the Gospel affordeth. I have beene so igno∣rantly inquisitive after the knowledge of Or∣dinances, that I have doubted whether ever I should be saved, dying ignorant of the Ordi∣nonces, and Church-government of the Lord Jesus. And looking for light, and finding darknesse and confusion in these things, I have beene afterwards as spiritually mad and foolish in the undervaluing of them. There is scarce an errour to be thought of, but by the folly and curiosity of my nature, I have beene tempted to reach forth my hand unto it. I have rune over the bogges of Familisme, but have not beene swallowed up in them; Yet that I may not be mistaken in this relati∣on notwithstanding all this; By the grace of God I am what I am.
And though the world hath looked upon mee as an Heretique, I have seene my selfe so fast in the armes of God, that I am confident, that neither men, Devills, Errours, sinnes, nor temptations, shall ever be able to pull
mee thence. I have beene dead by the law to the law, and am alive by the Gospell. I have ceased from works, and yet am cre∣ated to good workes. I am not under the Law, and yet in my minde I serve the Law of GOD. I can doe nothing, and yet can doe all things in CHRIST which strength∣neth me. And though I can doe all things, I am an unprofitable servant; I care not much what men can say of mee, seeing GOD doth daily assure mee in the Spirit of Christ, that I am his Sonne. It doth not too much afflict mee if any men refuse to have fellowship with mee as a SAINT, seeing I have fellowship with the Father, and his Sonne JESƲS, and thy selfe, and have liberty in my Conscience to have fellowship with all SAINTS.
My greatest sorrow, and most delightfull griefe at this present is this, That I am not more holy, being so strongly assured by truth that I am happy. I hope that thou wilt further this worke of purity in mee by thy spirituall prayers presented to the Throne of our FATHERS grace for mee; where I doe desire that thou wouldst know mee one with thy selfe, being one SPIRIT with JESƲS, though
I cannot but subscribe my selfe, The greatest of SINNERS, and lesse then then the least of all SAINTS,

