


My Lord,
THe hope which I have of doing some good, or at least, the confidence that I shall do no hurt in Publishing this small Piece, has induced me to expose both it and my self to the censure of the world. And altho there may be nothing else in it which may recommend it to your Grace, yet I assure my self You will approve of that temper and calmness which I have en∣deavoured with all care to preserve in every period of it. For, as bitterness, or sharpness of style is contrary to Charity, no less than mirth and drollery in matters of Religion, are to the se∣riousness of Christianity; so have I ever observed, that such a satyrical way of writing is much more effectual to raise the Passion, than to convince the Judgment of an Adversary. For which reason I have been studiously careful to avoid all expres∣sions which might exasperate, or give offence to our Non-con∣forming Brethren; and shall, with God's Blessing, continue the same care, if ever there be an occasion for me any further to defend what I have here written.
And upon this occasion, I beseech your Grace to give me leave to remember to the World how Eminent an Example of Tem∣per and Moderation You have constantly shewn Your self, as to all others, and at all times, so particularly to those to whom I now am about to Address my self. No man could be more true and firm to the Established Church, and at the same time more mild and gentle to those who dissent from her, than Your Grace has always been. Of which, Your unbyassed Steadiness through all changes and vicissitudes; together with the great
lenity even in those times when it was most in your Grace's power to have used severity towards them, is a demonstration beyond all exception.
Nor can I omit to take notice of the admirable good effect which your moderate way of Dealing with such persons has had upon divers of the Non-conforming Ministers, who were in these parts at the time when your Grace formerly sate in the Chair of this Diocess; several of whom, (as I have been infor∣med) being not only convinced by the Arguments, but even won by your Obliging and Christian temper, did freely and readily yield to receive Ordination at your Grace's hands, according to the form prescribed by our Church; and continued ever after to conform to the worship and discipline of it.
Nor have I any thing else to excuse my presumption in this Dedication, but only the hope that your Grace will be ready, ac∣cording to your accustomed Candour, to approve of, and encou∣rage every man, tho in the meanest station, who endeavors, ac∣cording to his capacity, to follow any part of that excellent pat∣tern which Your Grace for so many years has set to the World.
That Your Grace may enjoy all the Happiness of this Life, until such time as You shall exchange it for a Crown of Eter∣nal Glory, Is the most earnest and hearty Prayers of
Cork, July 15. 1697.

