



Honoured Patriots,
VVHen you were pleased to Call me to Preach this publick Sermon, I must confess by reason of my insufficiency for such a work, and a crowd of business that then I was in, I could not rejoyce in it; but I looked upon the Call as a Call from God, and therefore submitted to it, knowing that God doth often use weak and worthless Instruments, that the glory might be his, and not ours: and was the further encouraged, because I have found you like Hezekiah, speaking comfortably to those that teach the good knowledge of the Lord. The Printing of this Sermon was far from my thoughts, both in Studying and Preaching of it. I dare not say the matter is useless, but must confess the dress to be too uncomely, and will never be liked, if it come to the eyes of those that are either curious or captious. I conceive the reason why you ordered the Printing of it, was, Because you judged it a seasonable Word, and therefore thought it would be profitable; and indeed the timing of things to their proper season, is one of the highest acts of practicall Wisdome. I did the more readily consent to the Printing of it, that I might not have the least Censure from those that, from my self, and all Gods people, deserve so much honour. Though in this Sermon my weakness is exposed to publick view, yet if God may have honour, and any Soul profit, and I may be ac∣counted obedient to you that are our Rulers, I am satisfied. I do account it a great mercy that we have such Rulers, that we may more safely publish Truth, then conceal it: if we conceal it, we fall into the hands of God, but if we publish it, we are nt in danger of falling into the hands of men.
 The design of this Sermon is the Ʋniting of the People of God, for the Wounds of some Churches bleed, if not fester. Worthy Senators, I may boldly publish for the honour of God and your honour, That such hath been your labour of love in the Churches, that you seem to take more delight in the Ʋnity of the Churches, then in being Magistrates. This Sermon was once in your Ears, it's now in your Eyes, I desire the Lord may keep it in your Hearts; it may be it is providentially Printed for that end. As for my self, I know all are not Bezaleels or Aholiabs, and that he that is but a poor Labourer, and brings Stone and Morter to the Building, is accepted of God. My hearty desire is, That you, our Honoured Governour and Ma∣gistrates, may be called The Repairers of breaches, The Restorers of paths to dwell in, The Joy of many Generations; which is the earnest Prayer of him that is your daily Remembrancer at the Throne of Grace, and who is

