



I Haue been oftentimes deuy∣synge vvyth my felfe (moste gracious Souereigne) hovve I myghte best vtter my good vvyll vnto your noble Grace, according to my bounden duetie. I haue cō∣cluded and thought it best, to dedicate thys litle booke to your Maiestie, in the vvhyche the office of a Prince is briefly set forth, not onely tovvards God his superioure: but al∣so tovvards his Subiectes, sheepe vnder hys cure, a matter very proper and conueniēt for your most Royall Person: not bicause your Heighnes knovveth not the same all redye, but bycause it maie put your Maiestie in re∣membraunce of that ye knovve. Hovve can there be any thynge vvorthy of knovvledge that is vnknovvē to your most noble Grace: being so vvell learned your selfe, and serued vvith moste learned, Honorable, vvise, pru∣dent
 & Godly Councellers, so that your Ma¦iestie must needs see, not only vvyth the eies of your moste beautiful body, but also vvith the eies of your most godli minde: according to Plato sayinge in Phaedro. Δίπλοῦν ὁρῶντες ὁί μαοντες τὰ γράμματα that is, the learned see vvith double sighte: the lear∣ning of the Scriptures in deede, maketh the eies of the soule to see perfectly: as vvitnes∣seth the Prophet. 119. Chapter. Thy vvord is a Lanterne vnto my feet, & a light vnto my pathes, to vvalke & liue, therfore moste gra∣cious Queene, in the feare of the Lord, is ne∣cesary the hering & reading of Gods vvord. by the vvhich in faith feare him and kepe his commaundements: for the true seruinge of God, is the obseruing of his statuts: vvhose statutes, lavves & vvyl can not be knovven, vvithout the light of his vvorde accordynge to Matthevv. the 22. Chapt. Ye re not kno∣vving the Scriptures, knovv then most gra∣cious Souereigne the sacred Scriptures and Testament of Christe oure sauioure: In the vvhich he promiseth to your Maiestie a por∣tion
 most precious: after thys temporall a kingdome euerlasting: vvhich your Grace must obteine & possesse by onely faith ge∣uinge to the promyse of the Lorde. VVhat is the promise? mercie promised: to vvhome? to all that haue truste & confidence to be sa∣ued through his mercie: and that Christ our Sauiour is a true promiser, and vvill accom∣plishe his promise to all those vvhiche sted∣fastly beleue to be saued freely by him vvith out respecte of any other thing. For the ho∣lyest that euer vvas, is, or shalbe, is by Gods lavve iustly condemned, and throughe hys mercy onely saue, according to Paule. the .3 to the Romaines. Omnes enim peccaue∣runt, ac destituuntur gloria ei. All haue sinned, and haue neede of the glory & mer∣cy of God. That your Maiestie, after thys vvorldly kingdome long happely gouerned, maie reigne eternally through his promised mercie obteined by faith: I vvill vvhile lyfe maye laste, continually praye.

