


SIr, this Ser∣mon is yours by occasion, and request: and though, in respect of it selfe, it deserves not to appeare in publick; yet for your sake, whose name it must beare, I desire it might continue to po∣steritie.
Too few yong and noble
gentlemen, shew a pious care, and conscience to religion. The lusts of the eyes, the lusts of the flesh, and the pride of life, consume their dayes with vanity and wick∣ednesse. But God of his mer∣cy, hath seasoned you with a better spirit, and so stated you in good, that I am confi∣dent, neither I, nor others shall ever see you altered. I rejoyce, and it is my crowne, to see some deepe stamped Cha∣racters in you. I have known you from your infancy, and (from your constant love) have beene no stranger from your house: yet did I never heare you (blessed be God) either in passion, or out, to sweare the least oath, no nor so much as once to use the
strong and too much tossed Asseverations of Faith, and Troth; you are constant, day by day, at your private devo∣tions, to blesse all your occa∣sions, to prepare you for God whensoever hee shall call, and in the meane time to keepe your sweete acquain∣tance with heaven. You are so resolved an observer of Gods solemne worship on the Lords day, in comming with the first (as you can) and going with the last (like a doore keeper in the house of your God,) that, by your good will, you would not, on any season, loose any part of publike prayer, preaching, catechizing, or Sacraments, so oft as they are tendred, e∣ven to the last blessing. And
now, Sir, because of the di∣stance betwixt your house and your Church, and because you would avoid not onely the guilt, but the suspicion of Clandestine and unwarrant∣able courses, you have obtai∣ned by Royall and Ecclesia∣sticall order a consecrated Chappell in your owne house; In which you have, not onely daily prayers according to the lawes of our blessed Church; but also you doe sup∣ply the defects of publike worship, which long waies, and foule weather doe bring upon you, and your blessed family in you.
How happy is it, Sir, for you, and yours, that you had such Religious Parents to learne you to beare the sweete
yoake of Christ from your youth! How happie that God hath graciously sanctified their care, and your submissi∣on and observance so, as that you goe on to sow your good seede in this your morning, and doe not yet let your hand rest, when your yeares speake a full, and ripe young man! Lastly, how happy that God hath given you a religi∣ous Lady, whom you dearely love, and who closeth with you in Love, Mercy, and the devout acts of worship both in publick and private! Long may you live together in con∣jugal love, and pious affecti∣ons, to God, goodnesse, and good people! And as you have begunne, and hitherto continued, to be good exam∣ples
to all my flocke in good workes, and frequenting the house of your God: so that you may still live, and die in such indeavours, resolutions, and practises, shall be the ear∣nest prayers of

