



MAny & iust are the consideratiōs (No∣ble, Graue, Wise, and Learned) which haue induced me to dedicate these Works of M. Patrick Anderson to your Lordships. First because one of his Disputes (which was an happy dispute for me, & diuers others) was made before some of your Honours. Secondly because the order & methode which he hath kept in these Works, is euery day practised in your sessiō house of Scotlād, for in Law-matters you giue place in your sessiō house to the Confession of the party. And truly the parties owne acknowledgment of his offence is a sufficient proof amongst all Nations. Heere your Lord∣ships shal see in like māner how the very Protestants thē∣selues auow, that in the Catholike Roman Church & Religion, Saluation vndoubtedly is to be found 2. If you make great accōpt of faithfull & honest witnesses in proofe of maters in Law, you shall find likewyse alledged faith∣fully
 in the first, second, third, fourth, & insuing Ages the ancient and holy Fathers, euery one in his owne Age & Century giuing ful and cleer testimony for vs Catholiks against the Ministry; which holy Fathers did not forsee a∣ny debats amongst vs;Aug. duers. Iu∣an. Pelag.  1. prope nem & l.  cap. 17. Nor yet were angry neither at you, nor at vs (sayth S. Augustine:) What they aue found in the Church, that they haue held; they haue taught that wch they haue learned; & what they haue receaued from their Forfathers they haue deliuered to vs their posterity. 3. If Priority of pos∣session be of any regard (as questionles it is) among you, it is heer plentifully set down, that we Catholiks are first in possession, & that it is but a few yeares since we Ca∣tholiks of these three Kingdome were thrust out, by the Ministers, of our former rightfull, and so long continued possession of fifteen hundreth yeares; and condemned by those who had no power, authority, nor commission to accuse or condemne vs; not so much as hauing our accu∣sers before vs, nor place to defend vs 4. If Prescription be a matter of great Importance in proofe amongst you, you shal then heere find our Catholike Religiō, for which we now suffer in Scotland, England, & Ireland, deduced frō the tyme of the Apostles, from Age to Age, to these our very dayes, giuing in further proof that the Protestant & Puritan Ministers, who (against all Law hauing bereft vs of our prescription & possession) haue been condem∣ned in all Ages, by the Church of God then apparent, as manifest Heretiques, in the persons of the Arians, Pelagi∣ans, Nouatians, Waldenses, Albigenses &c. 5. If cōtinual clayme be a sufficiciēt way amongst you to preserue right & title, it is more then euidēt that our Catholike Pastours haue beene euermore waking to preserue out right, and Religion, as the Prophet fortold thus:Esa. 62 6. Vpon thy walles O Hierusalem haue I set watch men, all the day & all the night
 for euer they shall not be silent. But your Protestant Church hath (to the contrary) been so farre from performing the like, that it hath been inuisible, latent, and vnknowne to the world the space of fifteen hūdreth yeares.In his Treatise vpon the reuelation Gods rue Church (sayth M. Napper) most certainly aboad so long la∣tent and inuisible 6. If whē the letter of the law being foūd in some cases doubtful, ought (cōforme to your coustome in Scotlād) to be interpreted according to the ansvverable pratise of ensuing tymes; you shall in like maner find heer the doubtfull letter of the Scriptur, and obscure sayings of the Fathers made plaine on our part, by the answerable practise of all succeding tymes & ages. 7. If the iudgment and resoltion of most Ancient & wyse Iudges and Presidents giuen in former Ages in your countrey, be authentical or of credit in your Session house; heer then you shall see the graue and wholsome Iudgments giuen for vs Catholiks by the most famous, learned and holy Iudges & Presidēts of all Kingdoms & Ages for these 1500. yeares, cōdēning the Puritan, & the Protestāt Ministry of manifest Heresy and Errour, in the persons of Aerius, Vigilantius, Nouatus & such other Heretiks. Finally, if the Ministers would free thēselues (cōtrary to all Law) from all these precedēt proofes and Iudgments, appealing to the only written Law, & to the expresse word of God (as they do, & must needs do,) first it is easie to be seen by the ensuing Trea∣tises; That all the Ministers togeather shall not, or cannot shew, no not one debatable point of their Religion, to be conteyned in the expresse word. 2. They shall not be able to improue any debatable point of our Religion as being against the expresse word. 3. It is shewed that they haue falsified and corrupted the word of God miserably & ig∣norātly, making it therby not the word of God, but their owne word, & inuention.

By al which it appeareth sufficiētly, that our Catholike Faith & Religion (for the which now presently we suffer persecution in Scotland) is that selfesame Religion, and Faith wherunto our Scotish Nation was, aboue fourteen hundreth yeares since, confessedly first conuerted: That religion also which euen then, so longe since, and now is professed throughout the Christian world: That Religion also, which was then confirmed to vs, and other Na∣tions from heauen with the testimony of vndoubted mi∣racles: That religion which hath founded your ancient Municipall Lawes, Courts of Iudgement, erected & buil∣ded your most famous Churches of Elgene, of Murray, Glasco, Paslay, S. Giles in Edenburgh, Holyrood-house, the Chaunry of Rosse, and many others: That Religion finally which hath erected your Bishops Seas, Religious houses, and Abbayes, Colledges, Vniuersities, and many other knowne Royall monuments of Piety, in your most Noble, and ancient Kingdome of Scotland.
To the reading therfore of these insuing Parts & Trea∣tises, I earnestly and humbly exhort your Lordships, e∣uen by the infinit multitude of benefits which God hath bestowed vpon yow, by the pretious Bloud of Christ who hath redeemed vs all, by the tēder care of your own saluation, and by whatsoeuer els is sacred and holy; to the which end I will continue my dayly prayers to God, and remaine alwaies,

