



WHo doth not see (most dearly Be∣loued, Worthy and Constant CA∣THOLIKES) but that this third Part, or Treatise of my Works, doth chiefly, and principally belonge to you that are Catholiks in Scotland, as hauing receaued the Catholike Religiō vniuersally in your Country in the second Age, (or at least in the very beginning of the third Age) in the persō of King Donald▪ your first Christian King, and his Nobility, you being most worthy children of so renowned Parents, most honourable Of-spring of so excellent ancestours, most glorious posterity of so famous antiquity, whome future ages will iustly esteeme and extoll aboue many of your predecessour for retaining that in tyme of war which the left to you in tyme of peace, and for defen∣ding that by singular constancy in your sufferings, which they both receiued, & left you by quiet Traditiō.

Which Tradition, or Catholike religion being pro∣ued and declared most cleerly in this second age or cen∣tury; I doe by offering the same vnto you, but present the history of your own Kings of Scotland, the records and Chronicles of your owne families, the pedigree & Genealogy of your owne Forefathers, the antiquity & Nobility of your own progenitors, together with your iust Title & Clayme to their Inheritance, producing iointly for the same the word of God, the Scripture, the Bible, the testimonies of the holy Fathers of this age, yea, the very monuments of your owne Kingdome, which no man but foolish, can deny or call in doubt.
True it is, that by Gods holy prouidence you are borne in this time of warre, tribulation and contradicti∣on, insteed of that large peace and tranquillity which your ancestours enioyed, in the vse and exercise of that religion, for which you striue and suffer now presently in SCOTLAND; which sufferings of yours though for the present they seeme vnpleasāt & distast∣full to flesh & bloud, yet assuredly will the houre come when it shall proue a most singular benefit, an eternall blisse, glory & honour in your behalfe; by reason that,1. Thes. 1. You are become such followers of Christ, and of his A∣postles, as receyuing the word of God with ioy of the holy Ghost in great tribulation, you are made an example or spe∣ctacle to all other faythfull people in Macedonia and A∣chaia, by grace of your fayth, which is published euery where throughout the world.
You are of the blessed number of those to whome as the Apostle sayth,Philip. 1. it is granted not only to belieue in God, but also to suffer for God. Yea, I may say, to my great comfort and consolation, of you as he sayd and gloryed of himselfe, and his fellowes: Vincula vestra
 manifesta fiunt in Christo in omni Praetorio: Your bands & sufferings for Christ are made notorious thoughout all the tribunall seats of Scotland, which God hath visi∣ted now of late extraordinarily, by reason of the extra∣ordinary and barbarous proceeding of your enemyes in your behalfe (Et inimici vestri sunt Iudices) as your very enemies witnesse the same.
Your Countrey of Scotland hath been exceeding famous and reuowned in forraine nations, by reason of antiquity & constācy of the Catholike religion, with∣out any interruption, the space of fourteene hundred yeares, without any marke of heresy or schisme, as (be∣sides▪ many others history-writers) a famous forrayne writer witnesseth saying thus: NullaBozius lib. 8. de sig. Eccles. cap. 1. gens è. Boreali∣bu tamdui perstitit in vnanimi Religionis vnius consensu, vt Scotia: and by reason of this constancy in religion, Scotland was alwayes free frō the yoake and dominion of forraine Kings, saith the same writer: NullaEodem loco. gens njus res vel gracis vel latini scriptis illustratae, tāto tēpore indigenas habuit reges, vt Scotia. Your countrey was in such manner ennobled with many holy, learned & fa∣mous Bishops, who by reasō of their great zeale & cha∣rity did preach the Catholike & Roman religion in di∣uers forraine Natiōs, specially in Germany, where they were preferred to Ecclesiasticall and politicall dignity by Charles the great, and Emperour, before other nati∣ons, by reason of their Holinesse, Vertue, and Fidelity sayth PaulusLib. 2. de gest. Fran. Aemilius: Honores magistratus{que} alie∣nigenis, & imprimis Scotis, mandabat, quorum egregia fide virtute{que} vtebatur. Your Countrey is in like man∣ner renowned for the great number of holy Catholike Kings, Queenes, and Royall Posterity, famous to this day in diuers Kingdomes of Europe, who all
 now glorious in heauen receaue a particular consolati∣on by your integrity, and constancy in the selfe same Catholike religion, which many of them sealed with their bloud, praying for your perseuerance in that most honourable course & profession.
Which offering of prayers for you, though it be cō∣mon to all the Saints in heauen, yet particularly that B. Queene and Martyr Q. MARY, our Princes most gracious & holy Grand-mother, doth offer vp her pray∣ers for your perseuerance in the Catholike religion, as hauing experimēted during her mortall life your fide∣lity in her Seruice, against the calumnies, sedition & re∣bellion of the Ministers, of whome his Maiesty iustly saith; Me persecuti sunt à iuuentute mea.
And as it is a great honour & glory to you to haue had so many Blessed & holy Kings & Queenes, as pro∣fessours of your owne religion, so it is a great honor & comfort vnto you to haue had, aboue other Christian Kingdoms, the religion for which you do suffer, confir∣med & sealed, after fourteen hundred yeares continu∣ance in Scotland, with the holy bloud of a B. Queene; of whom besides others, a forrayne Author saith thus: Christus hoc magnum laudabilissimum{que} bonum septentrio∣ni dedit, vt Scotia haberet martyrem Reginam, Regis filiam, coniugem & Matrem. Whose holy prayers will be the more effectuall in your behalfe, that be constant in that religion, which she confirmed by the admirable con∣stancy of twenty years Imprisonment, and sealed with her Royal bloud. To the which end I will offer vp like∣wise my poore prayers to God the Father, as being,

