



ARISTOTLE that famous Philoso∣pher in penning his morall Philosophy thought all his labours wel imployed if he could proffit any one therby:Lib. 1. Heb. c. 1. how happy then may M. P. Anderson thinke his labours imployed, the tyme of his hard and rude impersonmēt in Edenburgh spent in Dis∣putes, & Conferences with the Ministers, hauing wonne therby sundry to the light of the true Ghospell, to the loue and feare of God, from whence the hope of all Eternity dependeth? And as you are the Fountaines of which many must drinke, the seeds from whence many must proceed, the lightes of the Kingdome, and the Mynes, whose treasure of learning is to be deriued to the whole body of the Kingdome of Scotland: So are there opened nto you in this second Part those veines of gold, cōtey∣ed in the expresse Word of God, and in the testimonies
 of the holy Fathers, and Writers of the first hundreth yeares after Christ; which Testimonies I will intreate you to peruse with an indifferent and single eye, with a great zeale of imbracing Truth frō the mouth of Christ, and from those Honorable, Learned, and holy Fathers of the first age, Quorum testimonia sunt omni exceptione maioa.
Truly, if yee would heare none but those, in whose bosomes yee haue been bred, and consequently to be so farre enamoured of your Ministers doctrine, without any ground in the expresse Word of God, or al Antiquity; the more yee should be blamed, that being amongst all Na∣tions held of witty & quicke Iudgment, fit for all sort of Sciences, yet yee would willingly, & wittingly preferre the counterfeit drosse of the Ministers, before the true & perfect Mettal of the holy Word, and testimonies of all antiquity. Or can you but imagin, that men of such life and conuersation, as your Ministers be, could find out any holsome doctrine,Bern. Ep. 190. Quae tot latuerit Sanctos, tot prae∣terierit sapientes?
S. Augustine remarketh, thatLib. 5. Confess. c. 2 Faustus Manichaeus and the ancient Heretiques of his sect, in their preaching and discourses promised nothing more thē Truth, Truth, the word of God, the Scripture, the Bible: yet he found, as he witnesseth no truth amōgst them, yea nothing but lies, vanities, and new inuented superstitions.
The same shall you discerne in the Ministers of our tyme: for although they bragge, and boast of the pure Word of God, the Bible, the written Word; yet in effect they cannot shew, no not one debatable point of their Religion to be cōteyned in the expresse Word of God. 2. They cānot possible improue any point of the Catholike Religion out of the same expresse Word. 3. They cannot
 name any Nation vnder the heauens, which auoweth their Scots Bible to be the Word of God. 4. They cannot name any forraine Doctour, or Doctours, who doe free their owne Scots Bible from falsifications, lyes, and er∣rours. Finally,Amb. in c. 3. Ep. ad Titum. By the word of the law they impugne the law, framing their priuate sense and construction to countenāce the peruersity of their mynds, by the authority of the law a ma∣king by their peruerse interpretation,Hier. l. 1 in c. 1. Ep. ad Ga∣lat. The Ghospell of Christ, the Ghospell of man, or which is worse, the Ghospell of the Diuell.
They boast of the pure preaching of the Word of God, yet in effect they haue no Cōmission, no Authority to preach, no Vocation at all, but areIoa. 10. v. 2.10. Theues, who enter not by the dore, but climbe another way, to steale, kill, and destroy your soules. They are the false Prophets who cry,Ezech. 13. v. 3 6.7. Thus sayth the Lord, when the Lord said it not, nor sent them. They glory to haue reformed the Church of God; wheras you shall easily perceaue how miserable, and de∣formed Scotland is become by their reformed Religion: and their owne formes and fashions do witnes the same plentifullie, as a famous, yea a Protestant-Writer called Zanchius doth testify thus of them:Ep. ad Ioan. Stur∣mi. Habe∣tur in fine l. 7. & 8. Miscellan. We Protestants of the reformed Church (sayth he) often of set purpose ouercloud the state of the question with darknes; things which are mani¦fest we impudētly deny; things false without shame w auouch; things plainly impious we propose as the first principles of Faith; things orthodoxall we condemne of heresy; Scriptures at our owne pleasure we detorte to our owne dreames; we boast of Fa∣thers whn we will follow nothing less then their doctrine; to deceaue, to calumniate, to raile is familiar with vs &c.
O yee flourishing Academians, O Scotland my dea∣rest Countrey, consider wisely, & in the presence of God, I beseech thee, how thou hast damned vp the passage, by
 which the cleere waters of al antiquity should flow vnto thy kingdome, and thou hast opened the sluse to the Pud∣dels of the Ministers new doctrine, new fayned Sacra∣ments, new Articles of faith, new Bible, and Scripture vnknowne as yet to all other Kingdoms, and Nations: Consider, I say, how God therefore hath punished thee, yea now of late with extraordinary Indigency; and a∣bandon these new, and vnwonted doctrines, and im∣brace againe that ancient Faith which once thy Noble, Ancient, and Princly Kingdome, Daughter of God, de∣uoutly sucked from the breasts of the Apostles, which all thy former Kings, and Princes, from King Donald the first, vntil Blessed Queen Mary, constantly professed, thy Lawes established, thy People honoured, thy Vniuersi∣ties defēded. To this end I will not cease to sacrifice vnto God my continuall prayers, and rest alwaies,

