


IN asmuch as there hathe bene, and yet is (most reue∣rend father) a nūber of leude and vnlearned persones, the which deride and skorne the holy masse, and the blessed sa∣crifice there of both god and man: and saye that it is a thin¦ge newely forged, and of late dayes inuented of the papi∣stes, as they in dirision doo name the true and catholyke seruauntes, of god: I thought
 it very necessary to translate this excellente and deuoute prayer, as a thynge moste ex∣pedient for those, which dayly doo prepare them selfes (as euery chaste and good preste shoulde doo) to celebrate and offer vppe vnto god thys he∣uenlye and blessed sacrifice,Augusti. ad Laur. Cap. 110. for the quycke and the deade. The whyche prayer, as of it selfe it is verye frutefull, con∣tayninge the hole mystery of the sacrament: so it declareth to suche as hereticallye and peruerslye vnto theyr owne destruccion (as wytnesseth, Saynt Peter) doo racke and wrynge scripture:2. Pet. 3. that the sa∣crifice of the Masse, is no fi∣gure, no Idoll (as they igno∣miniouslye doo terme it) no
 breade, nor no signification, but Christ hymselfe, hys very fleshe, and very bloude, bothe god and man, whome yf we worshyppe not in the holy sa∣crament of the aultare,Ioan. 6. (as a number of wycked personnes refrayne to doo) we shal not es∣cape (as saith,De uerbis domini serm. Ioh. Serm. 58. Saynt Austen) the eternall burning fyer and paynes of hell: for as it is no synne at all to adore and wor∣shyppe Christ being really and presently (as sayeth Saynte Austen) in the sacrament,Super Psal. 98. so it is a moste detestable synne, not to adore and worshippe Christ in the same. And to preach and affirme the Masse (as they doo moste impudently) to be a newe inuencion of the papistes Saynte Ambrose the whiche
 was twelue. C. yeares ago) in thys hys godly and vertu∣ous prayer, doth playnely and apertly to theyr great rebuke and shame, confute them, and declare the contrarye. Thys prayer thus rudely englishyd I dedicate vnto youre good Lord eshyppe, as to a mooste puisant protector of thys most excellent sacrament of the re∣all body and bloude of Christe the very substaūce and sacrifice of the blessed Masse: wisshynge your Lordeshyppe longe lyfe and continuance, aswel for the tuitiō and defense of the same, as of al other articles & poyn∣tes of the catholike faythe, the whyche in thys oure tyme (moste wycked for the worlde,
 alas for pitie, as yet stuft with many false and hollowe harted bretherne) hath nede of suche stronge and faythfull champi∣ons and defenders, as youre Lordeshyppe is, and to the vt∣termost of your power hath bene to the great honor & glory of God, to whom be all honour and glory for euer and euer.
