



AMongst other Doctrines here∣tofore gathered from my Text, viz Act. 24.14.15.16. We learned, that, Wee are to ground our Faith onely vpon the Word written. Which Doctrine arose out of this Observation, That Paul doth not say, He beleeved
all things whatsoever as direc∣tions of his worshipping the God of his Fathers; but Belee∣ving all things written in the Law, & the Prophets, so wor∣ship I, &c. This point is wor∣thy due consideration, in these prevaricating times, wherein Papists doe so fearefully decline the Word written, and runne vnto Traditions, which they call Vn∣written Verities; though indeede Traditionall very lyes; they runne (I say) vnto these, as vnto the rocke of their refuge. For if they could, but in shew, iusti∣fie their Antichristian Idolatry, and Superstitions by the Word written, how boasting they would then be, may appeare
by their catching at syllables thereof, which sound, in phan∣tasticall eares, to some of their purposes. So that Christ his censure vpon the Scribes and Pharises, may be iustly layd vp∣on them, viz: Yee haue made the Word
Mat. 15.1.6. written of none authoritie by your Traditions: But whosoever speaketh not according to this Word, it is because there is no light in them
Isa. 8.20.. For the whole Scripture that is, The Word written) is given by Inspira∣tion of God, and is profitable to teach, to convince, to cor∣rect, and to instruct in righte∣ousnesse, that the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect vnto all good works
2 Tim. 3.15.16.17..

 Amongst other Vses of the sayd Doctrine, this was one, If we are to ground our faith only vpon the Word written, then all, who are wise vnto Salvation, must diligently read the same; or, If they cannot reade, diligently heare them read in publique Congregati∣ons, & els-where, as they may. For to what ende was the Word of God committed to Writing; but that Gods people should reade, or heare it read diligently? Therefore let vs re∣ligiously take to heart, and con∣sider the wise exhortation of our Master Christ, viz: Search the Scriptures, For in them yee thinke to haue eternall life
Ioh. 5.39.. Wherein ob∣serue,
that He calleth the word of God Scriptures, that is, Writings, and not onely so, but The Scrip∣tures, that is, Writings incom∣parably excelling all other. For (indeed) they are given by inspiration of God. There∣fore we are to search them. Which word Search, implieth Diligence. As where we are exhorted
Pro. 2.3. to Search for the Know∣leage of God as for Treasures. But how are Writings searched o∣therwise, than by diligent rea∣ding? Thus did the Nobly-minded Baereans
Acts. 17.1 Search the Scrip∣tures daily. So that Christ his ex∣hortation is this in effect. If ye thinke (indeed) to haue eternall life in the Scriptures, then
shew your selues wise vnto salvation by your diligence in reading, or hearing them read. This point requireth much pressing in these times, where∣in too many are like those, whom Isaiah taxeth.
Isa. 29.10. VVho, being covered with a spirit of slumber, dreame of ea∣ting, but when they are a∣wake their soules are emp∣tie; Yet when a Booke is of∣fered them to be read, they refuse, saying either The Booke is Sealed, as doe the Papists; or, They cannot Reade, as doe thousands of irreligious people, whose carelesnesse to heare the Scriptures read, (discovered by their late com∣ming
to the Church, where the Scriptures be read, and their readinesse to heare the reading of vaine Bookes and Balldes) doth manifest their want of religious zeale, to supply their disability to reade the Scriptures, by diligence in giuing attendance to the reading thereof. But there may come a time of tryall, when the Deafe shall heare the words of the Booke, as ISAIAH Prophecieth in the same Chapter.
Vers. 17.1 VVhich Prophecie implieth, that he, who sayd, He could not reade, should (yet) haue signified desire to heare the Booke read. To prevent
which tryall (if it may so please our most gracious God) let's imitate, yea, emulate the reli∣gious Iewes,
Acts. 13.14.15. And 15.21. who so diligently heard the olde Testament read in their Synagogues every Sab∣bath day, that Christ, and his Apostles saw it not necessary to quote Chapter, and Verse, when they preached, or wrote. And why? Because, by diligent hearing the Scriptures read, their memory was so confir∣med, that they could presently acknowledge every allegation to be conteined in the Scrip∣tures. To which ende, viz: the confirmation of memory by reading, was the Word of God written; Yea so, That the chil∣dren
of Israel were commanded
Deut. 11.19.18. as well to write Gods words vpon the posts of their houses, and vpon their gates, as to be speaking of them, when they sit, walke, &c. that they might lay them vp in their hearts. These things I now write, that thereby I may stirre you, and others vp, by reading, to renew, and confirme your memory, that it may, vnto your farther edification, reflect vpon this ground of Religiō. The Scrip∣tures be the very Word of God. VVhich (indeed) is, The Princi∣ple of all Principles concerning Religi∣on, and therefore is (as it ought to be) esteemed accordingly of all that doe the Truth
Ioh. 3.2 Deut. 17.19, that is,
Obey God in Sinceritie, so as they come to the light thereof, that their deeds may be made manifest, that they be wrought according to God. Therefore not onely David a King, and an olde man, professed
al. 37.25.9.105.9. Gods Word to haue beene a Light to his paths, but the Spirit also, by way of a Question, doth, with a strong asseveration, affirme, That young men (if they feare God) must re∣dresse their wayes in taking heede to them according to Gods Word. To which our most holy God, and to the Word of his grace,
ct 20.32. which is able to build further, and to giue you an inheritance amongst all them which are sanctified, I heartily commend you.
