



WOrshipfull, and Gentlemen (my good friends) Cō∣forts, I well know, might
 seeme to be vnseasonably of∣fered in a world of securi∣ty; but that also I am not ignorant, that in a secure world, many sleepe not in the cradle of security. There is a righteous No∣ah, in a world of the vn∣godly, & a iust Lot among the Sodomites, vexed in heart with their vncleane conuersation. Where many (as one of the Prophets spea∣keth) eate the Lambs of the flocke, and Calues of the stalls, faring, as it is said of Diues, deliciously euery day; there may bee some (like poore Lazarus) lying at their gates begging food,
 for preseruation of life. While some, perhaps, may bee chaunting the song, to the sound of the violl, and be singing merrily the tune of worldly contentment: O∣thers, peraduenture, may be sad in heart, and set downe heauily mourning for their miseries. What if a Gallio relish not religion, nor doth care any thing at al, though Paul be smitten wrongful∣ly; yet must we think, there be such as do not forget, but truely take to heart the af∣fliction of Ioseph? While some are whole, not needing the Physician, as in their owne conceits they foolishly
 imagine; some other neuer∣thelesse may feele their spi∣rituall maladies, yea and groane vnder their burthē, desiring to be eased. Albeit full stomackes tread vnder∣foot the hony combe: yet the hungry soule is glad of the crummes which fall from the Lords Table. Indeede, the carnall libertine, if he may enioy worldly wealth, & earthly rest, he feeleth no want of spirituall comforts, nor taketh any notice of his spiritual bondage; but a ho∣ly Paul, a true conuert to God, though hee haue out∣ward contentments, yea & inward peace; yet because
 he cannot doe the good hee would, but often the euill, which he would not, he cri∣eth out; O miserable mā that I am, who shall deliuer mee from the body of this death!
Therefore to those that stand in need of cōfort, and desire the words of heauen∣ly refreshment; to those that are troubled in mind, in spi∣rit wounded and in their conscience afflicted: to those that are assaulted by Satan, vexed by ill men, disquieted in their outward estates, crossed in the honest course of their callings, or any waies tempted; to all those, and for their sakes haue I
 laboured in this worke of Comforts, that they may find (if God please) some so∣lace hereby to their poor af∣flicted spirits. I send it not to gybing Ismaels, mock∣ing at the children of the promise, but to obedient and faithfull Isaacs; not to prophane Esaus, but to religious Iacobs: to Io∣seph in prison and bonds, not to his brethren at liber∣tie at home, and vnhum∣bled: to the oppressed Is∣raelites, and not to op∣pressing Egyptians. I of∣fer it not to proud and hau∣tie Hamans; but to hum∣ble and mournful Morde∣cayes
 clothed in sackcloth: to Ieremy and Amos the true dealing Prophets, and not to Amaziah and Pa∣shur the flattering Priests: to Abedmelech a godlie Courtier, and not to Zibah the sycophant and cousiner: to a constant Ruth, not to a backe-sliding Orpha: to an Hannah, a womā trou∣bled in spirit, pouring out her soule before the Lord, & not to a Peninah, a vex∣ing and vpbrayding aduer∣sary: not to a Michol moc∣king her Lord and hus∣band; but to a contemned and despised Leah. In a word, it is to the heauie loa∣den
 that I wish refresh∣ment, and to the sorrowfull glad tidings, health to the sicke, rest to the troubled; soundnes of comfort, to the broken in heart, strength to the weak and feeble soule, and full supply of whatsoe∣uer is wanting for true ioy to euery one of the Lords e∣lected people.
Oh (my worshipfull, and worthy good friends) I wish the spirit of the Lord God vpon me, to publish power∣fully good tidings to the meeke, to binde vp the bro∣ken hearted, to proclaime liberty to the captiues, the o¦pening of the prison to them
 that are bound, to declare the acceptable yeere of the Lord, & to comfort all that mourne: this is my desire, this is the true intendment of this my labour. If God so blesse it, how ioyful & glad shall I be? and that it may be, I intreat the Lord, to ap∣point and giue vnto them that mourne in Sion, beauty for ashes; the ioy of oyle, for mourning; the garment of praise, for the spirit of hea∣uines, that they may bee cal∣led the trees of righteousnes the planting of the Lord, that hee may bee glorified. This mercy I craue also of God for you, and doe desire
 that this my worke (which here I present to you) may bee both friendly accepted of, as I offer it for a testimo∣ny of my true and hearty af∣fection, and also so diligent∣ly perused, as you may reape the ioyfull fruit thereof, & speake from experience the praises of God; and thus in my best well-wishes, not doubting of a kind accep∣tance, and your continu∣ance of loue, I heartily be∣take you to the protection and louing mercies of our heauenly Father.
Batcombe Decem. 29.

