


IT hath beene a com∣mon and vsual thing at all times and in al ages (Right worship∣ful and vertuous La∣die) to see many gifts and presentes brought and bestowed vpon the richer and welthier sort, and vpon such as haue had no neede, veri∣fying therby that, in earthly matters, which properly is spoken and meant of the minde, to wit: To him that hath shall be giuen abundantly, &c. Euen so, the abundance of God his good gifts, the humblenesse of minde, the loue of vertue, the zeale of the seruing of
 God, and the tender bowels of com∣passion which I haue credibly heard, and partly seene in your Ladishippe, hath often times stirred me vp, by wri∣ting to adde some good thing vnto the heape of those your good and ex∣cellent vertues. But finding nothing in my selfe wherewith to answere my desire, worthie the learning, what by reason of the want of knowledge and wisdome in me: I in the end resolued with my selfe to giue ouer my purpose and determination, and to finish with prayer vnto God, That it would please his Maiestie to blesse his giftes in you with encrease, so farre forth as it shall be thought good to his heauenly wise∣dome to appoint: neuerthelesse, spen∣ding some time as my leysure woulde serue me in reading ouer diuerse and sundry expositions of the sacred scrip∣tures, I lighted vppon this short para∣phrase of DANIELL TOVS∣SAINE of the holy Lamentations of the Prophet Ieremiah, an apt and fitte peece of worke (in my poore opi∣nion) to be euery way applyed vnto these our dayes, aswel for the comfor∣ting of all the faithfull childrē of God that are vnder the crosse & feele their
 miseries, as also for the awaking and stirring vppe of all those that haue no feeling of their miseries, notwithstan∣ding the great calamities which haue fallen, and are like still to fall vppon this latter age of the worlde. And because (as I haue alreadie sayde) I finde nothing in my selfe to further that loue of vertue and zeale of Chri∣stianitie which GOD in great mercy hath vouchsafed vpon you, I haue ob∣tayned at the handes of this godly mi∣nister and preacher of the word, DA∣NIELL TOVSSAINE, to sup∣ply my want, whom, if it shall please your Ladiship attentiuely with good affection to heare: the paine no doubt shall be much lesse than the profite, and you therby shall not faile to reape great fruite. The point of which small trauaile shall soone take ende, and the gaine long remaine and continue. And therefore whatsoeuer here shalbe handled in this little treatise: I most humbly beseech your good Ladiship alwayes in some measure to remem∣ber. To be short, If the people of the Iewes in Ierusalem hadde made an ac∣count of the wordes of the Prophet in forewarning them of their destruction:
 if they turned not vnto their God, it had not so fallen out with them as it did. But because they beleeued him not, but dealt most cruelly with him, the Lorde in his iust iudgementes re∣quited their obstinacie. For, the verie name of God his word, ought to strike into our heartes great reuerence to∣wardes it, great desire to haue it, great haste to heare it, great loue to read it, and like care to keepe it. If a King or Queene should write vnto vs, Oh, how readie would we be to shore vppe our eares? What haste would we make to heare the contents of the same? But beholde, God him selfe hath directed his letters to euerie one of vs, the Se∣cretarie of which, is his owne holy spi∣rite, and his Prophets, Apostles, and Ministers are his purseuauntes and messengers, which bring them vnto vs. And therefore, intollerable is our cō∣tempt towardes his Maiestie, that sen∣deth them, if we do not humbly heare and reade them, and diligently marke and obserue the especiall pointes and contents of them. And as it is written: the very dreadfull wordes of God doe follow such contempt.
1. Prou.O turne vnto my correction, for lo
 I will expresse my mind vnto you, and make you vnderstand my words. See∣ing then that I haue called & you re∣fused t, I haue stretched out my hand and no man regarded it, but all my counsell yee haue despised, and set my corrections at naught, therefore shall I also laugh at your destruction, &c.
Nowe then, what promise can be sweeter, than to haue God expresse his mind vnto vs, and make vs vnderstand his will? And what terror can be grea∣ter, then to haue his Maiestie laugh & reioyce in our destruction? Frō which dreadfull destruction I beseech him to deliuer vs, & stay vs by his holy word, vntill such time as wee come vnto his happy kingdome. Thus humbly lea∣uing the patronezing of this my poore and simple trauaile vnto your good Ladyshippe I cease.
From Marke Lane in London
the 16. of September. 1587.

