



MAny are the miseries that are common to all mankinde, as the dangers wherto this life is subiect, and the vnpleasaunt sau∣ces of sorrow, sicke∣nes, wants, troubles, and such other grievaunces, wherewith our life is sowred, doe plainely teach vs.
 There were amongst the Heathen that in consideration hereof vsed to weep, when their friendes were borne, and to reioice, when they died: by this custome acknow¦ledging, that the birth is an entrance into sorrow & the vale of miserie, from which by death they were deliuered. Well wri∣tethDe civitate Dei lib. 21: cap: 14▪ Saint Augustine, that this whole life, is but a punishment. And the Sonne of Si∣rach notably describeth and setteth out before our eies, the misery that belongeth to this life. Great travell is created for allEccle: 40: 1▪ men (saith hee) and a heavy yoke vpon the sonnes of Adam, from the day they goe out of their mothers wombe, till the day they re∣turne to the mother of all things. Then af∣ter hee sheweth how diuersly men are af∣flicted, and that this estate of life, befal∣leth euen to him that sitteth vpon the throne, aswell as to the poore, that lieth in ashes, so that none can claime in▪ this, any priviledge or prerogatiue.
And as all men haue their part of these common annoyances; so the godly haue
 besids these, their peculiar vexatiōs, in re∣spect of sinne that is too rife in our selues and others; whereby we are grieved to see Gods glory defaced, his name prophaned, his word reiected, our most holy professi∣on slaundered, and our selues drawen of∣ten times vnto sinne, against which wee striue, and shoulde striue euen vnto death.
Many also are the comfortes that God affordeth vs his children, that we shoulde not in this place of our painefull pilgri∣mage, bee altogither oppressed with sor∣row and griefe, and overcome with care∣full cogitations. Such comfortes are the company of our friendes and such as wee delight in▪ the vse of Gods good creatures to supply all our wantes, and such other helpes as hee blesseth vs withall. But a∣mong them all, there is not any like vnto that consolation, which we finde in resor∣ting to our good God, and making our moane to him, who is a Father, to the fa∣therlesse, a husbande, to the widdowe, a
 helpe, to the helplesse, and a strong towre, to the distressed, comfort, to the comfort∣lesse, to the sicke, medicine.
Now wee cannot come vnto him, but by faith, nor speake vnto him, as suters to be deliuered from the evil, we feare, or in∣riched with the good graces, that wee de∣sire, but by praier: which is a deuoute lif∣ting vp not of the hands only, but especi∣ally of the hart, vnto the God of all grace, the founetaine of all goodnes. So that the necessitie of praier hereby appeareth, and that wee haue continuall occasions that may force vs to make our requestes to God.
And least the burden of our sins should presse vs down to heauily, or we through our corruption or ignorance, should pray for other thinges, or in other sorte, then we ought: our Sauiour Christ hath set vs down a forme or patterne which we must follow, wherein wee may learne, as with boldnesse to come before the throne of grace, nothing doubting, but that our
 heavenly Father, will heare the sighes and groanes of vs his children: so also, how to frame our praiers in such sort, as that wee may be hard, and our requests granted, as in this little treatise I trust it will appeare. For though our heauenly Master promi∣seth that we shall finde, if we seeke, haue, if we aske, and the dore shalbee opened, if we knocke: yet we know that Saint Iames telleth some, that they aske, and haue not,Iac: 4: 3: because they aske amisse, that they might be∣stow or consume it on their lusts. Therfore it behoueth vs to pray with feeling of our wants, that we may pray fervently, and to follow the godly advice of Saint Iames in another place, who will haue vs to aske inIacob 1: 6: faith, or faithfully, and without doubting. Nowe to come with such confidence it1: Tim: 2. 8: much availeth, that wee not only lift vp pure handes, in testimony of an vprighte conscience, as Saint Paule admonisheth2: Tim: 2: 22 vs: but also that we cal vpon the Lord with a pure heart, as the same Apostle elswhere adviseth vs. For let every one that callethvers: 19:
 on the name of Christ, depart from iniqui∣tie, everie one I say that professeth Christ Iesus, much more then such as seeke for his helpe, in their praiers. These and such like cautions or admonitions, are necessa∣ry for them that seeke and sue vnto that most mighty God, who punisheth sinne, and hateth wickednes, least that with idle words we beat the aire, and haue our prai∣er turned into sinne.
To this end therefore especially in this li∣tle treatise vpon the Lords praier, haue I bent my selfe, & directed my course, that I might instruct the ignorant, not onely what to aske, nor whereof they stand in neede; (though that be not altogither neg¦lected) for our owne wantes, (if we haue any right feeling of our owne estate) wilbe a good schole▪ master to teach vs that les∣son: but especially, howe we should frame and prepare our selues, in these our prai∣ers to come before our heavenlie Father; and what manner of men we ought to be, that beg such things at the hande of God.
 So that in this glasse we may see, not only what, or how to aske & pray, but also how to liue, and by what rule wee must direct our conversation. Yea magistrates and pri¦vat persons, princes & subiects, pastours, and their flocke, and al others whatsoever, may hereby be put in mind of some peece of duty; and that they cannot pray hartely and earnestly for that, which themselues by such meanes as God affoordeth do not also striue to advaunce and maintaine. For how absurd a thing is it, that wee say with our lippes, Hallowed be thy name, thy king∣dome come, thy will be done: and yet God ha¦ving given vnto vs many good meanes, to glorifie him, and set forth his praise, ad∣vaunce his kingdome, & bring men vnto some reasonable obedience vnto his holie wil: we never set our hand to that plough, or apply our selues vnto that service, or at the least, we doe it to coldly, & to seldōe? Is not this to aske, that we care not for, & to pray for that we mind not, and to make a shewe to desire that we loue not? Is not
 this to dissemble with God, as if we were carefull of the things, that litle or nothing trouble vs?
This and such like faultes wee may find with our selues, which also we ought to re¦forme, vnlesse we will ast of Gods heavy wrath: and we may in some good measure learne to amēd thē, if we carefully regard, even those rules of life, which out of this form of praier we should gather, as to the godly reader I trust it will appeare.
Now this treatise haue I thought good to present vnto your worship as to one vn¦to whome I confesse my selfe many waies indebted, and by divers bondes of curtesie very much bound: And that the rather, because amonge many losses of friendes, much sickenes and want of health, & ma∣ny other crosses and griefes, whereof for some yeares you haue had no small porti∣on: I doubt not but your chiefest, your qui¦eest and safest refuge hath beene, earnest praier to the God of all grace, and a repo∣sing of your selfe in his goodnes, who in a
 tender loue pitieth his, and keepeth even their very teares in his botle, and heereth their cries in the needeful time of trouble. Take I pray you in good parte, this simple token of my vnfeaned good will. Regarde it not according to the woorth thereof in price, but thinke what profit it may bring to a Christian. And as often as you call vp¦pon our heavenly Father (which no doubt you doe verie often) thinke what manner of men we ought to be, that dare approch before him, and come into his presence, and how we should frame our selues so to intreat him, that hee may heare vs in this vale of misery, and comforte vs in all our griefs even vntill he bring vs to that hap∣py place of endlesse ioy and perfect felici∣ty: which the Lord God in mercy giue to you, and al them that vnfeanedly loue the Lord Iesus Christ: Amen.
