


RIght Honora∣ble: At what time the Ta∣bernacle, an outward re∣presentation of GODS presence among his an∣cient people of Israel, was erected in the wildernes,
 euery hand was busied and heart addicted to∣ward it. And so great was the zeale of the peo∣ple of that time therein that Moses was moued to bid them forbeare to bring any more offerings ere they would desist. As was then the Tabernacle, so is the Word of God vnto vs now. Happines or misery befalleth ei∣ther where it is planted or wanting. And there∣fore euery one of an abi∣lity should be ymployed one way or other to pro∣mote the welfare there∣of, either by learned ex∣positions
 of the more dif∣ficult and mystical parts, or in familiar manner set∣ting downe, for the capa∣city of the weaker sort, such things therein as concerne faith and good life; or by painfull and powerfull preaching so carue the Word, as euery soule that commeth with hungry and prepared af∣fections, may haue it por∣tion. And happy he that either so teaching it, or taught by it, is found walking in the light and rule thereof; and shall be sure to heare Christ pro∣nounce vnto him in the
 great day of Retributi∣on, Well done, good ser∣uant and faithfull. And therefore although the argument of this little booke (great for the mat∣ter) had deserued a farre better and more skilfull Pen-man thenmy selfe: Yet as one who desireth the general benefit of all, and vnwilling that any vacuum should be in that remainder of time which God shall giue; I haue endeauoured (though in much weakenesse) to set downe the briefe of such things, as are at large scattered and diffused
 through-out the body of the sacred Scriptures. A worke which (if effectu∣ally and elaborately per∣formed) would bee wor∣thy the view and reuiew of all such as desired to reade the SCRIPTVRE with profit, and would profit by reading. And because when wee haue done the best wee can, yet detraction will fol∣low the penne, euen as the Crowes doe the sower, or the Fowles that fell vpon Abrahams sacri∣fice; in which regard, as there is need of Patro∣nage to shelter writing
 from Calumny: So for my owne part, I haue humbly submitted these my poore and weake en∣deuors, vnder the wings of your Ladiships Honora∣ble protection, partly out of my opinion, That the fruits of the Gospell should first bee offered to such (your Ladiship a principall one) as are the Patrons or patronesses of the Gospell. And se∣condly, in lieu of my true and vnfained affecti∣on, and in remembrance of that Honorable Saint now with GOD, in her life time the subiect of
 many excellencies, and patterne of true Nobili∣ty, namely, your Lady mother: By whose boun∣tie I haue fared the bet∣ter: So not knowing whither to direct my thoughts better, then by way of thankfulnesse, I haue reflected them vpon your Ladiship, as the proper obiect, and heire of her possessions & ver∣tues. If your Ladiship shall please to accept these my small endeuors in good worth, I haue my desire, and shall day∣ly pray the Lord to esta∣blish your Noble heart
 more and more in the truth of that profession, which maketh you graci∣ous with God, and those that truely loue & feare him. From my house at West Markham, the fift of May.

