



VERY REVEREND AND VERTVOVS Mother, hauing a purpose ac∣cording to the vsual maner of others, who publish any treatise, to present it to the gracefull acceptaunce of some qualifyed person, I haue made choice of you for a Patronesse of this booke, whoe haue engaged your selfe by the bands of the same holy religion, to render all due honour, and respect to these noble persons, who haue borne the standard of the Crosse, soe coura∣giously,
 vnder the colours of S Fran∣cis. And indeed your life, & the liues of your vertuous sisters, are framed & instituted according to the same rule, and in some things (be it spoken to Gods glory, and the cōfortable hope of your reward, if yee perseuere in wel doing) notwithstanding the weake∣nes, and tendernes of your sexe, yee goe beyond them in embracing the crosse by mortifications, and austeri∣ties. For besides the wearing of haire-cloth, sharpe disciplines, frequēt me∣ditations, dayly mentall and vocall prayers, lying vpon a cold and hard strawbed, without stripping your sel∣ues of your course and poore cloths yee weare, rising at midnight to ma∣tins which things are cōmon to you both, yee doe alsoe obserue perpetual abstinence from flesh, and eate but
 one poore meale in a daye, and beside yee are allwayes murd vp within the foure walles of your monastery. To which obseruations Capucins are not obliged for iust causes, for that their labour in studies, their preaching, & instructing of others, can not subsist with them.
And because among you, the grea∣test part is sprōg from noble & prin∣cipall houses in our country, I doubt not but the view & consideration of their noble persons, will prouoke you to goe forward in your holy vocatiō, without the least faynting; which I speake, not as doubting at your reso∣lution and strength giuen to you by him, whoe spake by the mouth of his Prophet for assurāce of such as ye are. Esaiae. 40.31. Children shall faint and la∣bour, & youngmen shall fall by infirmitie.
 But they that hope in our Lord, shal chaunge their strength. They shall take winges as eagles. They shall run∣ne, and not labour, they shall walke, and not faynt. Yet good examples of those whom yee affect more then your owne naturall brethren (for the bonds of grace doe tye faster in loue then the bands of nature) serue for an incitement, and encouragement to you in going on well, in despite of all sinistre suggestion of him whoe see∣keth to supplant all those that runne as yee doe, that yee may obtaine such an incorruptible crowne. And if the examples of your owne sexe preuaile more with you, I knowe yee are well stored with them, soe that it should be vnnecessarie to put you in mind of them otherwise, then by a blessed cō∣memoratiō of them. I will only point at the first noble Dames from whom
 you deriue your selues by true descēt. Was not the blessed mother of God, the great Lady and mistresse, of that holy vow of virginitie which yee ma∣ke? whoe as S. Aug. noteth, euident∣lie prooued it by her aunswere made vnto the Angel, bringing her the ty∣dings of conceauing the Sonne of God. Which was: How shall this be done because I knowe not man? Luc. 1.34. For she wold not haue asked such a question how a woman should beare a sonne promised to her, if she had marryed meaning to haue carnal co∣pulation. S. Aug. cap. 4. de virg. Next in holy scripture, thoughe the pro∣phetesse Anne was not a virgin, yet she liued after her husbands death in the state of holy widow hood, and true deuout chastitie, and departed not from the temple by fasting, & prayers
 seruing night and daye: Luc. 2.37. whoe was a liuely paterne of that life which yee professe, in that yee dwell conti∣nuallie in Gods house, praying night and day, and offering your prayers accompanied with cōtinual fastings.
Now because the thrice blessed Virgin, and the prophetesse Anne, did liue single, and sequestred from o∣ther companie (for in the beginning of regeneration, as in the beginnings of humane generation, there was no multitude to be found) yet within few yeares after, there was a conuent of holy Virgins to be found, of whom the scripture maketh mention: soe that your conuentuall life, hath sprong from the pure fountaine of Gods word (which I note by the way, for the in∣struction of those that are afrayd without cause of traditions of the
 church of God) and hath bene euer since deduced to this age. Doe we not read that Philipp the Eāugelist (that is a preacher as S. Paul also writeth to Timothie. Act. 21.9. Doe the worke of an Euangelist) had foure daughters Virgins in his house, which did prophecie? In wich foure virgins, were consecra∣ted the first fruits of deuout Virgins. Vpon which place S. Hierome, that graue and learned patron of Virgi∣nitie noteth, that this was in Caesa∣rea. In qua ex gentibus Ecclesia per centu∣rionem Cornelium fuerat dedicata, etiam virginum puellarum praeberet exempla. Hieron. lib. 1. cont. Iouin. That Caesa∣rea in which place the church was de∣dicated by the centurion Cornelius, might also yeeld examples of maydē Virgins. As thoughe he wold haue sayd, which he speaketh in an other
 place in the same booke that it was a thing most requisit, that Monile Ec∣clesiae talibus gemmis decoraretur, that the chaine which the spouse of Christ doth weare, should be adorned with such gemmes, and pearles.
Heerin certes our poore countrie hath great cause of comfort, that al∣though yee, and other virgins of o∣ther orders of relig on (for the Queene, which is the church, in golden rayment is compassed wth variety) can not serue God at home in religious houses by reason of the difficulties of the time, yet doe yee in number dayly encrease, and clad with the garments of him to whom yee haue espoused your selues, to witt the garments of myrrhe, aloes, and Cassia (which are mortification, hu∣militie, and sanctification) yee make
 your houses shine as though they were of yuorie, & becoming daugh∣ters of the king of kings, yee haue delighted him in the honour yee giue him. Which is by lifting vp pure harts and hands continuallie to hea∣uen. And now although there be a chaos of sea betweene you and your deare countrye, yet is it not such as was betweene Abraham, and the rich man in the Gospel: and therfore yee must perseuere in all patience, and at∣tend. Donec misereatur Deus, till God take pitie of vs. For albeit God (whose iudgements are vnsercheable) doth remooue farre from our eyes any great hope of raising the walles of Sion, in that manner as they stand and flourish in Catholique contries, yet cease not yee to importune him with your holy prayers, and hope
 against hope, knowing that God is able to rayse vp children to Abraham out of verie stones, and persuade your selues, that your prayers shall not returne emptye. Sing with the Pro∣phet Dauid. Turne our captiuitie o Lord as a torrent in the south. Psalm. 125.4. and doubt not but after your sowing in teares, yee shall reape in ioyfulnes. Howsoeuer yee goe weeping, and casting seeds, yet in the end shal yee come forth with exultation, carying your sheaues, at the least into that heauenlie barne, where pure wheate is seuered from all chaffe, and drosse. Now good Mother, and deare sis∣ters, if I haue afforded you anie com∣fort by this small paines I haue ta∣ken, as I hope in your charitie yee will not denie soe much to me, let me for my recompence be made
 partaker of your deuotions, in re∣commending me to our B. Sauiour, and his holy Mother, to whom I will not cease to commend you like∣wise in my poore prayers, being euer.

