



IF we waigh and consider as∣well this present pece of Scripture in∣titled the Reuelatiō, as also the whole body of the same (Ryghte honorable and my singular Lorde) we shall fynde that the trewe Churche of Chryst hath ben euer from the first creation of the world, is now, and still shall be to the consumation therof, subiecte to greate aduersities, persecutions, and troubles, out of the which notwithstanding the Lord when he seeth it good deliuereth and preserueth the same, and suffereth her not to perysh. Wherupon the Romish haue a trew saying, that Peters ship may with billowes and waues of tempestuous stormes be ouer whelmed, but can neuer be drowned, which saying is doubtlesse most true, although thei thē selues sayle not therein, but rather seke to dround the same by ouer∣fraighting her with the heauy burthen of mens traditions. For certē∣ly the Shippe of Peter whiche is the figure of Chrystes Churche is in dede ofte tossed and tourmoyled with outragious stormes and tem∣pestes, but can neuer be drenched or swallowed vp of the same. For Christ bothe Master and owner therof, can and wyll, for his mercy & truthes sake appeace all rages at his pleasure. Herin both the Papistes and Gospellers do agree. But whether of them are the trewe Church thys matter is yet in controuersie & hangeth before the Iudg, which this present worke shall discerne and put out of all doubt. And to en∣ter a little into the matter as it were with a certen preamble, the true Churche of Chryste is not called the stony temple wherin we assem∣ble to heare Gods worde, receyue the Sacramentes, and to praye in, for suche are builded with handes, and with handes are destroyed a∣, nether yet is it called the congregation of certen Byshops of al
 nations assembled in a generall Counsell, for they all though in the firste lawfull and godly counselles, were many good men and excel∣lent mēbers of Christes Church, yet were they not the whole church which could not erre, and the which had authoritie to make new Ar∣ticles of the faith, but the Church is called the whole societie of peo∣ple that acknowledge the Gospell of Christe and beleue in him. And this Churche not to be of one time only but of all tymes & ages, as Adam with Eue hys wife, his sun Abel & his familie was the church, Noah with his familie was the churche. Melchizedec with his fami∣lie was the Churche, Abraham also with his familie. Likewyse Isaac, Iacob, Dauid, the Prophetes and Apostles with theyr Auditours that beleued in the Gospell of Christ were the churche, and where soeuer at this daye the Gospel of Christ is receyued and beleued there is also the church of Christ which by a figuratiue speache may be aptly cal∣led the Ship of Peter or Arcke of Noe. Now let vs consider the state of the churche vnder Adam, wherof the chiefest member was righte∣ous Abel, but him doth his brother Cain persecute for Religion and slayeth hym And this was the beginning of the tempest that arose a∣against the Ship of Peter, the beginning I meane, of the persecution of the church which shal last to the worldes ende. Lykewyse dyd the churche vnder Abraham suffer persecution by Ismaell, vnder Isaac by Esau, vnder Moses of Pharao, vnder Eli the high Priest the Arke of the Lorde was taken by the Philistines, and then it was thought that the church shulde haue quyte perished vnder Achab and wicked Iezabel, the Churche was not onlye afflicted and sore oppressed, but also in a maner extinguished where the Prophet Helias complayned that he was lefte alone. Vnder Ieremie, the Citie of Ierusalem was destroyed of the Babylonians, and the churche was not lyke then to perish, but rather vtterly lost already, when Christ the head of the Churche, was crutified, it was iudged that the churche had then ben cleane destroi∣ed. We had thought (say they) that he shoulde haue redemed Israell, what tyme king Pharao with his host had inclosed the Israelites, that is to witte, the churche betwene the mountaines and the Red Sea, it was lyke that the churche shulde haue perished, but Moses prayed & the Lorde miraculously deliuered them: Againe, the churche semed to be in extreme daunger when Sennacherib spoyled the kyngdome of Iuda, and ment to destroy Ierusalem, but througe the prayer of Eze∣chias the Kyng, God sent his Angell and distroyed the host of the As∣syrians. The church semed to tende vnto ruine, when Herod had kil∣led Iames with the sweard, and minded also Peter, but the congrega∣tion contynewyng in prayer, the Lorde sent his Angel to deliuer Pe∣ter. And to be short in those ten greuous persecutions which follow∣ed immediatly after the Apostles time the church many times semed
 brought vnto vtter decay, but alwayes when God saw it good it was reuiued, and as it were refreshed agayne. What shuld I recite the per∣secutions of the churche in the time of Athanasius wherin the Arrian Bishoppes so preuayled that the Emperour and his whole Armye so persecuted Athanasius, that the good Bishop was fayne to lye hyd in an holle, where he saw no sunne by the space of sixe yeares. And who wold then haue thought that euer the trew churche of Christ shulde haue flourished agayne? I nede not here to reherse the cruell persecu∣tions of the church vnder the Romish antichrist which neuerthelesse haue ben and be yet styll most tyranicall and blouddye. For that the same shall in this present worke more clerely appere, then that I nede to make any discourse therof, only I wolde shewe, briefely as dothe my Author, at large, that Christes trewe churche, is alwayes subiect to persecutions. To thintent therfore to passe ouer many thynges vn∣touched, and to come nerer our fathers memorye, in the tyme of the Emperoure Sigismunde, there was holden a counsell at Constaunce, wherein, the Bishops so conspired, to extinguish Christes veritie, that contrary to thauncient libertie of a free and general Counsel, and cō∣trary to the Emperours saufconduit, they not only burned there Iohn Husse and Hierome of Prage, professours of Chrystes Gospell, but de∣creed also, that the bones of Iohn Wickleffe, sumtime Person of Lut∣terworth, here in Englande: shuld be taken vp and brent. whose be∣stiall crueltie, of raging against dead men, our popishe prelacie of late dayes, rightly Imitatynge, as the children of one father, that was a murtherer frō the beginning, practysed lyke tyranny with the bones of Martin Bucer and Paulus Fagius at Cambridge. Such raging surges of late dayes did beate against the Ship of Peter. Blessed be the Lorde Iesus, that hath sent vs a goodly caulme, accordyng to the saying of the Prophet Dauid. The Iuste shall suffer muche tribulotion, but the Lorde delyuereth them out of all. And this is verely the argument & sum of this boke, that Chrystes churche shall suffer greuous persecu∣tion, but shall neuer be left destitute. For where the dragon fighteth on the sand, the Lambe Chryst like a conquerour, standeth on Mount Sion, right hable to succour all his, to the great comfort and consola∣tion of his chosen, whiche of necessitie, muste suffer with Chryst, yf with him, we will be glorifyed: And as Christ him selfe, when he was rayled vpon, gaue no euil words again. So is the true church of Christ knowen in this, that it suffereth persecution, and doeth not persecute agayne. Wherfore lyke as wise kinge Salomon iudged her, to be the true mother of the childe, which had suche compassion on it, that she had rather forgo the whole, then haue it diuided and dismembred, & the other to be the harlot, that had ouerlayne her childe whiche had also consented to the death of thother: Right so maye we discerne e∣uidently
 the whorish churche of Antichrist by her bluddy persecuti∣ons from the true churche and spouse of Chryst, the one with sweard and fyre seketh alwayes to quenche the treuth, the other through the sperite of lenitie, to winne men to the same, the one by compulsion and violent oppression, thother by perswasion: and meke intercessiō, the one by the sworde, the other by the worde, the one goeth aboute to peruert and depraue, the other seketh all meanes, to conuerte and saue. But lest I shulde excede here the iuste measure of an Epistle, and through prolexitie, be to your honour tediouse, which cā (as the pro∣uerbe sayeth) discerne a Lion by his clawes. I will breake of the thred of my discourse, notwithstāding, that the matter is so ample & large, that it wold require an other worke, wherin it is harder to fynde an ende, then it was a beginning, contented by these fewe examples of sondry tymes, to haue signified not to your Lordship, which knowe them much better then I: And haue red this present work in Latin as you do all others right diligently. But through your ientil patience, to the plaine English Reader, that the true church of Chryst hath ben in all ages persecuted, and that this present worke, written vpon the Reuelation of S. Iohn, & into an hundred Sermons digested, declareth no lesse; and is as it were an Ecclesiastical History of the troubles and persecutions of the Churche, especially from the Apostles tyme, vntill the last day, wherin Chryst, the head of the same shall come a righte∣ous Iudge, to condemn Antichrist, and all Antichristian hipocrites & bluddy persecutours: But to receyue his electe people and to crowne them with glory: And shall deliuer vp his kingdome, to his Father, & God shall be all in all. Which worke vnderstanding right well, that it shuld to your honour be acceptable. I dedicate and consecrate to your name, as you best haue deserued. Which in this and other like enter∣prises, haue ben to me, a golden spurre, that by you all others may receyue commoditie therof, to the glory of God and saluation of theyr owne soules. The Lorde Iesus with his princi∣pall spirite, strengthen and confirme youre good Lordeshyp in all youre Godly desires.
From Ipsewich the kalendes of March. Anno. Do 1561.
