



YOu venerable and Reuerend men, and Brethren, greatly beloued in Christ, vnto whom, by the fauou∣rable will & prouidence of Iesus Christ (whose vnworthy Minister I acknow∣ledge my selfe) I do execute the embas∣sage of the Gospel, who also for that purpose haue chosen and called me, to teach among you the word of Christian veritie and sanctitie: Are not to be pas∣sed ouer by me. The tongue serues to teach: but giue me leaue I beseech you, by writing to warne those whom with mourning I daily wish to teach, by ex∣ample, life, and work: would to God I might perceiue, that it were in my pow∣er to performe it.
It is a great matter certainly to be a Minister of the Word, but to bee a Worke-maister aunswerable to the word, is (by Christ) a farre greater matter. Wee loue a frequent Hearer
 of the word of God, but a diligent Doer of A dooer of the word hard to finde. the word heard & kept, we admire. These are my grones, these are my wishes in this calling, which by the will and grace of God I maintaine (pardon me I pray you, if I vnburthen these things into your bosome, with that Charitie and Faith that is meete) to wit: That I be not a monster, hauing a larger tongue than hands: For that saying of my mai∣ster Iesus Christ doeth sounde in my eares: He that teacheth and doth, he shal Mat. 5. be called great in the kingdome of heauen. He will haue me, not only to be the salt of the earth, in soundnesse of doctrine: but also the light of the world, in holi∣nesse of life, & example of vertue: O∣therwise of mine owne mouth will hee iudge me, as an vngratious seruant: And Luc. 19. Ibid. 12. I shall bee beaten with many stripes: If I binde together heauie burthens, and laie them on other mens shoulders, and I my selfe scarse touch them, or moue them with my little finger.
Euery man must shewe his faith by his workes, as a tree is knowne by her fruite. Let vs all heare that saying of Aurelius Numerianus: Be that which
 thou art reported to be. Or that of Ho∣race; Tu recte vivis, si curas esse quod au∣dis:
Well doest thou liue, if thou endeuer
To be the same, thou hearest euer.
We are called Christians, let vs liue a Christian life: We are called spiritu∣all, let vs liue in the spirit, and mortifie the deeds of the flesh. Let vs ioyne in wishes, and mingle mournings, that by begging, and getting the helpe of the holy Ghost, we may rather be, than de∣sire to seeme good: For as one saith; It skilleth more what thou art, thā what thou art accounted. Let vs I say on all sides, endeuour with ioynt forces, to bee the same before God, that we wold seeme to be before men. That shall we do, if ioyning Charitie with Knowledge; & Holinesse with Veritie, we lead a god∣ly and Christian life.
Surely God is holy, and we his ser∣uants ought to be holy, that we may be vnited to him: Wee are not our owne men. Why then should our owne Rea∣son & will beare the sway in our coun∣sels
 and actions? Let vs labour in all the parts of our life, to enioy God, as the chiefe ende, hauing a respect vnto his will to do it.
We are in the Church, the holy Ci∣tie of God, whom he hath consecrated to himselfe: Let vs count it a wicked∣nes, Motiues to godlines. to prophane it with our impuritie: Christ, who hath recōciled vs to God, is a pattern set before vs, let vs expresse his example in the actions of our life: God doth shew himselfe a father vnto vs: Surely we are too vnthankfull, if we shewe not our selues as children to him. Christ hath clensed vs by the la∣uer of his bloud, let vs shame to defile our selues with new staines or filthines: He hath also inserted vs into his mysti∣call body, let not vs fall away from that bodie, by sprinkeling our selues with foule blots. The holy Ghost hath dedi∣cated vs to God, as holy temples, let vs, by his helpe, who dwelleth in vs, make Mat. 5. our light so to shine before men, that they may see our good works, that our heauenly father may be glorified. We haue the An∣gels our guides and watchmen, let vs not, by the filthie stinke of our sinnes
 driue them from vs. Our soules and bo∣dies are destined to heauenly glory and mortalitie: Let vs labour earnestly to keep them pure and vndefiled, against the day of our Lord Iesus Christ.
What is therefore for to be done by vs? I haue with a good meaning, for our mutuall edification in Christ, gathered like a Bee, and framed out of all the best Authors (this fire of Christian Pietie and Charitie, that stirring vp one an o∣ther brotherly, and enflaming one an other in the way of a godly conuersion, and holy conuersation, we may attaine to the true felicitie of eternall life.
Take ye this of me, your vnworthie Minister, with all fauourable counte∣nance: reade it with me, with a minde desirous of Christian holinesse: Let it goe with me and you, all our life long: He allu∣deth to the title, Vade Mecum. Fauour with good will, the labours of your seruant, studious of your saluatiō, tending to Gods glorie.
Well then ye reuerend men, and be∣loued brethren, let vs enter the way of true happinesse: by a true conuersion, and godly conuersatiō: Let vs not faint in the way, for any difficultie or bur∣then
 of temptations, but let vs goe for∣ward in a continuall studie of continen∣cie, and obedience, vnto righteousnes, and by righteousnes, vnto the glorie of eternall life.
And afore all things, let vs do our en∣deuour to learne to denie our selues: O how hard and difficult a matter is it, for a man to forget and forsake himselfe, A hard thing to forsake our selues. and to apply his whole soule to the o∣bedience of God: How vnpleasant a thing is it, for a worldly man, not to seeke his owne, but by doing all things according to Gods wil, to seek the glo∣rie of God. Let vs by denying our sel∣ues, patiently beare the crosse that God doth late vpon vs, that we may be con∣formed to Christ, and by humilitie ac∣knowledge our owne infirmitie, and begge the grace and helpe of God.
When we haue thus forsaken our selues, let vs not neglect our neighbors, From our selues, to our neigh∣bours. From both to God. but rather preuent them with honour, and in good earnest imploy our selues wholely to procure their commoditie: From our selues and our neighbors, yea and from all things, let vs cast our eyes vpon God, and resigning our selues,
 and all that is ours, to his will, Let vs yeelde all the affections of our mindes to be subdued by him. If any thing fall out prosperously, let vs ascribe it to God, & not to our selues: If any thing succeed not according to our wish, let vs not be dismayed with impatiencie: but if any euil happen vnto vs, let vs not therefore recken our selues vnhap∣pie, neither let vs complaine against God for our estate.
Almightie God graunt, that by his holy spirit, working effectually in our hearts and minds, we may with carefull industry search out the way of Truth and Charitie, & with ardent desire long to come to our heauenly Father: and hauing found out & knowne the way, we may with good courage enter it, and with godly care walke in it: fleeing the vanitie and inconstancie of the world, that we neither goe backward, nor de∣cline, either to the right hand, or to the left.
The God of mercy and sanctificati∣on, so frame the course of our liues, in the vse of earthly things, that we pam∣per not our selues too much, but that we
 vse the world, as if we did not vse it: That 1. Cor. 7. we may learne no lesse to beare penu∣ry meekly, than abundance moderate∣ly: That we may restraine Luxury, our deadly enemy, least we turne the helps of our life into hinderances. Let vs re∣member, that these earthly things, are by the goodnes of God, appointed for our commoditie, that they might be as pledges, wherof we must one day yeeld an account.
In all the actions of our life, let vs carefully looke vnto the speciall cal∣ling, To looke to our calling. wherevnto God hath called vs, to do those things which beseeme it, and to shunne whatsoeuer is vnseemely for it. To conclude, the eternall Father grant vs to cōtemne this wicked world, & whatsoeuer appertaines vnto it, and as is meete, to meditate on the life to come, and the incorruptible Crowne in heauen.
These things, ye Reuerend men and brethren, I wish to you and my selfe, which my wishes and studies, if I shall perceiue not altogether to bee vnplea∣sing vnto you, I shal seeme to haue rea∣ped sufficient, and plentifull fruite for
 my labour in this Booke: and perad∣uenture shall be stirred vp to performe some greater matter. The Lord Iesus blesse you all, and euery one, aboun∣dantly from heauen. Amen.
Fare ye well, and liue ye happily,
At Stoade, Idibus, Octob, 1604.
