





May it please Your GRACE,
IT is now full three yeares, foure times tolde, since; it first pleased God, by Your hands, to transplant mee from a more bar∣ren soyle, into that no lesse fruitfull than pleasant Place, (Queenes Colledge in Cambridge.) like unto the golden Orchard of Hesperi∣des, if I may not rather liken. It, unto the Garden of Eden (Genes: ch: 13. vers: 10.): as in the midst whereof also there stood A Tree of Knowledge (D. Davenant then Master of Q: C: now Bishop of Salisbury.), I tasted of (through Your Favour) without offence: yea was ingrafted into It, by Your Grace. Which if, after so many yeares, It ex∣pect some fruits, I wonder not; but am rather im∣boldened to present You with these First. Which howsoever they belong unto You, as Gods High-Priest (Numb: ch: 18. vers: 17.); yet, if worthy any respect, are they Yours, in many respects more; for that indeed my selfe also am: even as punctually obliged unto Your Grace, as ever was Mephibosheth (2 Sam: ch: 9. vers: 1. &c.), unto that Man after Gods owne heart (1 Sam: ch: 13. vers: 14.). Blessed bee his name, whose glory it is chiefly; to bee found of such as seeke him not: and made manifest unto them that looked not after him. (Rom: ch: 10. vers: 20.) What Your sincerity will not that I publish, may it please Him to reward according to his Promise. (Matth: ch: 6. vers: 4.) But, me thinkes, I heare a sententious Seneca: (Quo modo Beneficium non semper recipiendum, sic non uti{que} reddendum. Quare subsidere apud te munus meum non vis? Quare obligatus, molestè fers? quare, quasi cum acerbo Faeneratore, signare rationem parem pro∣peras. Senec. de Benefic. lib. 6. cap. 40.) Quid in me Deos immittis? quo modo exigeres, qui sic reddis? there is, as a time to receive; so a time to render. Good deeds (as good dayes) would not be sent back, but set

 downe. He that is urgent to be loosed, shewes he is a weary to be bound. Neither in truth ought wee, to reckon with all men as exactly; as if none gave, but in hope to gaine. Our Saviour is peremptory; doe good and lend, (saith hee) hoping for nothing againe: then shall your reward be great, and ye shall be the children of the Highest: for, He is kind unto the unthankfull and to the Evill. (Luk. ch. 6. vers: 35. Illud certum est, juvandus est proximus; etiam nullae recipiendae sortis habitâ ratione. Bez. annot. in Loc. Beneficiae qui dat, Deos imitatur; qui repetit, Faeneratores. Seneca de Benef. lib. 3. cap. 15.) and if the Spirit, of such thus jointly; will not Your Clemency pardon me: since, if I have beene more troublesome, yet hath it been, but that I might not be; lesse good. Otherwise (not unworthily) might my hopes also melt away, as the winters hoare frost; and and as the hope of the unthankefull (so paraphraseth it Our Living-Library) (Iohan. Sarisbur. Episcop. Comment: in Coloss. cap. 4. vers. 2.) runne away as unprofitable wa∣ters. (Wisdom. ch. 16. vers. 29.) Yet am I not over-sollicitous, how to render, that were to repent (as it were) that ever I received, (Paenitet accepti Beneficij, quam nondum redditi piget. Quare qui tibi dignus visus est a quo acciperes, indignus videatur cui debeas? Senec. de Benefic. lib. 6. cap. 42.) or ashamed to owe, where I foresee a necessitie (if I will live wel) to borrow. To the praise of Gods glo∣ry, long may his Church enjoy Your Grace: even until (for Zions sake) Righteousnesse that (againe) (Haec enim primo ac proprie de Iudaeorum à Babylonijs gloriosâ Libe∣ratione. Scultet. concion: in Loc. goe forth as brightnesse, and the Salvation thereof as a Lampe that burneth: untill Jerusalem also that be, as a crowne of glory in the hands of the Lord; as a rich diademe in the hands of thy God. (Isay ch. 62. vers: 1. &c.) So prayeth unto Christ

From Tillmanstone Iune 28. Anno 1631.
