



SIR,
THe Diuine Power that inspired the breath of life into man, infused the life of Authoritie in∣to the King. This inspiration maketh man the image of God; that other maketh the King in particular the Lieutenant of God. And there∣fore humane right no sooner stileth one with the name of a King, but diuine Heraldrie graceth him with the title of a mortall God, thereby intimating that it is his chiefest glory, within the sphaere of his Royaltie to imitate the singular gouernment of that power, whose Substitute he is, and with whose name he is honoured. Now the vnparalleled excellencie of diuine gouernment ouer the world is grounded vpon that distinct knowledge which the Creator hath of the nature, con∣dition,
 and vse of all creatures subiect to his gouernment. And surely the readiest way for an earthly Potentate to make his go∣uernment exactly analogicall to that Jdea, will be by getting an accurate knowledge of the nature and qualitie of the Land and People ouer which God hath made him his Lieutenant gene∣rall. But the Metropolis and the Royall Throne require such fre∣quencie of the Soueraignes presence, that such knowledge can∣not be gotten by his owne obseruations. Our Maps therefore (especially being ioyned with discreet obseruations) as they are delightfull unto all, are especially vsefull vnto the King: for by this meanes, though residing in his Princely Seat, he may as the eye from the head, contemplate with much delight and pro∣fit the remotest Territories of his Kingdomes. And because af∣faires of a higher nature take vp the principal of his time, longer Descriptions are not for the purpose; the more compendious, so as accurate, are most sutable to the calling of a King.

Vpon these grounds (most dread Soueraigne) am I bold humbly to present these small Chorographicall Descriptions vnto the greatnesse of your Maiestie. Their compendiousnesse will free them from being thought troublesome or tedious to your Maiestie, and their exactnesse (I trust) will gaine them ac∣ceptation. Howsoeuer, shadowes they are of your Royaltie, and therefore they desire that they (as doth that Body which they represent) may safely repose themselues vnder the wings of your Soueraigntie; To which he commends them, and his loyall seruice, who is

