





I Haue not so giuen my minde to spor∣tes & recreation af∣ter the prescribed houres of my gram∣ticall studies; but that I haue orrowed so much time as to tran∣late this little Treatise or Man∣nuall (as the Authour termeth i) of Spirituall Exercises, ming∣linge
 this pure wheate of deuout and pious spiritual exercitations, with the courser graine of my hu∣mane litterature, as it were a cō∣pounded Masland, to sowe in the feilde of my youthfull daies for the future profit of my selfe, and a president for other youthes of better Talents to doe the like. Yet not so for my selfe, as to keepe it all priuate to my selfe like a Misard, but to publish it in prin that others maie gleane after m and haue their share thereof  well as my selfe, leauing and w¦shinge to them as much profit  to my selfe. This little treatis the first fruites of my labours,  know not (right worthy and m most respected louinge and re∣beloued Grandfather) to whom I should dedicate it, so congruous∣lie, as to your selfe, to whom in duetie I am obliged to render a
 account of spendinge my time, & in gratitude, to leaue to poste∣rity some monument and testi∣mony of my duetifull affection, & for the manifold significations and testimonies, of your most fa∣therly affection towards me, euen from my infancie to this present day, and will I doubt not so per∣seuer vnto the end, or rather with∣out ende. And with this filiall and reuerēt affection, I offer vnto you this my first endeuours, as an vn∣doubted testimonie of my dueti∣full respecte. The goodnes of the booke I know will commend it self, my translation needeth your fauourable acceptation. My ex∣cuse is my youth & want of lear∣ninge. My comendation (if there be any) my forwardnes in setting abroach my little skill for a com∣mon taste, till I be able to aspire vnto better. Which lesson I lear∣ned
 of the noble Poet Horace, who telleth such younge students as I am. Est quadam prodire tenùs, si non datur vltra. If wee cannot doe as well as wee should, yet lett vs doe as well as wee can.
