


RIGHT VVORSHIPFVLL,
I Neuer yet was so far in loue with the issue of my owne braine, that I durst suffer (much lesse offer) it to the publick view. Neither did I euer thinke ought of mine, worthy of the light. What approbation I found, (why should I deny, I haue found approbati∣on?)
 of my poore endeuours, from others, espe∣cially from your selfe, I tooke for friendly wel-wishing encouragements, not for certaine ac∣clamations of any more than ordinary merit. I know men, (Wise men especially) vse to ap∣plaud, what they doe not in true Iudgement ac∣knowledge excellent, to excite endeuour to that excellence which they gladly would applaud. Adde to this the consideration of the times whereinto we are fallen; partly accurately iu∣dicious, partly vncharitably censorious. The one likes nothing not exquisite, not sublima∣ted, the other nothing at all. This my late-borne off-spring, was by mee determin'd and con∣demn'd to the same obscuritie with other its fellowes. So farre was I from teaching it the way to the Presse, that it could scarce obtaine leaue to the Pulpit; especially in the presence of so vnderstanding an Audience. At the best, I committed it (as Moses Mother did him, Exod. 2. in an Arke of bulrushes) to the mercy of the waters, (people are waters in Scripture Apoc. 17. 15. phrase) and stood aside (as Miriam Moses sister) to see what would become of it. Since which time, that God, who hath (as I hope) design'd it, to some greater good of his Church,
 (as he did him) hath prouided some friends (like another Pharoahs daughter) to vnder∣take for the life and enlargement of it. These haue perswaded me, almost to loue mine owne, at least to take vpon me, as the parent of it (so was Moses by the prouidence of God, brought to his owne mother to Nurse) to nurse it, and being growne to this stature, that now you see, to present it backe againe, to them that vndertooke for it. Such, and so extraordinary hath beene their approbation of it: (At their perill be it, if they flatter) such their importu∣nity for it, that I haue condescended both to approue of their iudgements, and to yeeld to their requests. For what should I doe in these streights? To deny their Iudgements, were in mee rash and vncharitable. To repulse their requests (for the life of my owne) were cruell and vnmercifull. To doe either, were to runne a-crosse to that doctrine which I taught it to speake, and to shew my selfe proud, while I de∣sire to teach others to be humble. It is not Hu∣mility, but selfe-conceited arrogance, to prefer our owne single, partiall, opinion, (whether of our good, or euill) to the ioynt conspiring iudg∣ment, of many truly iudicious. As well too low
 as too high a valuation of our owne, if affe∣cted, cannot auoid suspition (at least) of vaine∣glory. To deny, or purpose to set an edge vpon importunity; to giue backe, to fetch a greater rise of glory, (as I call it after) an Artificiall kinde of Humility; is to affect the praise of Humility, in the subuersion of Humilitie, as that Father speakes. Thus haue you the reason Appelere de humi∣litate laudem, hu∣militatis non est virtus, sed subuer∣sio. Bern in Cantic. serm. 16. of this present publication, but not all. I was very willing to make a vertue of Necessitie; and to take the opportunity of this their Im∣portunity, to testifie to the world, my many ob∣ligations to your worthy selfe, to whom (next to God and his Church) I owe my selfe, and what I am. If I haue obtained any fauour from God, to winne any fauour from men in my poore seruices of his Church, I must (and doe) thankfully acknowledge it, to haue beene de∣riued to mee from your enheartening encou∣ragements, your encouraging countenance. To whom then (that I may giue a reason of my present dedication) to whom are my First-fruits more deseruedly due, than to him, that may iustly challenge the whole crop? as hauing beene, and still being, the strongest encourage∣ment of my poore labours, vpon earth. Besides
 all this, The very Subiect of my discourse in the sequell, seemes to send mee to your patro∣nage: In whom parentage, wealth, learning, wisdome, honour, haue all met with humility. How many are puffed vp with one of these? Hee's more than a man, that outstands the last. Rara virtus humilitas honorata. The world hath taken notice of your worths, and cannot but say, Honour hath followed you, not you it. The body of honour is vertue and meritorious deseruings; the soule of it is Humility; Who∣soeuer rises without the one, or stands without the other, embraces but the shadow of a sha∣dow: may be notable or notorious, cannot bee truly Noble. Go you on (Worthy Sir) to honor God (who hath honoured you) with your ho∣nour, with Religion, with true humilitie, and (I dare be your Prophet) that God of all honor and glory, shall adde more honour to your head, a good measure pressed down, in this life; shaken together and running ouer in that o∣ther. Such shall be the daily deuotions of
From my little Zoar this 12. of Nouemb. 1624.

