


Reverend and Worshipfull,
FOr my selfe, I am neither worthy of note, nor noted▪ but th booke of Ser∣mons which  dedicate to your worthy names, merits both. The Author Doctor Clerke, , highNaz. orat. 21. in worth, , but humble in minde. In Aarons brest-pe was vrim and Thummim, knowledge, and vertue; in this ctors brest was combined, scientia▪ & conscientia, learning nd integrity; of whom that may be said, which is written of S. Steven, thatAct. 7. 21. he was , both , and , able bot is learning, and his life to confound the Adversary. , learning, and modesty in one man to meete, , hard and rare saith Nazianzen. These met in him. Pis he was; hisEp. 187. care of God his true worship, and zeale unto  house, can∣not be forgotten: He delighted in the Lords welling, in Beth-el, Gods house was his joy; Divine Sermons had his presence, so had divine Service. Man may pray as Quandocun{que},1 Tim. 2. 8. so also vbicun{que}, as well wheresoever, as whensoever. ▪ saith Theophylact; Men may lift up pure hands in every place, as  so . He not content with
 private prayer in his owne house, daily frequented Gods house, esteeming it his happinesse to offer up▪ both sacrificium laudis, his thankesgiving, and vitulos labiorum, his prayers to God, in the great Congregation. And that which addes un∣to the honour of his name, he was constant in the true wor∣shippe of God, and faithfull unto death, , as Clemen.Clem. Alex. in Protrep. 1 Cor. 16. 13. Alex. to the last gaspe. Faith requires stability, , stand fast in it. A souldier must not onely not be a Transfuga, fly over to the adverse part, but he must not so much as stationem deserere, shrinke one whit from his standing. This Christi∣ans2 Tim. 4. 7. ground was faith, and surely he might say with S. Paul at his departure, , I have kept it. Nazianzen complaines of some, that did , fit their faith to the times,Orat. 25. ad Const. Aug and so made it, fides temporum potiùs, quàm Evangeliorum, as Hi∣larie speakes. But this worthy, was no time pleaser. Omnia pro veritate, Nihil pro tempore. A wise man saith S. Ambrose, NonHexam. l. 4. Hil. p. 308. V. Lyrin. c. 7. cum Luna mutatur, sed permanebit cum Sole. He was truly wise, his faith, was not like that of the Arrians, annua, & menstrua. Nought could drive him from the truth, Non homines, Non Daemones.
Workes of charity are signes of piety, he was Pious this500 pound. ad Pios usus. way too; witnesse his large Legacies to the poore, the soules of many blest him for this. He gave not to all, Almes be∣long not, , to them that make aSocrat. l. 7. trade, or living of begging. His pitty was to the weake poore,  whose hands faile and tremble, to such as live in Hospitals,  as the Hebrewes terme them, houses of mercy, to his owne poore.
Almes willed by dying men, , as Athanasius callesTom. 2. q. . ad Anti. them, are but dead sacrifices, yet acceptable at death, if there be mercy in time of life: His mercy was great to many poore at his death, great to his owne poore in his life, when100 pound to Minster. 20 to S. Mary Mount. in London. he made his owne hands his Executors; and his owne eyes his Overseers.
Modest he was, Caret ambitione religiosa devotio, said S. Am∣brose, free from ambition, , Naz. terme; Never active to preferment. Indeed the Lay-world had then learned, ▪ and that was Greek to him, he abhorred to defile himselfe, to corrupt others. This I can truly relate, and from his own mouth too, the preferment that he had was conferd
 on him unaskt, unlookt for. Naz. would not seek honour, norrat. 1. refuse it, . This Dr. did not onely not seeke it, but refused it. One onely place in all his time he affected, and made sute for, the Custos-ship of Christs Colledge in Cambridge, not to better his estate, but to better it; It was his Ithaca, and he did zeale the good of it.
Learned he was. Knowledge caused Galen to be called Naturae miraculum, this Doctor was Ecclesiae miraculum. No man ever knew him, but must needs say, that one of the brightest starres in our East is set. They which knew him well, knew him learned, in all kinde of learning. All Arts are knit, inter se, hence Tertullian, Nulla non alterius aut mater, autDe Idol. c. 8. propinqua. This divine had joyned all in himselfe so well, that it is hard to say in which hee was . Q Ennius cald himselfe Tri-Cor; A. Gellius speakes the reason, he perfectly knew three tongues, Graecam, Oscam, Latinam. Tri-Cor a fit title for Doctor Clerke, he throughly understood three langua∣ges, Latine, Greeke, and Hebrew; the reason as I conceive, that moved Doctor Willet in his dedicatory Epistle to Christs Col∣ledge, to stile him, Trium linguarum peritissimus. That Colledge had a testimony of his learning in his Hebrew Lectures, so had the Vniversitie in his Disputations, and Clerums; so had the Church; when his Majesty of blessed memory, called many to the great worke of the last Translation of the Eng∣glishDr. Andrewes Overall. Saravia. Clerke. From the Pentateuch to Paralip. committed to him and Dr. Saravia. He sate Iudge in the Eccles. Court. Bible, he was in that Number, like one of the chiefe of Davids worthies, not amongst the thirty, but amongst the first three. And as he was  of great learning, so also  of great paines. His life a continuall labour, either reading, or preaching, or Iudging; or in that which was his felicity, in instructing young Gentlemen, young Schollers. Many may truly say of this Booke as Cyprian of Tertullian, Da Magistrum. But wise men die, said the Psalmist as well as the foolish; There is Nomen Indeclinabile, and such a Noune is Death; This learned Clerke, this great Grammarian could not decline it. He is worthy to be remembred of us though dead, for he loved us, and our Church, witnesse this pledge of his love to both, his workes. These workes but Sermons, and those not many, yet such as the world hath few better. What Augustine spake of a short Text, is true of these Ser∣mons, Pauca verba, sed magnarum rerum gravida, theres more
 sound lightly in mens words than substance; in these ser∣mons, theres more substance, than sound in words. The words are but few, but full, as Philo said of love, so I of these . He that reades them, shall have no just cause to complaine with him in the Comedie, Pol ego & oleum, & operam perdidi.
If my testimony be too slight and slender, (as indeed who can worthily praise him) let it be remembred what PlinyPlin. Sec. l. 5. Ep. 10. sometime said to Antoninus, Pictores pulchram, absolutam{que} faci∣em raro nisi in pejus effingunt, an exact face is very seldome drawne but with much disadvantage; much more when a bungler hath it in hand. I may say of him and his workes,Naz. in Bas. orat. 20. as Nazianzen of Basil, , here wants his owne tongue to speake the worth of himselfe and workes, , in both there is excellent matter of praise, , but himselfe alone worthy, because a∣lone able to commend that matter. But the sea saith Nazi. , neede not the rivers, that yet run into it; nor he mine or any others praise. Learned hee was among the living, my desire is he may bee living among the learned. How shall he now live, but by preserving alive this posthume issue of his exquisite braine?
These Sermons when uttered with his voyce, were heard by your worships with admiration; Printing is a kinde of preaching. Clem. Alex. notes it,  both preachClem. Alex. Strom. l. 1. the word, : which when the world shall read, they will marvaile, that such excellency could lie so close. But qualia, qualia, presuming of your worships favorable ac∣ceptance; not for his sake that dedicates them, for what am I, or my deservings? but for the Authors, whose memory re∣maines yet with you, and you desire (I hope) should doe so with others, I recommend them to your Patronage, and your selves to Gods protection, beseeching him, to vouchsafe you his love, while you live on earth, and to crowne you after death▪ with eternall life in heaven. This is his prayer, who shall remaine,

