



RIght Worshipful, be∣ing so far obliged to his Maiesties fauour, as I confesse I am ne∣uer able to requite it, I can of dutie doe no lesse, then with Dauid, shew such kindnes as I may to Mephiboseth, for Iona∣thans sake, that is, take mee to the lowest, where I cannot reach to the highest, endeuouring to loue and honour all such, as I can know are
 beloued of his Highnesse, specially whom God hath called to serue and attend his Maiestie, and the more neerely by calling they stand in this seruice, the more entirely shall mine affection be toward thē. Among these, as God hath honou∣red you to be one; so is there reason why these, who loue you, should thanke God for you, not so much for your place of preferment, as for your fidelity in it, these foure and twentie yeares, by which you haue deserued the commendation of a faithfull seruant, and encrease of your Masters fauourable affection towards you.
It is a common speech, that fa∣miliaritie breeds contempt, & most excellent things by consuetude be∣come the lesse regarded, but this holds not alwayes true, for of such as are wise, a knowne & tried good is liked, euer the longer, the better. And I doe so verily thinke of all his Highnesse loyall seruants which at∣tend
 his Maiesty, that as they know better then others by long experi∣ence the rare qualities, wherewith his Highnes is endued from aboue; so they esteeme much more of his Maiestie then others can: yet is it not amisse they should still be wa∣kened with warnings, who haue such an incomparable iewel in their keeping, as is called by the Pro∣phet, The breath of our nostrils; and in whom, not onely these famous kingdoms vnder his Highnesse do∣minion, but all the Churches in Christendome haue such interest. In the conseruing of This one, in whom vnder God wee are all con∣serued; no circumspection, no care, no vigilancy, no seruice can be suf∣ficient.
It was a iust imputation of Da∣uid to Abner, and his fellow Cap∣taines, that their Master, King Saul being sleeping, they were carelesse of him, and suffered Abishai, who both would and might haue slaine
 him, if Dauid had not stayed him, to take away his speare, and pot from his head, Yee are worthie (said 1. Sam. 26. 16. he) to die, because yee haue not kept your Master, the Lords annointed. But heere, as there is no compari∣son betweene that cursed King, and our sacred Soueraigne: so the su∣perexcellencie of his person makes the least omission of any dutiful at∣tendance in such as are called vnto it, a double offence.
Alexander the Great being en∣quired of where his treasure was, pointed with his finger to his friends, and domestique seruants; and indeed, where they are faith∣full, they are singular blessings of God: for as Salomon saith, The plea∣sure Prou. 14. 35 of a King is in a wise seruant. And againe, Righteous lippes are the Prou. 16. 16 delight of Kings, and the King loues him that speakes right things. Ami∣cus aut seruus fidelis protectio fortis, munitum palatium, viuus the saurus: A faithfull friend or seruant, is a
 strong protection, a fenced palace, a liuing treasure, said Nazianzen. Neither doe I thinke that euer A∣lexander, Nazianzen. Orat. 22. or any Monarch, or King in the world, did countenance and credit such as serue them, more con∣fidently and louingly, then the King of Britaine doth such as at∣tend his Highnesse, which cannot but oblige euery loyall heart the more carefully and willingly to serue his Highnes againe.
And this, as in regard of your Christian profession is most seem∣ly for you, it being a duety the A∣postolique Canon requires of all Christian seruants, That they should please their Masters in all things, shewing all good faithfulnesse, that they may adorne the doctrine of God our Sauiour; so is it also fitting for that place wherein ye stand in the world, that ye may be answerable to that fidelitie in his Highnes ser∣uice, for which your Honourable predecessors haue beene greatly
 praised before you. For it is known that the honourable house of Coke∣poole, whereof ye are a sonne, being a principall family of that ancient, populous and flourishing tribe of Murray, notwithstanding their dwelling be in a part of the King∣dom, of olde greatly giuen to mis∣order, troups of rebels compassing them on euery side; yet did they still retain the honorable state and fashions of other honourable hou∣ses in the land, their house euer be∣ing a terror to the euill, a refuge to the good, a barre to the aduersarie, and a publique example in most turbulent times, of loyaltie to their Soueraigne. Thus haue they liued vnstayned in honour, fea∣red of the worst sort, loued of the best, euer gratious to their King, neuer blotted with the remissi∣on of any offence done against his Crowne, but alway beautified with manifold proofes of their fi∣delitie in his Highnesse seruice;
 wherin sundrie of them haue borne honourable offices both in Court and out of it, vnto this day. And all these, by their example prouoke you to leaue the name of that house as honourable for your part, as you haue receiued it from them: which as hitherto you haue done, so I hope for the time to come it may happely be inlarged, but shal neuer be impaired by any deed of yours.
And hereunto (right worship∣full) remember it is pietie and the true feare of God must aduance you. God hath conioyned these two precepts together; My sonne Pro. 24. 21. feare God and the King: he cannot keepe the one who violates the o∣ther; therefore your loue, feare, re∣uerence, and fidelitie toward the King, must be grounded on your loue and feare of God. Keepe al∣way within you a humble heart; for beside that it is the way to ho∣nour, it will keep you from falling. Among many priuiledges, where∣with
 humilitie indues such as pos∣sesse it, this is one, Humilis non ha∣bet vnde cadat. Thinke frequently vpon your end, make readie ere it come vpon you; it is no wisedome to begin to prepare, when of neces∣sitie we must remoue. The foolish men of the world, de mortalibus immortalia cogitant, dreame of im∣mortalitie in mortall things: but looke you to others who haue bin great before you and now are not, and by them learn to be wise. Liue at continuall enmitie with sinne; this is the onely enemie that is able to hurt you; subdue it and ye shall feare none other. Such sins as you haue done, vndoe them by godly sorrow; such as of weakenesse you may doe, preuent them with godly care. Keep so your Court on earth, that you still learn to be a Courtier in heauen, holy in life, feruent in praier; by these hath a man fellow∣ship with God, and accesse to the Throne of the heauenly King, to
 speake to his Maiestie when hee pleaseth. In this holy disposition, if this my little Treatise may serue any way to confirme you, I shall be abundantly contented. I haue de∣dicated it vnto you as a token of my loue, for the good which is in you toward all that feare God, and your courteous fauour shewed to my selfe in particular. And so hoping that with as good an hart ye will accept it, as I do offer it. I rest,

