



YOur Towne and Cor∣poration is both anci∣ent and eminent:Camdens Brit. for healthy Scituation, e∣legant building, frequencie of peo∣ple, grave government, and store of plentie in every kinde; so en∣richt by the Lords bounty with all necessaries for well-being, as that an understanding eye, cannot but stile your seat, and that without suspition of flattery, one of the compleatest corners in this garden of Europe; the lot is falne unto you in a good ground (the Lord grant,Psal. 16.6. your persons may exceed
 the place, in transcendent bright∣nesse of holy zeale and humble in∣nocencie; that such superficiall splendour and cloudy glitterings of terrene felicitie, doe not so op∣presse your eyes, but that you pierce thorow to see and desire a further and far-passing glory, To count all but losse, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Iesus,Phil. 3.8. you have received from God an ample portion: noted by many more, then acknowledged (emi∣nency could not be so farre and easily knowne, were it not for en∣uy attending) yet acknowledged by more I thinke, then know and weigh the grounds thereof; next under the Divine providence crowning our deare and dread So∣veraigne with a peacefull govern∣ment. I am mistaken, or they may be thus reduced.
1. A faithfull dispensation of divine mysteries, by able Pastours, lawfully called, and conscionably discharging their dutie: what trea∣sure
 you have had or at present do enjoy in this kinde, is not for me to disclose, the Lord enrich their hearts with a double portion of his Spirit and make you abound more and more in practicall thank∣fulnesse; it is your obedience that will commend our Ministry.
2. An impartiall administration of justice without respect of per∣sons or reward; when the scales are held in such steady hands, as that no sinister blast can shake them, then the common body is most sound and safe, from the fu∣ry of wild Bores abroad, and sub∣tletie of undermining Foxes at home: and here, if none unchari∣tably mistake the end, thus much may be spoken inoffensively, for the glory of God, comfort of the present Major with his assistants and the further exemplary encou∣ragement of successours in that place of government—The sword this yeere,Mr. R.M. Major that yeer; 1631. with conscionable vigi∣lancie, hath turned indifferently
 every way. My hope is, no female breath, no unfriendly perswasion of neighbours or kinred; shall be ever able to crosse or stay that motion; constancy will crowne you with a holy happinesse.
3. A carefull education of youth in godly exercises according to the rules of wholesome discipline; requiring paines in the Pastour, di∣ligence in the Schoole-master, and care in the Parents, to bring or see them brought up in the know∣ledge and feare of the Lord, daily solliciting the throne of grace for a blessing on all: the first hath not, nor shall, I trust, be wanting in any duty publike or private; thus farre I am bold on my brothers behalfe, unknowne unto him: the second, neither hath, nor is wanting; your owne Schoole having furnisht one age already with great Schol∣lers, famous in their kinde; and now the present hopes,Renow∣ned Iew∣ell: and Harding. by reason of his honesty and abilitie that undertakes the charge, doe in the
 eyes of judgement and chari∣tie, exceed the former; if the coldnesse of these times, or the unseasonable heate of indulgent parents doe not nippe or scorch the buds appearing: and that in the last, you your selves may not be wanting to your selves, this paines, and danger is adven∣tured.
Education of children is one fundamentall prop, either to begin or uphold a societie in well-being; a meanes to stay originall corruption from brea∣king forth, to make way for saving grace and to turne the hatred of our enemies into feare,Prov. 22.6. Psal. 127.4, 5. Traine up a childe in the way hee should goe, and when hee is old hee will not depart from it: Happy is the man, that hath his quiver full of such po∣lisht shafts, that he may not be ashamed when he speaks with his enemies in the gate.
This were enough, without
 further reason or apologie, to warrant all such endeavours as looke that way: I had other Motives, to doe that over a∣gaine, which too many (some say) have done already; they may, I confesse, see further; how principles explained can bee too common, I see not: one Sunne shines in divers Coun∣tries, but by many beames, so judge of truth proportionably; diversitie of stile, in the unitie of faith and matter, glorifies the Authour with varietie, and confirmes receivers of truth with further testimony; espe∣cially considering, how too ma∣ny use Catechismes, as they doe Almanacks, for a yeere and then their date is out.
Next after the advancement of his glory and enlargement of his kingdom, whose I am, & whom I desire and resolve to serve in the use of that talent, lent me for the good of his Church.

First, a conditionall necessi∣tie, and that, first to manifest unto others, what obedience is due, and what respect hath beene given here, to those So∣veraigne commands of such, who with Princely providence and fatherly care, doe or lately did sway the Scepter of this state: under King Henry 8.See the Acts and Monu∣ments of the Church. it was ordained, that Curates in their Sermons should delibe∣rately and plainly goe over the Pater noster, Creed and Com∣mandements, one clause or Ar∣ticle one day, and another, ano∣ther day; till the whole were taught and learned by little and little, and that they should deli∣ver the same in writing. And after—that fathers and mothers, masters and governors of youth should teach or cause to bee taught their children and ser∣vants, even from their infancy, the Pater-noster, Creed and Commandements in their mo∣ther
 tongue: and the same so taught should cause the said youth oft to repeat and under∣stand. Vnder Edward the sixt, I finde it enjoyned—That the Creed, Lords Prayer, and ten Commaundements should bee read in English every Holy-day: that the people should bee ex∣horted not only to learne them themselves, but also to teach them to their children and fa∣mily; that once a yeere all their Parishioners should be exami∣ned therein, and that none should presume to come unto the Lords Table (let all Mini∣sters take notice, to see this or∣der, which by the Law of God ought, and by the lawes of our Land may be, observed in every Parish) without a true know∣ledge thereof: the same for substance during the Raigne of that renowned Queene Eliza∣beth, King Iames, and his Maje∣stie that now is, renewed still,
 continued and confirmed: not∣withstanding all this, lamenta∣ble it is to observe, how the neglect of this dutie increaseth daily; especially there, where nothing, or as nothing, is done the later part of the Lords day; secondly, to render you your owne, as God commands, some testimony of thankfulnesse, for your ready and continuing love (more worth then wealth) since my first comming amongst you: what the good Shunamite did for Elisha: 2 Kings 4.10. you have doubled to me every way; and behold now, you have been thus carefull for mee, with all this care, what is to be done for you? lesse I could not, and more you expect not, dwelling contentedly among your owne people, then meanes to further your salvation; the Lord grant his Word may be in that pow∣erfull and plaine evidence of the Spirit delivered, as that many
 sonnes and daughters may bee borne unto Christ amongst you. Thirdly, to save the wearisome labour of transcription; called upon we have beene lately and begun, to goe over the same a∣gaine; this benefit the Presse affoards; not only to commu∣nicate with ease, but also to prevent some inconveniences might happen both to you and mee, by reason of many im∣perfect Copies abroad, which cannot be recalled, not other∣wayes over-mastered, now if any thing be amisse, it may be amended, if any point ob∣scure, it may be explained, or if in any part deficient, a supply may bee added. Fourthly, to minde men and women of that solemne vow and promise made at the Font, in their behalfe, for whom they become sureties, to teach or see they be taught, the use and end of Baptisme, the Creed, Lords Prayer, and ten
 commandements in the English tongue, with all other things, which Christians ought to know and doe for their soules health, and that they be vertu∣ously brought up, &c. which many, I feare, undertake rashly as a matter of forme and com∣plement, never thinking of it after. Fifthly, to point out a common calamity which I find rife in every place; many old people have no other religion, nor ground for salvation, but what consists in a bare and (of∣ten) senselesse repetition of this Cathechisme, not finding, but ma∣king it a prayer, hoping only in the grace of regeneration by Baptisme, never thinking of, nor endeauouring to performe the conditions, exprest in the administration of this Sacra∣ment. Sixthly, in desire at least to redeeme, many precious houres mispent in wanton pro∣digalitie which (blessed be the
 Lord) I live to bewaile, and make some verball satisfaction, for reall wrongs, I remember, done to others, by enticement, silence, example, &c. which to persons remote and disperst cannot else be effected: as also to repay somthing to the poore and ignorant, in lieu of what I received from the richly-lear∣ned: a number of good helps I found and would not lessen them; learning as lands, con∣cealed is forfeit, the talent hid is lost; riches are counterfeit, if not currant, so as a portion may successively fall to every mans share; who knowes what good, weakest endeavours may doe to the Church unborne? whose papers shall longest escape the devouring teeth of time and tyrannie? or what dismall cloud of Popish darkenesse (which the Lord prevent and keepe off) may in after times once againe overspread this British Ile, to
 lash our wantonnesse and make our people, prize more the meanes of knowledge? when courser fare will be more estee∣med, then dainties now.
Secondly, a purpose and de∣sire I had (If the Lord should remoove mee from you; a cra∣zie body, and the daily depar∣ture of others, my deare friends and neighbours, minde mee often of mortalitie) to leave remaining with you, who have beene either called or confir∣med by my ministry, the summe of all, which I have at seve∣rall times delivered; not with∣out presidents; Saint Mat∣thew having preacht to the Iewes, and being called to the Gentiles (as Bellarmine inter∣prets Eusebius) deemed it pro∣fitable to leave (and that in his owne countrey language) some memoriall of his doctrine with them, from whom hee was to depart in body: Bellar. lib. 4.
 de verbo Dei non scrip. cap. 4. out of Eusebius lib. 3. hist. Ec∣cles. cap. 21. The same is confir∣med by Epiphanius and Nice∣phorus, adding it was absenti∣am scripto compensare; I wish all Ministers would so recompence their wilfull absence. Such was the care and practice of Saint Peter, 2 Peter 1.14, 15 know∣ing that shortly I must put off this tabernacle, I will endea∣vour, that you may be able af∣ter my decease, to have these things alwayes in remembrance: if good bookes abound, in∣stead of Cards and Dice, it will proove both exemplary and beneficiall to you and yours; necessitie is laid on vs in pub∣like, and woe be unto you, if private duties be neglected; e∣very governour hath a charge to teach as well as feed: your wives, children, servants must be instructed out of the word, else what doe you for them,
 more then to your irrationall labourers? so Iosephus lib. 2. cont. Apion, according to a continuing practice of his coun∣treymen, who point children at five yeeres, to the Bible. Hilarius in Psal. 118. or 119. referring to that place, 2 Tim. 3.14, 15, 16. Chrysost. in Col. Hierom highly commends cer∣taine godly Matrons of his time, by name, Paula, Alga∣sia, Marcella, Laeta, Fabio∣la, &c. as by his Epistles to them appeares, for such spiritu∣all employments in their fami∣lies. Servulus is noted and laid downe for a patterne by Gre∣gory, one Iosephus by Epipha∣nius, Theodorus by Cassianus, Cornelia by Cicero, &c. but Abraham and the Baereans by the Spirit of God, Timothy by Paul, , &c. therefore let no pro∣phane person ignorant of anti∣quitie, censure private duties,
 as Puritanicall novelties; nor any feare, such labours can be in vaine in the Lord.
Thirdly, it was not the last nor least part of my care, to leave these thus legible, for a helpe unto my partner (a meet helper and a true Israelite) in performance of her duty to∣ward our family; as beeing if the Lord call mee from them, the greatest legacie and love-token, I am like to leave them.
Master W. Crompton of the Grange in Bedford neere Leigh in Lanca∣shiere.Lastly, a hope, these notes would bee welcome, pleasing and profitable to one, unto whom I owe, next unto God my Father in Christ, what I have or am: if by any meanes I might supply that want of service, which distance of place and necessary absence inevitably occasioneth not without griefe.
Other and better helps, I know, are extant, many; the very same points handled farre more exactly, by divers, only
 this you may call your owne: wherein some things toucht by others; about the attributes and decrees of God, the na∣ture and order of being and sub∣sisting in the B. Trinitie; about Angels, Originall sinne, Eccle∣siasticall orders, Offices, Dis∣cipline and seperated soules, &c. are omitted: the rest bee you pleased to accept, with the same hand they are offered, and I shall the lesse feele or feare what others censure; all I seeke from you for all, is practice: if any poore soule be convinc'd, confirmed, comforted or in∣structed in any point of our Religion or religious dutie, I shall deeme it a rich recom∣pence: all I would say unto you more, is by way of ad∣vise: content not your selves with meere civill honestie, let not formalitie delude you; search to finde out all your sinnes, French, Spanish, English,
 what you confesse, bewaile and reforme, the Lord will cover and pardon: build not your faith upon a morrall change, iudging your selves good e∣nough, because not so bad as formerly; give all diligence to make your calling and election sure, rejoycing most, when you have got any assurance your names are written in hea∣ven: let mee beseech you by the tender mercies of God in Christ, that you study to a∣dorne your profession, with pious practice; let your light so shine with unblemisht bright∣nesse before men, that they may see your good works and bee ashamed that falsely accuse your good conversation in Christ; slanderously reporting that wee are all for faith and nothing for obedience. Bee thankefull for the meanes of grace; for your preservation from deserved judgements; such I meane, as
 doe usvally befall populous pla∣ces; by fire and the plague of pestilence; for your plentie and prosperitie, that your soules may prosper as your bodies doe; for the mercy of God showed unto his Church beyond the Seas, by the hand of that re∣nowned Prince the King of Sweden, praying for accom∣plishment in his time.
3. In election of capitall Burgesses, whence principall officers are annually called to governe your societie, let pri∣vate, carnall ends be set aside, that so you may joyntly ayme at the publike good; as you de∣sire the glory of Christ, the advancement of his truth, and to stand with comfort before his judgement seat at the last day, pitch on such as are able to doe him best service; say they be not so rich or great in kin∣red as others, yet they will bring more credit and profit to
 your companie, then any o∣ther; as being the props of na∣ture, the noblest; of the world (so Schoolemen call them) and are so respected where Christ is honoured; who did him∣selfe, and taught us, to pre∣ferre our spirituall, before our carnall kinred.
4. For your Worke-house, I should reioyce to see it as full as your Schoole-house;One of the Iudges in his charge this last Assizes, proposed Dorchester for a pat∣terne to these parts. enough you may finde, may it please you, mercifully to stop your eares sgainst the deceit∣full cries of fond parents, and to send your eyes abroad into the high wayes, to compell them to come in: a matter it is of great consequence, as that which will proove an ease un∣to your selves, in regard of that (other wayes inevitable) bur∣den, by poore people daily in∣creasing, an honour to your societie, a benefit to the state, and a good meanes to enlarge
 Christs kingdome: omit not such an opportunitie, delay not duties, death is at hand.
5. Let the priuate exercise of recalling, reading, prayer and catechising bee more generally and constantly obserued: the later part of Saturday (which some of our ancestours made a vacation, for better preparati∣on to the day following) and such parts of the Lords day, as remaining before and after pub∣like employment, may be pro∣fitably spent that way: to the furthering of which good end, I hope it will please the Lord to put it into the hearts of some of you, to honour him with part of his substance, by building an∣other Church, or Chappell, for those poore people (I feare ma∣ny) who cannot when they wcd finde roome to stand within the fold: while you haue opportunity, doe good and defer not all till death.
6. If fasting might take a turne with feasting, and some∣times goe round, in priuate I meane, it would helpe much to further the worke of mor∣tification: the Lord calls now loude for th'one, not exclu∣ding thother, so vnderstand me; feasts of loue may in∣crease, if built vpon the decay of excessiue meetings. Symons poore boord that fed many with little, was preferd to Lu∣cullus his rich Table, that fed a few with superfluous varie∣ties: striue who shall be most eminent, not in building, fea∣sting or wearing of rich and o∣uer-costly appearell, but in pro∣moting and prosecuting good causes (as some of you haue done and at present are so em∣ployed) let not good propositi∣ons want a conclusion, through carnall delay or factious oppo∣sition: Husband well your time, for on the expence of
 this moment, depends eternity of weale or woe.
7. Let none of your sonnes or seruants bee vntimely sent beyond Seas, (where there is manifest danger of infection, no ordinary hope of instructi∣on) till they bee armed and sea∣soned with the knowledge and loue of sound principles: more∣ouer in forraigne traffique, let the world see, you preferre the publike weale, to your owne priuate gaine:Non remit∣titur pecca∣tum nisi restituatur ablatum. August. and to that end, euer content your selues with reasonable increase, and make restitution of what soe∣euer you can remember, to haue beene vnlawfully or doubt∣fully gotten; for what will it profit a man, &c. as Matth. 16. vers. 26.
8. Let brotherly loue conti∣nue and abound, that so you may often taste of that blessing which the Lord offers you, in the neerenesse of dwelling one
 by another; to encourage by councell and conference and stir vp one another in the way: for my part, I am perswaded of you, brethren, that yee are full of goodnesse, filled with all knowledge, able to admonish one another, your obedience is gone abroad and I am glad on your behalfe, but yet I would haue you wise vnto that which is good and simple concerning euill; and therefore I haue writ∣ten the more boldly vnto you, in some sort, as putting you in mind, because of the Grace that is giuen to me of God; and be∣cause I long to see a vnanimous growth in spirituall strength, your hearts as your houses com∣pact together in the Lord, that so you may ioyne to serue him with one mind and soule cheere∣fully trauailling towards heauen, in Vnitie and Amitie: a speciall meanes to witnesse your sinceri∣tie in the profession of Religi∣on,
 and to shield you from all scandalous aspersions of facti∣on, pride, strangenesse and diuisi∣on: you see how large a letter I haue written vnto you with mine owne hand, too large for such a discourse, were that re∣spected only, but not knowing whether I should euer haue the like opportunity againe, my loue vnto you and care for you, lead me into this errour.
I conclude with our Apo∣stle: my dearely beloued if there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of loue, if any fel∣lowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfill yee my ioy, that yee be like min∣ded, hauing the same loue, be∣ing of one accord, of one mind, blamelesse and harmelesse, the Sonnes of God without rebuke, in the middest of a crooked and peruerse generation, among whom yee shine as lights in the world: what soeuer things are
 honest, iust, pure, louely and of good report, thinke of and fol∣low them: and the God of peace who brought againe from the dead our Lord Iesus, that great Sheepheard of the sheepe, through the bloud of the euer∣lasting couenant, make you per∣fect in euery good worke to doe his will: in this hope I leaue you, and will neuer cease to pray for you while I re∣maine,
From my study in Barum this 9 of May 1633.

