



RIGHT HONORABLE:
AS the Soule is far more  excellent then the Bodie; this being but of the Earth earth∣ly, but the other of the Heauen heauenly: so whatso∣euer concernes the adorning of the pretious Soule, is farre preferred be∣fore all bodily furniture and com∣plement whatsoeuer. And seeing
 our wise God, though he hath con∣ioyned the Soule and Body to e∣ther, to make one perfect Crea∣ture, yet he hath subiected the Bo∣dy to the Soule, for the per∣fection thereof: therefore herein doth consist the perfection of the Creature, when the bodie and the things concerning the same, perfor∣meth it due homage to the soule, and imployeth it best meanes for the a∣dorning thereof, which as it cannot doe without the information and ac∣tuating of the soule, by which it is en∣liued, and therefore ought in all duty and thnkefulnesse to returne it streames to the fountaine, and honour the soule with that power which it receiued from the same: so hereby doth it procure true honor to it selfe, when it in all things furthers the soule to that end to which it was cre∣ated. Now as the Soule is the life of the Bodie, so God is the life of the
 Soule. And as the maine vse, and end of the Bodie, is to doe homage to the Soule: so the end of both soule and bodie, is to glorifie God. And by how much the bodie more furthers the soule herein, by so much more doth it attaine the end of it Creati∣on, and so aspires to that glorious estate, that this corruptible may put on incorruption, and this mortall may be swallowed vp of immor∣talitie. And this is that true hap∣pinesse to which man was created: as of nothing of himselfe, because he was a creature, so by nothing in and of himselfe effectuall to this happinesse: because hereunto hee must become a new creature in Iesus Christ. Indeed the Lord made man righteous at the first, and so capable of this happinesse: but he sought many inuentions, and tooke the forbidden way, and so lost the true substance of happinesse,
 while he hunted after the shadow thereof. And so it was good for him to be lost in himselfe, that he might be found in Christ: who is made vnto him Righteousnesse, and Sanctifica∣tion, and Redemption: that he which reioiceth, might reioice in the Lord.
Behold the end of our Creation, God made all things for his glory. Behold the Meanes to accomplish this end: Man must be stript of all glorie in himselfe, by his fall, that be∣ing Redeemed by the pretious bloud of Iesus Christ, he might wholly con∣secrate himselfe in all holinesse and righteousnesse, to the glorie of his Redeemer, as being wholly enabled by the power of Christ hereunto, and perfectly accepted by the righteous∣nesse of his Christ imputed vnto him; and led forward by the free grace of God in Iesus Christ to the finishing of his saluation in the feare of God, as hauing all things working
 together to the best vnto him, and being kept by the mightie power of God through faith vnto saluation.
This is the subiect of this Treatise. This the maine vse thereof: euen to teach a Christian wherein consists his true happinesse, namely in Christ, and not in himselfe, and to informe him how to trie himselfe, whether he be in Christ or no: namely, if he grow vp in Christ which is his Head, vnto a perfect stature. And this also is an vndoubted triall, that all out∣ward encrease is sanctified vnto vs: namely, if it further our Spirituall Growth in Christ, that we may lay vp a good foundation thereby, a∣gainst the life to come. The reasons why I haue consecrated these Medi∣tations to your Honours Protection; Are, first: Because the Lord hauing aduanced your Honour marueliously by the great fauour of our Soue∣raigne, to most high and eminent
 Place and Honour; you may hereby lay vp a good foundation against the life to come, by honouring the Lord with your greatnesse, and kissing his glorious Sonne Iesus, in coun∣tenancing his Word, and patroni∣zing his seruants, and worthily opposing the Enemies of the Gos∣pell: which through our securitie and remisnesse haue renewed and encreased their hopes in this day of their abasing. Surely, as it is strange that darkenesse should en∣rease in the midst of so glorious a light: so it is more then time to la∣bour the speedie dispelling thereof, least it obscure more and more our glorious light, and in the end banish the same.
And who more fit to encounter this darkenesse, then such glorious starres that are aduanced in the Firmament of our state? May it not be said vnto such as Mardokey
 said to Hester, being aduanced in such times: who knoweth whether thou art come to the kingdome for such a time: I hope I shall not neede to adde what Mardokey premiseth. If thou hold thy Peace at this time, comfort and deliuerance shall appeare to the Iewes, out of another place: The Lord knoweth how to deliuer his in the day of Tentation, and to catch the wicked in their owne snares. Blessed be God, that as he hath suckled your Honour, euen from the cra∣dle, with the syncere milke of the Word: so no doubt, by this time, he hath made you a strong man in Iesus Christ: and as he hath fur∣nished you with all outward meanes for the maintenance of the Truth; so he will enable you by his grace to improue your Place and Authoritie more and more hereunto: that so you may grow vp more and more as well in fauour with God, as with
 men, and stablish your outward greatnesse, by encrease in goodnesse and care to aduance the Kingdome of our Lord Iesus. And this I shall not cease daily to pray vnto our good God for: humbly entreating your Ho∣nour to accept of my poore endeuours hereunto: who as heretofore for ma∣ny fauors, so now especially much more shall rest bound vnto your Ho∣nor for this Protection. And so com∣mending your good Lordship to the euerlasting tuition of the Almightie; I rest euer in him

