



MY LORD:
THere is one Starre, . which from diuers Offices, receiueth sudry names (saith Pisida Constanti∣nopol.) It is  a nunce of the night, and therefore called . It returneth againe, and declares the approach∣ing of the day, then is it , and therefore called .
 Such a one haue I been at this time. The funerall of the late Archbishop of St Andrewes, the new function of his successor gaue occasion of both. I was inuited vnlooked for to the interring of the one, that I might speak to the liuing for the dead, and from him. There Hesperus ouer∣shadowed vs, with darke and dole∣full countenance. Inioyned againe to preach at the entrie of the other, there Phosphorus proclaimed the comming of a bright and ioyful day, which I pray God may long conti∣nue.
Blessed be the Lord, who still con∣serues a Ministrie in his Church! One generation passeth, & ano∣ther Eccles. 1. 4 commeth, but the earth re∣maineth; much more, he who for∣med Iam. 1. 17 it, for in him falleth no sha∣dowe of change. Before the Ruler of the world stand these Oliues, Zach. 4. which furnish oyle to his Candle∣sticke.
 In his hand are the seauen Reuel. 1. 12. starres: no smoke of the bottomlesse pit can vtterly quench their light. If one of them goe downe from our Horizon, another ascends. Elijah may be taken away; but one com∣meth after him in the Spirit, and power of Elijah. Moses dyed, but The God of the Spirits of all flesh raised vp Ioshua, with whom he wrought no lesse powerfully, then with Moses. By Moses he brought Israel out of Egypt, by Ioshua hee entred them in Canaan. By Mo∣ses hee destroyed one Nation of the Egyptians, by Ioshua he discom∣fited seauen Nations of the Cana∣nites. Moses diuided the red Sea, and Ioshua parted Iordan into two. Moses darkned the Sunne that it shined not, Ioshua detained it, that it went not downe, accor∣ding to the ordinary course. Nim∣rod for all his might cannot build
 vp, where IEHOVA will cast downe. Neither can Sennache∣rib for al his pride, preuaile against the Citie which God will protect. They are fooles who fight against heauen. Sidonians in their trea∣tie Act. 12. 20 with Blastus for Herod his peace, might learne them more wis∣dome: they imagine to quench the light of Israel, by cutting away comfortable instruments from the Church: but they are deceiued; for the Church is like a tree, whose branches hang downe to the earth, and may be cut off, though not with∣out diuine permission, but the roote is in heauen, which stil sendeth out others in their roome. I haue pen∣ned this Sermon, to stoppe the mouthes of misreporters, as I prea∣ched it, without paring or adding any thing, except a little discourse of the Religion of our Antipodes: And doe now dedicate it to your
 Lordship, as one who being a pre∣sent Auditor thereof, can best beare witnes to the truth of my relation. And I trust, your Lordship will also accept it as a testimony of that loue, which I owe vnto you, for your con∣stant profession of God his eternall truth, in this declining age, and your most sincere affection, in all your speeches euer auowed to his Maiesties seruice: whereunto as your Lordship acknowledgeth your selfe to be bounden beyond others of your ranke; So I pray GOD your Lordship may continue faithfull, in both vnto the death.

