



RIGHT Wor∣shipfull, & you the rest Beloved in our Lorde. That which the Apostle said cō∣cerning Wiues of being subiect to their1. Pet. 3.1 Husbands that even they which obeyed not the word might without the word haue beene wonne by the conversa∣tion of the wiues, while they beheld their pure conversation which was with feare: may with good congruity be said to Protestant-Christians, of often frequē∣ting Church-Service, that even they which obey not the word (I meane
 Roman-Catholickes) may without the word be wonne by the conversa∣tiō of such Protestants, while they be hold our pure conversation which is or ought to be with feare. Howbeit such hath beene the coldnes of a manie in this kind, the aversenes of others vn∣lesse there be Sermons to, the conni∣vence even of Pastors, I, and soothing their Flocke in this sin, that the Peo∣ple who by their conversatiō should haue converted others vnto vs, are themselues now in these daies cōver∣ted vnto them, and a many of vs the Ministers that hoaped of much inter∣est of bringing souls vnto God, stand nowe in doubte of loosing the verieEtiam de sorte nunc venio in du∣bium miser, Terent. A∣dlph. Act. 2 sc. 2. principall it selfe. I pray God2. Tim. 4.16. saith the Apostle in a case of lesse moment, that it may not be laid to their charge. Doubtlesse among all the oversights to be laide to the charge of vs Prote∣stants, this of frequēting Gods house no better is not the least, especially
 nowe in these times when the Lorde our God hath done so miraculouslie so much for vs, and when his honour (as it were) lies at the stake, and the fruit that wee bring forth makes his name (I would I might not say) blas∣phemed among the Papists.
The consideration hereof Right deare and dearely Beloved Christi∣ans, hath caused me as at the first to preach these two Sermons, the one to the Vniversity, the other to your selues: so nowe to set them forth only and wholy to your selues, that as one of them was the very first Sermon that ever I preached vnto you since I came to be your Pastor, so it might re¦maine vnto you for ever as a testimo∣ny of my care of you, and not perish with me when I am gone as did a ma∣ny good words in this kinde with my worthy Predecessor Mr Wharton.
Were this your Parish of that na∣ture that others be, & the Pulpit not
 so often, and necessarily to be supply∣ed by the Vniversity as it is, perhaps I would speake thence vnto you more often then I doe, but since I cannot what I would, I will now do what I can, even preach vnto youEvangeli∣zo manu & scriptione Raynold. de Rom. Eccles. Idol Epist. ad Comit. Essex. by wri∣ting, and it grieveth me not (asPhil. 3.1. speaks the Apostle) to write the same things to you, and for you it is a sure thing.
When our Saviour was risen a∣gaine from the dead and Mary Mag∣dalen, and the other Mary came to see the sepulchre, & by reason of the An∣gels countenance that had descended from heaven, it shoulde seeme they were somewhat frighted, Feare ye notMat. 28.5 saith the Angell, for I know that ye seeke Iesus which was crucified: he is not here for he is risen, as he said, Come see the place where the Lord was laid, And go quickly, and tell his Disciples that hee is risen from the dead: and behold hee go∣eth before you into Galile: there ye shall see him: lo I haue told you. I doubt not
 Beloved, a many of you are as desi∣rous to find Iesus as ever those womē were, especially in this age when so many Romish Sable Catholicks, so ma∣ny English Browne-Schismatickes so verefie our Saviours words,Mark. 13.21. Lo here is Christ, or to he is there, as it is in Saint Marks Gospell. I know I am not fit to be likened to the Angell, but yet may I say what did the Angell Lo I haue told you, and as our SaviourMat. 11.14. said in another case of Iohn the Baptist, And if ye will receiue it, this is Elias: so I in this case, And if ye will receiue it, this is the truth I haue here delivered in these Sermons.
Wherefore as the Prophet EsayEsay. 30.21. said to the Iewes, Thine eares shall heare a word behind thee, saying, This is the way walke yee in it, whē thou turnest to the right hand, and when thou turnest to the left: so assure your selues that now in this Age when there is so much turning on the Right Hand, and
 on the Left, this is the Word your eares haue heard, and I ingenuously professe that after so many yeares spent in this famous Vniversitie in reading Olde and New writers (you knowe whoseMat. 13.15. precept it was) if ei∣ther of the other waies, or any other had appeared vnto me better, for the better directing of your Soules, or doubtlesse I would haue proclai∣med it to you vpon the house top, hauing had so many opportunities, or I would at leastwise at this time haue vtterly abstained from printing This: a labour (beleeue me) not the least, and now as the world goeth not so necessarily to be vndertaken.
J had purposed to haue put you in mind, of the place of aboad God hath given you, even in the eye of this Vni∣versitie (the Vniversitie the eye of the Land) as though his meaning were you should be examples to all about you, how they also like you should
 frequent his House: of Church-Ser∣vice and of Sermons how they are both (if well performed) like Rahel, & Leah (but Leah without a blemish) which twaine did build the house of Israel and multiplied the heires of the promised land: of being to be as loath to loose the one at any time whatsoe∣ver, as a many are or seeme to be, to loose the other, the profit being in∣comparable that accreweth vnto vs by either: of being much more hard to Pray, then it is to heare a Sermon, and therefore how it behoveth vs to come the oftner to shew our willing¦nesse to vndergoe the greater paines in Gods Service: but I am now, even veryOctob. 15. 1612. now, surprised with the newes of her death, who was vnto me in her life the only Iewel of this world. I had thought that Shee also should haue had the pervsing of these Sermons, and haue seene in St Anstens Mo∣ther (twise mentioned in the former
 of them) the true similitude of he¦selfe. But God hath now disposed o∣therwise, and given her the place al∣ready, which this Booke would but haue guided and directed her vnto, and well am I worthy to loose the benefit of so good a Reader as Shee would haue beene, who haue suffred it so long to lie hidden by me as it hath. O my deare and worthy Mother what shall I say concerning thee? I might say of thee asMuliebri habites, virili fide, anili se∣curitate, ma∣terna chari∣tate, christia∣na pietate, Aug. Confes- l. 9. c. 4. St Austen of his Mother, Thou wert of a womanly carria∣ge but of a manly faith, thou wert fraught with an aged tranquillitie of mind, with motherly loue and Christian affection. I might say of thee as Nazi∣anzen of hisNazian E∣itaph. Pa∣tris. Mother: As the Sunne beames are faire and cleere in the mor∣ning and grow brighter and warmer to∣wards noone, even so my Fathers wife, shewing forth the pleasant first fruits of godlinesse at the beginning, afterwardes shined out with greater light. I might
 say of thee as did StO vera ma¦ter, adaman∣te fortir, melle dulci∣or, flore fra∣grantior Am¦bros. de Ia∣cob. & vita beata. l. 2. c. 12. Ambrose of the Mother in the Machabees, O truest Mother, stronger then Adamant, sweeter then Hony, more fragrant then the Rose. But I will now say nothing of thee, only this will I say of my selfe, I that haue said so much vpon the seaven & twentith Psalme the fourth verse, the subiect of this booke: must turne me now vnto another Text, and medi∣tate another while vpon theI went hea¦vily as one that mour∣neth for his Mother. Ps. 35.14. fiue & thirty Psalme the foureteenth verse, the proiect perhaps of another book.
Pardon me Beloved if I haue as you see thus left you a while, & paid this tribute of these few lines to the true Soveraigne of my Loue, I now come vnto you againe, and speake a∣gaine vnto you but in that which heareafter followeth, and which in part you haue heard already, in part you shall now heare.

