


THree things there are (right wor∣shipfull and ver∣tuous Lady) which as in all times, haue hindered the salua∣tion of men, so in these our daies, do not a little keepe men from sincere pietie: worldlines plea∣sure,
and persecution. Touch¦ing the two first, in the 14. of Luke the 18. verse, they which were bidden to the Lordes supper, excused them∣selues after this manner: One said, I haue bought a farme, and another said, I haue married a wife, and therefore I cannot come. The world is like vnto a Sea, in which many men are drowned. The fish Polypus, o∣therwise a sottish creature, yet in the catching of shel-fish, vseth strange diligence: euen so some haue wisedome, onely for gain; but as concerning religion, they are merely brutish. As for
pleasure, if it be a principle that plures gula quam gladio periere: moe haue perished by gluttony then by the sword: How many haue perished tho∣row voluptuousnes? Riches and pleasures are many a mans God. Now concerning persecution, how many are so effeminate that they cannot abide any tryall? Fiery tryal through the mercies of God, wee haue none by the meanes of a gratious King, whom the Lord blesse continu∣ally; yet are the godly afflicted with vices and sinnes: blessed are they that can mourne for
the sinnes of other men: ney∣ther are the godly persecuted with the sinnes of men only, but also with their tongues. He that feareth God now a daies, is made a wonder amongst men. This is a grieuous persecution, because it is done by men, that professe the same religion; and sogrieuous is it to many, that for this cause they will not bee counted religi∣ous: they had rather bee open∣ly prophane, then publiquely religious, lest they should be scof∣fed at. Shall wee thinke that these men would abide the fiery tryall, that cannot abide this so easie a kind of tryall? Now that
men may relinquish the world and worldly pleasures, and also that they bee not offended with persecution, I haue penned this treatise: the Lorde blesse the same, to all that shall read it. A true Christian may say with the Poet:
Quocūque aspicio nihil est nisi p̄tus & aether
Fluctibus hic tumidus, nubibus ille minax.
Whethersoeuer I cast my eies, there is nothing but the sea, and the aire, the one raging with his waues, the other threatning with clouds. To conclude, as I thoght good to publish this trea∣tise, so I iudged it meete to dedi∣cate the same to your worshippe,
being a true paterne of piety, and a rare example of religion. The Lord for his mercies sake, multiply these his graces vpon you, that you may liue Eternally.

