


¶ To the right Wor∣shipfull, wise, and vertuous Ladies, the Ladie Anne Fleetwood, Elizabeth Luke, and Elizabeth Dive, Grace and peace.
WHen I cōsider (right Worshipfull and ver∣tuous Ladies) the meanes that GOD hath giuen vs wher∣by we may proceede in pietie and godli∣nes of life, and when againe on the other∣side, I consider the little pietie that is a∣mongst men, I cannot sufficiently bewaile the times. That which Tullie the heathen man said of his time, I may say of our age, In ea tempora incidit aetas nostra vt cum maximè florere nos oporteret,
tune vivere puderet; We are fallen in∣to those times, that when we should most flourish, then we are most asha∣med to liue. For what Christian mans heart is not grieued, to heare of the oathes that abound in this land, and of the vsurie that is practised amongst men? but how∣soeuer the wicked swarme and abound, yet the godly must haue a care to proceede in pietie: shall Atheists striue for the dee∣pest damnation and greatest torments in hell, shall they striue to sinne most damna∣bly, and shall not the children of God striue to proceede from grace to grace? Salo∣mon in the 4. of the Prov. & 19. v. saith, That the way of the righteous shineth as the light that shineth more & more vnto the perfect day, signifying that the godly increase daily in perfection, till they come to eternall happines. Wee are in this life viatores, trauellers: therefore we must daily trauell to come neere to our iournies end, which is euerlasting life. The Schoole∣men make three degrees of charitie, one of those that are beginners in religion: the se∣cond, of those that proceede in the same:
the third, of those that are perfect: now the truth is, we are not perfect in this life, but must striue to perfection. Optatus spea∣keth thus, Onely Christ is perfect,Lib. 2. caete∣ri omnes semi perfecti sumus, all other of vs are but halfe perfect. For the furthe∣rance of which progresse in pietie, I haue penned this briefe Treatise, deliuered in sermons in my parish: in which Treatise I haue inserted authorities, which then I v∣sed not for causes knowne to my selfe. And as I haue penned this briefe Treatise for the benesit of the godly, so I dedicate the same to your Worships, whose chiefe care as to flie the corruptions of the world, and to proceede in godlines of life, as may appeare by the carefull vsing of the meanes here set downe, as I my selfe can testifie. The Lord of his infinite goodnes graunt that in so doing ye may continue vnto your liues ende, sic itur ad astra, that is the way to heauen.

