



IT was the saying of the wisest among men, (high & mighty Prince) In the multitude of peo∣ple is the Kings honor, but in the want of people is the destruction of a Prince. And for this cause as well the Law of God, as the constitu∣tions of men haue hembd in the furious affections of vnruly and disorderly persons, lest to the detri∣ment and danger of their neighbour, they should runne at randome beyond the rules of reason, in murthering and massacring him whom the Al∣mighty had made according to his owne image and holinesse. Now as there is no crime so enor∣mious, but it may be masqued with the mantle of
 some vertue: so is there a sort of people who pur∣chasing to themselues credit, with the too-too cre∣dulous multitude, doe vnder a plausible pretence of health, not onely sucke the substance from the deluded multitude, but often precipitate their bodies into Charons boat. Of whom a learned late Writer said well, that these people were more pernitious to a Common-wealth, then the com∣mon cut-throats by the high-way sides. All which offenders are not a little encouraged, by the ordi∣nary inspection of vrines, as it is at this day not without great preiudice to the publique, euery where practised.
Amongst many who haue stood in the gap a∣gainst this abuse, none hath handled this subiect more plainly and to better purpose, then this pre∣sent Author, whom for this cause I haue of a stranger vndertaken to make a Free-denizon, and to speake the language of this Land. As for my selfe, silence had beene more secure, and more safe for me to haue kept within the harbor, then to launce out into the deep and tempestuous Sea of mens censorious humours. But all the barkings and snarlings of the most enuious Momes & Zoiles being weighed in the scales against the publique good, will bee found too light, being especially shrowded vnder the wings of so mighty a Maecoe∣nas as your selfe.
Neyther is it any new thing that great Princes haue beene affectioned fauourers of Physicke, and Physitians. Hence haue we the name of Mithri∣dates daign'd vnto a noble Physicall compounded
 Antidote: of Gentius the Illyrian king to the hearb Gentian: of Lysimachus to the hearb Lysimachia, &c But that I may come yet a little neerer, it is recor∣ded that one of your Highnesse Ancestors, and sometimes King in the Northerne part of this Iland, composed certaine physicall Canons. And another King of the same descent is recor∣ded to haue attained to that skill in curing of wounds (a branch of Surgery, being it selfe one of the parts of Physicke) that many noble Families of that Kingdome hauing from him acquired this skill, haue with their inheritances transmitted the same to their Successors. But hath not our bright morning starre, the purchaser of our peace, of whom your Highnes hath his being, and on whom the eyes of the European Princes are now set, as in other Arts and liberall Sciences, so likewise in this Profession, manifested so profound knowledge, as one would thinke the oracle of Aesculapius had beene committed to his custody? And as the great Commander of this Vniuerse hath singled you out for a Successor to so great Countries and Kingdomes; so doe I not doubt but he will make you such a patterne of pietie, and endue you with so noble and heroicall vertues, fit for so high and mighty a calling, as the after-ages shall haue cause to blesse the memory of your name.
And if names (howsoeuer of no validity in them∣selues) doe yet often call to minde the noble ver∣tues and heroicall exploits of our Predecessors, and incite vs to a laudable imitation of the same: of what name shall we finde more magnanimous and
 couragious Champions, and better acquainted with the affaires of Mars and Minerua? Amongst many I will single out but three, which shall serue in stead of many moe.
The noble and heroicall exploits of that euer-renowned worthy Champion Charles Martell de∣seruing eternall memory, the famous Tours can yet testifie; whereas aboue three hundred and seuenty thousand of the miscreant Saracenicall nation, did affright not onely France, but euen Italy it selfe, and the Pope notwithstanding his triple Crowne, with all his Clergy, was not a little amazed; and yet were by this valiant Champion vtterly ouer∣thrown, leauing their dead carkeises for a testimo∣nie of his triumphant victory. It would be too tedious to relate the rest of his heroicall acts and exploits, as well against the fore-named Nation, as many others also.
But if I should enter vpon the acts of him who descended lineally out of his loynes in the second generation, that noble Charles, called, and that not without cause, Great, as he was not in word but in very deed also, I scarce should know where to be∣ginne. And howbeit his famous acts against the Saxons and Saracens, and sundry other nations, to∣gether with the managing of the Westerne Em∣pire, were great and glorious: yet were they farre inferiour to his other acts in planting and propa∣gating true pietie; witnesse the foundation of so many Churches and religious places, with rents and reuennues alotted for the maintaining of the seruice of the Almighty. So farre did this magna∣nimous
 Monarch differ from the iudgement of the ascrilegious Church-robbing Great-men of our dayes. What shall I say of his singular loue to let∣ters and learned men? witnesse the founding of the two famous Vniuersities of Paris and Pauie. As for his religious life in priuate, his constant and carefull performance of the duties of pietie, they are but seldome to be seene in Princes of that emi∣nency and might. So that of him I may iustly say that he deserueth to be paralleld with the greatest Princes, and to be enrolled among the Worthies of the world.
Another great and mighty Charles the Christi∣an world hath of later dayes produced: I meane that famous Emperour, the fift of that name, the glory of the Austrian House. Whose valiant ex∣ploits against both Christians and Infidels, together with the captiuating of the French King had made his name and fame immortall: if hee had not too basely abandoned himselfe to the performance of the will and pleasure of the Pope and his Shaue∣lings, especially those lawlesse Locusts, I meane the Loiolites, the Pharisies of our age, and in blind zeale bathed his Blade in the blood of his most faithfull and trusty Subiects: whom therefore God suffered to be pursued by his owne Subiect Maurice Duke of Saxony, by whom also hee was forced to yeeld to such conditions as did much of∣fuscate the splendor of his former victories. And would to God that great Henry of France of fa∣mous memory, hauing taken warning by the at∣tempt which lighted on his teeth, and not being
 circumuented by the soft and woolly words of that cunning Coton, had not suffered those infer∣nall Furies euer to take footing any more in that famous Kingdome of France, then perhaps, had wee not had these fires of dissention kindled, nor heard that one Subiect should vnsheath his sword to bath it in his Christian brothers blood. And I hope that the Princes and Potentates of the Chri∣stian world will now learne to be wise, and to bee warned by other mens harmes. But to our Charles againe, I thinke it may well bee said of him as of Dauids Worthies, that he was honourable among many, yet attained not to the former two. But one thing yet worthy remembrance in this worthy Prince I cannot passe by; that when as that scar∣let Whore, by her fawning and flattering demea∣nor, had drawne the affections of this Prince to∣wards her, & according to her accustomed change∣ablenesse and mutability (especially when greater gaine is offered) shewing him a tricke of her old trade, in entertaining another louer: this generous Prince not able to digest so hainous iniuries, did captiuate the triple Crowne, sacking the seat and City of this abominable Beast, and discharging the Papall authority through all the Spanish Do∣minions, left worthy president to all posterity, that the Kingdome of Spaine, as well as her neighbour Nations, could make a pretty shift without the Papall power.
In these three Worthies all manner of morall vertues, as also whatsoeuer concerneth either mi∣litary or Martiall discipline, together with the
 practices of piety and peace are liuely pourtraied and painted forth vnto vs. And our vndoubted hopes & presages of your Highnesse are such, that one day the very extract and quintessence of such heroicall vertues shall plainly bee seene to haue taken vp their seat and habitation in your selfe; the ripe fruit whereof shall be reaped not by this Iland only, but by the whole Christian world, when God in his owne appointed time shall call you to sway the Scepter of these hereditary Kingdomes. Now your Highnesse accustomed clemency and courteous entertainment of learning with the la∣bours of the learned, haue emboldned me, how∣beit the meanest among many more able and suffi∣cient then my selfe, to present vnto your High∣nesse these my rude labours; the which not my selfe alone, but many more of refined iudgement, haue thought fit to publish for the good of the publique.
Let it therefore please your Princely patience to accept of this first part of the first fruits of my labours, vntill the second part may see the light of the Sunne, which likewise longeth for, and relieth vpon the patronage of so great a Prince; beseech∣ing your Highnesse to accept of it, not according to the worth, but the will and good affection of him who doth present it. Thus did our gracious God in the building of the Tabernacle, accept as well of Goats haire and Badgers skinnes, as of sil∣uer, and gold, and precious stones, scarlet, purple, blew, and fine linnen. And the poore Widowes mite was accepted of according to the bountiful∣nesse
 of her mind. The mighty Monarch Artax∣erxes also accepted kindly at the hand of Sinetas the Persian his entertainment with a cup of cold water taken out of the Riuer Cyrus.
Now being conscious to my selfe, that my good and forward affection is nothing inferior, hauing no better gift for the present, I hope this my paines shall find no worse entertainment at your Highnesse hands. And thus shall I pray for your Highnesse happy and prosperous estate; with the abundance of all good things in this life, and endlesse happinesse in the life to come: and shall euer remaine

