



SO manifold are the miseries (high and mightie Prince) incident to mortall man, that it may seeme not ill said ofCicero in Calce lib. 1. Tusc. quaest. Silenus, who being taken prisoner by king Midas, for his ran∣some taught the king, that it was best for a man not to be borne; and being once borne, to dye speedily. And in like sort, that theLang. epist. me∣dicin. lib. 2. epist. 2. ex Herodoto & Lactantio. Thracians had some reason to mourne and lament at the birth; but on the contrarie, to feast and reioyce at the funerals of their friends. The ma∣nifold infirmities following him from his birth to his buriall, seeme to pleade for this opinion. And therefore no lesse wittily and wisely then truly was it pronounced by the heathen Poet:Viuere quid est nisi valre vta. Martial. To liue, I call to leade a life free from infirmities. And this was the cause why theDe his vide Po∣ld. Virg. de in∣uent. rerum lib. 1. cap 20 ex Pln. & lijs. ancients as∣cribed the inuention of Physicke to no meaner author then their gods, as they called thē. TheHippocr. in epist. Grecians gaue the famous Hippocrates such honours as were due vnto their supposed deities, erecting him a stately statue next vnto Hercules. ThePlin. lib. 29. cap. 1. Romanes for recouering their Em∣perour Augustus out of a dangerous disease, celebrated the memoriall of his Physitian Antonius Musa, in ere∣cting for his perpetuall praise a statue of brasse next vn∣to
 Aesculapius, besides the libertie this Emperour allow∣ed him in his life time to weare a ring of gold; whereby he promoted him to the order of Nobilitie. Critobolus was likewise highly honored for curing king Philips eye without any deformitie. King Ptolomee for curing of his sonne Antiochus, bestowed on his Physitian Erasistratus a thousand talents of siluer.De magnifico Pandlfo Mala∣testa Brixiae, Bergami atque Fani domino, hec Iohannes Mi∣chael Sauona∣rola in proemio ad lib. de balneis. And a learned late writer maketh mention of an Italian Noble man, who hauing at a certaine time inuited some Marquises and great Lords to dinner, and hauing disposed of euery one of his guests according to his greatnesse, and a sumptuous chaire yet standing emptie at the vpper end of the table, his guests guessing it was reserued for himselfe; he sud∣denly taking his Physitian Iacobus Rheginus by the hand (to the great amazement of these Nobles) placed him in this sumptuous seate; adding likewise these words: Sit thou here, the meanes and instrument of my health, whom thus all Princes ought to respect and honour. These few in∣stances among many (mighty Prince) I haue of set pur∣pose set downe, to the end it may the more plainly ap∣peare, how highly both this Art & the professors of the same haue bene in former times honoured; and how much it is, by meanes of ignorant and vnsufficient pra∣ctisers now adayes debased. The which as it is by diuers meanes occasioned, so is this impostorious coniecturing by vrines (I meane as most do vse it) none of the least. In the former discourse I aduanced the auantguard of my forces against this vsurper on another mans right: and in this I now set forward the whole forces of the maine battell, not onely to batter, but to beate downe, if it be possible, this so enormous abuse. And as the former, so was this last birth, in the very first conception, conse∣crated to your Highnesse. As therefore it pleased your
 Highnesse with your Princely protection to grace my former labours, and kindly to accept of the same; so do I now most humbly intreate you, with a gracious aspect to countenance these my latter paines. The gift, I grant, is farre inferiour to your greatnesse; but the saying of Plinie doth somewhat comfort me, affirming thatLacte dijs multae gentes supplicant & mola falsa li∣tant. Plin. prooem lib. 1. natur. hi∣stor. some nations vnfurnished of frankincense, offer vp milke and cakes made of meale and salt to their gods. And the same deities (saith the Poet) are pacified with the poore farmers turfe and corne.Saepe deis hos in∣ter honores, cespes & exigui placue∣runt sacra colo∣ni. Stat. syluar. lib. 1. And it hath bene a grace for greatnesse, to accept of small gifts at meane mens hands, and thought no vnbeseeming thing for great Princes to fauour learning and the louers of the same. But fearing to offend your Princely eares with prolixitie, the weight of matters now in hand requiring greater breuitie, I will here surceasse, beseeching the mighty God of Iacob, who hath deliuered you from the dangers of the deepe, and manifold perils by land, and brought you safe home to English soile, to the great comfort and content of all true hearted British (not Babilonish) subiects, heape and multiply vpon your Highnesse his mercies and blcssings, both externall, internall, and eternall. Amen.

