



Most Reuerend,
I Owe my selfe, and all I haue, vnto your Grace, much more my ser∣uice, with the labour of my hands, head and heart, as most bounden. Though Truth need no Patron, being it selfe free, and that which freeth vs; protected by the God of truth, preached by him that is the Way, the Truth and the Life; published, preserued and inspired by that Comforter that is the Spirit of truth, and therefore is great, and must preuaile: yet do I betake my selfe and my slender endeuours to your Graces protection, as my chiefe Patron; leauing Gods truth, which I haue laboured to make manifest, to his owne gracious blessing, and the censure thereof to
 his most Christian, Catholique, and Apostolique Church.
Your Grace did not onely by speech moue me to meditate vpon this subiect, but also gaue me great en∣couragement to proceed, when I presented vnto you a few sheets of paper the next morning after your mo∣tion, a slender modell of one nights framing. Hereunto I was pricked forward by a godly emulation (and it is good to emulate the good euer, yea and not onely the good, but the euill also in that which is good, as by the example of the vniust steward appeares) partly toward those multitudes of Authors, sacred, profane, old, new, friends and foes, with whose works your Graces great and good Library is plentifully furnished; deeming it a shame to my selfe, being then threescore yeares old, to dye and sorrow like Callicrates, who as he gaue vp the ghost, said, My death grieueth me not, because I came out of my countrey to dye; but it grieueth me to dye before I giue a wound vnto mine enemie. So verily it grieueth me not to be old, or to dye; but it would grieue me to dye before I had wounded a head of that beast which persecuteth the Saints of God. Wherefore seeing so many haue written great and tedious volumes against the truth, I would not passe like an arrow in the ayre, or a ship in the sea, and leaue no monument behind me, to put my flocke in mind of those things which I would wish to be beleeued after my departure; as well by my pen, which may haply pierce when I am dead, as by my tongue, which shall not ceasse (if it please God) to preach while I liue: and God knoweth I desire to liue no longer. Yea and not without some emulation of your Graces selfe, whom I continually obserue to be
 as painfull in your studies, as diligent in your prea∣ching; as actiue in your gouernment, as affable in your entertainment; as iudicious in the obserua∣tion of all authors as euer: which I haue not onely considered with due admiration, but also bene emu∣lous to follow and imitate such a guide, and so good, quamuis non passibus aequis. These haue bene my motiues. Such as my poore labours are, I pre∣sent to your Graces feete, as a part of that dutie which I owe for the great bountie of your more then liberalitie and continuall fauour extended to me and mine. Which if they shall be vouchsafed your father∣ly acceptance, I shall solace my selfe as Antima∣chus did, when all his auditors failed saue onely Plato: Legam nihilominùs: Plato enim vnus mihi instar omnium est. So if all my readers should faile me but your Grace, I would notwithstanding write; for your Grace vnto me is in stead of all, seeing you haue already stood me in more stead then all. If these obligations of your de∣sert and worth, were either by my negligence forgot∣ten, or by mine vnthankfulnesse misprised; yet the very subiect matter of my book would challenge it for your Grace before any other, and as soone from me as from any other.
For I writing of Antiquitie in mine old age, to whom should I commit it (for I cannot commend it) but to an Ancient in Gods Israel, who is the staffe and stay of my declining dayes? And seeing I hold, that the most Ancient Religion is the best, why should I not offer it to the most ancient Doctor of Diuinitie that I heare of in this land, and the most ancient Bishop, both for age and consecration, that I know in our Church? who hath
 not onely read all the Ancient Fathers with a diligent eye, but hath also noted them with a iudicious pen (as mine owne eyes are witnesses, and God reward you for such my libertie) and made continuall vse of them in his Sermons, as any ancient Father in our nation, shall I say? yea in all Christendome, as I dare say, and verily do beleeue: which our aduersaries howsoeuer they did enuie it, yet in their conscience could not de∣nie it.
Wherefore as Cicero wrote his booke De Senectute, in senectute; made noble Cato Maior his obiect, as the best patterne whereto he might conforme his proiect; and commended it to Pomponius Atticus an old man, as the worthiest Patron of such a subiect: So my poore selfe, in these mine old yeares (hauing entred my Cli∣mactericke) for the comfort of mine age, haue pen∣ned this little passage of the oldest Religion, and cho∣sen your Grace as the fittest and most worthie Patron thereof. Not to be tedious or troublesome to your Grace any farther, I will beg leaue (which your Grace will vouchsafe) to vsurpe in the conclusion of mine Epistle, that which your old friend and familiar vsed as the Preface of his booke:Cicero de Se∣nectute. Nunc mihi visum est de senectute (siue Antiquitate) ad te scribere: hoc e∣nim onere quod mihi tecum commune est, aut iam vr∣gentis, aut certè aduentantis senectutis, & te, & me∣ipsum leuari volo. Etsi te quidem, id modestè & sapien∣tèr sicut omnia, & ferre & laturum esse certò scio. Sed mihi cùm de senectute, (id est, Antiquitate) vellem ali∣quid scribere, tu occurrebas dignus eo munere, quo vterque nostrûm communitèr vteremur. Mihi quidem ita iucunda huius libri confectio fuit, vt non modò abster∣serit
 omnes senectutis molestias, sed effecerit mollem e∣tiam & iucundam senectutem. Nunquam igitur satis laudari (Theologia & Antiquitatis peruestigatio) potest, cui qui pareat, omne tempus aetatis sine molestia, imò summa cum laetitia & conscientiae securitate possit de∣gere.

