



Right Honourable, Right Reverend, and my singular good Lord,
THe perswasion and importunitie of some of my friends, and such as may chal∣lenge no small interest in me, hath (af∣ter many distracted thoughts and un∣setled resolutions) induced me to ad∣venture to exhibite some certain Sermons to the publick view and use of others. Of my self I have ever been a∣verse from such a bold attempt, as being too much con∣scious to mine own wants and imperfections, to enter∣tain a thought of committing any of my poore labours unto the Presse. But as those that had not gold, silver, precious stones, &c. to bestow towards the structure
 and ornament of the materiall tabernacle of God, broughtExod. 35 6, 7. fine linen, goats hair, rams skinnes, badgers skinnes, &c. and they were not onely accepted; but also did in some proportion promote the work in hand, and help to bring the same unto perfection: So likewise I thought that in the building of that spirituall1. Cor. 3.16. temple of God, whose walls consist of1. Pet. 2.5 living stones; whoseEphes. 2.20. foundation is built upon the Apostles and Pro∣phets; and whose chief corner-stone is Christ Jesus; though I could not shew my self  (as the1. Cor. 3.1. A∣postle speaketh) yet it might be in some measure ac∣ceptable to God, and conduce towards the perfection of that sacred building, if my poore labours were imployed therein, but asDeut. 29.11. an hewer of wood, or drawer of water.
They were Princes of the congregation, which gaveNumb. 7.13, 14. silver chargers, silver bowls, cups of gold, &c. But neither Moses, nor David, no nor God himself de∣spised the meanest gifts and offerings of inferiour per∣sons. Our Saviour Christ would not have rejected him that had but one talent, if he had negotiated with it, and notLuk. 19.20. and Matth. 25.25. tied it up in a napkin, and hid it in the ground. And the WidowsLuk. 21.1, 2, 3, 4. two mites, though they very little increased the stock; yet were accepted as well as the great abundance, which the rich men cast into the treasurie. To which mites I may fitly resemble these my poore labours, as being of no value in themselves: which therefore I had wholly suppressed, if I had not been confident that God doth more respect the heart and affection of the giver, then the worth and value of the gift. Resolving then upon these motives to give way to the importunitie of my friends, I conceived that the
 more I was conscious to mine own infirmitie, the more it concerned me to make choice of some noble and worthy Patron, under whose protection I might presume to shrowd these first-fruits of my labours. And therefore, after some serious thoughts passed in that kinde, I was for speciall reasons induced humbly to crave your Lordships favour; both to accept of these my rude and indigested Obser∣vations, as a testimonie of the obsequious love and ser∣vice, which I have for many yeares born towards your Honour: and also to vouchsafe to suffer them to passe under your noble protection.
First, because some of these Sermons were delivered in the Lecture at Kettering, when your Lordship vouch∣safed to be a principall member of that Societie: which gave me no small hope, that you would the rather cast a favourable aspect both upon me, and these my poore la∣bours.
Secondly, because the principall end, and scope of these Sermons is to preach Pietie and Charitie, the summe and substance of the Practick part of Christian Religion: whereof your Lordship hath given many rare examples. To which no small lustre is added, in that your Lordship hath not left these works of Pietie and Charitie to be performed by your Executors: but you have seen the complement and perfection of them while you are yet living. Which both the Ʋniversities, and divers other places (to your immortall fame and re∣nown) do daily, and will perpetually testifie.
Thirdly, I was the rather encouraged to presume up∣on your Lordships favourable acceptance, because that you have not onely ever been a noble Patron of all good learning: but also you have shewed singular respect to
 such as you have found industrious and painfull in the Church of God. And therefore I shall think my self hap∣py, if in the small remainder of my dayes, I may bestow my strength and labours, or be my self bestowed to benefit the Church of God, and do your Lordship any kinde of service, though in the least and smallest degree.
Thus was I animated to present this small volume, together with my humble service unto your Lordship, hoping that you will vouchsafe to cast the wing of your protection over it, and favourably accept of my poore endeavours. To which my humble request if your Lord∣ship shall vouchsafe to condescend; I shall not fear the de∣tracting calumnies of Cynicall censurers, but think my self to be safe under the favour of so worthy a person: whom God hath exalted to such eminent place both in the Church, and Common-wealth. Yea your Lordships fa∣vourable acceptation is sufficient to beget Hieromes re∣solution in me:Eist. lib. 1. pist. 2. ad Plinum. Legant qui volunt, qui nolunt abjici∣ant. Eventilent apices, literas calumnientur. Magis vestrâ charitate provocabor ad studium, quàm illo∣rum detractione & odio deterrebor. And I shall re∣ceive no small encouragement to proceed forward in a work of another kinde, which I purpose shortly (God willing) to present unto your Lordship. I can plead no worth; and therefore do humbly sue for favour. I hunt not after a shadow of fame for eloquence: I preferre naked truth before all painted flourishes; and affect such a stile as may profit the meanest auditour. For I remem∣ber what S. Augustine hath spoken to that point:Epist. ad Dmtr. De Scripturis disputantem non decet Aristotelis argu∣menta conquirere: nec ex flumine Tullianae elo∣quentiae ducendus est rivulus: nec aures Quintiliani
 flosculis & scholari declamatione mulcendae: sed pedestris & quotidianae similitudinis, & nullâ lu∣cubratione redolens oratio necessaria est, quae rem explicet, sensum edifferat, obscura manifestet.
Onely in handling the sacred Scriptures, it hath ever been my desire (by the help of Expositours and the small insight which God hath given me in the Origi∣nall tongues) to endeavour throughly to indigate and search out the drift and scope of the Spirit of God, and the true sense and interpretation of the words, before I presume to build any thing upon them. Wherein I ac∣knowledge that I do runne a contrary course to that novell conceit of many amongst us at this day; which blush not (in private discourse) to vent their too nice and fantasticall opinion, that the time which is spent in the pulpit in interpretation (if it exceed a short paraphrase consisting of a few words) is but lost; and that it is not preaching, untill we say this is the do∣ctrine, &c.
Which superficiall handling of the word of God (now too much practised in publick) I can resemble to nothing more aptly, then to erecting a large and goodly structure upon the superficies of the earth, without dig∣ging or searching for firm ground whereon to place the foundation thereof: which therefore is by every storm or violent blast shaken and endangered, if not overthrown and ruined.
The ancient Fathers and Doctours in the Church conceived not thatJohn 4.10 the water of life could with such facilitie be drawn out of the sacred Fountain of the holy Scriptures. Which moved S. Augustine to say,Epist. 2. ad Vlusian. Tanta est Christianorum profunditas literarum,
 ut in eis quotidie proficerem, si eas solas ab ine∣unte pueritia usque ad decrepitam senectutem maximo otio, summo studio, meliore ingenio co∣narer addiscere: in quibus latet altitudo sapien∣tiae, ut animosissimis, acutissimis, flagrantissimís{que} cupiditate discendi hoc contingat, quod ea∣dem Scriptura quodam loco habeat. Quum con∣summaverit homo, tunc incipit. Yea though he had the yeares of Methuselah, and the wisdome of So∣lomon. And Gregorie was of the same opinion, as ap∣peares by those words;Homil. Tanta ac talis est divinae Scripturae sublimitas, ut non solùm verba, quae à sanctis vel ab ipso Domino dicta referuntur, sed etiam circumstantiae rerum, quae simpliciter posi∣tae videntur, spiritualibus sunt plenae mysteriis. And Augustine again;De vera religione Si in Scriptura Sacra tan∣tùm essent quae facillimè intelligerentur, nec stu∣diosè quaereretur, nec suaviter inveniretur veritas. And for my own part, I have ever conceived, that if I delivered any thing to my auditours, not having first laid a sound ground for it, from the word of God; I should seem rather to preach my self, then Christ Je∣sus; and leave the hearers in suspence whether they should embrace it, or reject it. For (as Chrysostome saith)In Psal. 97. Si quid dicitur absque Scriptura, audito∣rum cogitatio claudicat.
And now my prayer is, that the LordHebr. 13.20. Jesus Christ, the great Shepherd of the sheep, may pro∣sper all your Lordships proceedings, and your Pa∣storall endeavour in the stewardspip and flock com∣mitted unto you: and after you have finished your course here on earth, entertain you into his king∣dome
 with that joyfull saying,Matt. 25.21. . To the saving grace of which blessed Jesus, I in all humblenesse commend your Lordship, and rest

