



BEcause an old man is next neighbour to my Dying man, I haue something
 to say to him. Old age of it selfe is more com∣able than common. For few of many liue till they be old: and commen∣dable it is in its owne selfe, and it carrieth with it re∣uerence and respect, accō∣panied with grace, and it is plighted to the righteous as a blessing,Psal. 91.16. With long life will I satisfie him. And it is to the godly, as a crowne vpon their heads.Prou. 16.31. Age is a crown of glo∣ry, when it is found in the way of righteous∣nesse. And it is likeEccles. 12.5. the Almond-tree that flou∣risheth.
 But when gray haires and manners grow not and goe together, but are seuered; and the older they be in age, are colder in vertue; their old age is not venerable, but despi∣cable.Cicero in Senect. Nō rugae, sed ho∣nestè acta superior aetas. Not wrinckles (saith the Orator) but thy worth addeth honour to thine age. As we grow in stature and yeares, so must we in fauour with God & man.Senec. Desine ea velle senex, quae voluisti puer. Seneca would aduise thee to take heed, not to lay the structure of age vpon the foundation of youth: but to loath the things when we are old, that we
 loued when wee were young.Senec. Elemen∣tarius senex, idi∣culus. We are to goe for∣ward, not backward like a Crab; wee must daily in∣crease in vertue and holi∣nesse of life, as the Moone that still waxeth till shee come to the full; as the ri∣uers still flow, till they come to a full floud. Bee thou therefore, thou old man, a practicall Christian euery manner of way in holy con∣uersation, holy meditati∣ons, in fastings oft, in pray∣ers oft, in almes-deeds oft, in hearing sermons, in re∣ceiuing the blessed Sacra∣ment oft, in the Temple a∣bout
 the seruice of God oft, reade the Bible oft, the best physicke for the soule, as it pleaseth Chrysostome to say, and let not the booke of the Law depart from thee, but meditate there∣upon day and night, and let his lawes bee thy coun∣sellours, and his statutes thy songs, in the dayes of thy pilgrimage. Alphon∣sus King of Naples, not∣withstanding hee was en∣cumbred with the affaires of a kingdome, a burden of it selfe heauie enough for any mans shoulders, yet would he neuer let goe the
 blessed Bible, but perused it diligently, together with Scholies and Paraphrases vpon the text, fourteene times ouer, as Panormi∣tane reporteth. If a King could finde the leasure to doe this, what shall I say of our elementary old men, who neuer yet perused the single Bible thorowout in all their liues; nay perhaps haue not the Bible in their houses, lesse in their hearts; and being now old, they ei∣ther scorne, or are loth to learne, but would turne o∣uer the book, & all matters of Diuinitie, for Preachers
 to deale withall? Againe, if Marcus Antonius the Emperour haunted the house of Sextus the Phi∣losopher, for learnings sake, and it irked him not in his extreme old age to continue that his course: how shall we be blamelesse, if we shall refuse instructi∣on, by neglecting to repaire to such as may edifie vs in our holy faith? It is a grace for an old man to learne.Marc. Antonius Pulchrum senes∣centi discere. It was the Motto of the said Emperour. Answe∣rable whereto is this sen∣tence of Socrates,Socrat. Praestat serò quam nun∣quam discere. Better late, than neuer to learn.

But now to the point, be∣cause howsoeuer the young man may die soone, the old man cannot liue long: and as Seneca saith,Senec. epist. 77. Mori, vnum ex officijs vitae est. It is one of the duties of life to learne to Die: therefore as the same Author saith, Wee are all our life long to learne.Seneca, Ideo tota vita discendū est. Now the chie∣fest point of learning, is to learne to die: therfore daily and much meditate thou thereupon.
Quid fis, quid fueris, quid cris semper mediteris: Sic minus atque minus, peccatis subjcieris.What thou art now, what thou hast beene,
What thou art like to be:
Consider well, and more and more
From sinne shalt thou be free.
Seneca. lib. 2. Epist. epist. 30. Mortem venren∣tem nemo hilaris accipit, nisi qui se diu ad eam composuit.For no man can be
 willing to goe with Death when hee com∣meth, but hee that hath long before fitted him∣selfe for it, as Seneca sagely saith.Senec. epist. 26. Incertum est quo in loco te mors expectet: itaque tu illu omni lo∣co expecta. Now be∣cause it is vncertaine in what place thou must looke for death, looke for it in euery place. Wherfore aboue all things, let vs learne the art of dy∣ing well. Wherefore Fre∣derick the Emperour, the third of that name, being asked to what studies a mā should especially giue his minde: his answer was, To the knowledge of
 God, and to the skill of Dying. A princely answer, and most pious.Bonus ex hac vita exitus, op∣timus est The∣saurus: adeoque nosse Deum, & bene posse mori, sapientia summa est. For a good passage out of this life, is the best treasure: and so to know God, & to be able to Die well, is the highest wisdome: a speech fathered vpō Maxi∣milian the Emperour. For so wee shallBern. Videbi∣mus Deum homi∣nem in coelesti gloria, patris po∣tentiam, Filij sa∣pientiam, Spiri∣tus Sancti benig∣nssimam clemen∣tiam. see God∣man in heauenly glory, seeing and agnizing the power of the Father, the wisdome of the Son, the louing kindnesse of the Holy Ghost: Bernard.August. Vide∣but in seipso: & hbebunt in seip∣ss: manebunt in aeernm  ipso. They shall see him in himselfe: they shal haue
 him in themselues: they shall remaine with him for euer: Augustine.August. O gau∣dium super omne gaudium, v nens omne gaudium. O foelix iucunditas & iucunda foeli∣citas: sanctos vi∣dere, cum sanctis esse, sanctū esse. O ioy aboue all ioyes, ex∣ceeding all ioy: O happy ioyfulnesse, and ioyfull happinesse, to see the Saints, to bee with the Saints, to bee a Saint. Wherfore what godly man would feare death, would flee death, which is the end of this life so laborious, and ye beginning of the other so glorious? Death is the end of all euills, the birth-day of eternall ioyes, the con∣clusion of mortalitie, and the introduction into im∣mortalitie.

Bernard Mors bona, melior opti∣ma; bona propter requiem, melior propter nouitatē, optima propter se∣curitatem. Certes such death is good, but a bet∣ter is the best: good, in respect of quietnesse; better, in respect of new∣nesse; best of all for safe∣nesse: Bernard.Ambros. Hanc qui gustat diuinā dulcedinem, mū∣di is non curat, & mortis ama∣ritudinem. He that hath tasted of this di∣uine sweetnesse, nought setteth by the worlds or deaths bitternesse: Am∣brose. In the intuitiue re∣gard hereof, holy men of God haue welcommed and embraced death with both armes, wishing to depart in peace with old Simeon, to be dissolued with Paul, & to bee with their Christ.
 Polycarpus in the midst of the flame, said, Receiue me, O Lord, & make me partner with the Saints, of the resurrection. Am∣brose at the point of death said diuinely, I haue not so liued, as I am ashamed to liue still among you: neither am I afraid to die because I haue a good Master. And it was a quick speech of Saint Laurence, short, but substantiall:Gulielus. Mal∣mesburiensis, lib. 1. cap 41. de ge∣stis Anglorum. I giue thee thanks ô Lord, because I am entring thy gates. And the words that the widow Babila vttered at her death, were full of
 spirit and life, Returne to thy rest, O my foule, be∣cause the Lord hath bin gratious vnto thee, and calleth thee. The words of Hilarion at his death were these, as Hierome reporteth:Hieron in vi∣ta Hilarionis. Depart my soule, why fearest thou? Depart, why tremblest thou? Thou hast serued Christ now almost se∣uentie yeares, and art thou afraid to depart? And now I am in this Ar∣gument, it irketh me not to descend to lower times, and to relate the last words of Iohannes Belcurio, yt fa∣mous
 Philosopher at Wit∣tenberg:Pater est ama∣tor: Filius re∣demptor: Spiri∣tus Sanctus con∣solator: quomodo igiturtristitia af∣fici possum? The Father is he that loueth: the Son he that redeemeth: the Holy Ghost hee that comforteth mee: how therefore can I bee hea∣uie? The last words of Christopher Duke of Wittenberg are remark∣able, worthy to be written in marble or lead: Albeit I could redeeme this life of mine for an hundred yeares longer, and that but for an halfe-peny, I would not giue it.Squalida ter∣ra erit medicina mea. The dirtie soyle shall be my soueraigne salue. These
 and such like examples, do me good, and warme my cold bloud, so as death with his grimme vizard on his face, shall not affright me. But I shall take vp the words of Augustine in mine agony, and say them often ouer to my comfort:Agust. Domi∣ne mortar, vt te videam: vidam, vt hic moriar: nō∣lo viuere, volo mori: mori desi∣dero, vt videam Christum: viuere renuo, vt viuam cum Christo. O Lord I will die, that I may see thee; that I may see thee, let mee die here: I will not liue, I will die; I desire to die, that I may see Christ: I refuse to liue, that I may liue with Christ. And I will thinke of the Poets words while I liue, which
 I haue endeuoured to English as I could.
My soule depart,Exi anima, exi anima, ex odoso corporis antro: Libera nunc tan∣dem coelica regna pete.
Isthic tu caro len∣ta iace, mala sar∣cina vitae: Debi∣ta iam pride ver∣mibus sca iace. Ʋino tibi, mori∣or{que} tibi, dulcissi∣me Iesu:
Mortuus & vi∣uus, sum, mori∣ar{que} tuus. depart my soule
from this thy fleshly caue
Set free: that so in heauenly seats
a kingdome thou mayest haue.
Lye here thou lumpe of flesh,
the burthen of my life:
Go pay thy debts vnto the wormes,
which are in thee most rife.
I liue to thee, I die to thee,
O Christ thou Sauiour mine.
Liuing and dead, I am, and will
remaine for euer thine.
And I will tender you this Epitaph, that was some∣times Senecaes, as suta∣ble to the condition of the best:Senecae Epitaphi∣um.
Cura, labor, meri∣tum, sumpti pro munere honores, Ite: alias posthac sollicitate animas Me procul à vo∣bis Deus euocat, ilicet actis Rebus terrenis, hospita terra vale.
Corpus auaca ta∣men, solennibus accipe saxis: Nā{que} animam coelo re∣dimus, ossa tibi.
Care, paines, desert, and honours all
My recompence and meed,
Farewell: sollicite other friends,
Which may to me succeed.

God calls me hence from you,
I know it very well:
O hostesse earth to earthly things,
I bid thee now farewell.
Yet greedy gut, my body take,
Commit to marble stone:
My soule I doe commend to heauen,
My bones to thee alone. Now these my deuotions in all due deuotion, I tender and entitle to your persons, as the persons that haue a principall seat in my affe∣ctions. I presumed (Noble Councellor) not long since, to shrowd vnder the pro∣tection of your great name, which I haue alwaies lo∣ued, and now honour, a voluminous booke in the Latine language: but be∣cause it may seeme an op∣pression
 to the presse, and as the malignant aspect of an vnlucky planet to Prin∣ters, whose obiect is a cer∣taine and present gaine; I feare it may sooner be shut vp in silence, as a sword in the scabbard: I haue beene not a little discouraged: yet I haue assumed spirits againe, and haue aduentu∣red to veile this my mi∣nute Manuell, vnder the same name of honour to which I most willingly flee, as to my best citie of refuge. I haue endeuou∣red all I may to be materi∣all, not verball: sententi∣ous
 and serious, not tedious, or friuolous. And herein I doubt not to put my selfe vpon the iudgement of the impartiall Reader. The points in this Portesse, are frō the text of Isaiah to E∣zechiah, Set thine house in order, for thou must die and not liue. To set our house in order, is to cō∣mend our sles to God, our bodies to the graue, & our goods to the proper ow∣ners. This is the epitomy & abridgement of the whole booke. And as this message bred in Ezechiah such good bloud, as it destroyed
 the message, and added fif∣teen yeares vnto his daies: so my trust is, that this message of mine shall work good in you, though not to the prorogation of your dayes here on earth, yet to giue you a long life in hea∣uen for euer and euer. I write to you, who haue li∣ued long, and seene many good daies: and God grant it, if it be his will, that you both may liue many yeares after mine eyes bee closed vp. Howsoeuer, Disce mo∣ri, Learne to Die, is a bet∣ter watch than ye weare in your pockets, to teach you
 how you spend your time how it is spen; and how th better part is spent: the same decreasing in euer one, euery houre, whil he doth increase. Accept Right Honourable, an you worthy Lady, the fre will offering of a true heart: To whom I profess I owe more than I can pay and if I could pay, I woul owe it still. The great e¦gagement of my father, fo more than thirtie year together to your Fathe for successiue fauours ver thicke: take a bond of me (Right Honourable) b
 way of peremptorie resolu∣tion, to performe you all de∣uotions, and to bestow an hundred bookes vpon you, might I haue so much vse of life, as to compile them, to the perpetuating of your name and memory vnder the Sun among the poste∣rity and ages to come. And good lucke haue you with your Honour; and grow you vp still higher and higher, as a Cedar in our English Libanus: And rosper you in all your pro∣ceedings, as the Ciprus rees vpon the mountaine f Hermon: and be you
 fruitfull in all good work as the fruitfull Vine lad with grapes; and let yo boughes stretch the selues, as doth the Ter¦binth: be you bountifulli vertue and true honour, the Rose, and comfortab as the Oliue tree. Finall God, euen our owne G giue you his blessing.

