


THE relation betweene the Right Hono∣rable Sir Iohn Suckling, and you both, partly by the nighest coniunction of na∣ture, as a Sister; partly by
 connubiall copulation, as a Brother in law, hath cau∣sed me to make enrolement of your names before my booke. The inequality that Sir Iohn hath of you both, in state & condition, doth not well admit this my compel∣lation of you both: but my trust is, that either in his height of humility, hee will not espie it; or else in his na∣turall indulgence pardon it. Though the one hath the Rubricke and red letter in this Calender; yet you both may chalenge of me a Saints roome in the same. Well, because I haue no other pre∣sent, but sheets of paper for you, and now, through this declination of my bodie through yeares, I haue small
 hope to set forth any more bookes; I could not other∣wise satisfie my minde, than thus to thrust you in by head and shoulders, and as the prouerbe is, Vna fidelia duos parietes dealbare, that is, with one Carpēters line to white two walls at once. Accept these two mites I cast into your Coffers, all the good will of body and mind: and accept this little Treatise of me, in the same candid sim∣plicity of minds, as I collate it on you. Weare it & teare it for my sake, for Gods sake, for your owne sake. I leaue these notes with you, as Paul did his Velloms and sermon notes with Carpus at Troas. Though you be not now to learne how to die, yet the
 best of all may be contented sometimes to bee put in re∣membrance thereof. The Aegyptians had commonly serued at their tables, a∣mong other their seuerall and sumptuous seruices, the skull of a dead man, to the end, in the middest of their delicates, to be put in the re∣membrance of their death. Philip King of Macedonia, commanded his Chamber∣laine euery morning thus to round him in the eare, Re∣member that thou art a mortall man. This was such a note in Hieroms Meditations, as me thinke, so often as I re∣count his speech, I thinke of the Nightingale, who ha∣uing got a note that likes her well, delighteth in the
 often trebling & quauering of it. Whether (saith hee) I sleepe, or whether I wake, or whatsoeuer else I doe, me think I heare this voice alwaies soun∣ding in my eares, Arise yee dead, and come vnto iudgment. I reade of an ancient Father that should say, that all his study lay in a booke of three leaues, the red leafe of Christs Passion, the white leafe of the blessed Resurre∣ction of the Saints, the black leafe of the blacknesse of darknesse for euer, determi∣ned for the damned. The often cogitation of death, cannot but reduce to our mindes the three leaues of this booke; and the memo∣ry hereof cannot but be as a Manuel vnto vs of melliflu∣ous
 meditations. There is nothing so effectuall to put an end to sin, as the deuout consideration of the end without end. But an end of this, because I speak at large to you of it in my Treatise following. It remaineth that I giue hearty thankes to you both, for the great kindnesse you haue shewed me in my natiue Citie, vnto which I was called a Preacher in the chiefe Parish thereof, not seeking it, nor once thought of it, whereunto I came chiefly for your sakes, vp∣on the sensible experience of your long continued loues towards me. During which time of my abode now for six yeares, I haue been much recreated by the
 pietie, humanitie, hospitali∣tie, societie; as hauing no o∣ther meanes to gratifie you withall, than this paper pre∣sent, the pledge of my vnfai∣ned deuotion to you both. Thus praying to God for a blessing vpon it and you, I commit you to the gratious protection of the Almigh∣tie, who shall build further, and giue you an inheritance among them that are sancti∣fied through faith.

