



SIR,
I May seeme to hazard your displeasure in surprizing you with this Inscription be∣yond your expectati∣on, and against your Assent. Yet I trust you will pardon my boldnesse for not pardoning
 your modesty. The matter being consign'd by your Warrant to come abroad in publike view, I presume you will deigne it a safe con∣duct vnder your Name, since it would be an injurious surmise to imagine you are loath to maintaine, and make good your owne hand. The Preaching, and Printing of the Argument is an intire Act of my Obedi∣ence, which prompts me to beleeve you cannot choose but protect, what you so much ap∣prov'd. Not long agoe my meane, obscure selfe represented the Person of our owne much honour'd. DEANE in this spirituall Imployment: That task was back'd with good successe, for he freely guarded it with his Tutelar power, being unwilling what was done in his service should be expos'd to the mercy of the world, and left to seeke forreine en∣gagements.
I know from my owne experience that you are made up of the same extractions of good∣nesse, and gentlenesse; your affections alike poys'd; your pulse beates in as even, and as soft a temper, there's no sullennes, no rough∣nesse
 in it. As yet you dignify an equall Dig∣nity in the Church; you fill up the place of Government with that generall applause, which heretofore was pay'd as His due. And though the beames of his Favour shine upon me in a more direct line, yet I feele the Re∣flexion of your friendlinesse much intended towards me. The Concurrence of which Cir∣cumstances hath instructed me that my De∣dication would be misplac'd, if it pointed to any but your selfe.
The Scope of the discourse suites with the season of the Day, & Times, in that it vindi∣cates the Rights of our Common Saviour, and our interest in his merits. I acknowledge in sincerity, not out of adulation, (and yet to Speake truth of some is rendred in the Dialect, and bad Comment of the Malevolent to flatter,) that by the piety, and prudence of the Arch-Angell of our Church, the most vigilant Sentinell of our Vniversity, Socinianisme is not discerne∣able amongst us, although their bookes have Clancularly crept in, endeavouring to infect,
 and poyson our faith. My zeale to the Primi∣tive Truth, with which we have been so long, and so happily possess'd, rais'd me to pursue it's just defence, lest the unexperienc'd being ensnar'd with the glaring appearance of So∣phisticated Reason, might be entic'd to suck up the venome their Rancour hath dis∣gorg'd. If they intend to bargain with con∣ceal'd factors to accomodate them for a Reply, let them know they shall not winne so much upon me as to wrest, or extort the least answer, for I meane not to make a Trade of writing, especially against such, who would re∣duce us to our first Rudiments, and put us to prove Prinicples not to bee Controver∣ted.
It is enough, J have discharg'd my duety to God, and my Nation, in making a plaine dis∣covery that the malice of their Tenets strikes at the Roote of Religion, shakes the ground of our salvation, vilifies the generally recei∣ved expositions of the Orthodox Fathers, who drew the water of life nearest to the Foun∣taine Head, and makes our owne particular
 Church to be all this while at a losse, by stand∣ing immoveably upon the old way, without stepping aside to any crooked by-paths, which Crosse the venerable foot-steps of the Ca∣tholique, Apostolique Doctrine. Thus ha∣ving silenc'd my penne; to suffer for such a cause will be my triumph, and I shall gaine the victory when they count me overcom'd. But I stay you too long in the Porch, may it please you to looke in, and behold the building, on which if you vouchsafe a favourable glance, you shall the more oblige me to bee

