



My Lord,
I Am as full of hope as desire that your Gentlenesse will helpe into the light this bashfull Piece of my Composure. For having long liv'd in the Sun-shine of your Favour, it may
well be expected that somewhat of mine should bee colour'd with the beames. The Argument being the wise mens devotion claimes a peculi∣ar Interest in your religious protecti∣on, since 'tis demonstratively evident that the Example of their piety hath made a conspicuous reflection on your practise, which spares no Cost that God may be serv'd like Himselfe.
We have seene their well-ground∣ed faith, which S. Peter calls Luci∣ferum in cordibus, appeare in the franke, and free Largesse of your Love to Christ. The sacriledge of former times purloyn'd the holy treasures, challeng'd the setl'd mansi∣ons of your Sea for their owne by Law, as if they mean'd you should
be knowne to be the most Christian Bishop in having with Christ no house left to repose your head in, nor Chappell standing, wherein you might offer up Attonement for them.
To remove this scandall your Exemplary munificence ayded by So∣veraigne Power hath given out of your Cofers to the Church, what o∣thers have taken away from the Church to store their Cofers. So that through your Lord-ships bounty we may now againe say here stands the Lords Oratory, and This is the Bishops Palace. Heretofore the E∣vangelicall Altar was plac'd so incon∣gruously throughout the whole Dio∣cesse that a Proselyte might easily mi∣stake it for a secular Table, or common
Boord: now it hath that exact positi∣on, which is consonant to the Pri∣mitive Times. To prevent a promis∣cuous imployment of our Cathedrall Ʋtensills your pious Zeale hath stampt Gods Marke upon them, whereby none may dare to alter the propriety, nor pollute them with pro∣fane uses. And thus you have wal∣ked in the steppes of wise men both in the Substance, and circumstance, which makes me confident that this Narration of the wise mens diligent enquiring, and devout worshipping our Saviour will find a gracious ac∣ceptance, being humbly presented to your Fatherly indulgence by

