



ALBEIT the arke of Noah, which is the Church of god, be through∣ly pitched within & without, with the Doctrine of the trueth, and good and wholesome discipline, and therefore is safe enough a∣gainst all the waues of wicked doo∣ers, and ouerflowings of vngodli∣nesse, the Lorde of hoastes that is with vs, and the God of Iacob that is our refuge, sitting at the stearne and houlding it, and pronouncing this blessing vpon it, I will bee with you to the end of the worlde: yet is it subiect to the rage of manie waters, to sirtes, sandes, rockes, Pyrates, and to euill minded passengers, that will rather hinder, then helpe in a storme or daunger. The last is not the least, that this barke and pinnesse is to feare. For as Epiphanius sayth, Omnem inscenso∣rem vehere potest nauis praeter fugitiuum, this shippe may beare any passenger, better then a fugitiue. We diuide these into two
flockes, as Labans sheepe and goates were diuided into two com∣panies, whereof some were blacke, other some party coloured. Those of the blacke guarde are heretiques, in doctrine: those that are of sundrie colours, and cannot agree among themselues what they woulde haue, but builde with confusion of language, with the buil∣ders of Babell,Gen, 11 Iudic, 12 and with the Ephraimites cannot pronounce Shib∣boleth, are those that in a singularitie of opinion, make a defecti∣on, whome Augustine noting with his inkehorne, giueth them no milder name then Schismatiques.August. Schismaticus es sacrilega discessione, haereticus sacrilego dogmate. Thou art a schisma∣tique (saith he) in thy sacrilegious separation, and an heretique in thy sacrilegious doctrin.August. Augustine sampleth the first sorte to a lyon, and the second to a Dragon, saying: Tunc leo fuit cùm apeitè saeuiebat, modo draco cum occulte insidictur: Then he is a Ly∣on, when he openlie rageth, and a Dragon, when he priuilie lyeth in wayte. Of this had woorthy Epiphanius respect, when he suited euery singular heresie to a seuerall serpent. A similitude that fell fitly into his purpose: because no aspe, viper or venemous creature, scatter such filthy vomit against vs, and fasten such venemous teethe vpon vs, as schismatiques and heretiques. With the inso∣lent neighbourhood of these two, as with the malignaunt aspecte of two vnluckie planets, hath the Church beene miserably disqui∣eted a long time. The heretique, like Iudas, hath alwayes ledde a bande of souldiers after him, and the schismatique hath neuer beene without his disciples and sectaries. Of heretiques we haue had such swarmes at all times, as if hell had emptied it selfe, and cleane degorged her stomacke, on the lappe of the Church: the sun and the ayer, that is the cleare sunne and light of the worde, hath beene darkened by the smoake of the pit.Reuel. 9. The blame whereof is to bee giuen to the peruersenesse of mens minds, that loue darkenesse rather then light, and to grope with the Sodomites, for a wall at noone daye, who will bee blind with their eyes open, and will not with Eli see the lampe of God burning in the Temple. The number of these without number I shall not, if I might, goe about to com∣pute, and comprehende in this narrowe roome and compasse of an
Epistle. They most of them were occupied about the person of Christ casting their filthinesse against his holynesse: either deny∣ing the eternall nature of the sonne of god, or calling into questi∣on the trueth of his incarnation, or else violating the vnitie of his person, or else compounding and confounding the distinction of his natures. In his diuinitie erred, very rankelie, these of auntienter tyme, Noetus, Praxeas, Hermogenes, Sabellius, with whome wee consorte Berillus and Marcellus, knowne by the title and name of Patripassiani, or otherwise surnamed Vnionitae, because they wold not acknowledge three persons, but onely three voices in the myste∣ry of the Trinitie. Hereupon Arius, Photinus, Artemon, affirmed that the sonne had a beginning, and was not euerlasting. Again, Euomius and Aetius conceiued the sonne to bee vnlike his Fa∣ther: which stumbling blocke while Ebion, Basilides, Cerinthus, Carpocrates, Paulus Samosatenus, are warie to auoyde, they take a greate fall, professing the Son of God to bee but a meere man. Further, Cerdon, Martion, Manicheus Valentinus imagined him to bee but a cypher, fantasie or vaine imagination, or to haue brought a body from heauen with him, and as Apelles sayth, com∣pact and conglutinated of starres, or a bodye without a soule, as Apollonatius fantasyeth. Which stinking dunghill of rotten here∣sies is stirred and digged vpp new, by heretiques of this age, espe∣cially that roguish opinion of Eutiches, who giue to Christ a dei∣fied bodie. Now the Nestorians treade as much awrie of the other side, giuing two persons to our Sauioure Christ, teaching that the worde is present with Christ by assistance. Thus is Christs coate, that was without seame, miserablie mangled with their circuler questions: Neyther hath the mysterie of iniquitie thus ceased, but Sathan that cannot put off his nature, by his emissaries and factiue instrumentes, the Papistes, the incendiaries of these dayes, hath kindled hot coales of fire, in the Church, and hath pow∣red such poyson into the bosome of it, as it must be a greate deale of Triacle that must purge is. But wee shoulde discharge our selues of that well enough, if wee could be at amitie and vnitye with our selues, and woulde fight with our ioynte forces againste
Edom, Babylon, Ammon, and Aram, with Ioab and Abisai, and not strike our selues with our owne quilles, as the Baalites launced themselues, with their owne kniues. If our kingdome were as strong as the diuels, diuision woulde soone vnioynte, and dissolue it. For if Sathan be diuided against Sathan, how can his kingdome stand, saith our Sauioure Christ? But this is the car∣buncle, botch, and byle of our ecclesiasticall bodie, we dissolue the brotherhood between Iudah and Israell:Zach, 11.14 whereas frater is cal∣led quasi ferè alter, we are brethren in euill, diuided in Iacob, and scattered in Israell, Ecclesiae titulo armantur qui contra ecclesi∣am dimicant: they are vnder the banner of the Church, that fight against the Church. It is Chrysostomes obseruation, that there is ingendred in euery thing, and proceedeth out of it, that which in tyme, if it be not looked too, will consume the thing: as out of wood commeth a worme, out of a garmente a moathe, out of a greene hearbe a canker, by which the woodde is fretted, the garmente is hindered, the herbe perisheth. This hath too liuelie an application to the Church. For in Adams house was a wicked Caine, in the arke of Noah was an accursed Cham, in the familie of Abra∣ham was a flowting Ismaell, vnder the roofe of reuerend Eli, were two vngratious waggestringes his sonnes, Ophni and Phi∣neas: in Dauids courte, there was the rebell Absalon: in the the schoole of Christ, was the traitour Iudas, in the companie of the Deacons was the crewe of the Nicolaitans. How the setled state of our church hath beene disquieted with home-borne crosse biters, male contentes and wranglers, to whome it is good sporte and gamesome, the distraction of the churche of Corynthe, some cal∣ling themselues Cephistes,1. Cor, 1. some Paulines, othersome Apolloni∣ans, styling themselues Brownistes, Barowistes, of the fraterni∣tie of the familie of loue, and taking manye such odde titles to themselues, I woulde wee coulde forget, as wee well remember. If the same moulde that now couereth some of the authors, and ring-leaders of these rowtes, might haue ouerwhelmed their factions, we woulde not haue so sharpened our pennes against them. But be∣cause they are belluae multorum capitum, beastes with many
heades, and they infect like a byle in a bodie, like a sinke in a citye, and they are sparkes that set the whole church on fire, wee maye not forbeare them. For they haue doone more hurte alreadie, then anie can diuine, and like they are to doo more, if their argumentes be not in time aunswered with a surioynder, taken from the magi∣strates scabbarde, that may choke their liues, and put them to a non plus. For the open persecutor, is not so nefarious as the preposte∣rous zelous professor. Of which I must tel, what a holy father saith, Venit persecutor, & non fregit crura Christi: venit Donatus, & dirupit ecclesiam christi, integrum corpus christi manet, in∣ter manus persecutorum. The persecutor came, and did not breake the legges of Christ: but in came Donatus, and broake the Church of Christ; the body of Christ remayned whole, be∣tweene the handes of his persecutors. The due regarde hereof dealeth with vs, to praye incessauntlie for the peace of Ierusalem, and to ensue it (all we may) with contention of sides, intention of mindes, inuentions of arguments: wherein, when we haue doone our vttermoste endeuoure, we shall neuer doo enough. For bee wee more watchfull then Argus, we shall still find more to doe. And here I may not let passe the desciplinarians of our dayes, who in such nice diffe∣rences between vs will not be tractable: for whose sake onely I pen∣ned this treatise, in a loue vnfayned towardes them, as I desire to liue, as reuerencing manye of their persons, and honouring theyr religion, tendring theyr zeale, but wishing it were seasoned with more knowledge. Heerein the Papistes and they are as Ionathans arrowes, beyonde and short the marke. I woulde we were all of vs middlings in the Kinges high waye, without turning aside to a∣nye of these bywayes, of the left hand, or the right. These labours I present to your Graces good learning, and liking, to commend them to the presse, or vtterly suppresse them, as it pleaseth your Lordshippe. For to whome shoulde I giue them, rather then to the Father of our Church, that stand no doubt most Fatherly affec∣ted towardes vs, and maynteineth the diuinity that is heere hand∣led? I haue also twice tasted of the louing inclination of your nature:
and therefore these paines, as the abilitye of the whole man, are consecrated to your Grace. The Almightye god giue you to see manye dayes in honour, to the honour of his greate name, and to the enlargement of the Churches tranquillity, so many yeeres now (blessed be his Maiesty) continued among vs.

