



Right Honourable:
THERE is euer a certaine presumption had of the fa∣vour of good men, so there be a reason added to accom∣pany their iustice. Mine, which giues boldnes to call vpon your succour is, that I am falling vpon the torture of publike Censure more through the severitie of Commaund, then the libertie of my owne will. I know the curiosity of the Eye is not so quickly pleas'd, as the flexibilitie of the Eare. And therefore the Fate of acceptation among Criticall Readers may perhaps proue different from that fauourable approbation of my Hea∣rers. Howsoeuer, seeing it is thought fit by the
Iudicious that this weake discourse should not expire with that short hower wherein it was deliuer'd, with neglect of all malignant Cen∣sures I passe through the Presse vnder the safe∣guard of your Honor's protection. Why I should dedicate this first living Issue of my braine to your Name, cannot seeme strange to Any, which Knowes You my Patron, and mee your Eleemosynarie. For who hath more interest in the Grape, then Hee that planted the Vine? I am vnwilling to intangle my selfe in Obligati∣ons to other men, when I am to giue you Secu∣ritie, and to passe my selfe ouer to your Honor.
As was my Auditory, so is my Sermon, Scho∣lasticall, and Popular: Politicall, and Morall; En∣deauouring according to my slender facultie to worke vpon Man first as he is Man, by his vnderstanding part: then as hee is a Christian, by his will, and affections. The first part is somewhat difficult, and intricate, but yet so languag'd, as it is made obuious, and familiar to the meanest Capacitie. The later part is more liuelie, and more easy, wherein a good heart may finde some sweet relish, if it be right∣ly chewed. The iniquity of the times requir'd
mee to beseech all such, who are indued with the right of Presenting to spirituall Promotions, that they would call to minde what a fearefull ac∣count such shall one day make, which cease not to preferre their priuate gaine before the publike good. The Archers shot at Ioseph, & they were his brethrē. The Archers shoote at our Church, and some of them are her Children, whom shee selected to bee her Stewards, and faithfull Disposers. For alas it is notoriously knowne (as a religious defender of our Church Rites com∣plaineth) that many Church-liuings haue bin so pa.
T. M. red to the quicke, that now they are hardly able to yeeld vitall nourishment; so sharply haue they beene launced, and lost their best bloud. For distinction sake I haue vnmask'd the turbulent Puritans in our Church, that they may no more abuse the world vnder that Impropriated title of Godly, and zealous Professors. If any ridiculously affecting that Scar-Crowe title of Martin Mar-Prelate shall through a giddy conceit of a distemper'd braine account it a crime to be Philo-Piscopall in an absolute Kingdome, or Monarchicall State, Hee must likewise implicitely affirme it is a crime to bee . The sequell is groun∣ded
vpon that Soueraigne Maxime, They which would haue No Bishop, would likewise haue No King. And so by violating Episcopall Iurisdi∣ction, obliquely they vndermine Regall Authority. I will bee sparing at this time in rubbing these sores, neither will I now inferre how the sen∣tence of the law should bee pronounc'd a∣gainst such State-wormes, because there is a time to keepe silence, and a time to speake. Thus praying for the encrease of all true honours vpon your Noble Family, My conclusion shall bee a Pro∣testation, that if your occasions should stoope so low, as to commaund so poore an Instru∣ment as my selfe in your Seruice, your Honor shall finde, I would not easily grow weary of your Commaundments, nor soone forget your fauours.

