



THE sinne of Sacriledge smitten of God by the Rod of his Lippes, and the Hand of his Iustice, is gro∣wen so common, with the couetousnesse and carnalitie of the times, as now it seemeth to be very good in Law. Munus ofterrendi is worne out of date, and Munus auferrendi is by intrusion come into his office: in the which he layeth lustily a∣bout him, and playeth the man. Haec habui quae dedi, was the prouerbe of old. Haec habui quae edi, is the Adage that is now of this age of ours. The great Leuiathan ma∣keth
 it his pastime to swallow vp a Church, et lege agraria, to engrosse aedes et sedes, the Portion and Possession of the Lord, and to make the poore Leuite that serueth at the Altar, to lodge in the streetes. The Schoole of them is great; and the mischiefe they will doe, if they may haue their mindes, is more then easily any one can diuine. They proiect no lesse, then that Desolation should stand in the Holy place; and that the Land should be full of Darknesse and cruell habitation: that the Priestes lips (the preseruers of know∣ledge) should be shut vp, and that the people crying for Bread, should haue none to giue it them. It is time the Lord should put to his hand, and haue mercie vpon Syon; yea, the time (I hope) is come, if not of building vp the decayed Walles, and of restitution of the Lords goodes: yet of preuenting the purposes of such nefarious violators of Holy thinges, who are so farre from repenting themselues of the euill already done, as they repine against vs that they can doe no more. This argument will be but bitter to their stomacks as Wormewood, and the very waters of Gall. I must not care for that: I am not a Cooke, Pulmentum praeparare, to make them sa∣uorie
 Sauce. VVe are set by God, as Phisici∣ans ouer you; so as I say with Augustine: Eligo aspera, sed salubria medicamenta, I choose you a bitter, but the better Potion. The region of this sinne being white, and readie for Haruest, and calling for a Sickle from Heauen to cut it downe, hath sharpe∣ned my Sickle, and made my Penne like the poynt of a Diamond, and hath enlarged my soule, in the anguish of my soule, for the wracke and hauocke made of Ierusalem; not to speake in the milde voyce of Eli, but with a stronger cry, as Christ vsed at the raysing vp of Lazarus, that had now in his Coffin entred into some degrees of corruptiō. For the VValles of Hierico, the VValles of this Sinne, will not come tumbling downe without the shrill voyce of Trumpets of Rammes hornes: Deafe Adders will diffi∣cultly be charmed, and deafe and dumbe Spirites will not be cast out, without much Fasting & Praying; all intention of minde, contention of Sinewes and Sides; all inuen∣tion of Argument is all too little for this Argument wee haue in hand. It is a hard Knotte in the Timberlogge, that must be often and forcibly driuen out by the Beetle:
 It is an extreame Disease, that requireth extreame remedies. Varium poscit reme∣dium diuersa qualitas passionum, sayth Gregorie; As the Passions differ in quali∣tie, so wee are to varie in the prescribed remedie. Hic lauacra mollia: ille ferrum quaerit ad vulnera; One Disease would be washed with Water, and be handled with a soft Hand; but an other must be launced with an Instrument, and seared with an hot Iron. This Sacriledge is a sore of such sort, that must be cut to the very quicke, the cor∣ruption thereof can not be let out with a Needle, but it must suffer a very deepe inci∣sion. I haue endeauoured to wound the very Scalpe of it, not thinking it enough to breake the Legges of these Thieues, as the Legges of the Theiues that were crucified with our Sauiour. These Meditations, as the whole man, are consecrated to your Grace, in a fitte time, to the ioy of many heartes raysed vp by God, for the buylding and beautifying a∣gaine the Lordes House that is at Ierusa∣lem, in despight of all the Aduersaries to Iudah and Beniamin, Sanballat, and To∣bias, and all the froward fellowes beyonde the Riuer. I humbly beseech your Grace, to be
 pleased with this poore Oblation, the earnest Pennie of my duetifull deuotion: and as you haue graciously my vnworthy person, so the cause that will be worthy, to take into your protection, by sheilding it from the iniurie of the time, and the malice of mens mindes; and by giuing it such countenaunce, as the nature of it shall need. Thus, powring out my spirit vnto God for you, (as duetie deepely bindeth mee) that you may liue long, and see many good dayes; that by your good Learning, and godly Wisedome, the Vine of the English Church, may more flourish and spread abroad her Branches, to the glory of God, and the common good; in all duetifull affection, I commende your Grace to the protection and preseruation of the Almigh∣tie.

