



WORTHIE S.r
I want but some feeling proofe to giue you, that might witnesse, howe strongly you commaunde my duteous affection. If my word should not be taken, the reasons I haue to shew, would ea∣silie perswade it. But your vertues which taught mee them, taught mee also to conceale them, for
 the connection they haue with an argumente much pleasing to most men, but not so sutable to the scope of your intentions. For as the Heauens bright Lampe shines onely to giue vs her light, without affecting any praise or honour from vs: Euen so your ayme in the pursuite of most laudable and vertuous actions is no other, then the pure respect of ver∣tues selfe, and hope of that immor∣tall recompence, wherewith hee, who gaue you this heroick spirit and indeuour, wil infallibly crowne your happie labours.
This consideration, for all it tea∣ches me to be silent in your praises, yet it frees mee not from that pe∣culier obseruance, which (if VER∣TVES CLAYME TO HONOR, be a warrantable title) I must needs acknowledge as a tributarie due to your noble worthes.Arist. 4. Ethic 3. For discharge whereof, not finding my weake abi∣lities
 better furnished, I was wil∣ling at least, by this simple present, (the sleight imployments of some va∣cant houres) to giue you a kinde of recognizance, howe much I doe worthely owe you, for those much-worthie respects.
Not to dissemble my pouerty; I must confesse, that the most I can here chal∣lenge (besides the changing of good Latin into badde English) is no more, but onely the reducing into Methode such Collections as I had long since gleaned out of sundrie Classike Authors; the stuffe is wholie theirs. But this poynt, I doubt not, will the rather commend it to your fauourable accptance, knowing that as the pitche of a darte pearceth a great deale deeper when it is deli∣uered from some able and valou∣rous hande: euen so, those motiues doe more forciblie penetrate and preuaile, which proceede from
 strong and soundlie-warranted au∣thoritie.
The occasion that set mee first a worke in this businesse, was the incombrance I chanced nowe and then to haue with certaine persons, who being more curious to demaunde reasons, then capable to vnderstand them, are so injurious to the Prin∣ciples of reason, as they will needes knowe the reasons, euen for the most profund mysteries of our Chri∣stian beleefe: imagining belike, that it were an absurditie to beleeue any thing which could not be prooued by reason. As though wee were bound to giue no more credit vnto God, then to a cousening Quack-saluer, whom no man will refuse to beleeue, if he bring reasons and de∣monstrations, for what he shall pro∣pounde Or, as though diuine O∣racles were of lesser authoritie then Lawyers REPORTS which, (to vse
 SENECAS wordes) ipsâ dicentium autho∣ritate per se valent,Senec. in Ep. etiam si ratio non red∣ditur.
But yet for to satisfie these men in some reasonable tearmes, who stande so much vpon tearmes of reason, I considered that saying of the Cy∣nicke Philosopher,Antist∣hen apud Stobae∣um. Contradicentem do∣cere oportet, non contradicendo compescere. Wherefore being desirous to haue them well taught, I thought it my best course, to addresse them vn∣to a Schoole-maister of that suffici∣encie, as nothing should bee wan∣ting in him which might be re∣quired for such a purpose: following herein the example of the Philoso∣pher PLATO,Val Max Lib. 8. who being by some demaunded his opinion in a questi∣on belonging to GEOMETRIE, would not take vpon him to resolue the poynte himselfe, but sent them to EV∣CLIDES, the most expert famous Ma∣ster of that facultie liuing in those
 dayes. So I perceauing how much it importes the schollers profit, to haue a wise teacher, haue presented them such a one, as might in all poyntes satisfie their curious desires.
To this purpose, I selected these fewe considerations out of such notes as I had formerly gathered, which might serue as a Directorie to guide them vnto the Infallible Rule of Faith; assuring my selfe, the onely authoritie of this teacher, to be a reason of that force, as needes they must yeelde vnto it, vnlesse they would shew themselues vtterly voyd of reason and humaine sence.
The handling of this argument, (for the parte that I haue therein) I must acknowldge to be (as they say) Pingui Minerua, no better then a plaine rusticke webbe of home∣spunne warpe; but this I was also taught to be the nature of Trueth,
 Vt nuda & simplex, esset luculentior:Lact. l. 3. cap 1. ideoque ornamentis extinsecùs additis, fucata cor∣rumpitur. In this poynte therefore, I followed SENECAS counsaile, who sayth it is better to take the beaten and plaine way,Ep. 102. Quàm nobis ipsis flexus disponere, quos cum magna molestia debeamus relegere.
What euer shall seeme wanting in the rest, I trust you will imitate the diuine bountie, not respecting so much the oblations woorth, as the poore offerers willing deuotion; without which, euen the richest Donaries, as lacking their formall perfection, doe merit verie litle, or no esteeme.
With these, NOBLE Sr. I humbly take leaue, wishing you FOR THE PRESENT, the full measure of that felicitie, which is no where founde but amongst Epicureans of your owne rancke; FOR THE TIME TO COME, so much more, as boundlesse Eternitie can
 giue you. And so I commende you to the euer-deare protection of our Heauenly SAVIOVR.
Octob. 12. 1615.
