



RIght Reuerend Father, the sweet refreshing your Honourable fauours did yeeld to such of my labors as hitherto enioy the light, when a suddaine vncom∣fortable blast had sorely nipt them in the very setting, makes these last gatherings of that spring seeke that comfortable warmth vnder your benigne protection, which the vnconstant frowning season would hardly af∣foord them in their growth. Besides these and other my personall obligements, that famous and worthy founder of this Attick Beehiue, of whose
 sweetnesse would God I had beene as capable as I haue beene long partaker, had neuer allotted any Cell therein for me or other Countriman of mine, but with particular relation to that seat of digni∣tie, which he sometimes did, your Lordship now doth, and, to the encrease of Gods glorie and good of his Church, long may enioy. Seeing this our great foster-Father is now ignorant of his childrens demeanor, and knowes not me; it shall be my comfort, to haue his honourable successors witnesses of my care and industrie to fulfill his godly desire, whose religious soule in his life time (as his written lawes doe testifie) did detest no∣thing more then idlenesse in the Ministrie, speci∣ally in his adopted Sonnes. The matters J here present vnto your Lordships & the worlds view, are sometimes in themselues so harsh and hard to be concocted, as he that would striue to make them toothsome vnto nice tastes, should put himselfe to excessiue paines; vnlesse his iudgement be much riper, his wit readier, his inuention pleasanter, his opportunities better, and his leisure greater then mine are. But it is one and the same point of iudgement, not to require exact Mathemati∣call proofes in discourses of moralitie, or a smooth
 facile Rhetorical stile in Logical or Scholastique conflicts. And, as by the statutes of that societie wherein J liue, I am bound to auoid barbarisme: so my particular inclination moues me, in contro∣versies especially, to approue his choice that said; Fortia mallem quam formosa. Jf any profes∣sed enemie to the truth we teach, will answere me from point to point, or attempt (not as their cu∣stome now is only in scoffing sort but seriously) to auert those vnsupportable, but deserued imputa∣tions, I lay vpon the foundation of his Religion, J shall (I trust) be able to answere him; the bet∣ter by continuance of your Lordships wonted fa∣uours, whom I still request the Christian Rea∣ders, as many as reape any profit from my paines on my behalfe to remember with such respect as is due to honorable Patrons of religious studies, or cherishers of painefull endeuours in good causes.
From Corpus Christi College. March xxv. 1614.

