



RIGHT HONORABLE,
SOme that have conceiv'd better of this then I can at the hearing (though it received little advantage by my delivery) thought it worthy to be published, to which when I was perswaded, I did not much study to whom I should dedicate it. For to whom should I present my service in this kind, but to her, who of all others hath given so many notable examples of religion, and so
much cherisht the professors of it, and my selfe amongst the rest. Religion and lear∣ning in these latter dayes never found a greater Patronesse. You have beene the good Angell that when the waters were troubled have helpt the distressed into the poole.
Iohn 5.2. The grapes in Babell sent upon a time to the Vine leaves in Iudaea desiring their shadow, least they were parcht with the heate:
Talmud Cholm. 62.1 Our succorlesse clusters need not send so farre for protection, did your branches spread (under which the beasts of the field,
Dan. 4.12. and the foules of heaven had their habitations) as heeretofore when the great Duke (my gratious Master for a moment) your illustrious brother lived.
During the intended expedition to Rochell. were your power as great as then, or as your disposition is good, my hopes would live though his excellency and my noble Lord of Anglesey, (whom I shall ever name with honour and sorrow) are dead. And I make no question but that J should only finde an exchange, not a losse, and at last
a happy successe of those many gratious re∣ferences, from his sacred Majestie (whom God preserve) for which I shall ever thinke my selfe bound to thanke your Ho∣nour and your noble kinseman Master Porter.
How can I conceive otherwise since your Honour lately without request free∣ly, and voluntarily offered me preferment of your owne, untill you could procure mee better. I presume you desire not to have this publisht,
Math. 9.30. yet our Saviour that char∣ged the two blinde men that they should tell no man,
Luke 17.18. did not mislike the turning backe of the thankefull stranger: should I conceale it, I should not doe right to your sweete and noble disposition, and leave in in some (it may be) a suspition of my un∣thankefulnesse: For which pious expres∣sion of your favour unto me, as also your many precedent (besides the reward which such works of charity carry with thē) your Ladyship shall ever have my prayers and
thankes, and as the humble acknowledge∣ment of my obligation to your Honour, so any future service when you shall please to descend so low as to command it from

