


AFTER that the Philosopher (right Noble Earle) had considered the moste woonderfull workes of God, and nature, so orderlie placed within the Sphere or round world, Macrocosi∣mus, with all things aboue the Elementes, and Quintessence, the hyghe heauens, as the in∣feriour constellations: Influences: and Begynners of corrupti∣ble substances: the Elements them selues: all thinges, in the Fyre, Ayre, vvater, and Earth: be it besyde of the highest immor¦tall, and perpetuall, or of the inferiours: mortall and corrupti∣ble, doing, being, growing, senting, and reasonable, as Microco∣sums, man, for other vses so necessary, the heauenly bodies, con∣spyred to one absolute Empyre, vvith all thinges vnder them, produced, to most effectual purposes, causing him to say, God, and nature, dyd nothing in vaine.
The which heauenly saying, dayly we fynde most true, albeit, many of those greate and hidden benefytes: preordinate by prouidence diuine: were vnknowen many yeares, to many na∣cyons. Insomuch, as husbandry an arte most comune: and now of least conning: was long vnknowen: men liuing on the fruits
of the Erth, without any manurāce, as beasts: for vntil Dionisius his time, it was vnknowen amōgst the Egipciās, & vntil Charles the fith Monarche, amongst the Indiās: as Diodorus, Polydorus and Martine Curtesse affirmeth: and in Greece and Asia, vntill Triptolemus: In Italie, vntill Saturnus: as Macrobius shew∣eth. So was, vvyne, Oyle, Honie, Ale, Beere, Bread, Cheese, and infinite other thinges, after orderlie appointed, to our vses as doth appeare And, Bacchus vvas the fyrst, that of Barly made Ale, for the Egipcyans: bicause as then they had no Grapes: the which we Britaines vse still, and they of Germanie, and Flan¦dres, beere. The Iewes found oyle, as Iustinus writeth, and Gor∣gonius the king, hony: Aristeus the making of cheese: Arachue Flax, and knitting, as Plinius approueth: Minerua, spinning: Nicias, fulling: Pallas clothing: Vso, apparel sayeth Eusebius, Building of houses is ascribed first to lobal, if we beleue Poli∣dore: walles and towers, sayth Aristotle the Cyclopians edified: Carpentry, Dedalus inuented: sayling, Neptunus: gold Cadmus found out, first in Thrace, and Emanuel the last king of Portu∣gall, sent to seeke it first in India: Siluer, Erictonius: Iron, Ideda∣ctili: Lead, Mydachuitus: Brasse, Aristotle sayth, Lydius: Fyre, Vulcanus: Phisick, Apollo: amplified by AEsculapius: perfec∣ted by Hippocrates: expounded by Galen. Bathes and hot hou¦ses, Nero, Agrippa, Vespasianus, Titus, and other Emperours, Kings, Philosophers and Phisitions, as testifieth Iulius Capito∣linus.
So that by these and ten thousand others, we may gather, that Gods good gyfts haue not all at one time bin reuealed, nor at one instant to al nacions auayled, but some by one, in one time, some by another in another time, and all as it pleased his infinit bountie, to ayde and benefite his creatures with: as by king Bla∣dud the Britten were first erected the bathes of Bath: So now we may say by your honour, the bathes of Buckstone to be be∣neficially edified, worthy euery where to be notified.
Of the which, by Gods help, and your honours protection,
somewhat shalbe shewed hitherto vnknowen, that the benefite thereof, may the better be perceaued.
The which worke, howsoeuer it be, I beseech your Noblenes to accept, as that which of most right, to you of duety belongeth. And, forasmuch as your care hath ben therein, to the benefyte of all: It is right that of all, you should be highlie magnified, for your vertuouse exployte, accomplishing of so noble a be∣nefyte, and that in this our age, when as the most sort, are giuen to seeke worldlie gayne, rather then the publique proffet (the more pittie it is to speake it) and that such, as to themselues, and theyrs, onelie, might belong. But your vertuouse industry, is, & hath ben, for the benefyt, of the vniuersall people of God: as a thing, descending from your parents: and of you enherited. Therfore, to you mightie Erle I dedicate, these my labours, and playne Treatise, entytuled Buckstones Benefyte, bicause, by you is accomplyshed, and notified, euery wher, that which was in a maner hydden, and vnknowen, to all a far of, and vnto the most neere hand. If, I should here shew, how greatlie they are to bee extolled: that take such paine, and be at such cost: for the wele publique: I might rather make a newe volume: then fynish this. As it may easilie appeare, by that which is already expres∣sed. VVherfore, I will stay my pen, for that, I confesse my selfe farre vnable: to set out the condigne prayses: that eyther too your honour belonge, for the true loue assurid Loyaltie, and great trust: vnto your puissance comitted: or the worthy benefytes: that the Bathes, or vvels, of Buckston do yelde.
Notwithstanding, great Alexander, retained with him in great fauour: one that wrote his hystory: albeit, it was not most ele∣gantlie penned (as Quintus Curtius affirmeth) bicause, it might encourage, some of more eloquence, to take in hand, the like enterpryse: for, otherwise what had auayled the fame of hys conquest? when that age had expired, if none had taken in hand: for the posterities to haue remembred: whose example herein I haue folowed.

For that, so great a benefyte, as is Buckstons Bathes, vvithin the edifices vnder a bushel should not be ouerwhelmed: not, with out the order heerein expressed how to vse them: frequented. Vntill some other of more learning will better handle hit. Cra∣uing nothing els for my paynes but that it may of your Lord∣ship bee vvel excepted praying for the long preseruacion and encrease of your honour, in all helth, welth, and felicitie. Amen.

