



IT is (right worshipful and dearely beloued) a very lamē∣table and pitiful thing to con∣sider (especially to those which are liuely touched with the spi∣ritual wants of their brethren) howe much blindnesse and ignoraunce preuai∣leth in these our dayes, wherein the Lorde hath giuen suche great light of his trueth, both by preaching and writing, as (if all circumstaun∣ces may be rightly weighed) I suppose verilie in no age more. But it is farre more miserable, to beholde (if wee coulde with Christian pitie and loue see it, either in our selues or others) the horrible heapes of transgressions, and the worlde of wickednesse, that generally, as a huge swelling sea ouerfloweth all, notwithstanding that great plentie and brightnesse which wee haue of the glorious Gospell of trueth. What it will please the Lorde by this hereafter to worke, either in mercie or iudgement towardes
 vs, as I cannot certainely pronounce, so this I dare boldely affirme, that as hee woulde not vouchsafe vs, any greater blessing in this lyfe, then to make the cleare sunneshine of his holy worde burst foorth into our darke and ig∣norant soules, for our reformation and amend∣ment, if with trembling heartes and reuerent mindes, we coulde receiue the same to our eter∣nall comfort: so on the other side, we can hard∣ly in the dayes of our pilgrimage haue a more euident spectacle of his most iust wrath against vs for our sinnes, then so euident manifesta∣tion of that liuely trueth, which he most gra∣tiously offereth, as the effectuall instrument of our reconciliation to his maiestie in his sonne Christes obedience, if wee shall moste vngrati∣ously continue (as heretofore wee haue done) in treading it vnder our feete, to our euerlasting condemnation in our owne iniquitie, vnlesse it please him, euen as it were by violence to pull vs out of that most miserable destruction wher∣in we are deepely plunged. Most true certain∣ly, and comfortable is it, that the Prophet Isay sayth:Isay. 55.10, 11 that as the raine commeth down and the snow from heauen, and returneth not thether but wa∣tereth the earth, and maketh it to bring forth and bud that it may giue seede to the sower, and bread vnto him that eateth: so shall the word be that commeth out of Gods mouth: it shall not returne voyd but it shall accomplishe that which hee will, & it shall prosper in the thinges wherevnto hee sendeth it. But with all, fearefull and terrible is
 that which S. Paul speaketh, that The Ministerie of the word is to some, the sauour of death vnto death:2. Cor. 2.16. and that saying also in the Epistle to the He∣brues, that That ground which drinketh in the raine,Heb. 6.7, 8. that commeth often vpon it, and beareth nothing but thornes and briars, is reproued, & is neere vnto cursing: & the end therof is to be burned. These seuerall ef∣fects of the word, in seueral & sundry persons, proceede not from the worde it selfe (for that is alwayes the worde of life) but from the malice and rebellion of our owne heartes, who haue suche aboundance of venime and poyson in vs, that looke whatsoeuer good thinge wee receiue, we doe as spiders turne it to ye increase of our owne corrupted nature. These thinges when we heare, and consente to the trueth of them indeede, ought we not, though we be but slenderly touched with godlines, both to reue∣rence God in his iudgements, and also condemn our selues in our owne naughtinesse, and la∣bour (if we haue any loue of our owne saluati∣on) to come out of this dyrtie dungeon, where∣in is nothing saue the mire and clay of all trans∣gression? Yes verilie. But alas howe small is the number of those, that trauel in that behalfe? Nay rather howe many are there, that neuer la∣bour the remouing of those stumbling bloc∣kes, whiche lie in their owne wayes? Yea which is fearefull to thinke, but muche more horrible to expresse, what greate swarmes are there, that rather then they would not be letted, will let and hinder themselues in the course of
 godlinesse:Luke. 16.8. What shall we say? Shall the chil∣dren of this worlde still be wiser in their gene∣ration, then the children of light? Will we ne∣uer learne, to bee as carefull for the thinges that concerne the hope of a better life, as they are painefull and laborious for the vaine and tran∣sitorie thinges of this worlde? Shall neither Gods cōmandementes, nor his promises, nor his punishmentes cause vs to be more diligent and watchfull, then eyther we haue bene, or yet are? If there fall a benefice or prebende, a farme or lease, or any such like, what running and riding is there to attaine the same? Horse and man to trauell daye and night is nothing, no, no cost or paines will be spared to atchicue it, and yet many times men are preuented, for some one or other commeth nowe and then betweene thē and home: the Lorde euen by this crossing of vs in temporall thinges, teaching vs not onely howe vaine and vncertaine they themselues are, but in what greate regarde and estimation wee ought to haue those thinges, that indure and a∣bide for euer. And yet for all this, how little account is made of them that concerne eternall lyfe, who seeth not? The Lord in great plentie offereth them vnto vs, and bringeth them home as it were vnto our doores, and yet we will none of them:Isay. 55.1. &c. hee biddeth vs take them of free cost, and yet we refuse the same: Yea and though we may haue such assuraunce of them and pro∣fite by them, not onely for this life, but also for the life to come, as none can take them from
 vs, yet doe we either suffer our selues easily to bee ouerrunne in that race, or else offer a manifest & manifold contempt of these graces, alledging either our pleasures or our profites, as they did that were called to the marriage of the kinges Sonne.Matth. 22.5, 6. Certainely that may at this time be verified in vs, whiche was long a goe written, in the first chapter of the holy Gospell of Iesus Christe, according to Saint Iohn:Iohn. 1.5. That light shineth in the darkenesse, and the darke∣nesse comprehendeth it not:Rom. 1.20. not that our igno∣raunce can excuse vs, for we haue so much light and clearenesse within vs, (notwithstanding our originall sinne) as doeth make vs vtterly without excuse: but that it doeth sufficiently bewray the blindnesse, malice and corruption of our owne heartes, who doe turne the light that is in vs into darknesse (and then how great is that darkenesse of ours?Mat. 6.23.) and do contemp∣tuously cast from vs the saluation of our GOD. Now if it shalbe easier in the day of iudgement,Matth. 11.20. for them of Tyrus, Sydon, Sodom, & Gomorrah thē for thē of Chorazin & Capernaum: in what a miserable case are we? who besides, that wee haue the doctrine of the olde and newe Testa∣ment confirmed by the myracles of Christe, hys prophets and Apostles, haue Iesus Christ liuelie described in our sight, and amongst vs crucified.Galat. 3.1. Heb. 2.1, 3. Wherefore we ought diligently to giue heede, to the thinges which we haue hearde, least at a∣ny time we runne out,He. 10.28.29. and to beware that wee neglecte not so greate saluation offered: for if
 he that despiseth Moses lawe, dieth without mercie vnder two or three witnesses:Heb. 10.28, 29 of howe muche sorer punishment suppose yee, shall hee be worthie, which treadeth vnder foot the sonne of God, and counteth the bloude of the te∣stament, wherwith he was sanctified, as an vnho∣lie thing, and doth despite the spirit of grace? For the auoiding of which mischiefes and euilles, & for the performaunce of contrarie good things, it were necessarie that euery good man that cal∣leth vpon the name of Christ shoulde not one∣ly striue in his owne person to departe from in∣iquitie,2. Tim. 2.19. but also according to his calling, should haue an eye ouer other for their good: & should carefully labour the building vp both of him∣selfe and others, as in knowledge, that by that meanes, the note of ignoraunce and blindnes iustly laid vppon vs, might bee remoued & ta∣ken away: so in obedience & practise, that care∣lesnes, carnalitie, & Atheisme, professed, though not in words perhaps, yet in deeds & cōuersatiō, might be turned into a holy care & cōscience to walke before God & men, as becōmeth his sain∣ctes, & therewithal the mouths of slaunderous Papists stopped, who feare not to affirm (though vntruely indeede) that we neyther preach, pro∣fesse, or practise good works. Wherfore amongst others, it behoueth all you (righte worshipfull and deare friends) according to the seuerall pla∣ces, wherein God hath set you, carefully to ende∣uour the promoting of Gods glory, both in your selues, and others: and so muche the rather
 you should striue vnto this, by how muche you haue a name of life and light, how iustly or vn∣iustly I will not now dispute: this onely I saye,Reuel 3.1. that as I do euen from the bottome of my heart beseech the Lord on your behalfes to assist you with grace,Reue. 2.5. & strength answerable to the report that goeth of you, least otherwise your candle∣sticke be iustly remoued, and the light giuen you, for hypocrisie, contempte, or disobedience taken from you, and bestowed vpon others, that in good time ye wil bring forth the fruits ther∣of: so, in the bowels of Christ I pray you all, one and other, from the highest to the lowest,Mat. 21.43. to bee vigilant and watchfull therein, that when the great Lorde and maister of the house shall ap∣peare, he may find you,Matth 24.45.46, 47. &c. not smiting your fellow seruantes, or else eating and drinking with the druncken, and so cut you of, and giue you your portion with hypocrites, where shall be conti∣nuall weeping, wayling, and gnashing of teeth, but faithfully and wisely occupied,Matth. 25.21. that so you may enter into your masters ioy, and be made rulers ouer all his goodes. You Magistrates therefore, and men of publike charge, set vp, and keepe continually in repaire amongst you, these two strong pillers, pietie towards God, and iu∣stice or righteousnesse towards men, for both in the flourishing state of your Citie, and in the distresse of the same (which God remoue if hee see it so good) they will stande you in more steede, and be better for you, then brasen walles (if you could possibly haue them) or the migh∣tiest
 bulwarks or ramparts in the world what∣soeuer. And as in respect of your owne particu∣lar persons, and publike callings, you must al∣waies hate couetousnesse,Exod. 18.21. and priuate gaine, en∣deuouring continually to be good common∣wealthes men, faithfully executing your duetie vnder God and her Maiestie, rather than exces∣siuely rich and wealthie: so you ought especial∣lie to haue an eye to your youth, which is (as it were) the frie of your citie, and take heed that they auoyde aboue all other wickednesse, idle∣nesse, which is the bedde, wherein the Deuill and our flesh doe not onely beget, but also bring forth innumerable multitudes of corrupt chil∣dren, as Atheistrie or godlesnesse, disobedience, and contempt of Magistrates, Ministers, Parents, and Maisters, drunkennesse, gluttonie, whore∣dome, theeuerie, beggerie, and suche like. You Ministers, feede the flocke of God, whiche de∣pendeth vpō you,1. Pet. 1.2. caring for it not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthie lucre, but of a rea∣die mind: and thinke it not sufficient to preache now and then, as once in a quarter, once in a moneth, or so: but as the Apostle saith, in season and out of season,2. Tim 4.2. and labour not only publike∣ly,Act. 5.42. but goe priuately from house to house, that so you may see the growth and increase of your trauels, and chiefely giue your selues to Cathe∣chizing,Gal 6.. Heb. 6.2. which as it is a very auncient and profi∣table order in the Churche of God, so lyeth it vpon you as a principall poynt of your charge by Gods word, and the good lawes of this land,
 knowing that the neglecte of it among other wants (as of Christian discipline, earnest prayer, holy fasting, and such like) hath bin as I take it, one great cause of all backwardnes & ignorance in our people. I prescribe no forme, nor any one order of Catechising for that belongeth not to me any manner of way, you haue many in print and all by publike authoritie allowed, as the Catechisme of our owne Church, Maister Cal∣uins, and now this, the very abridgement there∣of. This only I desire, and craue at your hands that you woulde continuallie vse this so profi∣table an exercise for the people, and so dutifull in respecte of youre selues, that you maye giue vp your accomptes with ioy,Heb. 13.17. 1. Pet. 5.4. and not with griefe, so that when that chiefe shepeheard shall appeare, you may in a good conscience say, as Paule the Apostle of the Gentiles sayth,2. Tim. 4.7. I haue foughte a good fyght, and haue finished my course, I haue kept the faith, and so receyue an incor∣ruptible crowne of Glory.Ephes. 6.4. You Parentes pro∣uoke not your children to wrath, but bring them vp in instruction, and information of the Lord, the duetie that God, both by the lighte of his word and nature hath layd vpon you, requi∣reth this at your hands, so that you can not ne∣glect it, without a double transgression. And in the education and gouernement of your infants and children, beware of these two extreames, that is, that you turne not your fatherly autho∣ritie either into ouermuch rigour, or cruelty on the one side, or into ouermuche familiaritie on
 the other side, both of them bringing with thē, vnlesse they be auoyded, innumerable inconue∣niences, as dissolutenesse of life, wantonnesse, contempt, vnnaturalnesse, hard hartednesse, and many such like mischiefes, condemned both by God and nature.Coloss. 4.1. Ephes. 6.9. And you Masters, doe conti∣nually vnto your seruants that which is iust and equall, putting away wrath and threatnings, knowing that thys is the readye way to haue your children louing, and your seruants obedi∣ent, and both of them dutifull towards you, e∣uen to walke in care and conscience of perfor∣mance of your charges towards God, who is the same to you, that you are to youre sonnes and seruants. Looke therefore what time you haue from your ordinarie vocations, as you haue the Sabboth dayes ordeyned by God himselfe, and ouer many idle holydayes, besides a number of very corrupt seasons and sports, as Shrouetide, Hocktuesday, Maygames, Corpus Christi playes, Midsomer watches, and suche like, whiche you take to your selues, withoute any warrant from Gods worde, or grounde of good lawes, hauing no better foundation, but wicked and canckred custome, deuised no doubt in the time of Pope∣rie and blindnesse, to keepe the hearts and heads of the people occupyed from looking into the most vile and grosse abhominations of that su∣perstitious and diuelishe sect: looke I say, what time soeuer you haue, from your lawfull cal∣lings, employ all that (yea and somewhat also from your ordinarie offices, rather than you
 would be ignorant) in learning your selues, and in teaching your families the ways, ordinances, and lawes of the eternall: and in stead of spen∣ding the time in dicing, carding, Tauerne and Alehouse haunting, forbidden by all lawes both of God and men, labour to profit youre selues, and to buyld vp those that apperteyne vnto you in sound knowledge, stedfast fayth, and blessed obedience, calling euery morning and euening at the least, before you take any thing in hande, or goe to your sleepe, your whole familie, and ioyne togither in hartie prayer and humble thankesgiuing, committing to memorie the points and principles of Christian Religion, set forth eyther in this, or some other suche shorte Catechisme, striuing also euery daye more and more, to ioyne to knowledge, sanctification, and holynesse of life,Heb. 12.14. withoute the whiche no man shall see God. For the furtherance of you in which exercises, I haue not only written these few lines in the way of exhortation, but also faithfully translated this little Booke, contey∣ning the summe of Christianitie, of which thus much I haue to say, that as euen at the firste fight of it, I was very much prouoked to tran∣slate it into our own toung, so before I had ful∣ly redde it ouer, the Lorde moued me, euen for your good, I persuade my selfe, and the testify∣ing of my loue towardes you, to dedicate what∣soeuer trauaile I tooke in that respect vnto you all, which if you shall receiue thankefully for me, and vse it well, to the increase of sounde
 iudgement in you, and the strengthening of your vnfeyned faith,Galat. 5.6. which worketh by loue, I haue that which I greatly wish and pray for. To conclude (for I feare I haue ben somwhat long) I hope I shal not neede muche to stande vppon this, to shewe what reasons induced me, to take paines at this time, in this poynte, and to offer the same to you, for besides that in nature and friendship I am streightly tyed to many of you, I do also in the right of a towneborn child (as it were) confesse my selfe much bounde to you all, in the Lord and for the Lorde, to do for you, as for my selfe, whatsoeuer lieth in me, as a sure seale and testimonie whereof, I would haue this little labour of mine to be taken, till it please God to giue strength and power to performe some greater worke. And yet I must saye, that if either the Author thereof, or the worke it selfe, or the manner of deliuerie of it, may adde com∣mendation to it (as I see no reason why they should not, the man being for his notable lear∣ning, great godlinesse, and good behauiour, ve∣ry rare and excellent, the worke also it selfe propounding Christianitie so soundly, suffici∣ently, & shortly, as in all respects, for mine own small reading, I remember not any that goeth beyond it) that then, as it can not want any iust prayse, so it may stande in steede of a greater gift: for parties that giue and receiue, ought mutually to consider this, not how much is ten∣dered or taken, but with what minde, and also how good, profitable, and necessarie the thing
 offered is, and so according to the qualitie, and not according to the quantitie, to value and e∣steeme the same: which I do not only pray you all to do, both in respect of my paines and good will towardes you, but also to ioyne in earnest and continual prayers to the Lord with me, for your selues, that both this, & all other meanes, both outward and inwarde, which he shall vse, for your regeneration and new birth, may be so profitable to youre selues, and blessed in the handes of them that endeuour the same, that you may be sanctified throughout, and that your whole spirite, and soule, and bodie,1. Tess. 5.2. may be kept blamelesse vnto the comming of oure Lorde Iesus Christ, to whome with the Father, and the holy spirit, three persons and one eter∣nall God, be all honour, power, glorie, maiestie, and dominion for euer & euer,
 At London, the xxiiij. of this Februarie. 1579.
