



EXPERIENCE doth wel ap∣prooue S. Bernards saying; Ef∣ficacior lingua, quàm litera: the tongue is of greater efficacie, then the pen. And therfore I suffer no little disad∣uantage, in that I must now speake vnto you in a silent letter, and plead my cause by a mute aduocate of my minde.
But since I vvrite vnto them, vvho are ot strangers in my busines, but aswell ye vvitnesses of the vvronges, vvhich I aue endured, as eare vvitnesses of the Doctrine, vvhich I preached amongst ou; my vndoubted hope is, that your
 heartes wil be touched with some com∣passion either tovvards me, vnvvorthily intreated by a faction (for I will not im∣pute the crime of a fevv vnto all) or tovvards your selues, vvhom this parti∣cular doth very highly import, in respect of your learning, honour, and estima∣tion.
For as the iniurie, which God, and his truth haue sustayned in my person, is now made knowne not only vnto our nation, but the fame thereof beginneth to spread it self abroad in theis forayne parts, so it concerneth you (my louing Fathers, and Brethren) to vvype avvay that disgrace, and blemish from your Mother, and your selues, vvhich some of her vnnaturall Children vvould both stayne her vvith, and deriue vpon you; endeuouring to obscure their priuate folly in the publick shame. VVhich pro∣tection I vvil neuer afford vnto them, vnlesse they can obtayn it by your ovv∣ne consent.

VVherefore, out of my affectionate zeale vnto your credit, I do both hum∣bly desire, and earnestly require you to auert this infamy from your noble Mo∣ther, and to free hir from the imputa∣tion, vvhich, othervvayes, you dravv vpon hir, as being eyther a patronesse of falsehood, or fearfull to defend the truth: vvhich folly in the first, or pu∣sillanimity in the second, is a great stay∣ne vnto men of your quality, and place.
For you stile your Vniuersitie the Fountayn, and the Eye of the kingdome. And you say not vnfitly; forasmuch as the Doctrine there taught doth streame forth into all parts of our nation: and all men come vnto you to receiue informa∣tion of their vnderstandings, by your Academicall instruction.
In vvhich respect you stand deepely obliged vnto God, and men (as you haue care of his glorie, and their benefitt) to vindicate the truth from oppression, & to redeeme hir out of captiuitie into
 freedome, that hir lustre may not be darkened, vvhere so great a pretense is made of the ghospells light.
Which iust kindnesse if I may not procure at your hands, yet the truth shall not be impayred thereby: nor vvill I be any vvhitt discōfited, othervvayes then in a sorrowfull commiseration of your estate. For my resolution is firmely ma∣de vvithin mine ovvne heart, to spare no travayle, that I may purchase condigne approbation of my cause from all the Vniuersities in Europe: if iustice may not be there done, vvhere Gods truth, and I (meerely for hir sake) haue receiued such iniurie, as seemeth almost incredible vnto strangers, vvho do not yet suffi∣cientlie vnderstād the courses of D. King, and of other Caluinists; the assistents of his spleneticall proceedings.
Finally (my Brethren) vvith my ho∣nest petition, and necessarie counsaill, I ioyne my hearty praiers (and teares vvith them) that it vvould please the authour
 of all goodnesse, and the God of all truth, to povvre the abundant riches of his grace into your soules, that your vn∣derstandings may be fully enlightened vvith his truth, and that your vvills may be made cōformable therevnto in your profession of the holy Catholicke faith. For vvhich as I novv suffer the vvant of my natiue cōtrey, so, in defence thereof, I shall be ready to yeald vp my life, vvhē it shall please my gratious Lord to call me vnto that honour: vvhereof I am vnvvorthy.
FARE YOV WELL.
From Arras.
14. March. 1609.

