



Good Madam,
AT what time it pleased Almigh∣ty God to put in∣to Dauids heart, & Salomons hands to build him an house at Ierusa∣lem, that his name might be there; It is memorable, how in that great
day of Dedication, the King did sanctifie the same with his pray∣er, and honoured it with his pre∣sence; teaching vs thereby, that Dauid may purpose, and Salo∣mon may performe, what God would haue done: and yet all in vaine, if the Lord doe not blesse in both his owne ordinance.
The helpe of heauen was with that good Knight your late hus∣band, of worthy memory, in his prouision to build vpon the poore in many works of mercy: which he left for you Madam to be perfected in the honor of Christ, in his poore members, of which the world is full, wee can goe to no Pulpit, but they pearce our hearts to prouoke our speech.
In tender whereof, it ioyeth vs much in these Northerne parts to heare, see, and feele,
how fully you haue perfected a worke so well begunne, with a liberall augmentation of more mercy, and greater extent of bounty, then euer was inten∣ded or expected of many I am sure (his poore Allies and Kins∣folks here) whose dayly prayers are with GOD, for that wherein you haue much inrich∣ed them.
And especially in that wor∣thy foundation of your Free Schoole here at Heskyne, drou∣ping much vpon the death of that Founder, for feare of fu∣ture fall, till your Ladishippe take holde to perfect the worke so well begunne, with so com∣fortable a reflection, and a∣spect of future good, as now it hopeth in GOD euer to breath sweet like the sauour of a field,
which the Lord hath blessed.
Saint Iames his day hath beene the day of Dedication, from the foundation till now, where and when the Eue hath beene kept solemne for Scho∣lasticall exercises (from the first day, and Master, who gaue it first life a shining Lampe, consuming himselfe to enligh∣ten others) euen downe to these dayes, laudably performed by the Masters, Vshers, and Schol∣lers there, In their succeeding times, and now haue exceeding∣ly well performed both in Greeke and Latine, Prose and Verse. I leaue it to the report of the Iudi∣cious hearers, who heard it, and ioyed much in their Acts.
The Eue so spent, the Feast was sacred for holy deuotion in the Parrish Church of Eccle∣ston,
being your Ladyshippes pleasure, it should so bee kept, as formerly it had beene; That those many Children, ouer whome you are now a carefull mother, being sanctified with the word of God and prayer, might learne more chearefullie to sing Hosannah to the high∣est.
The Prayers and Sermon so ended, your liberall heart and hand thought not good to dis∣misse the people, (after their soule solace,) without a bles∣sing of some bodilie repast, like vnto that of our Sauiour Christ, when hee sayde, Giue yee them to eate, which was rea∣dily done, and performed with chearefulnesse.
And now, good Lady, I doe heere present in priuate,
and lay in your Ladishippes lappe, what was then preached in publike, then this my poore frame of Palme and Cedar, speciall Materials in the Fabricke of the Temple, if Bezaliel or Hiram the widdowes Sonne of Nephthalie were, to put them into the worke: But they are dead, so is the Tabernacle and Temple too, with all it glorie, all demolished and turned to dust, all buried in the bowels of Christ, as Saint Augustine sayeth, Ne populus rediret ad Iu∣daismum, left the people might returne againe to Iudaisme.
The substance being come in place, those shaddow  are vanished, for the Vale of the Temple is rent a sunder from the toppe to the bottome, and Christ hath now appeared in per∣fect
beauty, a Minister of a better sanctuary, which the Lord hath pight and not man.
Righteous men, the plants of his pleasure, are Palmes and Cedars of that glorious buil∣ding, and a more cunning hand then eyther that of Bezaliel or Hiram hath framed them for the worke; for Summa sapientia aedisicauit domum:
Prou. 9. v. 1. Wisedome of Wisedome hath built her an house: A Palme and Ce∣dar among the rest, the Lord God of Heauen to make his worke more glorious, hath there layde the soule and spi∣rite of your louing husband, where are the Soules of iust and perfect men: hee hath put him in the Register of the righ∣teous, and why should eyther mischieuous enuie raize him,
or foule obliuion leaue him out? For my owne parte, I may not dissemble, or deuide eyther mine affection to him that dead is, or betray the truth of so exceeding great kind∣nesse as I haue receyued from your Ladyshippe from time to time, both towardes my selfe and mine in London: for which I shall euer pray, that you may euer flourish, and grow greene in the course of the Almighty, here a Palme in grace, and there a Cedar in glory: Not doub∣ting, but your Ladyshippe will take in good part these my poore paines, as a pledge of my loe; seasoned with my best prayers to GOD for your good Ladishippe, withall yours, euer to bee kept vnder his holy hand of proidence and protecti∣on:

Amen, Amen.
Standish, the fourth of May, 1615. 
