



WORTHY GENTLEMEN,
THe vse of Musicke in the warres, is partly to direct the Souldier, partly to en∣courage him. Such I wisht
this Sermon when I preacht it. Beside the directi∣on of it for the fighting of spirituall battailes; That it might be as Musicke to encourage you in your other warlike preparations, and to breathe some little life into your generous spirits, though already brauely actuated with resolution and valour.
It was yours from the beginning, and againe I make it yours. Yours in the bud, and yours in the fruit; in the seed yours, and yours in the har∣uest. What you left scattered in the first reaping, you may now gleane vp againe, and not loose an eare in a surrow, if any way seruiceable for your vse.
Of your fauourable acceptations I doubt not, comming from one that wishes a great deale of honour and happines, to euery member of your Societie, and to all your worthy designes. The poore Paynter could write vpon his Table, when he had embellisht it with the pictures of many rich Iems, Vellem & haec. My velle is the same with his. I wish I could adde reall encourage∣ments, to these verball that I giue you. But it must suffice me to do as some Grecians were said to do, in their sacrifices to Hercules. They should
haue offered to him, Oxen and Sheepe. Wanting at that time, they were faine to offer Melons and other fruites, cutting them into the shapes of Sheepe and Oxen, and fixing to their bodies little stickes of wood, artificially representing legs and feete; Such were the testimonies of their deuoti∣on and zeale, and such the ieiune oblations, with which here I present you.
In what euer they be defectiue, I shall endeuour to supply it, by my praying to God for you, as Moses prayde for the Israelites; Alwayes when they went forward in the Campe, that he would rise vp before them; alwayes when they rested that he would returne to them. So may he alwaies rise and alwayes returne vnto you both in your remo∣uings & in your restings. And the Lord make you all; (Captaines & Souldiers, Leaders and Followers) such as the good Centurion was in the Gospell; such as the good Cornelius was in the Acts, deuout men, fearing God, & full of faith & good works. Then shall fiue of you be able to chase a hundred of your enemies, and a hundred of you to put ten thousand to flight.

