



MAdame: It is a common saying in the world, that Examples are of greater force to perswade, than Precepts; and Experience the best Mistresse, for the teaching of Wise∣dome: And yet, euen Experience teacheth, that notwithstanding all the examples, which from the first infancie and child-birth of the world haue beene presented to our eyes
(as so many speaking witnesses of that ineuitable mortalitie, to which our liues are exposed) yet are wee not made wise in the vnderstanding of our ende.Deut. 32.29 The death of the late excellent and noble Princesse (which I will not say was vntimely, though it were early; for, shee fell not like the fruit that growes out of season: but, betimes shee was ripened and made fit to be gathered) may teach those that bee young, not to be con∣fident of their life; those that bee old, howerly to exspect their death; both olde and young to obserue that precept of K. Salomon, Not peremp∣torily to boast of the morrow:Prou. 27.1. be∣cause they knowe not, what a day may bring forth. That, which we are taught by the life of her example, we may also learn from the letter of this Sermon; the one seruing as an instru∣ctiō to our eyes, the other to our ears, both to our harts: which, because I was
enioyned to preach at her Funerall, I am also willing to print for her Me∣moriall; that as I ought her my ser∣uice while shee liv'd, so being dead I might consecrate to the honour of her name some pledge of my dutie. Per∣haps, the world will censure mee for both; and be ready to condemne me, either of presumption, or vaine∣glorie. But, as I passe not to be iud∣ged of men: so I care not to be ap∣plauded of men. For, God is my record, whom I serue in my spirit, that I desire no greater approbation to be giuen of my labours, than that testimonie of the blessed Apostle; That in all simplicitie and godly purenesse (not handling the word of GOD deceitfully) I approue my self to euerie mans conscience,2. Cor. 4.2. in the sight of GOD. I knowe, the Penne cannot bee so grace∣full as the Tongue; nor a speach, that is buried vnder a dead letter,
so patheticall in perswasion, as that which is vttered by a liuing voyce. This might somthing discourage me: yet, I greatly regard it not. For, Hee that in the morning bids vs to sow our seede, and in the euening not suffer our hand to rest,Eccles. 11.6. Hee (I hope) wil vouchsafe to sanctifie, with some blessing of his Spirit, that which I haue beene carefull to plant and to water.
That I presume to send it foorth into the world, vnder the counte∣nance of your Honourable protecti∣on, two special reasons do induce me; the one, in regard of the deceased La∣die: the safety of whose person being once the ioy of your life, and the soūd of her name continuing still deare to your remembrance; this Monument of my seruice, being dedicated to her Memorie, is therfore fittest to bee shrouded vnder the fauour of your Patronage. This (Madam) I knowe,
you may say with Iob, that your witnesses are in heauen & in earth, that if you might haue begged but her life of God, it would haue beene the greatest gaine you desired; and that, God hauing taken her away, the wāt of her self is the greatest losse you haue lamented. If there be any that will speak euill of those things which they know not, they be such whose tongues doe burne with malice; and let them blyster with the fire that kindles them: you may make a garland, for your selfe, of their reports.
The other motiue, in regard of my selfe; that entertainement and pre∣ferment, which so freely and bounti∣fully (for the poor seruice that I doe) I haue receiued from your selfe, and my thrice honourable good Lord: the most thankefull acknowledgement whereof, if euer I forget; I will not say with Dauid, Let my right hand forget her cunning (for,Psal. 137.5. that is lit∣tle)
but, Let God himselfe forget to preuent me with any grace, or to fol∣low me with any blessing.
It is now time, for me, to make an end of my tedious dedication: which I seale-vp with my heartiest prayers to the God of Heauen, both for my Noble Lord, and your selfe; besee∣ching him, that hee would multiplie his mercies vpon you, and his graces in you, and so vouchsafe to sanctifie the crosses that hee sends you as well as the blessings, that both may worke together for your good vpon earth, and for your glorie in heauen.

