



NOt only moste vntrue, but verye vngodlye also is the saying of some, who affirme that the wrytings of the Prophets containe nothing in them, but certaine olde Sermons whereof in our age and time there is no vse. For the Prophets in their writings teach the feare of God, reprehend idolatrie, trust and confidence in man, couetousnesse &c: and set forth the punishments of suche sinnes. They teach also of fayth in Christ, cō∣forting the afflicted with most sweete and pleasant Prophesies of Christ and his king∣dome. VVherefore not onely the Apostles oftentimes vse their testimonies, but euen Christ himselfe also, and exhorteth vs dili∣gently to read and search them. Most falsely therefore it is sayde of some, that they serue
 now to no vse: yea very vngodly also is this their saying, wherby they so lightly esteeme of gods word, which if it had no other thing to commend it but only the Author therof, who is God himselfe, that were sufficient to make vs most willingly to embrace it, as ve∣ry necessary to be knowen of al the godly.
Howbeit, by those places of the Prophets most comforte and spiritual ioy may be re∣ceyued, where they cōmend to the Church the promises of God concerning his sonne Christ: and therefore such places especiallye are to bee perused and meditated vppon of Christians, who in this world can loke for no other but trouble and affliction, wherof Christ in the Gospel hath foretolde them, yea which Christ their Lord & Maister hath before suffered, and therfore may not they thinke to escape free. Notwithstanding, in what affliction so euer, in theyr Christ they may finde most sweete consolation: if they be poore, he is able to inrych them: if they be sicke, he is a Phisitiō able to heale them: if they be persecuted of the world, he is able to delyuer them: yea and more than thys, if Sathan assayle them, by fayth in Christ they
 resist hys furie, auoide his snares, and ouer∣come his tentations: if the burden of sinne oppresse them, he and none but he is able to ease them therof: if deathe terrifye them, in hym they may find life, for he hath conque∣red Satan, he hath satisfyed fully for sinnes, he by hys death hathe ouercome death, and opened the gate of euerlasting life to all be∣leeuers.
Nowe forasmuch as these benefittes bee inestimable, and our weakenesse and infirmi∣tie is such that we can euen hardely beleeue them, it is very necessarye for vs diligentlye to reade and meditate vppon the worde of God, wherein they are cōmended and con∣firmed vnto vs: and therefore, such places of the Prophets especially are to be perused & well considered of, wherein they are menti∣oned and liuely set forth. VVherefore after good aduisement and due consideration, I haue published in print thys little Treatise, whyche I haue sent to your worship, beeyng fully perswaded, that it shal be found, not an vnprofitable Pamphlet, but a boke repleni∣shed with most sweet & singular consolatiō. For therin (as in readyng it you shal find) is




 conteyned a Prophesie of the Kyngdome of Chryste, wyth a most fruteful and godly ex∣position thereof, wherein is lyuely setforth the victorye and tryumphe of Chryst and of al hys members ouer sin, death, and Satan: also the moste certayne resurrection of all the faythfull to euerlastyng felicitye, wyth dyuers other thyngs moste comfortable to be read, and no lesse necessary to be known.
The dedication hereof I thoughte moste conuenient and meete to make to your wor∣ship, not onely thereby to testifye my thank∣full mynde toward you, for the manifolde & sundry benefits that I haue receiued at your hands, although euen this may seeme to be a cause sufficient, but especiallye for that you haue of a long tyme shewed youre selfe to be of the number of them, vnto whome the inestimable benefites of Christe doe apper∣rayne. For your Religion hath shined as well in workes as in words, in al godly conuersa∣tion as in a Christiā profession. VVherfore, forasmuch as to the godly, godly matters are acceptable. I doubt not but this Treatise wil of your worship be wel accepted, and there∣fore I neede not enter into the commenda∣tion
 therof, for in deede it doth sufficiently cōmend it selfe, as to the godly and diligent Reader wil plainly appere. Only this I wish, that al they that shal be occupyed in reading either this or any other godly treatise what∣soeuer, maye take suche fruite thereby, that their faith may be encreased, and their con∣sciences truely comforted.

