



WOrthily might I bee con∣demned of arrogancie, (most Noble Lord & La∣dy) because,The first Vo∣lume of this Treasurie, published a∣bout 5. yeares since. hauing past the Pikes in a peece of the selfe-same seruice (follow∣ed with fauour and kinde acceptation) I should therefore presume vppon the like successe: know∣ing the inconstant nature of Times, that as they al∣ter, so do mens humours & dispositions with them. For, that which carrieth liking and allowance to day, falles into loathing and contempt to morrow; Opinions being more various in the case of Bookes, then are the Arguments whereon they discourse, because carping curio∣sity will haue his censure. But, as the Last for Hercules, was not fa∣shioned to fit euerie foote, nor his Lyons skinne to be worne by any base Lout;Ignorance wil alwayes bee bold vpon the learnedst la∣bours. euen so the sublimitie of true iudgement (in matters of such industrious and painfull labor) should be left to the Learned;
 not to euery course and mechanicke conceite, capeable of nothing, but of such occasions as are suteable to his owne condition.
I haue read of the great RiuerA narrow sea betweene the Hauen Aulis of Boetia, and Euboeo. Euripus, which ebbeth and flow∣eth seuen times a day, and with such violence; that it carrieth Ships vpon it with full sayle, directly against the winde. Seuen times in an houre ebbeth and floweth rash Opinion, in the torrent of indiscreet and troublesome apprehension: carrying Criticke calumnie, and squint-eyed detraction, mainly against the winde of Wisedome and Iudgement; because their braines are no better ballast, nor their capacity of further reach or extendure.
Hesiod. in Lib. 3. Cap. 7.And yet, if the saying of Hesiode be true; That nothing can bee more pleasing, then variety, which is the soules cheefest solace: Then (not fearing folly, but speaking to peerelesse Noble nature) giue mee leaue to tell you, that there can hardly bee any especiall subiect imagined, but one Argument or other heere meeteth with it. From Sacred Diuinity (the most solide and supreame of all other) through all o∣ther Artes and Sciences whatsoeuer, euen to any lowly, and the mea∣nest (worthy) profession; here is some notable marke or Monument thereof (if it be either Ancient or Moderne) stored vp in this Trea∣surie, for future Ages to delight in,Comparing al the Volumes together. and to receiue no meane bene∣fite thereby.
Then (Honourable Lord and Ladie) all these blessings beeing Yours (as also my selfe, in endlesse dutie and seruice) when any sub∣iect of great, graue, and serious consideration (as of Nations, Mo∣narchies, Kingdomes, and People, in their Originall, Rising or De∣clining, by Warres, Dissentions, Combustions, or otherwise in the like occurrences) shall seeme troublesome or tedious to you: walke on but a little further, & then you may enter into a spacious Forrest, affording all choise of pleasing Game, either for Hawking, Hunting, Fishing, Fowling, or any other Noble exercise beside.
When those Forrest pleasures shall faint you (as all delights dull, by too much continuance) an Orchard standes wide open to wel∣come you, richly abounding in the fairest Frutages: not to feed the Eie onely, but likewise to refresh the Heart, inuiting you to plucke where, and while you please, and to bestow how, and when you list: because they are all yours, and whosoeuer else shall taste of them, do enioy such freedome but by your fauor.
There is one especiall recreation more (Gracious Madam) which remaineth soly to your selfe, and such as may enter by your admit∣tance; in a goodly large Garden, abounding with all kind of the fai∣rest Flowers, that open with the cheerfull mornings Sun, and shut a∣gaine at his sad departure, all sweet, and all soueraigne. And, because Ladies of elder times (as many haue had the like delight in our more Moderne daies) were singularly skilfull in Physick and Chirurgery: there is not a vacant place in the whole Garden, but it is fitly furni∣shed
 euerie where; the verie common walkes (euen as if they were Bride-like strewed by hand) are couered with the choisest Simples, purest distillatorie Plants, and wholesome Herbes of euerie Vertue: for which, the Garden was purposely founded, and not for fruitlesse idle vanity.
And were you all alone, without companie, and by your selfe, yet can you not so continue there: For, you may meete with a faire Beuey of Queenes and Ladies, at diuers turnings as you walke, and euerie one will tell you the Historie of her life and fortune (rare ex∣amples of Vertue and Honor) as themselues can best, truly & plain∣ly discourse vnto you. Some other also you shall see, sadly sitting vnder Eughe & Cipresse trees, with Garlands of those leaues wrea∣thed about their heads, sighing out their diuers disasters: whom your Noble nature cannot choose but commiserate; as greeuing to see a scratch in a cleare skin, and a bodie beautified by Nature, to be ble∣mished by vnkinde Destiny.
From manie remote Kingdomes and Countries (where natural∣ly they spake those seuerall Languages) are all these variable plea∣sures come hither, onely to kisse your Noble hands. It was no mean infelicitie for them, to find no fitter a Tutor, that might haue taught them to speake more eloquent English; which (indeede) also was my fault, seeing none else would tie themselues to so hard a Taske. But howsoeuer it may prooue, your rich iudgements, and all-suffi∣cient ability in the Languages, as also my weakenesse; will (I hope) bury all defects in your fauor, & beare out from scandall my willing endeuour, that I may finish the other (yet remaining) eleuen Bookes behinde, to perfect so rich and rare a Treasurie.
