


THere hath bin a great and long dispute (woorthy Lord) among the Learned, concerning the true definition of Nobility. Some haue held opinion, that this matchlesse Ladie, keepeth her seate in the Soule only; or else, with the Soule and Bodie together. Some other are of the minde, that her abyding is in Prudence: Others, in Iu∣stice: And others, in the goodnesse of manners. There are also some few, who say; that they know no other No∣bility, but such as proceedeth from Vertue. And if any one contemne Riches, voluptuous pleasures, glory; yea, and life it selfe, hee is held to be more Noble, then all the Kings and Princes in the world. So that they are perswaded, that al other things whatsoeuer which are in Man, are nothing els but Fortune, and meere presumption of the wealthy and proud.
Against whom also, there are diuers and contrary opinions. For, wise Plutarch affirmeth, that the calumny is false, which vniust Sophisters haue imposed on No∣bility. For they will admit no other kind of proofe, euen in things which are no∣torious and apparant to euerie eye: Albeit, to haue a good race of Houndes or Horses, they will seeke after the goodliest and worthiest. Likewise, they striue to haue the best seeds for their grounds, to produce the rarest plants and Hearbes: and yet (like Sots as they are) they dare maintaine, that Nobility by blood, is no∣thing auaileable to following succession, because the Originall came from the barbarous, or descended of the Ciuilized French; not crediting, that in the Ge∣neration of Children, the Fathers do distribute vnto them, some seeds and prin∣ciples of Naturall vertue.
Aristotle repelleth their opinion, and standing on much sounder termes; spea∣keth against them in this manner; That which Euripides teacheth (saith hee) is not true, to wit; That the honest minded man is only Noble, and not he that descendeth of an an∣cient race, and is borne of generous Parents: Because that in the definition of Nobility, the va∣lour & Vertue of our Elders are comprehended, Nobility it selfe being nothing else, but a certain Vertue of that Generation, which being lawdable of it selfe, ought to be followed with great af∣fection. Wherefore, he is worthy of praise & commendation, that employeth all his endeuor and diligence, to acquire the noblenesse of Generation; to the end, that afterward, worthy and valiant men may be deriued from him. So that at all times, and as often as the Originall of such generation, finds it selfe to bee com∣mendable, it ought iustly to be tearmed Noble. For, such a beginning, beareth in it selfe both a naturall power and vertue, to beget and produce many other answereable, and like vnto it selfe. Therefore, when such a man is met withall in any nation, as is of such worth, that he can extend and spread his vertue to many succeeding Ages: his descendants and off-spring will be naturally generous, and of the best and manliest manners.

Contrarywise, he that is bad & wickedly bred, doth commonly beget as lewd and bad children: according to whom (beside his euill examples) they will de∣riue from him the like wicked habitude. And therefore the Prouerb was not vn∣aduisedly spoken: Of a bad Grow, coms as bad an Eg. By this reason I hold, that al those whom we behold to be plunged in the gulfe of vices, and make mischiefe their chiefest commendation, although they be neuer so great Lordes, they are but meere vsurpers of Nobility, beeing no way descended of Noblemen, but rather of Cham, and haue nothing else but the bare name of Nobilitie. Whereas on the contrary, they that are noted no way to degenerat from the vertue of their ance∣stors, but truly haue followed them, euen from Father to Son (as we commonlie vse to say) are said to be of noble stem & stock, and discended of the posteritie of Sem. Hence it ensueth, that in the world there are many men, Noble, Magnani∣mous, valiant, and like vnto their famous progenitors: among whom, you hold the place and ranke of a most worthy, honourable, and vertuous Lord, imitating so directly the tracts of your predecessors, that you may well be said, to be Nobi∣lity and vertue it selfe. If it were needfull, to come to the Antiquity of Nobilitie, by the Fathers side, you are descended of the house of Vrfe, many whereof, haue held the very goodliest Estates and dignities in this Kingdome, and all by their most signale merits of vertue. What shall I say, concerning the pietie of your great Grandfather, M. Peter D'Vrfe, Great Maister of the Horse. The Churches & Monasteries builded by him, doe make sufficient testimony of his deuout zeale. What shall I say of your Grandfather, M. Claudius D'Vrfe, Knight of the Order, Gouernor to Messieurs les enfans de France, Ambassador for the King to his Holy∣nesse, & a curious obseruer of Antiquities? Your house by him builded, the Sta∣tues of Marble, and so great number of Medalles, which he caused to be brought from Rome, do amply speake, how great a friend and louer he was of Vertue. As for your Father M. Iaques D'Vrfe, Knight of the Kings Order, Captain of fifty men of Armes, Bayliffe of the Forrests, and Gouernor of the said Country. The memo∣ry of his vertuous deportments is so fresh and recent, as it would appeare super∣fluous further to remember them.
By the Mothers side, who knoweth not, that you are deriued of the illustrious house of Sauoy, allied to the bloud-royall of France? But as touching your perfecti∣ons, I would haue the whol world to know it, that you are one of the very best Po∣ets in France, as more then 100. choise Sonnets can testify, which you haue pleased to shew me. A matter redounding to your no mean honor, in not hauing atained to 18. years of age, when you made them: you are (beside) inriched with so happy a memory, that you haue (ad vnguē) al the Poetical fictions, with an absolut exposi∣tion of thē, as wel in Ouids Metamorphosis, Homers Iliads, as also diuers other authors.
Now in recompence of the gracious communication of your Poems, & for the seruice I iustly owe ye, I dedicate this Book to you, collected out of many Authors, Greeke, Latine, Italian, Spanish, &c. from whom I haue traduced most singuler things, appertaining to the seueral intention of each Chapter, hoping to continue them on, till they compleat the number of 30. Bookes. Receiue then this former Vo∣lume, with like loue and good wil, as I salute your graces with my humble recom∣mendations, praying God to send your Honor a long and a happy life.
From Montbrison  this 11. of March.

