



MOst courteous vnlearned lo∣uer of Poetry, and yet a Po∣et thy selfe, of no lesse price then H. S. that in honour of Maid-marrian giues sweete Margerā for his Empresse, and puttes the Sowe most sawcily vppon some great personage, what euer she bee, bidding her (as it runnes in the old song) Go from my Garden go, for there no flowers for thee dooth grow. These be to notifie to your diminutiue excelsitude, and compendi∣ate greatnesse, what my zeale is towardes you, that in no streigh∣ter bonds woulde bee pounded and enlisted, then in an Epistle Dedicatorie. Too many more lusty bloud Brauamente segniors, with Cales beards, as broade as scuilers maples, that they make
cleane their boates with, could I haue turned it ouer, and had no∣thing for my labour, some faire woords except, of, good sir will it please you to come neere, and drinke a cuppe of wine? after my re∣turne from Ireland I doubt not but my fortunes will be of some growth to requite you. In the meane time my sword is at your commaund; and before God, money so scatteringly runnes heere and there vppon vtensilia, furnitures, ancients, and other neces∣sary preparations, (and which is a double charge, looke how much Tobacco wee carry with vs to expell cold, the like quantitie of Staues-aker wee must prouide vs of to kill lice in that rugged countrey of rebels) that I say vnto you in the word of a martia∣list, wee cannot doo as wee would. I am no incredulous Didimus, but haue more fayth to beleeue they haue no coyne, then they haue meanes to supplie themselues with it and so leaue them. To any other carpelmunger or primerose knight of Primero, bring I a dedication and the dice ouer night haue not befriended him hee sleepes fiue dayes and fiue nights to new skin his beautie, and will not bee knowne hee is awakt till his men vppon their owne bondes (a dismall world for trenchermen, when theyr maisters bond shal not be so good as theirs) haue tooke vp commodities or fresh drop∣pings of the minte for him: and then; what then? he payes for the ten dozen of balles hee left vppon the score at the tennis court, hee sendes for his Barber to depure, decurtate, and punge him, whome hauing not paide a twelmonth before, he now raines downe eight quarter angels into his hande, to make his liberalitie seeme greater, and giues him a cast riding ierkin, and an olde Spanish hatte into the bargaine, and Gods peace bee with him. The cham∣bor is not ridde of the smell of his feet, but the greasie shoomaker with his squirrels skin, and a whole stall of ware vppon his arme enters, and wrencheth his legges for an houre togither, and after shewes histally. By S. Loy that drawes deepe, and by that time his Tobacco marchant is made euen with, and hee hath dinde at a tauerne, and slept his vnder-meale at a bawdy house, his purse is on the heild and only fortie shillings hee hath behinde, to trie his fortune with at the cardes in the presence, which if it prosper,
the court cannot containe him, but to London againe be will, to reuell it and haue two playes in one night, inuite all the Poets and Musitions to his chamber the next morning, where against theyr comming, a whole heape of money shall bee bespread vppon the boord and all his trunkes opened to shewe his rich sutes, but the deuill a whit hee bestowes on them, saue bottle ale and Tobacco: and desires a generall meeting.
The particular of it is that bounty is bankerupt, and Lady sensu∣alitie licks all the fat frō the seuen Liberal Sciences, that Poetry, if it were not a trick to please, my Lady would bee excluded out of Christian buriall, and in steade of wreathes of lawrell to crowne it with haue a bell with a cocks combe clapt on the crowne of it by olde Iohannes de Indagines, and his quire of dorbellists. Wherefore the premisses considered (I pray you consider of that woord Premisses for somewhere I haue borrowed it) neither to rich noble, right worshipfull, or worshipfull, of spirituall or tem∣porall, will I consecrate this woorke, but to thee and thy capering humour alone, that if thy starres had doone thee right, they should haue made thee one of the mightiest princes of Germany, not for thou canst driue a coach or kill an oxe so wel as they but that thou art neuer wel, but when thou art amongst the retinue of the Muses, and there spendest more in the twinckling of an eye, then in a whole yeare thou gettest by some grasierly gentilitie thou fol∣lowest. A King thou art by name, and a King of good fellowshippe by nature, whereby I ominate this Encomion of the king of fishes was predestinate to thee from thy swadling clothes. Hugge it, ingle it, kisse it, and cull it now thou hast it, & renounce eating of greene beefe and garlike, till Martlemas, if it be not the next stile to The strife of Loue in a Dreame, or, the Lamentable bur∣ning of Teuerton. Giue mee good words I beseech thee though thou giuest me nothing else, and thy words shal stand for thy deeds, which I will take as well in woorth, as if they were the deedes and euidences of all the lande thou hast. Heere I bring you a redde herring, if you will finde drinke to it, there an ende, no other detriments will I putte you to. Let the Kanne of strong ale your
constable, with the toaste his browne bill, and sugar and nutmegs his watchmen stande in a readinesse, to entertaine mee euerie time I come by your lodging. In Ruscia there are no presents but of meate or drinke; I present you with meate, and you in honou∣rable courtesie to requite mee, can do no lesse then present mee with the best mornings draught of merry-go-downe in your quar∣ters, and so I kisse the shadow of your feetes shadow, amiable Donsell, expecting your sacred Poeme of the Hermites Tale, that will restore the golden age amongst vs, and so vppon my soules knees I take my leaue.

