



RIght Honorable, It was well obser∣ued long agoe by that learned Father Saint Ierome, that the Scriptures consist non in le∣gendo, sed in intelligendo;S. Ierome in his Dia∣log. against the Lucife∣rians. Not in reading, but in vnderstanding. For, they are euen a pleasant Garden shut vp, an wholesome Fountayne sealed: necessarie it is that they bee opened, that they be vnsealed, otherwise, they shall be vnprofitable vnto vs. They
 may well (saith Vincentius Lyri∣nensis) receiue euidentiam,Vincent. Lyc. aders. Haeres lucem, distinctionem, they may bee ex∣planed, cleered, distinguished: so long as they still retayne ple∣nitudinem, integritatem, proprie∣tatem; Their fulnesse, soundnesse, and proprietie. But who shall at∣tempt this great worke? who shall dare to enter into the Land of Canaan, to encounter the sons of Anak? who shall take in hand to leuell the Mountaynes, and make the rough places plaine? who shall open the darke and dif∣ficult passages of the diuine Ora∣cles?ractnt rilia abri. . Surely, not Tradesmen, not such as follow the Plough, not they which sit at the Distaffe, not meere Laikes; but such as are sanctified and called thereunto. They must doe it who haue re∣ceiued Priestly Grace and Ordi∣nation, as it is written: The Priests
 lips should preserue knowledge,Mal. 2.7. and they should seeke the Law at his mouth: for he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts. They, I say, must doe it, who are the suc∣cessors of the Apostles, vnto whom our most blessed Sauiour said, Goe, teach all Nations.Mat. 20.28. A∣mongst these, I the last, the least, and vnworthiest of many, haue, according to the measure of grace giuen to me, opened and explaned the Holy Scriptures these ten yeeres and more. And this Summer in Iune last, your Lordship being absent, in mine ordinarie course I tooke in hand, by Gods direction, to explicate two Verses of that most heauen∣ly Sermon of our Lord in the Mountayne, which by all meanes I endeuoured to doe sine offensio∣ne Fidei; without preiudice to the Faith,Fulgent. l. 2. ad Mon. as Fulgentius would haue
 mee: and with Vincentius Lyri∣nensis, Iuxta Catholici dogmatis regulas; According to the rules of Catholike Doctrine, which in all my labours and endeuours, peculiar to my function, I desire strictly to embrace and follow.
Hauing opened and illustrated in this wise, the sense of those two sacred Verses before mentioned, in two short Sermonarie discour∣ses; I am bold to present them vnto you, my most Honorable Lord and Master, vnder whom I haue now almost these ten yeers exercised my Priestly function; vnto whom from my soule I doe wish and pray for all increase of knowledge, of vertue, of grace and peace in our Lord Iesus Christ, LANGAR, Iuly the 4. 1619.

