



DOe I appeale, for the evi∣dences of my sincerest instru∣ctions and unpartiall endea∣vours in this Sermon to pre∣vent such inconveniences as were iustly feared, but by vi∣gilaney of authority and effi∣cacy of Gods truth and ordi∣nance apparantly prevented. Who so fit as those who yeelded me their presence and pa∣tiences to assist me in giving up this account, being requi∣red, and now out of my power to be healed (having past as I understand) the hands and allowance of the examiner. Far was it from my purpose when I preached it, to do what now is thought fit to be done without me: Onely we may adde our testimony that this is the same, and all that was delivered upon that necessary occasion, whereby it may appeare how small their understanding and charity is, that so rashly censured it, or those whom it concerned. Gving of preservatives may import danger of infection, but not that all that take them are infected, or that prescribe them iniurious. Yet a foolish calumniation fall backe upon its
headlong avoucher by discovery of truth, and he had his punishment in his bosome before his mouth was open. They are happy that need so little feare traducers, whiles their consciences pleade for them before God, their actions before men; the worst people will cry, Ad leones with others; and fooles will at least be medling, and iudge cause and per∣son before they understand. Were authority so iealous, as ignorance is censorious, some would be more silent for their owne case: others against their wills, whom we would be glad to heare speake. Best is; none but a sycophant or man∣pleaser, could censure the delivering of these few rules and cautions so needfull here, as since they have appeared to be. At least we know what can comfort us with Paul, 2. Cor. 1.12. and shall, I trust, wait the better on all Gods ordi∣nances, with more wisedome, and never the lesse zeale, for that it is more according to knowledge. In Eccl. 5. and the first seven verses the Preacher sheweth what abundance of folly, vanity, rashnes, error, sinne, danger, and repen∣tance often accompanieth divine services in publike and private, for the prevention whereof I wish we could better distinguish betwene holy zeale and headlong performance. There is greatods betweene knowledge of the necessity of a duty, and ability to performe it in a due way and manner. I know not what hath lately more gravel'd and amazed me, then some Novices new boasts of such sudden sprowting of grace in these latter and colder times, unto that height of abilities, which hath not beene knowne in purest times un∣der powerfullest meanes, amongst eminent and famous Christians, but with long time and much experience. We are bound ever to acknowledge and blesse God for the glori∣ous successe of the Gospel even now in this Kingdom, yet expect we no miraculous effects of it, as in the Primitive
Churches, which, inioying them, yet needed to be regulated in the use of them, because sometimes it was not decent and orderly: and if in the publike, how much more in the pri∣vate, where there is none to order the rest, or that can well iudge wherein the decency of such performances consists; but ignorance and affection must sway and censure al. And it is no small comfort to us in this place, nor slender gagg to licentious tongues abroad, that the severall lights (among which this is one of the least and obscurest) held forth in one day by so many able and well agreeing guides, was not without that successe, which hath since caused much thanks∣giving to God by many of those that they were reached unto, among the rest, who being more wise and humble, & having more godly knowledge and experience then some other, per∣ceived some failings & inconveniences which they were not aware of, nor could so well be discovered without some help. If others see not the generall use of these insuing directi∣ons, it will be their advantage not much to trouble their thoughts about it; leaving those, whom it concernes, to en∣ioy their benefit, and to give testimony to what they heard, who can and will rightly interpret it, and these few lines by sudden accident (to supply a defect, and prevent an inconve∣nience) hastily written to be prefixed, Dec. 17. Anno Domini 1631.
