



RIght Worshipfull, it is a thing most euident, that the present Religion of the Church of Rome is an En∣emie to the grace of God, two waies. First, because it exalts the libertie of mans will, and extenu∣ates the grace of God: and this it doth in fiue respects. For first of all it teacheth, that naturall freewill of man hath in it not one∣ly a Passiue or potentiall, but also an Actiue power, or imperfect strength in duties of godlines: and so much the lesse power is as∣cribed to the grace of God. This doctrine of theirs is flat against reason. For, the will of man in it selfe is a naturall thing: and therefore it is neither fit nor able to effect
 any supernaturall action (as all actions of godlines are) vnles it be first of all (as they say) eleuated aboue his condition by the im∣pression of a supernaturall habit. And the Scripture is vtterly against this doctrine, when it saith, Ye were once darknesse, Eph. 5.8. We are not sufficient of our selues to thinke any thing of our selues, 2. Cor. 3.5. The naturall man [that is, he that wants the spirit of God] cannot per∣ceiue the things of God, 1. Cor. 2.14. Ye were dead in sinnes and trespasses, Eph. 2.1. Without Christ and without God in the world, v. 12. Againe, Scrip∣ture saith further, that the heart of man is slow, Luc. 24.25. and vaine, Psal. 5.10. and hard that cannot repent, Rom. 2.5. and stonie, Ezech. 36.26. and that the Iewes were obstinate, their necke as an iron sinew, and their brow brasse, Isai. 48.4. and that it is God who giues eyes to see, and an heart to vnderstand, Deut. 29.4. By these testimonies it is manifest that grace doth not onely helpe and assist our weake nature, but altogither change the peruerse qualitie thereof, and bring it
 from darknes to light, Act. 28.18. and from death to life, Eph. 2.1. Which grace whoso∣euer doth not so farre forth acknowledge, neuer yet knew what the Gospel meant: neither did he euer consider the words of our Sauiour Christ, No man comes vnto me, vnlesse the father draw him, Ioh. 6.44. Prosper the scholler of S. Augustine hath a notable saying, which I maruell that the Papists of our time doe not consider. We haue (saith he) free will by nature,Prosp. contra Collat. c. 18. in fine. but for qualitie and condition it must be changed by our Lord Iesus Christ.
Secondly,Molina de grat. & lib. arb. q. 14. art. 13. disp. 12. Gratiae auxilia, quòd efficacia sint, habent de∣pendenter ab ar∣bitrij libertate. some of the Romish religion auouch, that the efficacie of Gods preuen∣ting grace depends vpon the cooperation of mans will, & they affirme that the Councel of Trent is of this mind: but thē to the que∣stion of Paul, 1. Cor. 4.7. Who hath sepa∣rated thee? the answer may be made, I my selfe haue done it by mine owne will. And that shall be false which Paul teacheth, that beside posse-velle, the power of wel-willing, ipsum velle, that is, the act of wel-willing is of God. Phil. 2.13. Others there∣fore place the efficacie of grace in the con∣gruitie
 of fitte obiects and perswasions: as though it were sufficient to stirre vp the heart and to incline the will in spirituall matters: and our weakenesse might be cu∣red with so easie a remedie: but God is fur∣ther said to soften the heart. Ezec. 36.26. to turne the heart, Luc. 1.17. to open the heart, Act. 16.14. And because our hearts are ouer hard, he wounds them, Cant. 4.9. he circumciseth them, Deut. 30.6. nay he bruiseth them, Ezech. 6.9. And when nothing will doe good, at length God is said to take away the stonie heart, Ezech. 11.19. to quicken them that are contrite, Isa. 57.15. Eph. 2.5. to giue a new heart, Eph. 4.23. Ezech. 36.26. nay to create a new heart, Eph. 2.10. and 4.28.
Thirdly, they giue vnto God in all con∣tingent actions, a Depending will, whereby God wills and determines nothing but ac∣cording as he foresees that the will of man will determine it selfe. And thus to main∣taine the supposed Libertie of the will, that is, the indifferencie & indeterminatiō ther∣of, they depriue God of his honour and so∣ueraignitie.
 For by this meanes not God but will it selfe, is the first Moouer and begin∣ner of her own actions.Shumel. sup. 1. Thom q. 23. art. 3. disp. 8. And there are euen of the Papists themselues that condemne this doctrine as a conceit.
Fourthly they teach that the grace which makes vs acceptable and gratefull to God, stands in the inward gifts of the mind, specially in the gift of charitie. But this is most false which they teach: for cha∣ritie is the fulfilling of the lawe: and Paul saith, we are not vnder the lawe but vnder grace. Rom. 6.14. And againe, as many as are iustified by the law, are fallen from grace. Gal. 5.4. Now the grace that doeth indeed make vs grateful to God, is the free fauour and mercie of God pardoning our sinnes in Christ, and accepting vs to eternal life, and not any qualitie in vs, as Paul sig∣nifies when he saith, we are saued not ac∣cording to our workes, but according to his purpose and grace, which is giuen to vs in Christ before all times. 2. Tim. 1.9.
Lastly they teach that the renewed will of man, by the general direction and coope∣ration of God, can performe the duties of
 godlinesse, without any speciall helpe from God by new grace. But the scripture speaks otherwise. By the grace of God I am that I am. I haue laboured, yet not I but the grace of God which is with me. 1. Cor. 10. No man can say that Iesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost. 1. Cor. 12.3. Without me ye can doe nothing. Ioh. 15.5. After ye beleeued, ye were sealed with the spirit. Eph. 1.17. He which hath begun this good worke in you will fi∣nish it vntill the daie of Christ. Phil. 1.6. That ye may abound with hope by the vertue of the spirit. Rom. 15. It is God that workes in you the will and the deede. Phil. 2.13. Though the righteous fall he shall not be cast off: for the Lord puts vnder his hand. Psa. 37.24. Incline my heart to thy testimonies: turne away mine eies from beholding of vanitie: & quicken me in thy way. Psal. 119.37. Teach me to doe thy will: because thou art my God: let thy good spirit lead me in the land of righteousnesse. Psal. 143.10. Create in me a newe heart, renewe a right spirit in me—: and stablish me
 by thy free spirit. Psal. 51.12. Draw me and I will runne after thee. By these and many other places it is euident, that God after he hath indued vs with his spirit, doth not leaue vs to be guided by our selues (for then we should fall againe to our former miserie) but he directs vs, he lifts vs vp, he leads vs, he confirmes and sustaines vs by the same grace, & by the same spirit dwel∣ling in vs, that walking in the way of his commandements, we may at length attaine to euerlasting happinesse.
The second way whereby the Papist shews himselfe to be an enemie of the grace of God, is that he ioynes the merit of works as a Con-cause with the grace of God in that which they call the second iustificati∣on, and in the procurement of eternall life: whereas on the contrarie Paul in the Arti∣cle of iustification opposeth grace to works, yea to such workes as are the gifts & fruits of the spirit. For Abraham did good works not by naturall free will, but by faith. Heb. 11.8. And Paul opposeth iustifying grace to the workes of Abraham, where he saith, to him that worketh the wages is not im∣puted
 according to grace. And Tit. 3.5. Not of the workes of righteousnesse which we haue done, but of his mercy he saued vs. Rom. 11.6. If by grace, then not of workes: or els were grace no more grace. Augustine said well, that grace is no waie grace, vnlesse it be freely giuen euery way.
Thus then all things considered, it is the best to ascribe all we haue or can doe that is good, wholly to the grace of God. Excel∣lent is the speech of Augustine: Only hold this as a sure point of godlinesse,De lib arbit. l. 2. c. 20. that no good thing can come either to the sense or mind, or be any way conceiued which is not of God. And Bernard: The Church shewes her selfe to be full of grace,in Cant. serm. 67. when shee giues all shee hath to grace, namely by ascribing to it both the first and the last place. Otherwise, how is shee full of grace, if shee haue a∣ny thing which is not of grace. Againe, I tremble to thinke any thing mine owne,Horreo quic∣quid de meo est, vt sim me∣us. that I may be mine owne. This doctrine is the safest and the surest in re∣spect of peace of conscience, and the saluati∣on
 of our soules. So much the Papists them∣selues (betraying their owne cause) say and confesse. Bellarmine the Iesuite saith,Bellar. de Iu∣stificat. l. 5. c. 7. By reason of the vncertentie of our owne iustice, & for feare of falling into vaine glorie, itTulissimum. is the safest to put our whole confidence in the alone mercie and goodnesse of God.Cassand c. de lib. arbit. Cassander in his book called the Consultation of articles in que∣stion, to Maximilian the Emperour, cites a saying of Bonauenture, which is on this manner: It is the dutie of godly mindes to ascribe nothing to themselues, but all to the grace of God. Hence it followes, that how much soeuer a man giues vn∣to grace, though in giuing many things to the grace of God, he take something from the power of nature and free will, he departes not from godlinesse: but when any thing is taken from the grace of God and giuen to nature which per∣taines to grace, there may be some dan∣ger. Thus then to hold and maintaine iu∣stification by faith without workes, and to ascribe the whole worke of our conuersion to God, without making any diuision be∣tweene
 grace and nature, is the safest.
These things I shewe more at large in this treatise following, which I now present to your Worshippe as a small testimonie of mine humble dutie and loue: desiring you to accept the mind of the giuer, and to peruse it at your leisure. And thus I commend your Worsh. to the protection and grace of God in Christ.

