



ALTHOVGH DEMADES (right vvor¦shipfull) sayde that the lavvs of DRACO vvere for their extreme cruel∣tie vvritten vvith bloud, bycause to all offences vvere thei neuer so smal an equall punnyshment vvas appointed, yet some there vvere vvhich recey∣ued a vvorthie punnishment, amongst vvhich that lavve by him made, concerning Idlenesse, is to be nūbred, vvhich he punished by death, & that vvor∣thilie if he dyd respecte the sequele, and the rotten braunches vvhich did spring of that vice, supposing thereby to preuent many myschieues and enormi∣ties grovving to the cōmon vveale. What ruine and decay it bringeth to the Weale publike tyme doeth not novve require in generall to declare, but thys particular vice Lavvlesse lust, is to be expressed, the vvhich aryseth and taketh hys begynning of Idle∣nesse. For, vvhen the mind is not occupied, then do yll affections possesse it, and the lothsome iuste of Carnall concupiscence entreth therein. THEO∣PHRASTVS on a time being demaunded vvhat
this luxurious Loue vvas, he aunsvvered, that it vvas the affectiō of an ydle minde. OVID in like ma∣ner in his fyrst Elegie or lamentable Song sayeth.
Et in vacuo pectore regnet Amor.
There is nothyng vvhich causeth a mā more to de∣generate from his kind than this, for it doth make him rather to resemble Beastes, than creatures en∣dovved vvith reason. Wherfore the Poets not vvith∣out a cause haue painted out & described Loue like a Shephierde, signifying therby, that vvhoso follo∣vveth sensualitie, and inordinate desire of the flesh, are more like beasts than men, for vvhen reason ru∣leth not affection and appetite, men become like to vnreasonable creatures redy and apt for al vvicked∣nesse, embracing vice as a vertue, and folovving en∣mitie, strife, fighting, and many other inconueni∣ences, vvhich proceede thereof, as things good and auaileable. Who seeth not foolish Cupid painted blinde, bicause they vvhich are vvounded vvith hys siery Arrovves liue vvithout feeling of Death, they haue nothing in reuerence, neyther their Fathers, nor friendes, they feare nothing, neither the slaun∣derous reproch of Infamie, nor the doubtful daun∣gers of life, but like blinde mē runne headlong in∣to destruction. The famous Comicall Poet ME∣NANDER considering the aforesayde things, and that by no daunger, aduise and counsell, luxurious Louers vvoulde be feared from their purpose, doth iustly lament and bevvaile it in this Verse:

 Which is thus in English.
Alas, Alas, Loue is to men a great myschiefe. OVID in his Bookes entituled DEREMEDIO AMORIS, shevveth a meane hovve to auoid this miscrable affection, in tvvo Verses, vvhich are these in effect.
If thou flée Idlenesse Cupid hath no might,
His bowe lieth broken, his fire hath no light. CRATES the Thebane sayd that there vvere tvvo thinges princypally vvhych subdued this affection, time and hunger. Diuers vnlavvefull vvayes there are vvhereby this is purchased, vvhych rather pro∣uoke to madnesse than Loue, as charmed drink cal∣led in Latine PHILTRA, AMATORIA PO∣CVLA and HIPPOMANES, al vvhich do cause furie and madnesse, not Loue, according to the o∣piniō of many notable Writers, as of OVID, IV∣VENAL, VIRGIL, PROPERTIVS. It is left in vvriting, that LVCRETIVS the Poet vvith a charmed drinke (as some suppose) giuen him by his Wife, vvho loued him too tenderly, became so mad, that at length he murdred himselfe vvith hys ovvne hands. ARISTOTLE vvriteth Li. 2. mag. moral. that a certayne Woman gaue a man a char∣med drinke, vvherevpon sodaynely he fell dovvne dead. Many other lyke examples may be found in Authours, vvhich vvould terrifie such as enterprize
those vnlavvfull meanes, frō their purpose. In stead of this vvicked meanes vve ought to vse gentle and milde manners, louing them vvhich loue vs. Wher¦fore very vvell doth OVID vvarne vs in hys secōd Booke DE ARTE AMANDI, speaking of those charmed drinkes, vvhose vvordes are these:
Sit procul omne nefas, vt ameris ama∣bilis esto.
Al wicked artes to do not remember.
But loue for loue againe do yu render. That Historie of PLVTARCH in hys preceptes of Mariage, Capit. 24. is not vnfitte for this place. PHILIP king of Macedon, loued a poore Thes∣salian maid, vvherof vvhen OLYMPIAS his vvife vvas aduertized, she toke it very grieuously, especi∣ally bicause the maiden vvas reported to haue got∣ten the loue of PHILIP vvith charmed and ma∣gical drinkes. Wherfore she commaūded the may∣den to be brought before hir, to the end to impri∣son hir, or to bannish hir into farre countreyes. But vvhen she savv the maydē to be vvel fauored, beau∣tifull, vvittie, and in all poynts amiable and louely, Let false accusation goe (sayde OLYMPIAS) for thou hast in thy self the strength of poyson: neither vvas she aftervvarde displeased vvith the mayden, or vvith hir husband the King. Gentle manners is the true charmed drynk vvherby the vvoman ought to vvin the husband, and vvhich all should put in vre. The fruites vvhich spring of hote Loue and fleshly lust are declared in those Tales follovving, murder grevv of it, and the reuengemente of murder com∣mitted,
enfued thesame. The fatherly affection that SCEDASVS and MELISSVS dyd beare vnto their children, is of all parents to be follovved. The filthie fact of ARCHIAS is vtterly to be abhor∣red, & altogether to be rooted out of mens mindes, much lesse to be commytted, for it is a thing more than beastly, and against nature as PLATO saith. We oughte to take ALGIPPVS as a true paterne and example to imitate, and not (as EPICTETVS sayd) desist from vvell doing, vvhatsoeuer men say or do, but alvvayes perseuer in goodnesse, seeking after such things as are auaileable for the common Weale, in so doing vve liuing shall not onely haue great honor, vvhich (as TVLLIE sayd) is a diuine goodnesse, but dying shall merite and obtayne immortall fame, vvhych vvas the marke that anti∣quity shotte at, and did couet after death to haue an euerlasting fame for vertuous deedes done, and no∣ble enterprises atchieued, as CICERO, IVLIVS CAESAR, and POMPEIVS did, and not by any vnlavvfull and vvicked meanes, as foolish HERO∣STRATVS dyd, vvho to haue a perpetuall name, burned the famous Tēple of DIANA at Ephesus.
These fevve lines (right vvorshipful) I haue tran∣slated at leysure times, vvhich although they seeme scarce vvorthie the translation, yet I tooke them in hand, supposing that to be true vvhich the vvelskil∣led PLINIE sayd: There is no Booke so naught but in some part is profitable. I haue ioyned here∣vnto another small Hystorie and the sayings of the Philosophers of Greece, desiring you to accept and take them vvith such gratefulnesse of mind as AR∣TAXERXES
receyued a handful of vvater giuen him by a poore man, vvhich vvas the best gift he had to present him vvithal.. Thus I leaue to trouble your vvorship, beseching almighty God to preserue you and all yours in health and prosperitie.

blazon or coat of arms
GARDES LA FOY AV DIEV ET AV ROY

