



WHatsoeuer bee the opinions of others (Right Reuerend and most worthie Prelate, my sin∣gular good Lord) concerning the Adiaphoristicall Contro∣uersie, which so long time hath troubled the state of our Church: I am not any whit dismaied, but haue very great hope thereof, in so much that I am not affraide, to exspect and promise vnto my selfe a very happie and desired issue of all these domesticall iarres. Specially,
The ROCKS whereat the refractarie Mi∣nisters im∣pinge. because I seeme to descrie and discouer those dangerous ROCKES, whereat many both heretofore haue been, and at
this present (alas!) are not a little dashed: which being detected and propalated vnto the whole world, the Godly may prouide for themselues, and safely saile in the maine Ocean of the Gospels work, without danger or feare of shipwrack. Now these ROCKS are specially three; whereof
The FIRST is,
I. ROCKE. That Christ is a Law-giuer. that some doe suppose, that Christ Iesus, as a LAVV-GIVER, hath instituted a certaine POLICIE in his Gospel, and decreed Ecclesiasticall Lawes, which euery man ought necessarily to ob∣serue and obey: vpon which sandie foundation the whole frame and building of the Presbyterian Dis∣cipline is founded. But whence this new and inso∣lent false-Position is drawne, no man can be igno∣rant, that hath but superficially read ouer the De∣crees and Canons of the Councell of Trent. For thus those purple Fathers haue superciliously defi∣ned, or thundred rather; If any man shall say, that Christ Iesus was giuen of God vnto men, as a Redeemer, whom they ought to put confidence in, and not also as a Law-giuer, whom they ought to obey, let him bee accursed. Concil. Trid. Sess. 6. Can. 21.
But (ô the immortall GOD!)
The Detectiō of the 1. Rock. what manner of Christ, doe both the Tridentine Fathers, and the re∣fractarie Ministers propose vnto vs! Of CHRIST our Redeemer, they make also a LAVV-GIVER; yea they transforme IESVS the Sauiour of the world, in∣to MOSES the Law-giuer. This they doe, after the example of Mahomet, who fained that GOD sent CHRIST into the world, to propound a perfecter Law, than Moses did. Yet Christ himselfe (out of the Prophecie of Esay, cap. 61. vers. 1.) teacheth vs, that he is
sent, to Preach the GOSPEL vnto the poore (Luc. 4.18.) Now to
Evangelizare. Preach the Gospell, that is, to bring glad tidings, is not, to propound new Lawes. And albeit (in Matth. cap. 5.) Christ interpreted and expounded certaine Precepts, yet thereby he did not make, or deliuer vs any new Law; but onely vindicated the law of Moses from the corrupt and false glosses of the Pharisies, and restored it to the former perfection. That we ought to obey Christ according vnto the Precepts of the Decalogue, which Moses deliuered, no sober man euer denied: but this is it, that wee constantly disavow and gain-say, to wit, that CHRIST is a LAVV GIVER; or that the Gospell, which is the glad tidings concerning spirituall and eternall righ∣teousnes, hath ordained any new corporeal Policie. Yea rather, it commandeth vs, to obey the present Magistrates and Lawes, if they doe not repugne the lawes of nature; and willeth that wee endeuour to defend, maintaine and beautifie the present Poli∣cies. Excellent well hath M. CALVIN written here∣of: Because in the externall Discipline and Ceremonies of the Church (saith he) God would not particularly pre∣scribe what we ought to follow (because hee did foresee that these depended of the condition of the times,
Note well. neither did he iudge that one forme could be conuenient for all ages) therefore herein we ought to haue recourse vnto those ge∣nerall Rules, which hee hath giuen (in his Word) that what things soeuer, the necessitie of the Church shall re∣quire to be commanded for order and decencie, they may be examined by them. Therefore hath hee deliuered no∣thing expressely concerning these things, because they are not necessarie vnto saluation: and ought to bee diuersly
fitted for the edification of the Church, according vnto the different manners of euery Nation and Age, as the profit of the Church shall require, aswell for the changing and abrogating the vsuall Discipline and Ceremonies, as also for instituting of new, as shall be conuenient. Caluin. In∣stitut. lib. 4. cap. 10. §. 30.
The SECOND Rocke whereat the Ministers im∣pinge,
II. ROCKE. That whatsoe∣uer is perfor∣med in the VVorship of God, is VVor∣ship. is that some haue inconsideratly defined, that nothing at all may be performed in the duties of Re∣ligion, or in the exercise of diuine Worship, which is not Worship it selfe, or at leastwise some part of the Worship of God. Hereupon they exsecrate the Consignation of the Crosse in the Sacrament of Baptisme, and the bowing of the Knee in the Lords Supper, as new Worships.
But who would haue thought,
The Detectiō of the 2. Rock. that any man, by any importunitie of opinion, could be brought in∣to this sentence, to define thus? I see the Prophets and Apostles oftentimes calling vpon GOD and fa∣sting. I see CHRIST himselfe kneeling and praying (Luc. 22.41.) What? Doe the Ministers thinke, that fasting and kneeling, are the Worship of God? Vn∣possible. Yet these things are performed in the very exercise of Diuine Worship.
The THIRD Rocke,
III. ROCKE. That the Church can or∣daine no signi∣ficant Ceremo∣nies. is that some haue determi∣ned, that the Church hath no power to ordaine any significant Ceremonies. Hence also they doe con∣demne the Consignation of the Crosse in Bap∣tisme, and the vse of the Surplice in the celebration of Diuine Seruice.
But who doth not see,
The Detectiō of the 3. Rock. that this Paradoxe is de∣duced and deriued from the former? Because the
Ministers thinke, that all such actions as serue for or∣der, decencie or edification in the Worship of God, are very Worship it selfe, therefore they wil haue no Ceremonies at all to be ordained. But all the holy Scripture, and the whole World reclaime the iudge∣ment of the Ministers herein, as we haue abundant∣ly and at large prooued in the Booke it selfe. Wee must diligently and warily auoide such monsters of opinion, and such strange kind of speaking, as mani∣festly and directly contradict the expresse sentence of holy Scripture: for this is  to teach otherwise, as Paul speaketh.
These be those pernicious ROCKES, which now I haue plainly discouered and detected, to fore∣warne the weaker and vnlearneder sort, that they be not moued with Syrenian sweete songs, to fall into the gulfe of eternall ruine. And verily I doe not doubt, but the Ministers for the most part al of them (such is the grace, wisedome, learning & conscience GOD hath endued them with) will easily vnderstand and embrace this counsell: Onely I greatly feare the
. curiositie and businesse of the Lay sort (whom for
. The intolle∣rable curiositie of the Laytie. difference sake wee doe so nominate) in this matter. For these are wont, euen with Tribuniti∣call clamours to reprehend and taxe
Vetera insti∣tuta mediocria. ancient Con∣stitutions moderatlie ordained, to decree new Lawes, to prescribe Policies, and what not? These vrge the Ministers with continuall importunitie, and adde oyle vnto the fire. But let them know, that the Discipline and Gouernement of the Church, is committed to other artificers, not vnto them; and
let them remember that vsuall precept, that euery man adorne his owne boate.
Euen as,
Aristophanes his Cleon. in Aristophanes, Cleon is said, to haue one foote in the Court, and another in the Tents: So a∣mongst vs, there are many restlesse Cleons, who haue one foote in the Court, and another in the Church; and in such manner build their Citie and frame their Policie, as the Ape did, in the Fable of Hermo∣genes; which I will briefly recite, that all men may behold the picture, or image of their foolishnes who frame new Policies.
There was an old APE,
Hermogenes his Ape. that had long time liued amongst men; which at length, being negligently look't vnto, made an escape, and returned vnto the other Apes, into the woods and plaines. There she declareth, that the life of men was very happie and blessed, who were guarded, with houses against raine, cold and heate, and with walles against wilde beasts and enemies: she sheweth also the corne sto∣red vp in their granaries, their assemblies and mee∣tings, their theaters, their sights, their playes. She exhorteth the rest of the Apes, to imitate this wise∣dome of Men, to build houses, and to compasse them in with walles, to keepe away other wilde beasts. Whole troupes of Apes are met together, to heare this new Counsell. All of them applaud such a specious and profitable sentence: and presently the Senate and People of the Apes did publish a Decree, that foorthwith they should begin to build a Citie. But the yonger Apes being sent to prouide and fetch in timber and stones, when they wanted
instruments, and had no meanes, to hew downe trees, to polish and fit the stones; at last they learne by experience, and acknowledge, that foolishly they attempted a thing impossible, and abhorrent from their nature.
Such altogether, are all those Builders of new Ci∣ties, who dreame of new Policies, and a new Disci∣pline. And albeit it bee credible, that in all Ages there were some such Apes: yet our Age (alas for pitie!) hath seene very many, who haue been the cause, of great perturbation in the Common∣wealth, and of horrible ataxie in the Church, and now for a great time haue troubled all England. But let the wiser and godlier sort remember the pre∣cept deliuered in this Fable, and let them not rashly and inconsideratly contend against Politique con∣stitutions, which doe not containe manifest impie∣tie or turpitude. I would haue spoken more to this purpose (Right Reuerend and most worthie Bi∣shop) but that I did know your Lordships Wise∣dome and Learning to be such, that you doe farre better vnderstand these things, than they can bee spoken by me.
To conclude therefore, I haue presumed to pub∣lish these Positions of THINGS INDIFFERENT, which according to my weak abilitie, I haue described in a most briefe and plaine method, as it were in a table, vnder the defence and protection of your Lord∣ships name: which meane signification of a grate∣full minde, most prone and readie to your Lord∣ships seruice, I humbly beseech your Honour that
you would vouchsafe to accept in good part. The Lord Iesus Christ preserue your Lordship, and still more and more heape vpon you his blessings spi∣rituall and temporall, for the good both of Church and Commonwealth.
From you Ho. Palace at LONDON, this 7. of Februarie, 1606.

