



SIR,
BEing ouerruled by some friends to print this Ser∣mon, not framed, nor in∣tended to any such pur∣pose: my choyce was ea∣sier to whom I should dedicate it. The world seeth how much I am bound to you, for the late reall kindnesse confer∣red on me. For which, to shew my selfe thankfull by all honest meanes, the lesse you expect it, the more I hold it due. Our Sauiour, who most auoided popular applause, See thou say nothing to any man,Mark. 1.14. Luk. 17.16.
 misliked not the Samaritane,Mat. 21.12. that turned backe to giue thanks. And much it were to be wished, that in these daies thankes would serue. But since buyers and sellers haue broken into the Temple;Mat. 26.15. Judas'es what will yee giue me,Act. 8.18. and Simon Magus' offering, make most bargains for Bene∣fices. Whereby God is dishonoured, worthy men dis-hartned, hirelings pre∣ferred, good lawes deluded, holy things prophaned, the Church stained, the people starued. The more remarkable therefore hath beene your free dealing with mee, & your religious kinsman's M. Periam's, with M. Orford of our Col∣ledge. If such Patrons might be patterns for disposing the Lords portion, many in the country might bee better taught, and in our Vniuersities sooner imploy∣ed. My selfe with this fauour of yours am the more affected, because it comes from my natiue countrey, to which my best seruices were otherwise deuoted. Besides, it stands with a kinde of conue∣niencie (in my desires at least) that Exce∣ter
 Colledge especially, should bee pa∣tronized from Exceter; from which it first had it's name and Founder, and for which it hath bred (as by Gods grace it shall continue to doe) so many men of worth. Concerning this ensuing dis∣course, I haue little to say. It must speak for it's selfe, now it appeares abroad. Iu∣dicious is that position of Saint Au∣gustine, Mens liues are as their loues:Haud quicquam facit bonos vel malos mores, ni∣si boni vel mali amores, epist. 52. Amor est vis a∣nimae, naturali quodam pondere ferens eam in lo∣cum vel finem suum, Lib. de nat. & dignit. diuini amoris cap. 1. where∣of Bernard giues the reason, because loue is to the soule, as waight to the body, it caries it to his right place, if it bee rightly placed. As long as the Larke so∣reth vpward, shee sings without danger of the Net: but stooping to gaze on the Fowlers deceitfull glasse, she is quic∣ly insnared. We are all too farre in∣amour'd with the glympses of things below; where the Diuels ginnes are al∣waies in a readinesse. Our ancestors first loue was more wisely fixed. My song therefore hath beene, Returne, returne,Cant. 6.13. O Shulamite, returne, returne! Which howsoeuer may sound harsh in some
 mens censures; yet the better sort (I trust) will conceiue my meaning to be good.Homil. 7. in ep. ad Philip. He that runnes in a race, (saith S. Chrysostome) is not so much to eye the spec∣tators, as the marke. And, Readers, it can∣not meet with more vnderstanding, then it had hearers. Next to Gods glory, and the Churches good, if you accept it kindly, I attaine my scope: To whom it is due first fruits, from him that assuredly resteth
 From Exceter Colledge in Oxford, August 5.
