



MOst gracious Soveraigne, meeting with this compendious Re∣monstrance of the Prelates late dainge∣rous encrochments, both upon your owne Prerogative Royall, and your Sub∣jects Liberties, compiled by a late lear∣ned Gentleman, out of a zeale to your Majesties ser∣vice, and your peoples good: I could doe no lesse in point of allegiance to your Highnes, and true affec∣tion to my Countries weale, then prostrate it in all humility, at your Royall feete, imploring your Prin∣cely acceptation of it. The rather because it was o∣riginally destinated to your Majesty by the author; whom I heard oft complaining, that it was the infe∣licity, sometimes, of the best Princes (by reason of the unfaithfulnesse and misrepresentations of those
 State-agents whom they most imployed, and least suspected,) to be utterly ignorant of the true estate both of their owne and the Republikes affaires be∣leiving all things to be uprightly and justly managed, when it is nothing lesse: relating with much regreet that memorable speech of Aurelian the Emperor re∣gistred by Flavius Vospiscus in the History of his life,) There is nothing more difficult, then to raigne well. For 4. or 5. cheife Counsellers of State (ayming at nothing but their owne private ends) assemble and take Counsell to∣gether how to deceave the Emperor, informing him, that such and such proects are to be allowed, and put in execu∣tion; The Emperor imprisoned as it were at home, utterly ignorant of the truth of things, is constrained to know that onely which they informe him of, and to doe nothing else but what they direct him. Whereupon hee makes those Iudges whom hee ought not, and remooves those from the Republike whom hee should retaine. In a word; as Dio∣clesian himselfe said; a good, cautious, yea the best Em∣peror is sold and abused by his most indeared instruments; whiles hee seeth all things onely with their eyes, heares nothing but with their eares, and executes all things with their hands. The consideration where∣of, as it instigated the Author originally to compile, so it hath animated mee to enlarge this Breviate (with the addition onely of some late occurrences;) and to present this third Impression of it to your Highnes veiw, (though perchance with some hazard to my person and estate, by reason of the Prelates great swaying power and implacable malice:) wherein as in a Christall glasse, your Majesty may eft soone
 discerne the insufferable usurpations of your ungrate∣full Bishops, upon your owne Royall Prehemi∣nences and your Subjects Liberties: (contrary to all Law and justice,) in their true naked coulors, uncased of all such false varnishes, and specious glosses which themselves have cast upon them, to cover their de∣formity, and delude your Majesties senses, who sus∣pect no such blacke workes of darknes under their pure white Rochets.
Plutarchi Convivium.Cleobolus was wont to say, that a Prince was happy if hee trusted to none of his flattering Minions; and I may adde, that Christian Kings are ever happiest, when they lend not their eares overmuch to the noxious enchauntments of ambitious Prelates; Who to advaunce their owne power, accomplish their owne aspi∣ring designes, feare not toSee Socrates Scholast. Ec∣cles Hist. l. 4. c. 14. to. 25. l. 2. c. 38. and Master Tyn∣dalles Pra∣ctise of Po∣pish Pre∣lates Doctor Barnes hu Supplication to King Hen∣ry the 8. The 5. and 6. part of the Homily a∣gainst Re∣bellion. arme Princes against their Subjects, Subjects against their Princes, one Christian King and Kingdome against another, to the imbruing of their hands without cause in one anothers blood: as Abbas Vsper∣gensis, Nauclerus, Aventine, Mathew Paris in their histories, Theodoricus a Niem, Zabarell and Iohannes Ma∣rius De Schismate, Benno Cardinalis, and Balaeus in the lives of Hildebrand and Boniface; Master Fox in hisPage 168 269. 174. 175. 178. 181. 184. to 134. 248. 249. 303. 320. 321. 350. 409. 410. 479. 533. 1035. 1036. 1132. 1897. 1899. Acts and Monuments; and (to omit all other) Doctor Iohn White, in his Defence of the way, chap. 6. have plentifully manifested.
Plutarch. Lacon. Apo∣thegmata.Theopompus being demaunded, by what meanes a King might safely keepe his Kingdome? Replied; if hee give his freindes free liberty of speech, (to acquaint him with things amisse:) and avenge the injuries done to his Sub∣jects,
 as much as may be; the later of which hee can ne∣ver execute without the former.
But alas, this is thePlutarch. De Adula∣tione. lib. usuall misery of Princes (and people too,) that they have many flattering Prelates and Courtiers to misinforme and sooth them; few faithfull Counsellers impartially to acquaint them of things that are amisse. It is storied of KingPlutarch. Apothegm. Antiochus, that being hunting on a time, in the pursuite of his game, hee strayed away from all his freinds and Courtiers; where∣upon hee was enforced to enter in a cottage of poore men, unknowne: As hee sate at supper with them, hee beganne to discourse with them, concerning the King and his governement; whereupon the poore men replied; that Antiochus was of himselfe a very good King, but hee com∣mitted the managing of most of his Kingly affaires to his freindes and Courtiers, who were ill men; himselfe meane while, out of his overmuch love of hunting, negligently omitting necessary things; by reason whereof his people were oppressed, and things ill governed. The King for the pre∣sent held his peace, but the next morning when his guard came to the cottage, and brought him his purple robes and diadem, by which hee was knowne to be the King: hee there∣upon spake thus to his Courtiers; from the day I first received my robes and crowne, I never heard true speeches of my selfe till yesterday.
What this King spake concerning himselfe, I feare your Majesty may in a greater measure averre, concerning your Prelates audacious disloyall en∣crochments upon your selfe, and your Subjects: tha you never received any true and full relation o them, since you were a King, till now they were re∣presented
 to you in this Epitome, and that they and their Proceedings are farre other then what you have hitherto beene informed, and ever tooke them to be. I doubt not but the Prelates with their favorites, have oft inculcated this idle false Paradoxe to your Ma∣jesty:Yet King Henry the third when hee heard of the death of Hubert Archbishop of Canter∣bury, reoy∣ced at it, say∣ing, Now at last I am King of England: as if hee had beene no King (as in truth hee was not) whiles hee lived and bare sway: Antiquita∣tes Eccles. Brit. p 144 And King Henry the 8. thought himselfe but halfe a King as long as the Clergy bare sway, & them but halfe his Sub∣jects: Fox Acts and Monuments: p. 961. 963. Yea Master William Tyndall in his Obedience of a Christian man p. 114. saith: That Kings are but shadowes, vaine names, and idle Tit∣les, having nothing to doe in the world; but what the Pope and Bishops please; which hee there puts at large and in Practise of Popish Prelates. NO BISHOP NO KING: as if Prelates were the onely pillars, patriotes, suppor∣ters of Princes, Monarchies, and Prerogatives, whose Soveraignity would fall quite to grounde, did not the Bishops rocheted shoulders (like so many Atlasses,) hold up their tottering thrones. Yet the severall Sta∣tutes of Provision and Praemunire, in sundry of your Royall Progenitors raignes; the Statutes of 25. H. 8. c. 14. 19. 20. 21. 26. H. 8. c. 1. 28. H. 8. c. 10. 37. H. c. 17. 1. & 2. Phil. and Mary, c. 8. 1. Eliz. c. 1. 5. Eliz. c. 1. 23. Eliz. c. 1. 7. Jacobi. c. 4. 5. the 5. and 6. Homilies against disobedience and willfull Rebellion. The second part of the Homily for Whitsunday, p. 214. 215. 216. Mathew Paris, Mathew Westminster, Hoveden, Malmesbury Nubrigensis, Walsingham, in their seve∣rall histories of England, and others out of them; Master William Tyndall in his Practise of the Popish Pre∣lates, Doctor Barnes in his Supplication to King Henry the eight p. 988. &c. William Wraghton in his hunting of the Romish Fox; Master Fish in his Supplication of Beggers, Henry Stalbridge in his Exhortatory Epistle, Master John Fox in his Acts and Monuments, Master Haddon, Contra
 Osorium, f. 243. to 253. 292. 293. Thomas Gylson his Proditiones Praelatorum à conqueslu. Antiquitates Ec∣clesiae Britanicae in the lives ofBalaeus Scriptor. Brit. Cent. 9. c. 54. Stephen Langthon, Becket. Anselme, Boniface, Arundell, Peckam, Winchesly, and other Archbishops of Canterbury, to omit,Defence of the Apology part. 5. c. 6. divis. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. So c. 9. Divis. 1. Bishop Jewell, BishopDiscourse of the true difference betweene Christian Subjection and Anti∣christian Rebellion. Bilson, DoctorDefence of the way. c. 6. Iohn White, SirIrish Re∣ports. The case of Prae∣munire. Iohn Davis, Plessy Morney his History of the Papacy, with forraigne historians of all sorts, together with the writes of Ad lura Regia, and the severall Prohibi∣tions in ourRegister pars 2 f. 36. to 66. La whookes, testify: that not onely the Bis∣hops of Rome, and forraigne Prelates, but even our owne English Bishops too,Fox Acts & Monuments p. 961. (the Popes sworne Vassals, Legates, creatures heretofore) have beene ever the greatest, violen∣test, and most professed, open, common enemies, to the ab∣solute Monarchie and Prerogative of Christian Empe∣rors, Kings, Princes, wresting the spirituall, if not the tem∣porall, sword and scepter out of their hands, arrogating ei∣ther one, or both of them to themselves alone, as their pe∣culiar right; ingrossing not onely all spirituall Iurisdiction and Ecclesiasticall power into their owne hands, but tem∣porall too: and thatTyndalls Practise of Popish Pre∣lates. Fox Acts & Monuments 1381. An∣tiqu. Eccles. Brit. p. 30. & 139. 140. 141. principally by creeping into the se∣cret Counsell of Princes, and the greatest swaying offices of State, thereby subjecting the temporall Iurisdiction to the commaund and pleasure of the spirituall, that so they might as much as in them lay abolish, obscure and delete the power given by God to the Princes of the earth, gather and get to themselves the sole governement and rule of the world, (as the Statute of 37. H. 8. c. 17. resolves) and play Rex in every place without controll. Neither is this true only of Popes, or our owne Popish Prelates
 in former ages, of which there can beFox Acts & Monu∣ments, p. 326. 321. 409. 410. 350. 1035 1036. 1897. 1899. 1980. 533. 303. Gualtherus Haddon, Contra Hier. Osorium. l. 3 f. 143. to 153. Antiquita∣tis Ecclesiae Brit. and Bishop God∣win his Ca∣talogue of Bishops in their seve∣rall Lives: Speeds Hi∣story of great Brittanie. p. 554. 565 570. 574. 582. 584. 1034. Dr. Barnes his Supplication. p. 188. 189. &c. no question; the severall Treasons, conspiracies, Rebellions and Mutinies of Dunstan, Robert, Lanfranke, Anselme, William Corbell, Theobald, Edmond, Becket, Hubert, Stephen Langhton, Robert Winchelsie, Walter Reinolds, Iohn Stratford, Thomas Arundell, Henry Deave, Archbishops of Canterbury; William de sancta Maria, Roger Niger, Fulco Basset, Henry de Sandwich, Bishops of London, William Gifford, Henry de Blohes, Iohn Gernsey, Henry Woodloke, Adam de Arldon and Steven Gardner, Bishops of Win∣chester, William Longchamp, and Eustachius, Bishops of Ely: Hugh Wallys, Henry Burwash, Hugh Novant, Alexan∣der de Sevensby, and Robert Strekton, Bishops of Coventry, and Lichfeild, Roger the third Bishop of Salisbury, Robert Stillington, George Nevill, Luis, Maugre, Raivelinus, Gyles de Burife, Ralfe, Thomas Rushooke, Iohn Fishar, Lewes, Iohn Trevaus, Bishops of Bath and Wels, Exeter, Worceter, Hereford, Chichester, Rochester, Bangor, and Sant Assaph, Alcredus, Geoffry, Thomas de Corbridge, Alexander Nevill, Richard Scroope, George Nevill, Thomas Woolsie, Edward Lee, Archbishops of Yorke, Egelwyn, William Rairlipho, Ranulph Flambard, and Anthony Beake, Bishops of Durham, Thomas Merkes, Bishop of Carlile, with others, (all great Traitors, Conspirators and Rebels,) against most of your aitis Royall Progenitors witnes. But likewise of those, who professe themselves Pro∣testant Bishops, and your Majesties most obedient Loyall Subjects, in this our present age. Who though they have so much ingenuity yet left, as to acknow∣ledge they received their Bishoprickes from your Majesties meere grace; notwithstanding they are
 growen so shamelesly ungratefull, as if not absolutely to deny your prerogative Royall i causes Eccle∣siasticall, yet publikely to professe, that they received their Episcopall authority office, and dominering Lordly Iurisdiction, which they now exercise over Ministers and people, not from your Majesty, but onely from God, from Christ, and the Holy Ghost, (by whichDoctor Iohn White his Defence of the way. c. 7. Bp. Iewels Defence of the Apology. parte. 5. c. 6. diuis. 6.7.8.9.10. &c. 9. divis. 6.1 & 2. Phil. & Mar. c. 8. title the Pope and his Prelates challenged all their power:) contrary to the Statutes of 26. H. 8. c. 1.37 H. 8 c. 17. 1. Ed. 6. c. 2. 1. Eliz. c. 1. & 8 Eli. c. 1. which expressely resolve, that they have no maner of spirituall or Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction whatsoe∣ver,Against willfull Re∣bellion. part. 5. p. 308. 309 but onely in, by, from and under your Majestie, and that at your Majesties will, to revoke it when you please: yea directly contrary to the Scripture, which is so farre from giving, that it expresly prohibits Bishops and Ministers, all Lordly temporall Jurisdiction, and worldly governement whatsoever, not onely that, which is tyranni∣call, but likewise that, which is moderate, just and law∣full in other temporall Magistrates. Math. 20.25.26.27. Luke. 22.25.26.27. 1. Pet. 5.1.2.3. as our owne Homilies, BishopDefence of the Apology part. 5. c. 6. divis. 6, to 12 Iewell, BishopHaborow for faithfull Subects. Elmer, Bis∣hopTrue difference betweene Christian subjection & antichristian Rebellion. p. 124. 125 126. 127. Bilson, Master DeaneReproofe of Dorman f. 17.48.57.43.44. Nowell, the Fathers cited by them, andLuther, Zwinglius, Melan∣cton, Calvin, Bullinger, Hemingius, Illyricus, Gualter, Sadael, Beza, Munster, Sne- Snecanus, Szegedine, Erastus, the Churches of Bohemia, Broughton, Raynolds, Withers, Whitaker, Fulke, and other in their places quoted in a petition to her Ma∣jesty p. 22. 23. And in Gersonius Bucerus de Gubernatione Ecclesia. most Protestant Divines extant, interpret those texts. Yea they are now so strangly audacious, as
 without any Letters, Patents from your Majesty, to keepe Consistory Courts, visitations, Synods in their owne names and rights: to make out Citations, pro∣cesse, excommunications, Letters of Administration, Licenses for Marying without banes &c. in their owne stiles, names, and with their owne Seales alone; to institute and prescribe new Articles, Constitu∣tions, Ordinances, Ceremonies, Lawes, Rites, formes of Oathes &c. and impose them on your Sub∣jects, publishing them in print in their owne names, and swearing Churchwardens, Sidemen, with other your Majesties Subjects, to execute, and submit unto them, contrary to their owne 12. Canon, (as if they were absolute Popes, Kings, and Lawgivers,) with∣out your Majesties privity and the Parliaments ap∣probation: of which exorbitances they are so farre from being ashamed, that in a late Latine Pamphlet, licensed by the Archbishop of Canterbury his Chaplaine, that now is, and dedicated to his Grace, by oneCollectio∣nes. p. 53. Chow∣naeus, they stick not to proclaime; that your Majestie and other Princes Ecclesiasticall Lawes, receive both their vitality and vivacity, from the Bishops, as from the HEART AND HEAD: yea Doctor Wien Bishop of Norwich (no more a Regulus, but a Rex,) in his late presumptuous Visitation Articles, printed at London, 1636. in his owne name (worthy your Majesties consideration) makes not onely theChap. 9. Article. 11. Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, and his Vicar generall and Visitors Ecclesiasticall Lawgivers, and their Injunctions, Oracles, and Lawes to be diligently observed and inquired of upon Oath: but himselfe most presumptuously takes upon
 him like an absolute King or Pope, to prescribe new Lawes, Canons, Injunctions, Articles, Orders in his owne name and right without any Commission from your Majesty, or your Royall privity or assent, con∣trary to your25. H 8. c. 15. 21. 27. H. 8. c. 15. 37. H. 8. c. 17. 1. Eliz. c. 1. Magna Charta. c. 29. Lawes, and your owne late Royall Decla∣ration before the 39. Articles; suspending no lesse then 30. Ministers of best note and quality in his late Visi∣tation, (though every way confirmable to the Do∣ctrine and Discipline, by Law established in the Church of England, and so reputed in his predeces∣sors times) onely for refusing to conforme against their consciences, duties, and allegiance to those grosse Innovations, which hee would obtrude upon them, contrary to your Royall Lawes andBefore the 39. Articles and concer∣ning the Dis∣solution of the Parlia∣ment. p. 21. 42. Decla∣rations against such Innovations. Which Tyranny of his, as it hath produced a greatAmos 8.11. famine of Gods word in those parts, and bread in your Subjects hearts a great murmuring, discontent and feare of alteration of Religion; so it hath caused many to forsake the Realme, and will no doubt draw2. Chron. 36.15.16.17. 1. Thess. 2.15.16. downe Gods Plagues and Vengeance on it, who since this Bishops late Visitation, hath visited many places of the Realme, with Plague and Pestilence, and threatneth even a famine of bread unto it, to recompence that famine of his word, which hee and other Bishops have every∣where made; who neither preach themselves, and inhibit others from preaching, upon no just occasion who else would gladly doe it. And as if this were not enough; both your Archbishops, with sundry other of your Bishops, in the late Censure of Doctor Bast∣wicke, in the High Commission Court at Lambheth
 (whom they excommmunicated, fined one thousand pound to your Majesty, imprisoned and suspended from practising Physicke, onely for writing a Booke in Latine, printed beyond the Seas, in defence of your Majesties Prerogative Royall in causes Eccle∣siasticall, against the Popes and Italian Bishops pre∣tended Primacy, being provoked by a Papist and ob∣liged thereunto by his Oath of allegiance; his loyalty and fidelity to your Majesty being his sole offence;) they feared not to proclaime and solemnely to ad∣judge, like so many ungratefull disloyall Subjects, that I say no more: That they received their Episcopall power, Soveraingty and Jurisdiction, not from your Majesty but from Christ alone; that they claime and enjoy it by no other, but a divine right, (contrary to their Predeces∣sors and the Parliaments expresse resolution, 37. H. 8. c. 17. 31. H. 8. c. 9. 10. 1. E. 6. c. 2. 1. Eliz. c. 1. and the very words of their Oath and Supremacy to your Majesty: and that Bishops anciently were reputed and stiled Kings and Princes, whence they had there Miters, Thrones and Crosier staves: a shrewde signe they would be no lesse then Kings now, to sway all things both in Church and State, as they endeavour to doe; though contrary to our Saviours expresse prohibition, Matth. 20.25.26.27. Mar. 10.42.43. Luke. 22.25.26.) And to shew themselves Kings indeed, they most pre∣sumptuously take upon them to dispense with Lawes and Statutes, as in the case of marying without as∣king banes; to stop the course of your Majesties Pro∣hibitions to their Courts, in cases where they have beene alwayes granted; to imprison those who dare
 sue for, or deliver your Royall Prohibitions to them; and some of them stick not to proclaime, that they would see the man who dares withstand their exorbitant, il∣legall proceedings, or grant a Prohibition to inhibit them; yea they generally hate, and persecute all your faith∣full Subjects, who dare defend your Crowne and Ec∣clesiasticall Prerogative against their Papall usurpa∣tions on them, farre more then they doe any Preistes or Iesuites living, whom they now much favour and connive at (though Traitors to your Majesty;) because they favour all these their Episcopall oppressions, and encrochments, as tending to erect and justifie the Popes disclaimed exploded Monarchy. And is it not then high time for your Majesty to looke about you? to curbe these aspiring Popes of this our lesser world (asAntiquita∣tes Eccles. Brit. Ead∣merus & Godwin in vita Ansel∣mi. Speeds History. p. 463. Anselme and the Archbishops of Canter∣bury were sometimes stiled by the Pope of Rome himselfe not without just cause,) before they grow so head-strong as wholly to usurpe your Royall Diademne, and quite shake off your yoke? Have they not taken halfe your Crowne allready from your sacred head, (I meane your intire Royall, Ecclesiasticall Iuris∣diction, which they claime, engrosse, usurpe and exercise by their owne inherent power) and placed it upon their owne ambitious Pates, not fearing lately to contest even with your Majesty in your owne sa∣cred Presence, whether you or they should visit the University of Cambridge (of which you alone are the undoubted Visitor) and there enn without any speciall Patent from your Majesty in their owne names and rights alone, and not as your Majesties
 Visitors, contrary to their very Oath of Supremacy to your Majestie, and the expresse Statutes of 26. H. 8. c. 1. 31. H. 8. c. 10. 37. H. 8. c. 17. 25. H. 8. c. 19. 21. 1. Ed. 6. c. 2. 1. Eliz. c. 1. 5. Eliz. c. 1. 8. Eliz. c. 1. and other Acts? Yea have they not mai∣med your temporall Iurisdiction, also by stopping your owne Royall Prohibitions to their Courts; by intermedling with temporall offices and affaires, of purpose to advaunce their owne spirituall power and Iurisdiction, and by forcing your Subjects to take Oathes before them in cases which concerne neither Matrimony nor Testament? Surely your Royall Pre∣decessors, and their Iudges have so resolved, long a goe; and therefore in their Writs of Prohibition, and Ad Iura Regia; they commonly inserted these clauses, that the Prelates Proceedings in all causes not meerely Ecclesiasticall, and their admi∣nistring Oathes to your people in any cases, but of Matrimony and testament, was:Register pars 2. f. 36. 37. to 65. In grave prae∣judicium Coronae & dignitatis nostrae regiae: In nostri contemptū, & regiae dignitatis laesio∣nē: In laesionem coronae & dignitatis nostrae &c. Adding moreover: Nos qui ad illaesam observationem jurium Coronae & dignitatis nostrae vinculo juramenti astringimur, no∣lentes talia tolerare; vobis prohibemus ne quicquam in praemissis attentare praesumatis; per quod juri coronae & dignitatis nostrae
 derogari valeat quovis modo, & si quid per vos in hac parte minus ritè attentatum fue∣rit, id sine dilatione aliqua revocari faciatis; ne ad vos tanquàm ad jurium coronae & dignitatis nostrae violatores graviter capere debeamus, &c. Eo studiosus nos decet ope∣ram adhibere & solicitius extendere manum nostram quoad hoc vinculo Iuramenti te∣neri dinoscimur & astringi; pluresque con∣spicimus indies jura illa pro viribus impugna∣re, nobis & coronae nostrae praejudicium & exhaeredationem multipliciter generantes. Nos volentes hujusmodi praejudicio, & ex∣haeredationi remedio quo poterimus obvi∣are, omniumque jura coronae nostrae im∣pugnantium conatus illicitos refraenare; vo∣bis & vestrum cuilibet districtè prohibemus, ne praetextu alicujus Commissionis vobis vel cuilibet vestrum factae vel faciendae, quic∣quam quod, in derogationem juris nostri regij, quacunque auctoritate nobis incon∣sultis attentare praesumatis, seu per alios at∣tentari faciatis: scientes, quod si secus fece∣ritis, ad vos tanquam ad violatores juris no∣stri regij graviter capiemus, &c.

The Latine I confesse is none of the best, but the sense is notable, manifesting both theTurbamur non immo∣dicum, cum PRELATI regni nostri, qui ad jus regium no∣strum con∣servandum illaesum ex juramenti vinculo sunt astricti quic∣quam facere conspicimus, quod in no∣stri praejudi∣cium ante∣dicti juris regij laesio∣nem cedere poterit quo∣quo modo. Register ps. 2. f. 64. b. Prelates rea∣dinesse in all ages to usurpe upon your Predecessors Crownes and dignities, and their vigilant constant care on the other side to curbe, prevent, and punish these their encrochments, as derogatorie and prejudiciall to their crowne and dignitie (being bound thereto by their Coronation oathes) both by imprisonment and the sei∣sure of their temporalties, as the Attachments, fol∣lowing upon these Prohibitions, manifest.
Your Majesty no doubt hath as37. H. 8. c. 17. 26. H. 8. c. 1. 28. H. 8. c. 10. 1. Ed. 6. c. 2. 1. Eliz c. 1. 5. Eliz. c. 1. 8. Eliz. c. 1. 23 Eliz. c. 1. compared to∣gether. absolute a Prero∣gative over all Ecclesiasticall Persons and causes, as su∣preme head on earth of the Church of England, as ever any your Royall Progenitors; and your Prelates now, no more Episcopall Jurisdiction, Jure divino, then their undutifull Predecessors; you have taken the selfesameSee Totelli Magna Charta, 1556. f. 164. Oath at your Coronation, to preserve, to defend the rights, the Pre∣rogatives of your Crowne and Liberties of your Subjects, as your ancestors have done, and you have shewed your selfe very carefull to preserve, if not enlarge your Prerogative in temporall things. I doubt not there∣fore, but you will likewise upon the perusall of this Breviate, vindicate your Ecclesiasticall Prerogative from your Prelates disloyall encrochments, as your Progenitors have done, and not let loose the raines unto them to usurpe upon your Crowne, your digni∣ty, and the Liberties of your Subjects more and more, and doe what they please, without controll.
If any of them suggest to your Majesty, that it is for your honor, and the Churches good, that the Bis∣hops and Clergy should domineere and beare cheife
 sway in Church and State; flowrish in worldly honor, wealth, pompe, dignity; manage the cheife tempo∣rall offices and affaires, and Lord it over your Nobi∣lity, Gentrie, people, as their Predecessors have done in former ages.
Can. 14.15 18.19.20.22.23.34.35. Suerius Concil. Tom. 1. p. 513. 514. Gra∣tian. Dist. 41. 88. 29. 95. 59. Causa. 41. qu. 1. causa. 15. q. 7.First, That the 214. Bishops in the 4. Councell of Carthage An. 436. were of a farre other Iudgement. For they denied, that every Bishop should have (not a Lordly Pallace,) but Hospitiolum, a little cottage to dwell in, not farre of from the Church. That hee should have vile (not Lordly, costly,) household stuffe, and a poore table and fare, and should seeke the au∣thoritie of his dignity by his faith and merits of life. That hee should not take upon him the Probate or Administration of Wills; nor goe to Law for transi∣tory things though provoked; That hee should not take any care of his temporall estate to himselfe; Sed lectioni & orationi, & verbi Dei praedicationi TAN∣TVM MODO VACET; but should ONELY give himselfe to reading, and prayer, and the preaching of Gods word. That hee should ordaine no Ministers without the advise of his Cler∣gy, and the consent and testimony of the Citizens. That hee should heare no mans cause, without the presence of his Clergy; and that otherwise his sen∣tence should be meerly voyd, unlesse it were confir∣med by the presence and suffrage of his Clergy. That in what place soever hee was sitting, hee should not suffer a Presbyter or Minister to stand; That in the Church and Session of the Presbyters, the Bishop should sit in the upper place: but within any house
 COLLEGAM SE PRESBYTERORVM AGNOSCAT; hee should know himselfe to be but the fellow or co-partner of Ministers. Thus this Councell of 214. Bishops decree, and that so justly, that every one of these Canons is incorperated into the Popes owne Canon Law, and there remaine unre∣pealed till this very day, at least 40. others Councels, determining both before and since,See Concil. Carthag. 3. Can. 15. Gratian. Causa. 21. qu. 3. that Bishops and Clergy men ought not to beare any temporall offices, or intermedle with secular affaires, since no man that goeth a warfare to God, ought to intangle himselfe in the affaires of this world: (2. Tim. 2.4.) that hee may please him, who hath chosen him to be a soldier. WhenceSurius Concil. Tom. 1. p. 466. 467. 468. 469. Pope Damasus the first, in his Decretall Epistle concerning Chorall Bishops; compares those Bps who turne over their flockes to such Bishops and Substitutes to be governed and instructed by them, that they may follow their lusts, ut pro suo libitu SE∣CVLARIBVS CVRIS INHIENT, and give themselves to secular cares at their pleasure, and more freely doe what seemes good to every one of them in his owne eyes: to Harlots, who presently, so soone as they are delivered, delivered their infants to other nurses to be brought up, that they may be the sooner able to follow and satisfie their lusts. For, and by reason of such things and Bishops, soules are neglected, the sheepe perish, diseases increase, he∣resies and scismes breake forth, Churches are de∣stroyed, Preists are defiled, and other evills arise. Wherefore the cheife Preists may not imitate who∣rish women, who put over their children to others to
 be nursed, that they may follow their pleasure, but they themselves ought to nourish them, themselves ought to render fruite to their Lord with increase, and to present the fruitfull sheaves to him with glory. For if the Lord himselfe, among other cares of his sheepe, hath touched and cleansed the leapers, why doe wee disdaine to doe the same things? Especially when as the Lord sayd to Peter,Iohn. 21.15.16.17. If thou love me, feed my sheepe. If we desire to be the Lords Disci∣ples, let us follow his steps; that it may be sayd of us, I am the good Shepheard, and know my sheep, and am knowne of mine, and I call them all by name, &c. Every one who negligently feedes the Lords flocke so often committed to him, is convinced not to love the cheife Pastor, nor yet to be willing to be made his Disciple, whose examples hee neglects to imitate.
Gen. 31.38.39.40.Wee remember, that Iacob, who had served long for his wives, said thus to Laban: This twenty yeares have I beene with thee, thy ewes and thy shee-goates have not cast their younge, and the rammes of thy flocke have I not eaten. That which was torne of beasts, I brought not unto thee, I bare the losse of it; of my hand didst thou require it, whether stolen by day or by night. Thus I was, in the day the drought consumed me, and the frost by night, and the sleepe departed from mine eyes. If therefore hee did thus labor and watch, who fed Labans sheepe, how great paines & watchings ought he to take, who feeds the sheep of God? This can no Prelate or Bishop doe, who is busied in worldly affaires or flowes in worldly
 honor, wealth, Pompe and State. For asEpist. 37 Hildebert of Turen truly writes: It is impossible that hee should at any time speake with the Lord, who (even when hee is silent) talkes with all the world: Such a fable-bearer doe I, O wretch (saith hee) professe my selfe, who when as I spend the whole dayes about keeping of cattle and worldly affaires, doe not spend so much as one moment in keeping of soules. Businesses, which are worse to my spirit, meet with me, which engrosse me wholy to themselves, which steale away the secret times of prayers, which defraud Ecclesiasti∣call duties of their seasons, which as a small thing rage and vex me with stinges by day, and likewise in∣fest me when I sleep by night; and that which I can∣not acknowledge without teares, the creeping and theevish remembrance of causes follow me, poore wretch to the sacred Altars, where whiles I deprecate the flight thereof, I am surrounded with their as∣sault. These birdes, I unhappy wretch, indure with sacrifying Abraham, but it is not yet given me to drive them away with Abraham. Now innumme∣rable losses of vertues follow the captivating occupa∣tions of the minde, to which whiles we miserably are subject, wee doe not so much as minister with Mar∣tha: For Martha ministred, but to Christ; but which of us may say that wee doe run about and mi∣nister with Martha, who whiles wee run about, doe neither minister to Christ, nor for Christ. Hence is it (writesDe Statu Domus Dei. l. 3. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 12. pars. 1. p. 628. Potho,) that in these dangerous times the scarcity of spirituall things doth most of all presse and shake us, when as plenty of temporall things
 abound. For the Church in this time is made greater in riches, but farre lesse in virtues. Whence chari∣ty now waxing cold in many, the desire of heavenly things vanisheth quite away in us, and all the studie of virtues is turned into the appetite of transitory things. For these things men desire to be Bishops and Prelates of Churches, that they may enjoy these things, that they may flow with pleasures, that they may rather rule over the Church of God, then pro∣fit it; that they may have the family of the Church, subject to them, that they may be Lords of things, that how much the richer their Churches are, they may thereby become more famous. Since therefore ambition raignes in these men, how can they adorne the doctrine of Christ in word and example in all things? What vertue of true religion is there in them whose heartes the brightnes of divine illumination hath forsaken? Thus these, in direct opposition to this your Prelates suggestion, who pleade so much for worldly, honor, pompe, wealth, and rule, which of all other things they should most detest.
Secondly, I answere, that Christ himselfe avers,Iohn. 18.36. that his Kingdome was not of this world; expreslyMath. 20.25.26.27. Marke. 10.42.43.44.45. Luke. 22.24.25.26.27. 1. Pet. 5.1.2.3. 3 Iohn. 9. Iohn. 21.15.16.17. Acts. 20.28. Marke. 16.15.16. prohibiting his Ministers and Apostles, to Lord it over his inheritance, or exercise any temporall Domi∣nion over them, commanding them onely to feed & teach, not domineere or rule over his flock like tem∣porall Lords: toMath. 11.29. be lowly and humble without pompe, state, or worldly possessions, as hee and his Disciples were, being1. Tim. 6.8.9.10.11. content onely with food and raimet, eschuing worldly pompe and wealth, as the very bane and
 poyson of the Church: HenceSermon. on Hag. 1. p. 176. and on Math. 9.37. p. 318. Defence of the Apologie. parte 6. c. 9. Divis. 3. pag. 567. 568. Bishop Iewell records out of IoannesCap. 22. in vita Silvestri See Polichro∣nicon. l. 4. c. 26 f. 171. Thomas Be∣cons Reports of certaine men. Vol. 3. f. 241. Parisensis and others, That when Constantine the Great advanced Bishops, and en∣dowed the Church with lands and temporall posses∣sions, there was a voyce of Angels heard in the ayre, saying: hodie venenum infunditum in Ecclesiam: This day poyson is powred into the Church. And from that time forward (saith Polychronicon out of Giral∣dus Cambiensis) because of the great riches that the Church had, it was made the more secular; and had more secular busines, then spirituall devotion, and more pompe & boast outward then holinesse within. Therefore Ierome in Vitas Patrum saith; Since the holy Church increased in possessions, it decreased in virtues according to the old Proverbe: Religio pe∣perit divitias, Et filia devoravit matrem. And out of Sant Bernard hee writes: that since Prelates increased in worldly pompe, chusing the first places in the Church, they have beene the cheifest in persecuting Christ, and have ever shewed themselves, not tea∣chers, but deceivers, not Pastors but Impostors; not Prelates but Pilates, succeeding not Peter in teaching, but Romulus in murthering: Concluding out of the same Bernard; that no Prelate, no not the Pope him∣selfe, can be both a Successor of the Apostles & a Lord; for doubtles hee was forbidden one of them by our Saviour, Math. 20.25.26. where Christ by severall duties and honors, hath set a difference betweene the offices of both powers. Our Princes never tooke up∣on them the office of Bishops, but your Bishops (saith hee to harding) have taken upon them the of∣fice
 of Princes: Of your Bishops it is written in your owneConcil. Ma∣crense. Catal. Test. Verita∣tis. p. 121. Councels (and I would it were not now as true of ours,) Behold there is now in a maner no worldly affaire, but Preists and Bishops have it in a hand. Such Bishops be they of whom Sant Chrysostome writeth thus: They that neither beleive, nor feare the Iudgement of God, abusing their Ecclesiasticall dignity in secu∣lar sort, turne the same in secular dignity. Such Bis∣hops they be of whomContra Lu∣ciferianos & in Soph. c. 1. Sant Hierom saith thus: They themselves be to themselves both Laymen and Bis∣hops too: They worship the Lord and Melchom both together, thinking that they may serve both the world and the Lord, and satisfie two Maisters at once, God and Mammon; who fighting under Christ, bend themselves to worldly affaires, and offer up one Image both to God and to Caesar. And therefore Car∣dinall Cusanus saith: Hereof groweth a great deformi∣ty that Bishops are bent onely to worldly cares. Thus andIn his Ser∣mon on Hag∣gay 1. De∣fence of the Apologie, part. 4. c. 17 Divis. 1. & part. 6. c. 11 Sims. 5. p. 576. 577 much more Bishop Iewell. Neither is this Prelate singular in his opinion. Our famous English Apostle Iohn Wickliffe, affirmed:Thomas Walsingham Hist. Angl. p. 205. 302 303, 304. 305. 306. Wiclesi. Dio∣log. l. 4. c. 15. 16. 17 18. 26. 27. Fox Acts & Monuments p. 398. 399. 412. That Popes, Car∣dinals, Bishops, or other Preists, might not civiliter dominari, rule like civill Lords without mortall sinne. That it is a sinne to endow them with temporall pos∣sessions, that no Prelates ought to have any prison to punish offenders; nor get any large temporall posses∣sions or riches: And that no King should impose upon any Bishop or Curate any secular office; for then the King and the Clarke should be Proditor Iesu Christi, a betrayer of Christ Iesus. William Swinderby, a Mar∣tyr under Richard the second, held:Fox Acts & Monuments p. 431. 434. That the more
 Lordship a Preist hath, the nearer hee is to Anti∣christ: That the Preists of the old Law were forbid∣den Lordship; and that Christ himselfe refused and forbad his Preistes Lordships, saying: Reges gentium &c. The Kings of the heathen beare rule &c. but you shall not do so. And Sant Peter saith Neque dominantes in Clero, Not bearing rule and domination over the Clergy. So it seemeth to me that it is against both Lawes of God, that they have such Lordships, and that their title to such Lordshops is not full good, &c. So theFox Acts & Monuments p. 514. 517 518. 522. Noble Martyr Lord Cobham professed: That the will of God is, that Preists being secluded from all worldlinesse, should conforme themselves utterly to the examples of Christ, and his Apostles; be evermore occupied in preaching and teaching the Scriptures purely, and in giving whole∣some examples of good living to others, being more modest, loving, gentle, and lowly in spirit, then any other sorts of people. Where doe ye finde (sayd hee to the Prelates) in all Gods Law, that ye should thus sitt in judgement of any Christian man, or yet give sentence of any other man unto death as yee doe here dayly? No ground have ye in all the Scriptures so Lordly to take it upon you, but in Annas and Caiphas which sate thus upon Christ; and upon his Apostles, after his ascention. Of them onely have ye taken it to judge Christs members, as ye doe, & neither of Pe∣ter nor Iohn. Since the venime of Iudas was shed into the Church, yee never followed Christ, nor yet stood in the perfection of Gods Law. By Venime I meane your possessions and Lordships: For then cried an Angle in the ayre (as your owne Chronicles
 mention) Woe, woe, woe, this day is venine shed into the Church of God. Before that time all the Bps of Rome were Martyrs in a maner: and since that time we read of very few: But indeed one hath put down another, one hath cursed another, one hath poy∣soned another, one hath slaine another, & done much more mischeife besides, as all Chronicles tell. And let all men consider this well, that Christ was meeke and mercifull; the Pope (and his Prelates) is proud and a tyrant: Christ was poore and forgave, the Pope is rich and a malicious manslayer, as his dayly Acts doe proove him. Rome is the very nest of Antichrist, and out of that nest cometh all the Disciples of him; of whom Archbishops, Bishops, Prelates, Preists and Monkes be the body, members, and these pild Friars the tayle. Though Preists and Deacons for preaching Gods word, ministring the Sacraments with provi∣sion for the poore be grounded on Gods Law, yet have these Sects no maner of ground thereof. Hee that followeth Peter most nighest in pure living, is next unto him in succession. But your Lordly order esteemed not greatly the behaviour of poore Peter, what ever ye prate of him.Passus. 15. 2. 4. b. Peirce Plowman, an an∣cient English Poët, writes to the same effect:
If Knighthood and Kindurite and commons by conscience,
Together love Lelly, leveth it well ye Bishops,
The Lordship of Landes for ever sall ye lese,
And live as Levitici, as our Lord ye teacheth. Deut. 8. Numb. 5. per primitias & decimas &c.

SirThe Plow∣mans Tale. Geffry Chaucer our renowned Poët, is, yet more punctuall.
The Emperour yafe the Pope sometime,
So high Lordship him about,
That at last the sely Ryme,
The proud Pope put him out.
So of this Realme is in dout:
But Lordes beware and them defend,
For now these folke beene wondrous stout,
Moses Law forbod it tho,
That Preistes should no,
Lordeshippes weld,
Christs Ghospell biddeth also,
That they should no Lordshippes held,
Ne Christes Apostles were never so bold,
No such Lordshippes to them enbrace,
But smrn her sheepe, and keepe her fold,
God amend hem for his grace, &c.
This Booke of Chaucer was authorized to be printed by Act of Parliament in the 34. and 35. H. 8. c. 1.In his workes. p. 124. 140 152. 142. Master William Tyndall Martyr, writes thus: Let Kings rule their Realmes themselves, with the helpe of Laymen that are sage, wise, learned and expert. Is it not a shame above all shames and a monstrous thing, that no man should be found able to governe a worldly Kingdome save Bishops and Prelates that have forsaken the world, and are taken out of the world, and appointed to preach the Kingdome of God; Christ saith, that his Kingdome is not of this
 world, Iohn. 18. and Luk. 19. Vnto the young man that desired him, to bid his brother to give him part of the inheritance, hee answered; who made me a judge or a devider over you: No man that layeth his hand to the plowe and looketh back, is fit for the Kingdome of heaven, Luke 9. No man can serve two Maisters, for hee must despise the one. Matth. 6. To preach Gods word, is to much for halfe a man: and to minister a temporall Kingdome, is to much for halfe a man. Either other requireth an whole man. One therefore cannot well doe both. The Bishops after they had put Christ out of his roome, they gate themselves to the Emperors and Kings, and so long ministred their busines, till they have also put them out of their roomes, and have get their autho∣rities from them, and raigne also in their steed: So that the Emperour and Kings are but vaine names, and shadowes, as Christ is, having nothing to doe in the world. Thus raigne they in steed of God and man, and have all power under them, and doe what they list. What names have they? My Lord Bishop, my Lord Archbishop, if it please your father-hood, if it please your Lordship, if it please your Grace, if it please your holines, and innummerable such like. Be∣hold, how they are esteemed, and how they are crept up above all, not into worldly seates onely, but into the seate of God, the hearts of men, where they sit above God himselfe. For, both they, and whatsoe∣ver they make of their owne heades, is more feared and dread, then God and his Commandements. An∣tichrists Bishops preach not, because they have no
 leisure for their lust and pleasures, and aboundance of all things, and for the combrance that they have in Kings matters; and busines of the Realme. One keepeth the privy Seale, another the great Seale, the third is Confessor, that is to say a privy traitor, and a secret Iudas, hee is President of the Kings Counsell, hee is an Ambassadour, another sort of the Kings se∣cret Counsell.Note. Wo is unto the Realmes where they are of the Counsell, as profitable are the Prelacy, unto the Realmes with their Counsell, as the Wolves unto the Sheep, or the Foxes unto the Geese.Page. 181 For there is no mischeifes or disorder, whether it be in the temporall regiment or in the spirituall, whereof they are not the cheife causes, and even the very fountaine and springs; and as we say the well head: so that it is impossible to preach against any mischeife, except thou begin at them, or to set any reforma∣tion in the world, except thou reforme them first. Now are they indurate and tough as Pharaoh, and will not bow unto any way or order. And therefore perse∣cute they Gods word and the Preachers thereof, and on the other side lay awayte unto all Princes and stirre up all mischeife in the world, and send them to warre, and occupie their mindes therewith, or with other voluptuousnes, lest they should have leisure to heare the word of God, & to set an order in their Realms. By them is all things ministred, and by them are all Kings ruled; yea in every Kings conscience sit they ere hee be King, and perswade him what they list, and make them both to beleive what they will, and to doe what they will, neither can any King or Realme
 have rest for their busines. Turne thine eyes whe∣ther thou wilt, and thou shalt see nothing prosperous but their subtile yolling, with that it is flowing water, yea and I trust it will be shortly a full Sea. In all their doings, though they pretend outwardly the ho∣nor of God, or a Common-wealth, their intent and secret Counsell is onely, to bring all under their power, and to take out of the way whosoever letteth them, or is to mighty for them. And when they are once on high, then are they Tyrants above all Ty∣rants. Whether they be Turkes or Saracens. Thus and farre moreSee his Practise of Popish Pre∣lates worthy to be serious∣ly read. Master TyndallFox Acts & Monuments p. 926. 927 Master Fish in his Supplication of Beggars, thus complaines to King Hen∣ry the 8. of the inconvenience of the Prelates greatnes and sway, both to himselfe and his subjects, worthy your Ma∣jesties most serious consideration. Oh the greivous ship∣wrack, of the Common-wealth, which in ancient time before the comming of these ravenous wolves, were so prosperous, that &c. What remedy? Make Lawes against them? I am in doubt whether ye be able. Are they not stronger in your owne Parliament-house then your selfe? What a number of Bishops, Ab∣bots, and Priors, are Lords of your Parliament?The fruits of Prelates greatnes. Are not all the learned men of your Realme in fee with them, to speake in the Parliament-house for them, against your Crowne, dignity and Commonwealth of your Realme, a fewe of your owne learned Coun∣sell, onely excepted? what Law can be made against them that may be avaylable? Who is hee (though hee be greived never so sore,) that for the murther of his ancester, ravishment of his wife, of his daugh∣ter,
 robbery, trespasse, maine, debt, or any other offence, dare lay it to their charge by way of Action? and if hee do, then is hee by and by, by theirNow they bring such into the high Commission, and there ruine them, or force them to give over their actions. wy∣lines accused of heresy; yea they will so handle him ere hee passe, that except hee will beare a faggot at their pleasure, hee shall be excommunicated, and then be all his actions dashed. So captive are your Lawes unto them, that no man whom they list to ex∣communicate may be admitted to sue any action in any of your Courts. If any man in your Sessions dare be so hardy to indite a Preist of any such crime; hee hath ere the yeare goe about such a yoake of heresie laid in his necke, that it maketh him wish hee had not done it. Your Grace may see what a worke there is in London; how the Bishop rageth for inditing certaine Curates of extortion and incontinency the last yeare in the Ward-mote Quest. Had not Richard Hunne commenced action of Praemunire against a Preist, hee had yet beene alive, and no heretick at all, but an ho∣nest man.Note the danger that accrues by making Cler∣gymen cheife tem∣porall officers And this is by reason that the cheife Instrument of your Law, yea the cheife of your Counsell, and hee which hath your sword in his hand, to whom also all the other instruments are obedient, is alwayes a spirituall man; which hath ever such an inordinate love unto his owne Kingdome, that hee will maintaine that, though all the temporall King∣domes and Commonwealthes of the world, should therefore utterly be undone. Which MasterActs and Monuments p. 1381. Iohn Fox himselfe thus seconds:Note. This hath beene one great abuse in England these many yeares, that such offices as have beene of most importance & waight,
 have commonly beene committed to Bishops and other spirituall men; whereby three divellish mis∣cheifes and inconveniences have happened in this Realme, to the great dishonour of God, and utter ne∣glecting of the flocke of Christ, the which three be these.
First, they have had small leasure to attend to their Pastorall cures, which thereby have beene utterly neglected and left undone.
Secondly, it hath also puft up many Bishops and o∣ther spirituall persons into such haughtines and pride, that they have thought no noble man in the Realme, worthy to be their equall and fellow: (Whence22. H. 8. fol. 184. Hall in his Chronicle observes, that the authority of Car∣dinall Wolsey, set the Clergy in such a pride, that they disdained all men; wherefore when he was fallen they followed after.)
Thirdly, where they by this meanes knew the ve∣ry secrets of Princes, they being in such high offices, have caused the same to beNote, the Bishops the greatest Freindes & Pillars of the Pope, & more faith∣full to him, then to their Prince. knowne in Rome, a∣fore the King could accomplish and bring his intents to passe in England. By this meanes hath the Papacy beene so maintained, and things ordered after their wills and pleasures, that much mischeife hath hapned in this Realme and others, sometime the destruction of Princes, and sometime to the utter undowing of many Common-wealthes.
MasterVpon the 8. Comman∣dement. pag. 78. Hooper, both a Bishop and Martyr of our Church, delivers his judgement of the point in these ensuing termes: For the space of 400. yeares after Christ, the Bishops applied all their witt onely
 to their owne vocation; to the glory of God, and the honor of the Realmes they dwelt in. Though they had not so much upon their heades, as our Bishops have, yet had they more within their heades as the Scripture and histories testifie. For they applied all the will, they had unto the vocation and ministry of the Church whereunto they were called. But our Bishops have so much witt, that they can rule and serve (as they say,) in both States, in the Church and also in the civill policy, when one of them is more then any man is able to satisfie, let him doe allwayes his best diligence. If hee be so necessary for the Court, that in civill causes hee cannot be spared, let him use that vocation, and spare the other. It is not possible, hee should doe both well.See Bucerus De Regno Christi. l. 2. c. 12. It is a great oversight in Princes thus to charge them with two burthens. The Primitive Church had no such Bishops as we. They had such Bishops as did preach many godly Sermons in lesse time then our Bishops horses be a brideling. Their house was a Schoole or treasure house of Gods Ministers. If it be so now, let every man judge. The Magistrates that suffer the abuse of these goods, be culpable of the fault. If the fourth part of the Bishop∣ricke remained to the Bishop, it were sufficient, the third part to Schoolemaisters, the second to poore, and Soldiers were better bestowed. If any be offen∣ded with me for this my saying, hee loveth not his owne health, nor Gods Lawes, nor mans; out of which I am alwayes ready to proove the thing, I have said to be true. Further, I speake of love, not of ha∣tred. And in his Apologie hee saith: It is both against









 Gods Lawes and mans, that Bishops and Clergy should be judges over any subjects within this Realme, for it is no part of their office: they can doe no more but preach Gods word, and minister Gods Sacraments, and excommunicate such as Gods Lawes doe pronounce to be excommunicated. Who would put a sword into a madmans hand? Thus this good Prelate, whom Master Latymer, (whoFox Acts & Monuments p. 1578. gave over his Bishopricke out of conscience (as Shaxtor Bishop of Salisbury likewise did,) and skipped fo joye being divested of his Bishoplike habit, becaus hee feeled his shoulders so light, and was discharge of so heavy a burden;) thus seconds in his Sermon of th Plough:Edit. 1578 cum Privile∣gio fol. 17. God saith by the Prophet Ieremy; M¦ledictus qui facit opus Dei fraudelenter, guilefully an deceitfully some bookes have, negligenter, negligent¦ly, or slackly. How many such Prelates, how man such Bishops (Lord for thy mercy) are there now  England? And what shall we in this case doe? Sha we company with them? O Lord, for thy mercy sha we not company with them? O Lord, whether sha we flee from them. But cursed be hee which dot the worke of the Lord negligently or guilefully A sore word for them that are negligent in discha¦ging their office ill. Yee that be Prelates looke we to your office; for right Prelating is busie labourin and not Lording; therefore preach and teach, and l your plough be doing. Yee Lords, I say, that live li loyterers, looke well to your office, the plow is yo office and charge. If ye live idle and loyter, yo doe not your duty, &c. They have to say f
 themselves long customes, and authority, placing in Parliament, and many things more. And I feare me this land is not ripe to be plowed: for as the saying is, It lacketh withering. This land lacketh withering at least it is not for me to plough. For what shall I looke for among thornes, but pricking & scratching? what among stones, but stumbling? what (I had all∣most said) among Scorpions but stinging? But thus much I dare say, that since Lording and loytering hath come up, preaching hath gone downe contrary to the Apostles times. For they preached and Lorded not, and now they Lord and preach not. For they that be Lords, will ill goe to the plow. It is no meete office for them. It is not seeming for their estate. Thus came up Lording Loyterers. Thus crept up unpreaching Prelates. For how many unlearned Pre∣lates have we now at this day? And no marvail, for if the ploughmen that now be, were made Lords, they would cleane give over-ploughing, they would leave their labour, and fall to Lording outright, and the plough stand. And then both ploughes not walking, nothing should be in the Common-wealth but hunger. For ever since the Prelates were made Lordes and Nobles, their plough standeth, there is no worke done, the people starve; they hauke, they hunt, they carde, they dice, they pastime in their Prelacies with gallant Gentlemen; with their daun∣sing Minions, and with their fresh companions, so that ploughing is set aside.Lording hath put downe prea∣ching. See Supplication to K. Henry the 8. An. 1544. And by their Lording and Loytering, preaching and ploughing is cleane gone. And thus if the ploughmen in the country,
 were as negligent in their office, as Prelates be, we should not long live for lacke of sustenance. And as it is necessary for to have this ploughing for the su∣stentation of the body, so must we have also the other for the satisfaction of the soule; or else we cannot live long ghostly. For as the body wasteth and consu∣meth away for lacke of bodily meate; so doth the souleThe Pre∣lates there∣fore who sup∣presse Le∣ctures and preaching, as many now doe, onely starve and pine, not feed mens soules. pine away for want of ghostly meate. And as diligently as the husbandman plougheth for the sustentation of the body; so diligently must the Pre∣lates and Ministers labour for the feeding of the soule; both the ploughes must still be going as most neces∣sary for man. They have great labors, and therefore they ought to have good livings, that they may com∣modiously feed their flock; for the preaching of the word of God is called meate. Scripture calleth it meate, not strawberies, that come but once a yeare, and tarry not long, but are sone gone; but it is meate, it is no dainties. The people must have meate that must be familiar, AND CONTINVALL, and DAYLY GIVEN VNTO THEM TO FEED ON, &c. And wherefore are Magistrates ordained, but that the tranquility of the Common-wealth may be confirmed, limiting both ploughes. But now for the fault of unpreaching Prelates, me thinke I could guesse what might be sayd for excusing of them. They are so troubled with Lordly livinge, they be so placed in pallaces, couched in Courts, ruffeling in their rents, dauncing in their dominions, burdened with ambassages; pampring of their paunches like a Munke that maketh his Iubely, mounching in their Maungers, and moyling in their gay Manours, and
 Mansions, and so trobled with loytering in their Lordships, that they cannot attend it.Ecclesiarum Prelatè in mundialibus scilicet effi∣caces, in spi∣ritualibus desides. Will. Malmesbu∣riensis. De Gestis Re∣gium Ang. l 5 p. 173. They are otherwise occupied, some in Kings matters, some are Ambassadours, some of the privy Counsell, some fur∣nish the Court, some are Lords of Parliament, some are Presidents and Comptrolers of Mints. Well, well,Bps ought not to inter∣medle with temporall or state affaires Is this their duty? Is this their calling? Is this a meetSee Bucerus de Regno Christi. l. 2. c. 12. office for a Preist to be comptrollers of Mints? Is this a meete office for a Preist that hath cure of soules? Is this his charge? I would heare a question, who comptrolleth the Devill at home at his parish, while hee comptrolleth the Minte? If the Apostles might not leave the office of preaching to be Deacons, shall one leave it for minting? I cannot tell you, the say∣ing is, that since Preistes have beene Minters, money hath beene worse then it was before: And they say, that the evilnes of money hath made all things deare. And in this behalfe I must speake to England. Heare my Country England, as Sant Paul sayd in the first Epistle to the Corinthians 6. chapter: for Paul was no sitting Bishop, but a walking and a preaching Bishop: Is there (saith hee) utterly among you no wise man to be an arbitrator in matters of Judgement? What? not one of all that can judge betweene brother and brother, but one brother goeth to Law with another, and that under hea∣then Judges? Appoint those Iudges that are most object and vile in the congregation: which hee speaketh in rebu∣king them; for saith hee; ad crubescentiam vestram dico, I speake it to your shame. So England I speake it to thy shame, is there never a Nobleman to be aSo in his 5. Sermon be∣fore K. Edw. hee writes thus Though I say, I would wish my Lord Presi∣dents, I meane not that I would have Prelates Lord Presi∣dents, nor that Lord Bps should be Lord Pre∣sidents. As touching that I sayd my minde and Conscience the last yeare. And although it is sayd, Praesent, it is not meant that they should be Lord Presidents; the office of a Presidentship is a civill office, and it cannot be, that one man shall discharge both well. Lord
 President, but it must be a Prelate? Is there never a wiseman in the Realme to be a Comptroller of the Mint? I speake it to your shame, I speake it to your shame. If there be never a wise man, make a Waterbea∣rer, a Tinker, a Cobler, a Slave, a Page Comptroller of the Minte. Make ameane Gentleman, a Groome, a Yeoman, make a poore begger Lord President. Thus I speake, not that I would have it so, but to your shame. Is there never a Gentleman meet not able to be Lord President? For why are not the Noble∣men and young Gentlemen of England so brought up, in the knowledge of God and in learning, that they be able to execute offices in the Common∣wealth. The King hath a great many of Wards, and I heare there is a Court of Wards; why is there not a schoole of Wards as well as there is a Court for their lands? Why are they not set to the schooles where they may learne? Or why are they not sent to Uni∣versities, that they may be able to serve the King when they come to age? The onely cause why Noblemen be not made Lord Presidents is, because they have not beene brought up in learning. Yet there be already Noblemen enough, though not so many as I could wish, able to be Lord Presidents, and wisemen enough for the Mint. And as unmeet a thing it is for Bishops to beThe same reason holds our Lord Presidents, Lord Chaun∣cellors, Lord Treasurers &c. Lord Presidents, or Preists to be Minters, as it was for the Corinthians to plead matters of variance before heathen judges. It is also aNote. slander to the Noblemen as though they lacked wisedome, and learning to be able for such offices. A Prelate hath a charge and cure otherwise; andNote well. ther∣fore
 hee cannot discharge his duty, and be a Lord President too: For a Presidentship requireth a whole man, and a Bishop cannot be two men. A Bishop hath his office; a flocke to teach, to looke unto; & therfore hee cannot meddle with another office, which re∣quireth an whole man. Hee should therefore give it over to whom it is meet, and labour in his owne bu∣sines, as Paul writeth to the Thessalonians: Let eve∣ry man doe his owne businesse, and follow his calling. Let the Preist preach, and the Noble men handle temporall matters. Well, I would all men would looke to their duty, as God hath called them, and then we should have a flourishing Christian Com∣mon-Weale, &c. But our Blaunchers, which will be Lords and no Labourers, when they are commanded to goe and be resident upon their Cures, and preach in their benefices, they will say: What? I have set a deputy there, I have a deputy, that looketh well to my flocke, and hee which shall discharge my duty. A deputy, (quod hee) I looked for that word all this while. And what a deputy must hee be trow ye? E∣ven one like himselfe. Hee must be aNote, those who lobour to advance and bring in the Canon Law, labour to advance and usher in the Pope againe, whose Law it is: as Miles & Clricus, and William Turner in his hunting of the Romish Fox, have notaby and unanswer∣ably prooved. Canonist, that is to say, one that is brought up in the study of the Popes Lawes and Decrees: one that will set forth Pa∣pistry as well as himselfe; and one that will main∣taine all superstition and idolatry; and one that will nothing at all, or else very weakely resist the Devils plough, yea happy it is, if hee take no part with the Devill, and where hee should be an enemy to him, it is well if hee take not the Devils parte. They are Lords and no Labourers, but the Devill is diligent
 at his plough. And now I would aske a strange que∣stion: Who is the most diligent Bishop and Prelate in all England, that passeth all the rest in doing his of∣fice? I can tell, for I know him who it is. I knew him well. But now I thinke I see you listning, hearkning that I should name him. There is one that passeth al the other, and is the most diligent Prelate an preacher in all England. And will yee know wh hee is? I will tell you; It is the Devill. Hee is the most diligent preacher of all others, hee is never ou of his Dioces, he is never from his cure, ye shall neve finde him unoccupied, hee is ever in his parish, hee keepeth residence at all times, yee shall never finde him out of the way: call for him when yee will, hee i ever at hande, the diligentest preacher in all the Realme, hee is ever at his plough: no Lording no Loytering can hinder him, hee is ever applying hi businesse, yee shall never finde him idle, I warrant you. Oh that our Prelates would be as diligent to so the corne of good doctrine, as Sathan is to sow cockle and darnell. There was never such a preacher in Eng∣land as hee is: he is no unpreaching Prelate. Hee is no Lordly loyterer from his cure, but a busy ploughman so that among all the Prelates, & among all the pack o thē that have cure the Devill, shall goe for my mony. For he still applieth his busines. Therfore you unprea∣ching Prelates, learne of the Devill to be diligent it doing your office. Learne of the Devill: and if you will not learne of God nor good men to be diligent, for shame learne of the Devill: Ad erubescentiam ve∣stram dico. I speake it to your shame. If you will not
 learne of God, nor good men ever to be diligent in your office, learne of the Devill. Howbeit there is now very good hope, that the Kings Majesty both by the helpe of good governance of his most hono∣rable Counsaylers, trayned and brought up in lear∣ning and knowledge of Gods word, will shortly provide a remedy, and set an order therein. Which thing that it may be so, let us pray for him. Thus this good Bishop in opposition to our present Prelates doctrines and practises; Who if hee were now alive and should say thus much, hee might peradventure, (if some of them had their will) be martyred once againe.
Our learned Martyr Doctor Barnes, in his Sup∣plication to King Henry the 8. p. 210. 211. writes: That it cannot be prooved by Scripture, that a man of the Church should have so great temporall posses∣sions as Bishops have. That they cannot by the Law of God have any Iurisdiction secular, and yet they challenge both powers. This is the Article that did bite you: for you cannot be content, with the office of a Bishop, but you will be also Kings. How that standeth with Gods Law, or with your oath, I have declared to our noble Prince. And our worthy Mar∣tyr Master Iohn Freth, in his Answer to Master Moores Preface, p. 116. determines thus: But surely since Sylvester received such possessions, hath the canker so crept in the Church, that it hath almost left never a sound member. Before that time there was no Bishop greedy to take a Cure: For it was no honor and profit as it is now, but onely a carefull charge, which was like to cost him his life at one
 time or other. And therefore no man would take it, but hee that bare such a love and zeale to God, and his flocke, that hee could be content to shed his blood for them: But after that it was made so hono∣rable and so profitable, they that were worst, both in learning and living, most labored for it, for they that were vertuous would not intangle themselves, with the vaine pride of this world, and weare their Crownes of gold, where Christ did weare one of thornes. And in conclusion it came so farre, that who∣soever would give most money for it, or best could flatter the Prince (which hee knew all good men to abhorre) had the Preheminence, and got the best Bishoricke. And then in steed of Gods word, they published their owne Commandements, and made Lawes to have all under them, and made men be∣leive, they could not erre what ever they did or sayd. And even as in the roomes and steed of Moses, Aa¦ron, Iosue, Caleb, and other such faithfull folke, came Herode, Annas, Caiphas, Pilate, and Iudas, which put Christ to death. So now insteed of Christ, Peter, Paul, Iames and Iohn, and the faithfull fol∣lowers of Christ, we have the Pope, Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, and proud Prelates, wit their Proctours, the Malicious Ministers of thei master the Devill, whose end shall be according to their workes.
But perchance the Bishops (who much abuse you Royall eares with misreports) will informe your Majesty that all these forecited Writers and martyred Bishops, we Puritans and seditious persons: Be it so, (though a gross
 untruth, unlesse all be Puritans and seditious persons, who oppose their ambitions, aspiring secular Pompe and Lordship:) yet let them heare on the contrary some few of their owne stampe and creatures, whom they cannot taxe of any such crimes as these.Ioannis de Aton. Con∣stit. Othobo∣ni. f. 69.70. Othobon the Popes Legate, with a whole generall Councell of all the Prelates and Clergie both of England and Ireland un∣der him, held at London, An. 1268. published this decree: In as much as it is reputed a speciall decency of Ecclesiasticall honesty, to be farre estranged from carnall actions; wee decree it a very hainous and fil∣thy thing, that hands deputed on heavenly mini∣steries, should be entangled with secular affaires: Or that certaine Clerkes, seeking after earthly gaines and temporall Iurisdiction, through a foule and greedy rapine, doe receive from Laymen secular Iu∣risdiction, and be called Iustices and doe minister Iustice, which they cannot minister without a dissi∣pation and injurie of Ecclesiasticall order. Therefore wee, desirous to extirpate this horrible vice, straight∣ly forbid all persons of Churches and Vicars with per∣petuities, yea also all other maner of persons what∣soever placed in the Ministery, that they presume not to take any secular Iurisdiction, of any secular person, or to exercise the same, according to the precepts of holy Canons: By this present Constitu∣tion wee straightly inhibit, that none placed in spi∣rituall warfare, presume to exercise in the secular Court, the office of an Advocate, either in the cause of blood, or in any cause whatsoever, save onely in such causes as are permitted unto him by Law. And
 wee likewise forbid that any Clergy man, be either a Iudge, or an assessor. Divers such Constitutions are inDistinctio. 21 quaest. 3. Gratian,De immu∣nitate Eccles. Lyndewoode, the Councels at largeDecreta∣lium. pars 5. 6. 7. passim. Iuo Carnotensis, andSumma Angelica tit. Clericus: Et Ioannis Lon∣gheconcius: De vita & honestate Ecclesiastico∣rum. lib. other Canonists, inhibi∣ting Bishops and Clergy men to intermeddle with any secular offices or affaires, which for brevity sake I pretermit.
Epist. 147Petrus Blesensis, Archdeacon of Bath, flou∣rishing about the yeare of our Lord, 1160. Writes thus to the Bishop of Bangor, concerning the Wealth and State of Bishops: The Title of poverty is glorious with Christ; and that which hath becomed the Sonne of God, ought not to misbeseeme you. The Prince of the Apostles and Prelates saith:Acts. 3 6. Gold and Silver have I none. Yea thatPossidoneus in Vita. Great famous Augustine (Bishop of Hippo) therefore made no will, because the poore servant of Christ had nothing at all, whereof to make any bequest. It is your duty to live of the Gospel as the Lord hath appointed, not to goe pompously in the ornament of cloathes, in the pride of horses, in the multitude of attendants. It becomes you as a pro∣fessor of preistly and Episcopall holines, to cut of all footsteps of your ancient conversation (Thus didGodwins Catalogue of Bishops. p. 628. Ai∣dan the first Bishop of Durham, who for 17. yeares space together travelled up and downe the Country even on foote to preach the Gospel, giving what∣soever hee could get unto the poore: Whose footsteps our Prelates now disdaine to follow, no not on horse∣backe:) And in hisBibl. Pa∣trum Tom. 12. pars. p. 942. 943 Treatise of the institution of a Bishop, dedicated to Iohn Bishop of Worcester, hee writes against the Lordlines, Courtship, and secular im∣ployments
 of Bishops, especially those, which concerne the Eschequer: Certaine Bishops abusively call the liberality and almes of ancient Kings bestowed on them, Baronies, and Royalties, and themselves Ba∣rons, it being an occasion, of most shamefull servi∣tude. I am afraid, least the Lord complaine of them and say:Osea. 8.4. They have raigned, but not by me, they have made themselves Princes, but I know it not. Thou must know that thou hast taken upon thee the office of a Shepheard, not of a Baron. CertainelyGen. 46.34. Ioseph being in Aegypt, instructed his Father and Brethren to say to Pharaoh, Wee are Schepheards. Hee would rather have them professe the office of a Shepheard, then of a Prince or Baron. Christ saith,Iohn. 10.11. I am the good Shepheard: But thou art made by him a Shep∣heard or a steward; a stewardship is committed to thee, and know that thou must give an account of thy stewardship. The husbandry of God is commit∣ted to thee, thou hast need a weeding hooke as an husbandman, of a staffe as a Shepheard, of a wee∣ding hooke, that as the Sonne of a Prophet, thouIer. 1.10. mist pull up and destroy, build up and plant. Use thy staffe by driving the wolves from the Sheepfold, by sustaining the weake Sheepe, by raising up those that are fallen, by reducing those that have strayed. But among the fruites of thy Episcopall office, let e∣ternall things be ever preferred before temporall. Let another giude and dispatch thy temporall cares and affaires for thee, but doe thou diligently attend the salvation of soules. The minde consecrated to the discharge of divine service, ought to be free from
 worldly imployments. Thou art addicted to great things, be not taken up with the smalest. These things what ever they are, which tend to the gaine of the world, and pertaine not to the gaining of soules, are small and vile. If you shall have secular busines,1. Cor. 6.4 saith the Apostle, appoint those who are most contemptible among you to be Iudges: Thou therefore, O good Pre∣late, set all things after the Salvation of soules; For, soules are as farre more worthy then bodies, and al things else that humane ambition caused, as heave it selfe excels earth in dignity. Yet at this day wit many Episcopall auctority consists onely in this, tha their plowlands be fatted with chalke and dung, tha their fishponds be multiplied, that their Parkes an the bounds of their possessions be inlarged. In buil¦ding Pallaces, Mils, and Ovens. All the care of Pre¦lates is increasing their rents. What is it the voyce o our Saviour to the Prince of the Apostles and Pre∣lates, if thou lovest me, till thy lands, build hig houses? wee read that hee said to Peter,Iohn. 21.17. If the lovest me, feed my sheep. Thou art the Heire and Vic of Peter; feed my sheep by preaching, doe the work of an Euangelist and shepheard: thou must not b ashamed of the Gospell, if thou beleivest, thou ough test not to be ashamed of thy pastorall office. Be in¦stant thefore in season, out of season, fullfill th Ministry; Thy Ministry hath more of burthen, the of honor. If thou affectest the honor, thou art a hireling; if thou imbracest the burthen, the Lord i¦able to increase his grace, that thou must recei gaines out of gaines, and profits out of profits. 
 thou shalt drowne thy selfe in the † Labyrinthes of Court affaires, especially of the Eschequer,A good note for Bis∣hops, that meddle with Court and Eschequer affaires. thou shalt suffer great losses of spirituall exercise.Matth. 6.24. No man can serve two Maisters, God and Mammon. Let it not slip out of thy minde, how in the tonsure of thy head, when as thou wast elected into the Lords portion, how thou hast renounced, the ignominy of Lay-im∣ployments. But in the day of thy consecration, thou hast made solemne vowes to renounce all secular things and imployments, (asSee the Booke of or∣dination and Consecration of Bishops. our Bishops and Mi∣nisters, yet doe in the presence of God, and the whole Congregation) which have bound up thy lips, thou art obliged with the words of thy owne mouth, when upon the interrogation of him, that consecrated thee, thou hast published without any exception, that from henceforth thou wouldest xchange & sequester thy selfe from all worldly businesses, and dishonest gaines, and wouldest allwayes bend thy whole study, and care upon divine affaires. What hast thou to doe with the renounces of the Eschequer, that shouldest neglect the care of soules, but for one short hower?Note this. What hath Christ elected thee to the receit of custome? Matthew being once taken from thence never returned thither againe. Be not therefore in the route of those, who preferre worldly imploy∣ments before spirituall, swallowing a Camell, and straining at a gnat.Ruffinus. Hist. l. 10, c 2. Wee read that in the dayes of Constantine there were certaine Bishops, flattering the Prince, who gave greater reverence and heed to Royall Edicts, then to Euangelicall precepts. And there are some Bishops now a dayes, to whom the
 dispensation of Gods word is committed, who are silent from good things, dumbe doggs, neither able, nor yet willing to barke: they are turned into an evill bow, giving themselves up as weapons of ini∣quity unto sinne. This exasperated Gods wrath, and accumulates the danger of eternall damnation as an¦ny, that certaine of the cheife Preists and Elders o the people, although they pronounce not judge∣ments of blood, yet they handle the same things by disputing and debating of them, and thinke them∣selves therefore free from blaime, that decreeing judgment of death, orLet those Prelates, who have had their voyces in such sen∣tences, con∣sider this. truncation of members (whic yet some of them of late have judicially given sentence of they absent themselves onely from the pronuncia∣tion and execution of the poenall sentence. Bu what is more pernicious then this dissimulation? Is i lawfull to discusse and determine that, which it is no lawfull to pronounce? Verily Saul did many waye handle and plot the death of David, & that hee migh palliate his malice under the shadow of innocency, hee sayd,1. Kings. 18.17. Let not my hand be upon him, but the han of the Philistims be upon him. Verily as much as thi dissimulation did excuse him with men, so much di it the more damnable accuse him with God. We have an expresse forme of similitude, in that Consistor wherein Christ was condemned to death: the Scribe and Pharisies sayd,Iohn. 18.31. It is not lawfull for us, to put a man to death; And yet when they cryed, saying, Cru¦cifie him, they pronounced a sentence of deat against him with bloody malignity. Whom the slew with the sword of the tongue, they protested 
 was not lawfull for them to slay, and their iniquity was in this very thing so much the more detestable, because that they might escape the judgement of men, they covered it with a simulation of innocency. Thou art set over the soules of men, not their bo∣dies; the Prelate hath nothing that is common with Pilate. Thou art Christs Steward and the Vicar of Peter: neither oughtest thou to give an account of the Iurisdiction committed to thee to Caesar, but to Christ. Yet some Bishops by usurped offices and ad∣ministrations of the world, make themselves ob∣noxious to the bend of the Court, and as if they had renounced the priviledge of their dignity, expect the sentence of an harder event, &c. Thus and farre more this ancient Writer against the Wealth, Pompe, Pride, Lordship, Lordlines, Iudicature and secular imployments of Bishops, even in his blinde age.
The Booke of Ordination of Ministers and con∣secration of Bishops, compiled and approoved by the Bis∣hops themselves, ratified by3. E. 6. c. 12. 8. Eliz. c. 1. two severall Acts of Parliament, (lately printed by the Archbishops speciall commaund, with the Booke of Common Prayer,) andCanon. 36. subscribed unto by all our Ministers, is most notable, to this purpose. For it prescribes all Bishops, when they ordaine Ministers to use this exhortation to them. Have alwayes printed in your remembrance, how great a Treasure is committed to your charge, for they be the sheep of Christ, which hee bought with his death, and for whom hee shed his blood. The Church and Congregation whom you must serve, is his spouse and body. And if it shall change the same Church, or any
 member thereof, to take any hurt or hinderance by reason of your negligence, yee know the greatnes of the fault, and also of the horrible punishment which will ensue. Wherefore consider with your selves the end of your Ministry towards the children of God, towards the spouse and body of Christ; and See THAT YOVBy what Law of the land then can Bishops silence or suspend Mi∣nisters, or put downe Lectures, or afternoone Sermons at their plea∣sure, whom this Booke confirmed by Parlia∣ment en∣joynes them never to cease their labor, care, and dili∣gence? &c. NEVER CEASE YOVR LABOVR, YOVR CARE, AND DILI∣GENCE, untill you have done all that lyeth in you, according to your bounden duty, to bring ALL SVCH AS ARE OR SHALL BE COM∣MITTED TO YOVR CHARGE, unto that ripenesse or perfectnesse of age in Christ, that there be no place left among them, either for error in re∣ligion, or for vitiousnes of life. (And what Prelate or Minister hath done this?) And for this selfesame cause, yee see how yee ought to forsake and set a side (as much as you may)See an excellent Passge in Martin Bu∣cer, De Or∣dinatione Legitima Ministro∣rum, &c. in his Scripta Anglicana, p. 253. & De Regno Christi. l. 2 c 12. ALL WORLDLY CARES AND STVDIES. Wee have good hope, that you have well weighed and pondered these things with your selves long before this time, and that you have clearely determined by Gods grace to give your selves WHOLLY to this vocation, whereunto it hath pleased God to call you, so that (as much as lyeth in you) you apply your selves WHOLLY to this one thing, and drawI would those Prelates and Ministers would consider this who draw all their care and studies the quite contrary way. ALL YOVR CARE
 and STVDY this way and to this end. And that you will CONTINVALLY pray for the heavenly assistence of the Holy Ghost, that by dayly reading and weighing of the Scriptures, you may so wax ri∣per and stronger in your Ministery. And that this your promise shall more moove you to doe your du∣ties, yee shall answere plainely to these things, which we in the name of the Congregation shall demaund of you touching the same. The Bishop. Will you give your faithfull diligence alwayes to minister the doctrine and Sacraments, and the discipline of Christ, as the Lord hath commaunded, and as this Realme hath received the same, according to the Commaundements of God, so that you may teach the people, committed to your cure and charge, with all diligence to keepe and observe the same?
Answere. I will so doe by the helpe of the Lord. The Bishop. Will you be diligent in prayers and in reading of the holy Scriptures, and in such studies as helpe to the knowledge of the same, laying aside theHow well doe our State-Pre∣lates, Bps, & Ministers thinke you performe this serious pro∣mise, or thinke upon it? studie of the world and the flesh?
Answere. I will endeavour my selfe so to doe, the Lord being my helper. The like exhortation is given to, and the like promise made by all Archbishops, and Bishops, when they are consecrated, before all the congregation present. Are not such Prelates therefore doublely perjured both to God, and man, who breake these solemne publike protestations, by neglecting their spirituall functions and preaching, by silencing, suspending the most powerfull frequent preachers, by putting downe Lectures and Lecturers, and by giving themselves principally, if not

 Prophet Esay had foretold, to preach the Gospell, would doe nothing without warrant. And there∣fore being asked if hee were a King, answered simply, and by a plaine negative, My Kingdome is not of this world. If his Kingdome was not here, neither the ordering of Policies; yea when they would have taken him up to have made him a King, as one thatFew of our Prelates would now refuse such a profer. refu∣sed that belonged not to him, hee conveyed him∣selfe from among them. If imperiall Iurisdiction be∣longed to him, why refused hee his calling? If it did not, where had Paul, Peter, or any other, any autho∣rity to meddle with that which hee refused? Seeing, hee saith; As my Father sent me, so send I you. In another place, Christ knowing the bounds of his cal∣ling, would not meddle with externe policy. Hence Bishops me thinkes by his example, should not give themselves too much the bridle, and too large a scope,See Bucer, De Regno Christi: l. 2. c. 12. to meddle too farre with matters of policy. If these two offices, I meane Ecclesiasticall and civill be so jumbled in both functions, there can be no quiet or well ordered Common-wealth. Christ saith to his Disciples: Princes of the Nations doe beare rule like Lords, it shall not be so with you. It falleth not into an Apostles or Churchmans office, to meddle with such matters. For none going to warre, intangleth him∣selfe with the affaires of this life; it is enough for them to attend upon one office; to attend as sole Preists, not as Errant Bayliffes. (And elsewhere in that Booke hee proceedes thus:) Come off ye Bishops away with your superfluities; yeeld up your thousands, be content with hundreds, as they be in other reformed
 Churches, where there be as great learned men as you are. LET YOVR PORTION BE PREISTLIKE, NOT PRINCELIKE. Let the Queene have the rest of your temporalties, to maintaine warres, and to build Schooles throughout the Realme, that every parish Church may have its preacher, every City her Superintendent to live not pompously: which will never be, unlesse your be disposed and bestowed upon many, which now feed and fat but one. Remember that Abimelech, when David in his banishment would have dined with him kept such hospitality, that hee had no bread to give him, but the Shewbread. Where was all his superfluity to keep your pretented hospitality? for that is the cause that you alleadge, you must have thousand thousands; as though you were commaun∣ded to keepe hospitality, rather with a thousand then with a hundred: Remember the Apostles were so poore, that when the lameActs. 3.1. to 7. man, who lay at the Temple-gate called Beautifull, asked an almes of Pe∣ter and Iohn, as they went about to goe into the Temple; Peter answered him in this maner: Silver and gold have I none. And Paul was so farre from having Lordships, that his owne hands ministred oft times to his necessities. If the Apostles of our Saviour had so small possessions and revenues, why should our Pre∣lates, who boast themselves to be their proper Suc∣cessours, enjoye or couet so great? When as Paul en∣joynes them, if they have but foode and raiment therewith to be content, godlinesse alone with contentment being great gaine, and a sufficient portion. This prooves the
 saying of Doctor Barnes most true, in his Supplica∣tion to King Henry the 8. against the Bishops, p. 211. They say they be the Successors of Christ and his A∣postles; but I can see them follow none but Iudas; for they beare the purse, and have all the money. And if not they had not so great possessions, I am sure an hundred would speake against them, where now dare not one, for losse of promotion. Iudas sold our Master but once, and ye sell him as often as hee commeth in your hands. In the Acts and Monuments of our Martyrs, f. 1796. I finde this Dialogue between Sir Iohn Baker, Collins his Chaplaine, and Edmund Allin a Martyr. Baker. I heard say, that you spake against Preists and Bishops. Allin. I spake for them, for now they have so much living, and especially Bishops, Archdeacons, and Deanes, that they nei∣ther can nor will teach Gods word. If they had a hundred poundes a peece, then would they apply their study, now they cannot for other affaires. Col∣lins. Who will then set his children to schoole? Allin. Where there is now one set to schoole for that end, there would be 40. because that one Bishops living divided into 30. or 40. parts, would finde so many as well learned men as the Bishops be now, who have all this living, neither had Peter nor Paul any such re∣venue. Baker. Let us dispatch him, hee will marre all. Collins. If every man had a hundred pounds, as hee saith, it would make moe learned men. Baker. But our Bishops would be angry, if that they knew it. Allin. It were for a Common-wealth to have such Bishoprickes divided, for the further increase of lear∣ning.
 Nicholas Bullingham, Bishop of Lincolne, in his printed Letter to Master Bull, December 5. 1564. writes thus from Embden, where hee arrived after many stormes: Would God Master Bull, that all the Pre∣lates of England had beene with me, when we fell to cutting of Cables, riding at anchor in the raging Seas. There would have beene tearing of square Caps, ren∣ting of Rochets, defying of Bishoprickes, despising of Pompe, promising of new life; crying for mer∣cy: O what a Tragedy would there have beene? Well, well, though now they walke drie shoode in their Pallaces, there is a God that will trie them and all his people by fire or by water, unlesse we heartily re∣pent. Grace to repent, graunt us, O Lord, without delay. Amen, Amen.
Doctor Bridges, Deane of Sarum, afterwards Bishop of Oxford, a great Champion for the Prelates; writing against the Papists in defence of the Princes Su∣premacy, hath these words:Of the Princes Su∣premacy, p. 926. Christ hath put such a barre between Bishops and Princes, that his spirituall Bishops cannot have earthly Kingdomes. And where∣as the Papists held; that the Pope was not properly but improperly a Lord; hee replieth: Christ sim∣ply debarreth all his spirituall Ministers from ruling of temporall Kingdomes. Christ hath both properly and unproperly debarred them. Vos autem non sic. You shall not doe so. These words strike dead Master Saunders; yea our Lordly Prelates too. Doctor BilsonOf the true difference between Christin Subjection, and Anti∣christian Rebellion, p. 126. 127 Warden, and shortly after Bishop of Winchester writes thus: Christ expresly forbiddeth his Apostles to be rulers of Nations. The Kings of the Nations
 rule over the people, &c. but with you, it shall not be so. In which words Christ doth not traduce the power of Princes as unjust, but distinguished the cal∣ling of the Apostles from the maner of regiment, which God hath allowed the Magistrate. Christ saith, not Princes are tyrants, you shall deale more courte∣ously: but hee saith: Princes be rulers by Gods or∣dinance; you shall not be so: that is, you shall nei∣ther beare rule, nor exercise authority over your brethren. After which hee prooves that the Greeke word  is not meant of any unjust or ty∣rannicall rule; but Christ in this text doth thereby distinguish the calling of his Apostles from the maner of lawfull regiment, which God hath allowed the Magistrate. And therefore (saith hee) the con∣clusion is inevitable, that Princes may lawfully com∣pell and punish their Subjects, but Bishops may not. The distinction between them is evident by their se∣verall Commissions, which God hath signed. TheRom. 13. Prince, not the Preist beareth the sword: Ergo, the Prince not the Preist is Gods Minister to avenge Ma∣lefactors. PeterMatth. 26 himselfe was sharply rebuked by Christ for using the sword: and in Peter all Pastors and Bishops are straitly charged, not to meddle with it. All that take the sword, shall perish with the sword. And of all men1. Tim. 3. Tit. 1. a Bishop must be no striker. For if hee, that should feed his Maisters household,Math. 24. fall to striking, he shall have his portion with hypocrites. The servants of God must be gentle towards all, instructing (notAs to ma∣ny Prelates doe now, who are the grea∣test strikers, finers, im∣prisoners, and oppres∣sors of all others. imprisoning) those that resist with mildnes, not compelling any with sharpnes.
 Their function is limited to the preaching of the word, and dispensing of the Sacraments, which have no kinde of compulsion in them, but invite men2. Tim. 3. and 4. onely by sober perswasions to beleive and imbrace the promises of God. To conclude, Pastors may teach, exhort, and reproove, not force, commaund, or revenge: onely Princes, be Governours, that is, publike Magistrates, to prescribe their Lawes, and punish by their sword, such as resist them within their dominions, which Bishops may not doe. Thus Bishop Bilson. AndPoore mans Library, Tom 2. f 15. 16. Bishop Alley, with Master DeaneReproofe of Dorman, p. 17. 48. 57. Novell before him, use the selfesame words in substance, interpreting that text of Math. 20. and Luke. 22. as hee hath done. To conclude these testimonies. The third part of the Homily of the Perill of Idolatry, ra∣tified by the 35. Article of our Church, Subscribed unto by all our Prelates and Ministers, and reprinted by your Majesties and your Royall Fathers speciall commaund; recites f. 59. That Bishops in the primi∣tive Church, did most diligently and sincerely teach, & preach: For they were then preaching Bishops, and more often seene in Pulpits then in Princes Pallaces; more often occupied in his Legacy, who said: Goe yee unto the whole world, and preach the Gospell to all men, then in Embassages and AFFAIRES OF PRINCES OF THIS WORLD. Yea all the Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, and Clergy of England, in their Institution of a Christian man, dedicated by them to King Henry the 8. subscribed with all their names, and printed cum Privilegio, An. 1537. resolve thus:Chapter of Orders. Fox Acts & Monuments Edit. 1610. p. 971. Wee thinke it convenient, that all
 Bishops and Pastors shall instruct and teach the peo∣ple, committed unto their spirituall charge; that Christ did by expresse words prohibit, that none of his Apostles, nor any of their Successors, should under the pretence of authority, given unto them by Christ, take upon them the authority of the sword, that is to say, the authority of Kings, or of any civill power in this world, yea or any authority to make Lawes, or ordinances in causes, apertaining unto civill powers. If any Bishop, of what estate or dignity soever hee be, be hee Bishop of Rome, or of any other City, Province, or Diocesse, doe pre∣sume to take upon him authority or Iurisdiction, in causes or matters, which appertaine unto Kings, and the civill powers and their Courts, and will maintaine or thinke, that hee may so doe by the authority of Christ and his Gospell, although the Kings and Princes would not permit and suffer him so to doe. No doubt that Bishop is not worthy to be called a Bishop, but rather a tyrant, and a usurper of other mens rights, contrary to the Lawes of God, and is worthy to be reputed none otherwise, then hee that goeth about to subvert the Kingdome of Christ. For the Kingdome of Christ in his Church is spirituall, and not a carnall Kingdome of the world: that is to say, the very Kingdome that Christ by himselfe, or by his Apostles and Disciples sought here in this world, was to bring all nations from the carnall Kingdome of the Prince of darknes unto the light of his spirituall Kingdome, and so himselfe raigne in the hearts of the people by grace, faith, hope, and
 charity. And therefore sith Christ did never seeke nor exercise any worldly Kingdome, or dominion in this world, but rather refusing and fleeing the same, did leave the said worldly governance of Kingdomes, Realmes and Nations, to be governed by Princes and Potentates (in like maner as hee did finde them) and commaunded also his Apostles and Disciples to doe the semblance; whatsoever Preist or Bishop will arrogate, or presume upon him any such authority, and will pretend the authority of the Gospell for his defence therein, hee doth nothing else; (but in a maner as you would say) crowneth Christ againe with a crowne of thornes, and traduceth and bringeth him forth againe with his mantle of purple upon his backe, to be mocked and scorned of the world, as the Iewes did to their owne damnation. Thus all our Pre∣lates and Clergy (and after them King Henry the 8. in his necessary Erudition for any Christian man, autho∣rized and approoved by the Satute of 32. H. 8. c. 26. the Lords spirituall and temporall i the Nether∣howse of Parliament, An. 1545. where the same words are verbatim repeated) resolve, contrary to the Doctrine and Suggestions of their present Successors. As the Doctrine, so the practise likewise of our most am∣bitious domineering Prelates, condemnes the suggestions of our secular Bishops: It is recorded ofMatthew Paris. Hist. Major. p. 94 Antiquitates Eccles Brit. p. 122. God∣wins Cata∣logue of Bis∣hops. p. 88. Thomas Becket, that greate traiter and turbulent Archbishop of Canterbury, who set the whole Kingdome in a long com∣bustion had yet so much conscience, and divinity in him, that being installed Archbishop of Canterbury, (being but a meere Deacon before,) hee voluntarily
 resigned and gave over his Lord Chauncellourship of England, sending the great Seale to the King, who was then in Normandy, together with a Letter wherein hee certified him, That hee could not serve the Church & the Court both at once: & therefore he resigned this his tēporall office, as incompatible with his spirituall. Wee readHoveden Annalium, pars posterior p. 767. 768 779. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 138. 139 140. 142. 143. Speeds History, p. 550. that when Hubert, Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, was made Lord Chauncellour, cheife Iustice of England, and high Governour of all the Kings Dominions immediately under him, that hee was much blamed, and that not unworthily, and no lesse envied for taking these offices upon him: in so much that a Noble man said unto him in scorne, at what time hee was made Chauncellor, I have heard of many Chauncellours made Bishops, but of an Archbishop, that would vouchsafe to stoop to the Chauncellorship, till now I never heard of any, (for most Bishops that were Treasurers and Chauncel∣lors, were first such Lay-officers, and Lay-men to, and then made Bishops for a reward of their service or better maintenance; not first Bishops, and then made Treasorers, Chauncellers, and such like tem∣porall officers.) Whereupon within two yeares after his advauncement to these high places, the better to excuse his ambition, hee made a dissembling and counterfeit shew of being desirous to have his tem∣porall offices, in so much as hee dealt effectually with the King by letters, to give them leave to re∣signe them,Yet our great Pre∣lates thinke not so. saying, That the charge of his Church was worke enough for one man, whereunto onely hee would gladly dedicate himselfe. This hee did assuring himselfe in his owne conceit, that the King knowing
 no man about him so likely, to manage those affaires as himselfe, and not being able to want him, would intreat him to retaine them still: But the King thinking his motion reasonable, and not willing longer to deny it, the Archbishop thus taken tardy in his owne snare, as though his minde and determi∣nation were suddenly altered, signified unto the King in letters, that notwithstanding his great desire of betaking himselfe onely to spirituall matters, and the manyfold infirmities of his age, hee would be content to afford his labour and diligence in his other offices yet a while longer, if therein hee might doe his Majesty any profitable service, acquainting him with all, that in these two yeares, since his perfer∣ment, hee had gathered for his use 1100000. markes which hee was ready to pay into his coffers, augmen∣ting (it is like) the summe; and adding thereto out of his his owne purse, that so hee might in cleanly sort buy againe those honorable and gainefull offices, which his subtile dissimulation had almost lost him. But the King not long after, upon a petition of the Lords in Parliament, thrust him out of these offices; to which when he was againe restored; the Pope upon complaint by the Monkes of Canterbury of his inter∣medling in civill affaires, presently enjoyned him without further delay, to resigne all his temporall offices; which hee (how loath soever) was faine to doe; the Pope assuring him, that hee would neither suffer him, nor any other Bishop or Clergy man to intermeddle in temporall affaires, commaunding all Prelates of the Church, upon their Canonicall
 obedience, not to take upon them any temporall of∣fices, because being intangled in secular businesses, they could not possible sufficiently discharge their spirituall functions; for as the wise man saith:
Pluribus intentus minor est ad singular sensus. Hence was it, thatGodwins Catalogue of Bishops, p. 152. 602 Thomas Arundell, so soone as ever hee was made Archbishop of Canterbury, pre∣sently thereupon gave over his Chauncellourship of England, as unable to discharge both. AndGodwin. Ib. p. 158. Iohn Stafford, who succeeded him in that See, though hee held that office long, yet at last waxing weary of so painefull a place, hee voluntarily re∣signed his Chauncellorship of England, as incom∣patible with his spirituall function, and an impedi∣ment to his discharge thereof. SoGodwin. Ibid. p. 267. Iohn Totham, Bishop of Ely, a wise and vertuous man, but very un∣learned, was made Chauncellour of England, Anno 1317. in which office hee continued but two yeares, and then voluntarily gave it over, after which being made Treasurer, hee (out of conscience,) resigned that place within a twelve moneth, and be∣tooke himselfe altogether to the governement of his Church, his more honorable and proper function: Yea that ambitious, proud Cardinall and Archbishop of Yorke, ThomasGodwin. Iid. p. 621. Woolsie, who wholly merged himselfe in secular offices and state-affaires, falling into disgrace, put from his places, attainted into a Prae∣munire, and last of all arrested of high treason, con∣sidering his former courses, and Gods just judgement on him for them, brake out into these words, being the last hee uttered: If I had served God as diligently
 as I haue done the King, hee would not have given me over in my gray haires; but this is THE JVST REWARD, that I must receive for the paines and study, I have had to doe him service, not regarding my service, to God, so much as the satisfying of his pleasure. A good lesson for all our Court Pre∣lates, now guilty of the selfesame offence; of whome wee may say, asAntiquit. Eccles. Brit. p. 138. William Paruus once did of Hugh, Bishop of Duresme; Istis mundus non crucifixus, sed infixus fuit; and not as Paul writes of himselfe. Gal. 6.14. The world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world; many of them being now too likeGodwins Catalogue, p. 637. 638 Malmesbury De Gestis Pontificum Angliae. l. 3. p. 277. Walter the 28. Bishop of Durham, who attending more worldly affaires, then the charge of his flocke, gave himselfe altogether to temporall businesse, wherein hee wholy occupied himselfe, becoming a temporall Iudge, de∣termining all causes at his pleasure, oppressing the people, and taking still the course, that might be most for his owne gaine; which made him so odious among the common people, that at last they mur∣thered both himselfe and his cheife agents, Lufwyn and Gilbert, even in the very Church it selfe, fo which they fled for sanctuary. If then those ambitious Prelates in the very night of Popish darkenes, have thus either voluntarily or coactively relinquished these their secular imployments, as incompatible with their spi∣rituall, should not ours now much more doe it in this cleare sunshine of the Gospell? yes verily. I have thus long detai∣ned your Majesty with these domestique authorities, and
 examples (to which † infinit others might be added) that so you might discerne,Fox Acts & Monuments passim. Hen∣ry Stalbridge his exhorta∣tory Epistle. An Epistle to Queene Eli∣zabeth. Nicholaus de Clemangis: De Corrupto Ecclesiae Statu Illyri∣cus. Catalogus. Testium Ve∣ritatis. Tho∣mas Beacon his Supplilca∣tion, and his reports of certaine men. Mar∣tyn Bucer de Regno Christi. l. 2. c. 12. dedi∣cated to King Ed∣ward the 6. Haddon Contra Osorium. l 3 f. 243. to 253. 292. 293. 294. Doctor Barnes his Supplication to King Henry the 8. p. 210. 211. 212. Iohn Frith his Answere to Master Mares Preface, pa. 116. Master Whethenhall his Discourse of the Corruptions now in question. The Supplication to King Henry the 8. An. 1544. what difference there is betweene the judgements and opinions, and practise of our present overswayng secular Prelates, and these their more moderate Predecessors (whom they cannot charge with Puritanisme Novelty or faction, as they doe all such who now concurre in judgement with them) and how dangerous unlawfull, and pernicious it is both in regard of Church & state; for Archbishops, Bishops or other Clergy men to exercise temporall dominion, or manage temporall offices and State-affaires; which Auctors, Bishops, Mar∣tyrs, where they now alive, and should write or speake thus much, they would finde such little Laud and applause among our Pontificall Prelates, as it would be a greater question, to which Dungeon they should be forth with committed close Prisoners, then whether they should escape unpunished, unpersecuted by them.
As those writers, so the Godly Emperors heretofore were so farre from imploying Bishops and Clergy men in temporall State-affaires, thatIustinian Codicis, lib. 1. De Episcopis & Clericis, 17. 36. 40. Honorius and Theo∣dosius the Emperors enacted this Law: It is our gra∣cious pleasure, that Clergy men shall have no com∣munion with publike functions or things pertaining
 to the Court, unto whose body they are not incor∣porated: And Iustinian the Emperor decreed; That Bps should not be suffered to take upon them the o∣versight of any orphane, or to be a receiver, or ga∣therer of charges belonging to the treasure, or to take upon them publike or other mens possessions, that so their ministry might not be hindred; yea hee pro∣mulged this ensuing Law: Wee repeating our procla∣mation thinke it good, not onely that the Iudges of every tribunall, but that the governours of the Churches of this excellent City, among whom this MOST FILTHY KINDEProbate of wills, an∣ciently be∣longed not to Ecclesiasti∣call Courts. OF PROOVING WILLES OF DEAD MEN hath crept in, be forewarned that they meddle not with a thing, which by the disposition of our Lawes, appertaine not in any wise to any other, then onely to the Maister of our revenues. For it is absurd, yea rather an igno∣miny for Cleargy men, to shew themselves cunning in common pleadings. And the transgressors of this ordinance wee deeme, shall be punished with the losse of 50. pound of gold: yet (saith the Glosse,) because a litle gaine was given for probate of wills, covetous Cleargy men have usurped them. The rea∣son of the Lawes is thus elsewhere expressed:Codex, De Testa. l. De Consulta di∣nalia. Codex De Dona. L. in hac. Et L. Se. It is a great absurdity, that offices should be mingled together without order or consideration, and that one man should cacth a thing committed to the credit of an∣other. Wee thinke that the deceit of these men ought to be met with, who under pretence of being Deanes or Collegiate men, when they performe no such duty; endeavour by reason of other charges,
 to withdraw themselves, that none under color of some one office, which hee doth not execute, might be eased of the weight and burden of an office, which by duty hee should execute. But to returne home againe. The veryRegister pars 1. fol. 187. b. See f. 175. 179. b. 184. b. Common Law of England hath provided a speciall writ, inhibiting Cleargy men to be elected to any temporall office or imployment, and discharging them thereof in case, they are elected; quia non est consonum, &c. because it is not meet, that hee, who hath theIf these rea∣son hold good in those who have but one Cure, much more in Bis∣hops who have so ma∣ny flockes to attend and supervise. Cure of soules, and is to give perpetuall attendance on his cure, and other pious spirituall services, ad insistendum alibi in secula∣ribus negotiis compellatur; should be compelled to imploy himselfe in secular affaires elsewhere; CON∣TRA LEGEM ET CONSVETVDINEM REGNI NOSTRI, contrary to the Law, and Custome of our Realme. A cleare resolution, That Cleargy-mens intermeddling with secular offices and af∣faires, is contrary to the very Common Law, and Custome of the Realme, and a very unseemly thing.Antiquita∣tes Ecclesiae Brit. p. 139 140. 141. Mathew Parker, Archbishop of Canterbury, in the life of Hubert his predecessor, records; that about the yeare of our Lord, 1197. there was nothing sound and sincere in the Christian republicke: that the whole Cleargy under a feined and counterfeit shew of re∣ligion, did wallow without punishment in wicked∣nesses, in bribes, in honors and rapines, neglecting utterly the preaching of Gods word. The originall (saith hee) of this evill sprung from this, that the Cleargy did too much intermeddle with worldly af∣faires, contrary to the Decrees of the orthodox Fa∣thers.
 For at that time the Deane of Paules was made Lord Treasurer; who carrying that office, quickly hourded up a great treasure; at last falling into a deadly disease past recovery, hee was exhor∣ted by the Bishops and great men to receive the Sa∣crament of Christs body and blood, which hee trem∣bling at refused to doe; whereupon the King admo∣nished and commaunded him to doe it, hee promi∣sed him thereupon to doe it the next day: being ad∣monished to make his will, hee commaunded all to voyd the rome but one scribe.A strang eill & death of Cleargy Lord Trea∣surer, who like Iudas, Christs Treasurer & Baggebea∣rer, died in despaire. Who beginning to write his will in the accustomed formes, in the name of the Father, of the Sonne, &c. the Deane percei∣ving it, commaunded him in a rage to blot it out, and these words onely to be written:Lego omnia bona mea Domino Regi, corpus seputurae, Animam Diabolo. Quo dicto expira∣vit, &c. I bequeath all my goods to my Lord the King, my body to the grave, and my soule to the Devill; which being ut∣tered, hee gave up the Ghost.Note. The King here∣upon commaunded his carcase to be carried into a Cart, and drowned in the river. This sort of ex∣amples (writes hee) are therefore to be produced, that Cleargy men may be deterred from being Lord Treasurers, Collectors of the Kings Customes, and from civill and publike imployments. In Huberts time all secular offices almost were in Cleargy-mens hands; for some of them were Chaunsellours, some Iustices, some Treasurers of the Kingdome; others had other offices in all the Kings Courts, and plura∣lities of many great livings besides: which wealth, honours, offices, and dignities, as it made them like to Kings in state and magnificence; so it puffed
 them up with such pride and arrogance, that in the 36. yeare of King Henry the third, they were re∣mooved from all civill offices and honours, at the in∣stant request and desire of the greatest Noblemen, to whom the same offices were committed. Hence some of all orders in our present times, have most sharplySee Nicho∣laus de Cle∣mangiis, De Corrupto Ec∣clesiae statu: c. 17. 18. 19. an ex∣cellent Dis∣course a∣gainst Bps, intermedling in temporall affaires, and bearing civill offices. Henry Stallbridge his exhorta∣tory Epistle, against the pompishs Po∣pish Bishops of England, as yet the true mem∣bers of their Father the great Anti∣christ of Rome, writ∣ten in King Henry the 8. his raigne, and the Sup∣plication to King Henry the 8. An. 1544. reprehended the Cleargy for this very thing, that being advaunced to the degree of divini∣ty, then which nothing in humane life ought to be deemed more holy, they should be hindred there from with secular businesses, as with servile workes, and being withdrawen from divine things, should give themselves to pecuniary and exchequer affaires which are most estranged from the dignity of their life, by which some (as appeares by the example of that Dean of Paules) have made shipwrack both of Conscience and soule to. Wilhel∣mus Nubrigensis speaking of Hugh, Bishop of Du∣resme, for intermeddling with the procuration of temporall affaires, hath these words: That office (to wit, of Lord Chauncellour or cheife justice) was committed by the King to the Bishop of Duresme, who did not so much as refuse, but chearfully im∣brace it; who verily contenting himselfe with his pro∣per office, had much more decently beene a Minister of Gods Law, then of mans; since no man can serve both, as hee ought. And that saying of our Lord to the Apostles, yee can not serve God and Mammon, did principally respect the Apostles Successors. For if a Bishop that hee may please both the heavenly and earthly King, at once will devide himselfe to both of∣fices:
 Verily the heavenly King, who wills that men should serve him with all the heart, with all the foule, and with all the strenght, doth neither approove, nor love, nor accept his divine ministry. What then will hee doe, if a Bishop doth not give peradventure not so much as halfe of himselfe to execute the things which are of God, and become a Bishop; but committs his cures to unworthy and remisse execu∣tioners, that hee may wholy serve an earthly Court or Palace? For no halfe man can sufficiently admi∣nister the offices of an earthly Prince. By which sentences and examples wee verily are admonished, that assiduous care and study of Cleargy men, in worldly and civill affaires, which makes them proove slow and unfit to divine things, is by all meanes to be reprooved, and that the complaint of those is very unjust, who tax them for not intermeddling with temporall affaires, and study to call them back from divine things, to which they ought with all their might to apply themselves. Thus this ArchbishopThomas Walsingham Ypodigma Neustriae, An. 1371. p. 132. in the raigne of King Edward the 3. An. 1371. at a Parliament holden at London, upon a Petition of the temporall Lords, the Bishops were remooved from the temporall offices of Chauncellor, Treasurer, Clerke of the privy Seale, and Laymen put into their places: they being commonly the cheife plotters and contriuers of all treasons, conspiracies, and rebellions, the very incendiaries, pests, and greivances both of the Church and State, the cheifest instruments to advaunce the Popes usurped authority, though with the prejudice of the Kings, (which they never cordially affected) and the Arch-ene∣mies
 of the Common-weale, through their pride, oppression, covetousnes, rebellion, and tyranny, when they have beene in office, as appeares bySee Anti∣quitates Ec∣clesiae Brit. in their lives. Had∣don, Ca Osorium. l. 3 f. 251. Fox Acts & Monuments p. 168. 169 174. 175. 178. 181. to 207. 214 to 219. 227 to 234. 248 249. 303. 320. 321. 350. 409. 410. 479. 533 1035 106. 1132. 1897. 1899. and elsewhere. Halls Chro∣nicle, Anno 16. H. 8. f. 138. &c. Dr. Henry Stalbridge his exhorta∣tory Epistle, Dr. Barnes bis Supplica∣tion to King Henry the 8. Master Tyn∣dals Practise of Popish Prelates. Thomas Becon his Supplication. Anselme, Becket, Arundell, William Bishop of Ely, Cardinall Woolsy, Stephen Gardener, with others forecited.
How safe therefore it may be for your Majesty, either in point of piety or policy, to intrust them with the managing of temporall State affaires, ne∣glecting preaching, and their owne spirituall functions, or to permit them dayly, to incroach upon your Ecclesiasticall Prerogative, as they have dangerously presumed of late in an high deree, I humbly submit to your Royall wisedome; who as you are best able to right your selfe against their usurpations here presented to your Princely view, (which your faithfull Subjects dare not now so much as whisper against for feare of ruine, both to them∣selves and their families, if they once fall into your potent Prelates talents, who are most implacably bent against all such, as are most able and ready to pleade Gods cause and your Majesties against their impious, superstitious, disloyall innovations: it being now more safe to be a Iesuite, or Traytor to your Majesty, then an enemy to your Bishops dis∣loyall proceedings) so are you every way meetest, both in respect of your Soveraigne power, and au∣thority to rescue your poore oppressed wooried Subjects from these ravenousActs. 20.29. Wolves, under
 whose cruelty, injustice, and manifold exactions, they now grone and languish, a short view whereof the se∣cond part of this Breviate will represent unto your Highnes. Alas, the condition of your best Subjects now is such, that they know not whether to flie for succour or releife against yourVideat ali∣quis eos qui Pastores gregis & E∣piscopi popu∣li esse debe∣bant. Vbi studium doctrinae a∣pud hs? Vbi legum vel pietatis & religionis ve∣rae, vel pro∣priorum quaedam & ipsorum cu∣stodia? Aut quid jam in∣ter horum, & tyrannica illa veterum imperia in∣terest? An minus ardent regni cupi∣ditate? An remissius ex∣petunt splen∣dorem divi∣tiarum? aut verecundiùs libidinibus obscaenis in∣dulgent? aut clementiùs dominantur? Alexander Alesius. Or∣dinat, Ecclesie Angliae Proaem. apud Buceri Scripta Anglicana. p. 371. Prelates injustice, tyranny, vexatious, exactions, oppressions, who by their policy and potency have blocked up all wayes of succour and redresse. If any Subject heretofore had beene injured by them, hee might have releived himselfe by a Prohibition, an Action of the case, or Prae∣munire at the common Law; But now they have sued out a Prohibition against Prohibitions themselves, that they may play Rex, and doe what they list with∣out controll: and hee, who would right himselfe by an Action of the case or Premunire, can neither finde counsell, who dare plead for him, nor Iudges who dare suffer, much lesse incourage him to proceed: As for appeales, as they are with much cost and diffi∣culty rarely obtained, so are they commonly a re∣medy worse then the disease, and but a leape out of the frying panne into the fire, as the proverbe is. If any debarred of these legall remedies, appeale immediately to your Majesty for releife, their Sup∣plications are either forestalled, perverted, or sup∣pressed before they can finde accesse to your Royall presence by the Bishops and their agents, or else re∣ferred back againe to themselves, (which is nothing
 else in truth, but to put the lambe that flies for shel∣ter to the shepheard, from the wolfe into the wolfes owne mouth that would devoure him, and to make the persecutor his owne Iudge and Executioner to:) who being both enemies, the parties complained against and their owne Iudges in their owne case, (thoughSee Fox Acts and Monuments p. 1024. 1520. unmeet and unreasonable, that they should be so, and contrary to all Lawes,) are sure to passe sen∣tence against the complainer, and so to proceed a∣gainst him even for seeking releife, that hee shall neither have meanes, nor ability, nor courage left him to complaine the second time, though more op∣pressed then before. This being the deplored con∣dition ofSee Doctor Barnes his Supplication to King Hen∣ry the 8. many of your best Subjects, as well Mini∣sters as people, who languish, groane, yea perish un∣der the Prelates tyranny, malice, cruelty, oppres∣sions and extortions, alas poore, Creatures, what shall they doe? where shall they complaine? whether shall they flie for shelter or releife? To your Iudges: they may not; to your sacred person, they cannot; to whom else, they know not any upon earth: Onely they have one gappe open (which the Prelates as much as may be labour to hedge up, though in vaine, by inhibiting all private Christian Fasts and assem∣blies) to flie to God by hearty prayer and humilia∣tion,Ps. 142.2 Ps 62.8. to power out their soules, their greifes, their com∣plaints before him, and shew him of their troubles: If it were not for this one posterne, their very hearts would breake, their spirits die within them, and they perish for ever under these their pressures. I beseech your most excellent Majesty therefore upon the ben∣ded
 knees of my soule (asWilliam Wraghton: Dr. Barnes, and the Au∣thor of the 2. Supplica∣tions to King Henry the 8. Mr. William Tyndall; the Supplication to Queen Eli∣zabeth, &c. others heretofore have in the like case besought your Royall Progenitors) both to consider and commiserate the distressed condition of your oppressed, persecuted faithfull loyall Ministers & people, (with which I perswade my selfe you have beene hitherto unacquainted) who dayly power out many fervent prayers to heaven, both for your Ma∣jesties happinesse safety, and against your Prelates ty∣ranny and injustice, which have long since peirced the cloudes and craved justice,Iames. 5.4.6.10. yea vengeance against them, both from heaven and earth. Your Subjects all know for their comfort, that as you of your selfe are a most just and gracious Prince; so you have proclai∣med it with your owne Royall mouth in the highest Court of justice, and registred it on record:His Mjes Speech in Parliament Iune 7. 1628. prin∣ted at the end of the Petition of Right. that your Maxime is, that the poples Liberty strengthens the Kings Prerogative, and that the Kings Prerogative is to defend the poples Librties. And for their further com∣fort, in your owne royallPage. 21. 22. 23. 42. 43. Declaration to all your lo∣ving Subjects, concerning the causes of the last Parlia∣ments dissolution, publied by your speciall commaund, An. 1628. you have since that made this solemne Protestation: Wee call God to record before whom wee stand, that it is, and alwayes hath beene our hearts de∣sire, to be found worthy of that title which wee accompt the most glorious in all our Crowne, Defender of the faith: neither shall wee ever give way to the authori∣zing of any thing, whereby anyTherefore all the late Innovations in Doctrine, in Discipline which our Prelates and their agents have made, are without and against his Majesties authority. See his Majesties Declaration before the 29. Articles, to the same effect. Innovation may creep
 into the Church, but preserve that unity of Doctrine and Discipline, established in the time of Queen Elizabeth, whereby the Church of England hath stood and flourished ever since. And wee doe here professe to maintaine the true Religion and Doctrine established in the Church of England, without admitting or conniving, at any back sli∣ding, either to Popery or Schisme. Our care is & hereafter, shall be, to preserve the auncient liberties of our Subjects, and to keepe them intire and inviolable, as wee would doe our owne right and Soveraignty. Wee doe also declare, that wee will maintaine the ancient and just Rights and Liber∣ties of our Subjects, with so much constancy and justice, that they shall have cause to knowledge, that under our go∣vernement and gracious protection, they live in a more happy and free estate, then any Subjects in the Christian world. Wee doe prosesse, that as it is our duty, so it shall be our care to commaund and direct well, but it is the part of Officers to performe the Ministeriall Office. Wee shall accompt our selfe, and all charitable men will ac∣compt us innocent both with God and men: and those that are negligent, wee will esteeme as culpable both to God and us; and therefore will expect, that hereafter they give us a better accompt. Which Royall Declaration (toge∣gether with that other, before the 39. Articles, pro∣hibiting all innovations in Doctrine and Discipline in the least degree,) as it assures every faithfull loyall Sub∣ject, that all the late manifold dangerous Innova∣tions in Religion, Ceremonies, and Doctrine, theMounta∣gus, Iack son, Coseus. Wid∣dowes, Shel∣ford, Reve, Chonne, White, Hey∣lyn, Herynge Pocklington, with sundry others. late pernicious, absurd, prophane Popish, Arminian and licentious Bookes, published by the Bishops authority, in affront of your Majesties Declarations, with the se∣verall
 encroachments on your Subjects Liberties, and just ancient Rights, here represented to your Majesty, are directly contrary to your Royall plea∣sure, and the sole exorbitances of your insolent, ty∣rannicall, violent domineering Prelates and their officials; so it gives me more then hope, that your Highnes (who areRegister. pars. 2. f. 7. a. 10. a.b. 15 a. 38 b. 127 b. 180. a. 222. 125. 126. Singulis de Regno vestro in exhibitione Iustitiae Debitor, and are wont in your Writes to your Officers and Judges, to enjoyne them, to doe plenam & celerem Iustitiam, to all your Subjects which complaine of any injustice, pres∣sures, or delayes:) upon the perusall of this Breviate will call them to a speedy strict accompt for the same, as culpable both to God and your Majesty; and inflict such condigne punishments on them, as their de∣sperate presumptuous enchroachments upon your owne Crowne and dignity, upon your Peoples Li∣berties and ancient Rights, and contempts against these your Declarations demerit, notwithstanding all your former favours toward them. It was a me∣morable speech of King Edward the third, in his Pro∣clamation against that insolent Prelate John Stratford, Archbishop of Canterbury, (whom hee most favoured and trusted) upon some complaints against him:Antiquita∣tes Ecclesiae Brit. p. 255. Fox Acts & Monuments p. 350. Cum ipse & alij Prelati regni qui de nobis Ecclesiarum suarum temporalia recipiunt, ex debito fidelitatis juratae fidem, honorem & reverentiam debeant exhibere; solus ipse, pro fide, perfidiam, pro honore contume∣liam,
 & contemptum: pro reverentia red∣dere non veretur. Vndè etsi paratissimus & semper fuerimus Patres spirituales, ut con∣venit, revereri; eorum tamen offensas, quas in nostri, & regni nostri periculum redun∣dare conspicimus; NON DEBEMUS CON∣NIVENTIBUS OCULIS PRAETERIRE. I doubt not, but as your Majesty may justly take up the same complaint, or a farre worse against some or most of your Prelates now; so you will arme your selfe with the like just and Royall resolution; that you ought not to passe by with conniving eyes, these their of∣fences, here humbly presented to your veiw, which you see every day more and more to redound, both to the ecclipse and danger of your owne Ecclesiasti∣call Iurisdiction, and of your Kingdome too; if not of that true ancient faith and Doctrine of the Church of England, of which you are the cheife Defendor.Plutarch. Apothegm. Philippus. It is storied of King Philip of Macedon, That a cer∣taine poore oppressed old woman oft times petitioning him to heare her cause, the King at last gave her this answere, That hee was not at leasure to doe it. Wherevnto shee pre∣sently replied; Noli itaque regnare; doe not therefore raigne. Which speech hee admiring, forth∣with heard not onely her cause and complaints, but many others in proper person. Your Majesty hath not one or two, but aMr. George Huntly, Mr. Peter Smart, Mr. Vicars, Mr. Worke∣man, Master Ward, Mr. Wrath, Mr. Crowder, Mr. Snelling with sundry other Mini∣sters. Doctor Bastwicke, Mr. Thomas Bruer, and divers other Laymen. great multitude of poore oppressed Subjects, now lying mourning and pining away under your Bishops pressures, tyranny, unjust procee∣dings
 and censures (some of whose cases this Breviate will acquaint you with) who though they have not oft petitioned your Majesty for releife, as this poore woman did Philip, nor received the like answere from you, as shee did from him, yet their cases are as wor∣thy your Roall audience, as hers was of Philips, if they could have such free accesse to your Majesty with their complaints as shee had to him; the Prelates greatnes, power, and vigilancy being such, that those who are oppressed by them, either cannot, or dare not appeale to your Majesty for releife, and those who doe, though upon never so just grounds, are reputed factious, schismaticall, Seditious, and I know not what besides for their paines: yea as that worthy Martyr, Doctor Barnes in his Supplication to King Henry the 8. writes p. 183. Now it is so farre come, that whosoever hee be, high or low, poore or rich, wise or oolish, that speaketh against them and their vi∣tious living, hee is either made a Traytor unto your grace, or an heretike, enemy or schismatike against holy Church, as though they were Kings or Gods. And if any man spoake of Gods Law and right conscience against this their dam∣nable tyranny, litle will they sticke to make him an heretike. And if that will not helpe, & to colour & maintaine their oppression, then adde they treason, sedition, rebellion and contempt against your Grace, though hee be never so true a Subject. I beseech you therefore upon the bended knees of my heart & soule, to imitate King Philip, in giving them a full, a speedy and gracious hearing even in your owne Royall Person: and if your more weighty publike State-affaires will not afford you so
 much leasure, appoint some faithfull trusty tempo∣rall Lords and Gentlemen of quality, to be your Commissioners to inquire after, heare and deter∣mine all their greivances, pressures, illegall impri∣sonments, fines, suspensions, deprivations, excom∣munications, exacted fees, and other barbarous usages and vexations, as your Royall ProgenitorsRegister pars 2. f. 125. 126 have done in former times even in the case of Bishops. It was Jobs honor and comfort in his afflictions;Iob. 29.13.14. that hee was eyes to the blinde, feet to the lame, a Father to the poore; that hee searched out the cause which hee knew not; and brake the Iawes of the wicked, and plucked the spoyle out of their teeth: and that the blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon him. O let it be your Majesties crowne and honour too in these particulars here tendred to you.Seneca De Clementia. lib. 1. c. 26. Nullum ornamentum Princi∣pis fastigio dignius pulchrius{que} est, quam illa corona ob cives servatos: is one of the best and most honorable Mottos that any Christian Prince can select; And there is no readier way for your Majesty to intitle your selfe thereto, then by rescuing your poore in∣nocent harmlesse wooried sheeps and lambes, out of the Iawes of these Bitesheepes, these ravenousHab. 1.8. Zeph. 3.3. Acts. 20.29 evening wolves, (though in Sheepes cloathing) who devoure and prey upon them; especially in your Ec∣clesiasticall Commission, and that under pretence of your Majesties authority, which they now pervert to erect and revive an absolute, irregular, Papall and Episcopall Iurisdiction of their owne, not derived from your Majesty, to tread your Majesties Eccle∣siasticall Iurisdiction, and your poore Subjects liber∣ties
 under their feet, to accomplish their owne po∣pish, antichristian, disloyall designes, to suppresse religion and preaching, to crush, roote out, and to wrecke their owne particular malice upon your con∣scionable, painfull, powerfull Ministers, Preachers, (whom they now silence, suspend, excommunicate and thrust out of their livings at their pleasure, with∣out any lawfull cause, to the great greife and discon∣tentment of your people, because their paines and holy lives are a secret checke to their idle licentious conversations) and all others who dare publikely appeare in your Majesties quarrell, to oppose their ambitious, audacious usurpations upon your Eccle∣siasticall Prerogative and your Subjects Liberties, or presume to checke them for their non-preaching, pontificall, idle voluptuous, secular proude un∣christian lives, though good Father Latymer in his second and fourth Sermon, before King Edward, was so bold with them for these their enormities, as to re∣quire him in Gods behalfe, to make all the packe of ne∣gligent, non-preaching, rare-preaching Bishops, Quon∣dams, & to cast them out of their office, as unsavory salt, fit for nothing but to be cast out, and trodden under mens feet. Now the great17. Revel. 14. cap. 19. 16. King of Kings, & Lord of Lords, so pre∣serve & direct your Majesty in all your pious enter∣prizes, for the preservation & propagatiō of true reli∣gion among us; the keeping out of Popish errors, pro∣fanes (which flow in a pace upon us; by your Prelates negligence, practises and connivance) who are more favourable to Preists and Iesuites, though Trayters to your Majesty by the Statute of 27. Eliz. c. 2. then
 unto Puritans (as they stile them) who defend your Crowne and Prerogative Royall like faithfull Sub∣jects, against their Episcopall and all Papall encroach∣ments) the maintenance of your owne Ecclesiasticall Prerogative, with the releife, the rescue of your poore afflicted Subjects against the Prelates insolent encroachments, oppressions, exorbitances; and the advauncement of the publike welfare both of this Church and State; that the religion, with the sincere preaching and preachers of Gods word (of late trod∣den under foote) may once more flourish, Gods heavy Iudgement of the plague broken out in many places, by your execution of Judgement like another Phinehas, on these notorious malefactors, be speedily stayed: (Psal. 106.30.) and you may long enjoy a glo∣rious Crowne OB CIVES SERVATOS in this life; and in the world to come, a Crowne of glory which fadeth not away.

