


THe occurrents of three que∣stions, beeing first aunswered from the mouth of their natiue causes, I hope (Right Honorable) that my poore paines shal finde this rich fa∣uour, that the truth yeelding it selfe to be their clyent, your honour will vouchsafe to become their Patron. And because the language of al questions is not alike; some demanding, some commanding, some obiecting, some vpbrai∣ding, some complaining, some controuling, some one way, some another, I will set down their seueral tunes, and tones as they spake vnto me. The first questions complaint (grieued to be dislodged before fully setled vpon the tast of discontentment) is:
 what necessitie causeth the Remoue of these motiues? The cause aun∣swereth, the hurt & danger accompanying them. The hurt is manifest: for as in the bodie the increase of proud flesh is the decay of the sounde: So the spirit of
popery (fed with vaine wandrings, and wandring va∣nities of many of our wanton wits wanting grace) as it in the grouth of pride winneth ground in the body of this land: so the wholesome doctrine of true religion is turned tenant out of dores, to the great hurt of the whole realme, and the vtter vndoing of many. And therefore small need there is of these Motiues, when we our selues many of vs, helped that way by our own corruption, moue already down the hil to our destruc∣tion. But rather great necessity haue wee to remoue thē, and to stay our steps before ye break-necke of truth and true religion befall vnto vs. Againe, as the hurt is manifest, so is the daunger euident: For as a stumbling blocke vnto the blinde, so these Motiues crossing the way of the simple, will cause them to stumble and fall. Besides this, the change of Common-wealths is ob∣serued by the learned to come, not from fortune; for that is idle and prophane: nor from any fatall periode or reuolution of the stars; for that is but an astronomi∣call fancy: neither yet wholy from the maners of men and their dispositions; for that is but a philosophicall coniecture: But especially, it beginneth with ye change of religion; for that is a theologicall rule. And it is no∣ted by many of note, that there sildome hath beene ei∣ther with vs, or else where in Christendom, any altera∣tion of gouernment, but some notorious hereticks, or schismatickes haue gone before, as signes and tokens of troubles already begun in the Church, and immi∣nent dangers eftsoones insuing vpon the Common∣wealth. And therefore very necessary it is for the pre∣seruation of the peace of both states, to remooue the fewell of these flames, and to stop the gap or fill vp the breach whereat the enemy laboreth to get in vnto vs.
This complaint of discontent ended and aunswered, the expostulation of vnkindnes in the second question rubbeth yet harder vpon me.
 Admit it bee needfull to remoue these Motiues: yet what need I of all other to take the matter so haynously, and to busie my selfe more then needes? my answere. First it was not meet for any of our stronger champions, to enter the listes against so weak an enemy: for so he might get greater credit by being ouercome, then we glory by ouercom∣ming: the aduersaries mouth beeing still full of lies in their owne praise, with the open throat of vaine glory crying out, that their punies were able to hould plea with our ancients. Secondly, inter minores theologos, (if the authour be not quoted amisse) my selfe in many respects as fit as any to answere this quarrell.
Westminster. Cambridge. Trinity Coll. D. Still now B. of Bath and Welles. For the same schoole bred vs both, ye same Vniuersity nourced vs both, the same colledge maintained vs both, ye same master preferred vs both, the same roofe, nay the same bed somtimes contained vs both. Euery one wherof (as it is the lot of bankerupts to drowne others in their decay) haue lost somthing by his fal. The school saith, I haue lost my hope of him; the Vniuersity saith, I haue made shipwracke of my fauour in him; the colledge faith, I haue cast away my maintenance vpon him; the maister saith, I haue preferred preferment to discredit by him; the lodging saith his roome, the bed saieth his ease was euilly bestowed. For the recouery of which losses, if my slender gifts may any way comfort them, I thought it my duty in the behalfe of the schoole, V∣niuersitie, colledge, master, and the rest, to make some shewe of them to the view of the worlde: that it may perceiue and iudge (apt enough otherwise to iudge a∣misse) that all birdes be not blacke because the Crowe
is so: neither all of the same schoole, Vniuersity, and colledge, be popish, because some one proueth to bee a papist. But the obiection of the thirde question pres∣seth me worse then both the rest. Say it bee a matter conuenient that these motiues should be surprised be∣fore they go any further; and the action as fit for me as another:
 yet how can I without the hand of presump∣tion present so small a worke to so great a personage?
I confesse (most noble Earle) that I am at a losse, and know not herein what to answere: Onely that ho∣norable disposition, which I haue alwaies obserued in your Lordship, to receiue as your guests all that in the way of vertue and truth trauell towardes their iournies end of true happinesse, hath caused me an vnknowne traueller to make thus bold with your Honor: which boldenesse of loue, rather then loue of boldenesse, if at this time it may bee accepted without offence, I will passe my word for it, it shal neuer hereafter attempt the like, without further warrant of welcome from your Lordship. You fauored Alablaster whiles alablaster without spot: O let the same goodnesse in fauour de∣scend vnto him that hateth his spots, but loueth him. The mother of vs both, the Vniuersity, once dignified, I had almost said deified with your presence, hath com¦mitted her selfe vnto your patronage: maruaile not therefore (Right Honorable) though we her sons run together with our mother vnder the safegarde of your wings. The father of all, euen the God of mercy, blesse your Lordship and honorable familie vnto the worlds ende.

