



Honourable, and reverend Iudges:
IF the name of a Law-giver be acceptable vnto you, here is Moses; if iust iudgement pretious, here it is as liuely, as truly deciphered; ye neede not disdaine this counsaile, for it is the breathing of Moses wise∣dome, nor refuse to take measure by it, for it is the me wand of integrity; Yea, not Moses meerely, but God ioyntly prescribe the orders, impose the charge; God and Moses, therefore I trust shall prevaile with them that sit in the place of God, and execute the office of Moses; As ye learne much out of your owne vo∣lumes, to informe your vnderstandings, so take something from hence to quicken conscience; were ye never so sage and discreet, able to satisfie all doubts so soone as they are propounded, and to resolue all difficulties without a demurre, yet practise is the praise and blisse of Iudges; to this ye are here vrged, and incited; and oh feele the impulsives of this counaile, let not Moses mouth yet seeme to be shut. Iustice exalts a Nation;
Prou. 14.54. Oh as ye loue your Nation, exalt it, which ye can never doe, except ye bring Iustice into her full vigour. Iustice is eneebled, the Nation depressed where there are wicked Iudges; there neede no greater plague to a Country, nor Bane to a Kingdome, then to have the Benches of authority infected. When the wicked are in authority,
Pro. 29.2. Pro. 28.15. the people sigh. As a roaring Lyon, and a hungry Beare, so is a wicked Ruler over the poore people. Davids greatest pu∣nishment that hee would wish of God for that intestine enemy a∣gainst him and the Church,
Psal. 109.6. was this S thou a wicked ma to be Ruler over him. How carefull and faithfull ought Iudges
therfore to be to ease the griefes, and remedy the mischiefes of the Common-wealth. Remisnesse gives Iustice the assault, but Corruption puts it to the rowt; Let not torpulency therefore possesse you in that place; but above all, let not bribery fasten vpon you; for if Iudges should looke broad eyed after lucre, or goe tracing after their owne advantages, the whole Kingdome were but a Burrow for them to ferret advantage out of. Oh there∣fore let every Iudge consult with his soule, and argue with his conscience vpon what secret purposes, and inward resolutions hee tooke that high calling vpon him, and let every one be a Iudge to passe sentence upon himselfe how innocent, and inculpable hee hath beene, whether in his whole course the Glory of God, the Common good, and not his private, hath beene his constant stu∣dy, ayme, exercise. Vpon this let every one ponder, for I boldly censure none, but humbly admonish all. And those Iudges that vpon these things can vprightly discharge themselves be∣fore God, and the world, what are they but the Mirrours of worth, and the Wonders of government? their places have ad∣ded to their Honours, but not to their sinnes, to cure a feeble estate, they have not wounded conscience; these Iudges engrave reverence into the hearts of the people, by their deserts whilst they are living, & when they dye, people become halfe dead with them, their hearts aking, and their eyes trickling a long time af∣ter that they have lost the presence of such renowned memorable Governours. Thus let all Iudges dignifie their callings, blesse their places and Circuits, that wheresoever there be blemishes, enormities, yet the Iudges may be spoilesse. And thus with all humility, and due submission, I commend my Labours to your favourable construction, and your Labours to Gods gracious di∣rection.

