



THE vsuall maner of setting foorth Bookes, is vnder the Patronage of some, willing and able to
defend the same: I affect not singularity; occasion putting me vpon the work, I trace the same way. My burthen is Balme from Gile∣ad, Remedies and prescripts for all diseases, especially the Plague: Whither should I goe with it, but vnto this renowned Cittie? It was composed in this Cittie, and first vented in this Cittie, mine owne habitation and Ministrie is yet bounded by this Cittie: the principall distressed part of this Land was, and is ordinarily (as populous places vse to bee)
this Cittie; from hence as the euill was, remedy may be dispatched to other parts (being first here approued.) I am not ignorant, that ma∣ny in this Cittie and Land, approued Doctors, haue in their seuerall stations com∣posed Balmes, and might of the same simples or Text, furnish both this Cittie and Land: and yet am not dis∣couraged. This is what I could in that straight of time, a part of my labours, amidst many publique and priuate distractions, (mine whole Family being smit∣ten,
(though not with that hand) this may put vs in minde of our great trouble; Gods mercifull deliuerance from that trouble, and our proportioned duty vnto GOD (when as all may bee forgotten) speaking of all, to vs and our Poste∣rity.
It hath made choyse of your Patronage, Right Hono∣rable, &c. the weale of this Cittie, is (vnder his Maiestie) committed vnto your vigi∣lancie, you haue good skill and great experience of that euill, and this remedy: You
haue had your parts in the one and the other: Gra∣titude to God (the Gilead of this Balme) requireth Patro∣nage: Prouidence also in re∣gard of future times; What Ioseph did against times of famine, will not be amisse for you to doe in your pla∣ces, against future times of the plague. Experienced Physitians were now enfor∣ced to draw out old experi∣ments. And although these may bee (as the Physitians prescripts were) out of date, when as that euill shall bee ouer; yet it will not be safe
in such a time to be wholy to seeke. Besides, who knoweth how soone the same hand may send it a∣gaine? And as yet some im∣pressions remaine of it in diuers parts of this Land; on whom GOD looke in mercie. Adde yet, this Balme is a Catholicon, a Salue for euery sore; the trembling Ague as well as the destroy∣ing Plague, and of daily vse: in these names doth it call vpon all; especially your Honour, &c. for Patronage.
I cannot but visite and mention you my kinde and
Worshipfull friends, in your places, members, and parts of this famous Cittie.
Dr. Westfield and M. Tho∣mas Gippes (as long louing friends, I ioyne you toge∣ther, that the tye may bee the surer to each other, and my selfe:) Gratitude requi∣reth it.
You, Dr. Westfield; in re∣gard of many kindnesses receiued: by you was the foundation of my small pit∣tance of knowledge in sa∣cred things (vnder God) laid; whilst as, an hearer, I sat at your feete: I freely ac∣knowledge
your furthe∣rance to, and care of mee in the Vniuersity, direction in studies, cost, encourage∣ments, setting me a worke first, when as I was , in tirocinio; and constant curtesies. If I haue failed in composition, you can and will point it mee out: If I haue taught the truth, I que∣stion not your Patronage: If you owne it, many others will for your sake & name, which is, and O that it may be euer precious.
You, Mr. Thomas Gippes, by whom the Lord, tooke
me vp; without your good will, loue, and leaue, I had not beene an Academick: by it I went vnto the Vni∣uersitie of Cambridge, and was maintained almost wholy there: I liued since in your house. In a word, I haue and doe still finde you a Father. I cannot but particularly name you. Gra∣titude bindeth me to much more: I would encourage you and others liuing, by your example to workes of that nature.
And you, Mr Abraham Colfe, the place I fill is yours.
It is as mine account; you are my common shelter: Your great loue vnto mee, vnto your Parish; good men and Gods truth, deser∣ueth a mention.
Finally, my Worshipfull and louing Parishioners, you; Though the Doctrine was generall, mine application was vnto you: Some of you were not present, such as heard may safely reade a∣gaine: I spake then, and write now, for your profit.
I haue freely reprooued sinne; were they not that cause? Am I not a watch∣man?
could I but see them, and their fruit, the Plague? Was it not in the middest of vs? How narrowly did we escape? Was it not time to crie? Who thought ei∣ther day I should speake, or he heare more? It is Gods Ordinance to repentance, and so the saluation of my selfe, and you that heard me also.
Amongst other sinnes, I much smite at the neglect of the Lords day, our Chri∣stian Sabbath. My purpose, doctrine, and practise, is not Iewish. I respect & fol∣low
the doctrine of our Church, in those contemned (by such as know them not) Homilies: The rule I ac∣knowledge the fourth Com∣mandement, one of the tenne words, Gods immutable and eternall Law, & would vrge nothing but what is an∣swerable.
If you Right Honourable, Right Worshipfull, and my louing friends, in your places, shall approue of this Balme, quatenùs e narthesio sacro (if any question it, trie it, bring it to the Scriptures, the onely Canon and rule; doe but pra∣ctise
it.) I hope it shall doe Gods people much good, It shall bee sauorie to their temporall, and eternall sal∣uation; Our great God shall haue his glorie, I mine end. For which, with all other blessings, I shall daily be∣seech the Lord, and rest
From mine House on new Fishstreet Hill: London May the 10. 1626.

