


MOST Honorable LLa: & you worthily regarded Knights, if I did know any creatures cōparable vnto your selues, for Christian cariage and profession of Religion in the like measure, vnto those surely I would direct this my poore labor & publish their examples, whereby I might direct o∣thers as by that star to the wisemen to take view of such shining lights as should beget a desire in the beholders, o be cōformed the vnto, euen to find the babe and glorifie the euerlasting God, who inhabi∣teth Mat. 1. the heauens in neuer ending glory: Besides this it may not bede∣nyed, but your honors fauors of diuers sorts afforded vnto me both in prison and abroad, haue iustly deserued the deepest offices of all my acknowledgments: And since the Lord hath pleased so to shake all my outward indowments as nothing therin may be found accep∣able to present in grati animi memoriam, yet let it please you that I offer a pose of such fragrant flowers, as I gathered in the Lords own spiritual garden of my most happy changes, amōgst which that same very censure of wisedom hath my thinkes a wonderfull soueraigne wisdom. 3. taste, for diuerting all infections of that contagious discontentment which doth accompany mortalitie in all men. They seeme forsaken (saith he) but their hope is full of immortalite: What is that? The next wordes explaine, in few thinges they bee restrained: But in many things they be rewarded: if your Ho: LLa: and you Chri∣stian Knights please, to search by way of meditation, why man was
 Crea you wil readly dscouer, out of your owne dayly exercises, the cause and end of mans creaton: was to giue obedience vnto the euer uing God their Creator.
The gentle long suffring preseruer of heauen and earth. Ifly vnto thee for thi very gentleues (saith a father) to bee intrated: But how Chrisst. shall they serue him without knowledge of his name? They erred: saith the Lord because they did not know my waies, And how shall this Psal 95: knowledge come, but fy Faith? and how Faith but by the worde preached? And how know they this faith, but by experience? And Rom. 50. 1 Pet. 6. 7. Ro: 5. 4 how commeth experience but by triall, and how triall but by afflic∣tions. Tribulation saith Thapostle worketh patience and patience bops, &c. So that affliction is as the schoole or Academy, wherin the best schollers (by rendering & exercises) be appointed and prepared to Thes. 3. comencements of the dietie, by making familiar their receiued for∣mer rudiments of ordinarie discipline and changes. Now how dis∣tasing this in vnto ye world, who regorge pleasures & profits, till they sursit, it (killeth not: Christ saith vnto Iohn his Disciples. The poore reciue the Gospell, which worde (Poore) in that place I thinke doth Mat: 11. 29. Isaiah. 61. 1. signifie the meanest sort in estate and knowledge because I find op∣position in that Chapter verse 25. I thanke thee O father, that thou hast hid these thinges from the wise and prudent, and hast opened them vnto Babes: Heere seemeth a double warrant to cleere all doubts that the Gospell at it is in it selfe Sermo crucis, so affliction by weyned estate, doth most surely accompany the professors thereof, according to the measure of their desire to be changed, and the Lords purpose to shine in them: But what if the world (for all theise) doe scorne so open truth? Then do I answere, that the Iewes disputed Ioh. 7. 4. euen so, when they said, Why doe none of the rulers beleeue in him. Then which there was neuer any thing more grose and insulse: For Ioh. 12. 42. 43. the worde it selfe giueth a reason of their forsaking him (Viz) For feare to loose their places in the Sinagogue. And also because they loued the praise of men more then the praise of God. Thus hauing cleared in short, as by way of abstract, or post-script the crown of af∣fliction by so plaine and open demonstration, of the sacred Wrde, Ioh. 12. 48. which shall iudge at the last day, I do dedicate this poore exercise
 out of my very loue, and for a seriuice vnto you haue personages who are able to discerne the truth of that I write: wherein I offer as a motiue for all men to indure: my owne particular suffrings open∣ly and causelessely orphaned with my many Children by violence inflicted, euen so far as if the worlde had no other president of the Lordes watch ouer his vine. (Behold saith Isaiah, I the Lord doe watch ouer my vine, yea day and night do I watch least any man assaile it,) yet that the Lord hath preserued and fed my most vnwor∣thy selfe, thiese many yeeres as by Rauens, by your respected LLa: mirrours of Religion and vertue, and by that euer renowmed wor∣thy one, the La: Anne Countesse of Warwick, as Pharoahs daugh∣ters taken me out of the Reade Arke of my Mother sinne, and put∣ting me to Nurse into the schoole of afflictions and grace. This I Exo. 2. say may remaine as a monument for euer to openly announce the truth of his name in that hee is called wonderfull.

