



AMong all the blessings of God (Right Worshipful) wherwith he hath richely adorned his Churche, none is of such excel∣lencie as the pearle of his Gos∣pell:
 which he hath lefte as a pledge of his gratious good∣nesse to his faithfull flocke, therein to comfort themselues, during the time of their pere∣grination in this world, obiect to so many Woolues, and raue∣nous beastes. And because this Iewell of inestimable value, may be indifferently bestowed vppon his people, and in due measure and proportion par∣ted among them, he hath ap∣pointed such Superintendents, and Ouerseers: or rather Pas∣tours and Sheepheardes, (to speake familiarly) as are not
 only instructed by diuine influ∣ence, howe, where, and when, the treasure of Gods endlesse loue, (which is his holie word) is to be communicated: but also sufficiently fortified with the spirit of power and valiant∣nesse, to protect his sheepe from the bloudie chappes of Coruorantes, that they be not damnified. Such Pastours we haue had of late, who to the in∣tent they might not seeme de∣fectiue in their office & charge, neither see the throates of Christes tender lambes torne with Tigers tallans, fought in
 their profession so faithfully, that the losse of life seemed to them large lucre, and to die vn∣der the sworde of the aduersa∣rie, singular aduauntage. Can we be ignorant, vnto what plea∣sant pastures, sweete medowes, fragrant feeldes, comfortable springes, & holesome brookes, they haue brought the flocke of Christ: yea, at such time as they were like to famishe for lacke of stouer, and to perishe for want of water? Some of these Sheepheardes (after the example of Christ, O excellent imitation,) laide downe their
 liues for their profession, that their sheepe might in them learne a president of Christian constancie: other, for whom God in his secrete counsell had prouided succour and refuge, in the middest of daunger and destruction satte in safetie: and bonefires burning rounde a∣bout them, felt not one sparc∣kle of the flame, Wherein God shewed his omnipotence, and besides that his compassion: his omnipotence in preseruing them, euen at the speares point: and his compassion in remembring his sheepe, of
 whose deliuerance from errour he was not vnmindfull, being so carefull for their Sheepherds restitution. Herein shineth the goodnesse of God most glori∣ously, and it is no small prouo∣cation vnto vs to be thankfull. And although euerie Pastour hath not confirmed his doc∣trine with the losse of life: yet is it no reason that they are not Apostolicall. For, in a Pastour this is required, that he breake the bread of life to the people purely, that he intermingle not his owne imaginations with the Scriptures, that he teache
 the trueth vprightly, and that his conuersation giue a testi∣monie, amongst men, of his profession: and this take I to be Apostolicall, as I count the contrarie Apostaticall. That Sheepheard, or that sheepe, which feeleth an inward dispo∣sition and towardnesse thus to liue, (Christianly I meane, to speake summarily) let him take into his handes the instrumen∣tes which worke such spirituall effectes. Let him open the bookes of religious men, and though he be able to teache, yet let him learne: for the grea∣test
 Clearke may holde it no scorne to be Christes scholer: though Nichodemus thought it a shame. Whatsoeuer maketh for the glorie of God, for the benefite of our brother, for the consolation of the soule, for the suppressing of vice, and for the aduauncing of vertue, blessed is he that imbraceth it, his inheritance is in Heauen. Such a pearle of price com∣ming to my hand (Right Wor∣shipfull) rough & vnwrought, I tooke the paines (though not artificially,) to polishe and trimme, making that smooth,
 which was rugged, and resto∣ring that to perfection and soundnesse, which was before lame and maymed. The Booke was yll englished, and worsse printed (the more pitie,) con∣sidering the goodnesse of the matter, and the learning of the writer. I haue amended that which was amisse, and scowred away the rust from this excel∣lent peece of metall: whiche glistering with a newe grace, I present vnto your Worship, supposing that worthie your patronage, which by so wor∣thie a Churcheman was pen∣ned
 and published. Commit∣ting your Worshippe to the tuition of the highest, whose right hand ouershadowe you in this life from all perilles temporall, and in the life to come crowne you with blessings eternall: Amen.

