



MANY, and diuers Reasons I find which are wont to moue and induce men to dedicate their Labours vnto others. ometymes the great Excellency and orth of the person is such, that thrice∣ppy doth he thinke himselfe, and most cky doth he deeme his worke, if it may


 be but graced with the fauour of so great a Patron. Otherwhiles as well the great∣nes, as the multitude of fauours receiued, heapeth such obligation vpon a man, that without the perpetuall blemish of shame∣full ingratitude, he cannot auoyd the im∣ployment of his best endeauours; partly to signify his gratefull mynd, for the be∣nefits receiued, and partly to acknow∣ledge the full requitall beyond his reach confessing withall his owne vnworthi∣nes of what he hath allready reaped.
Againe men are wont to be allured with this Hope, that vnder the safe pro∣tectiō of so Noble a Patron or Patronesse their worke, otherwise subiect vnto ma∣ny sharpe Censures, may escape the dan∣gerous stormes of carping tongues. Be∣sides, some are intised, not so much with any fauour allready done, or benefit re∣ceiued, or any friend-ship as yet obtay∣ned; but with a longing desire, an strong hope by this meanes to creep in fauour of those, to whome they think
 their seruice may be gratefull. Lastly many are drawne to offer vp their Workes at the feet of Great Men and potent Per∣sonages, because it handleth some matter touching them, their House, or Family, whereby it seemeth iniurious vnto them, that any other should protect or patro∣nize the same besides themselues whome it toucheth so neere. These and such like are wont to be motiues of their dedicato∣ry Epistles.
For all these, and many other rea∣sons (O Blessed Saint) I find a very strict obligation, wherby I am many wayes bound to present these my first Labours vnto thy Worthy Selfe. For if the Excel∣lency and Worth of thy Person be respe∣cted, the Greatnes of thy Sanctity is a cleare argument therof. If Benefits re∣ceiued might induce me, myne owne Conscience is a faithfull witnes of thy many and singular fauours towards me. And who dare be so impious as to carpe t my rude lines, when they be honoured
 with the Name of BLESSED MAG∣DALEN? Besides, if Hope of future Fauours may allure me, the Benefits al∣ready receiued, giue me not only a steed∣fast Hope, but ful Assurāce also of greater Fauours. Finally the whole subiect of my Labours being thy Selfe, thy admirable Conuersion, thy rare Pennance, thy sin∣gular Loue, and the rest of thy excellent Vertues; where should my willing La∣bours better be kept, where more safely lodged & laid vp, then vnder the golden Key of thy Protection; who not only as a strong Citty or Castle of Refuge heere on Earth, but as an impregnable For∣tresse and inuincible Tower from Hea∣uen, wilt protect and defend me?
Take therfore (Glorious Saint) this little Mite into the rich Treasure-house of thy great Aboundance, not conside∣ring so much what the Giuers hand can performe, as what his willing Hart doth aspire vnto, and what in his best desires he wisheth to accomplish. Remember (o
 Myrrour of the World) thy louing Mai∣sters words in thy defence, when the ve∣nemous tongue of Iudas did lay open the inward poyson of his hart, deeming that pretious oyntment to be losse, that was bestowed vpon sweet IESVS: but he seeing the inward deuotion of thy infla∣med Hart, answered for thee, Quod habuit hoc fecit: She did what she could; as who should say, this oyntment, although in it selfe pretious and of great esteeme, yet in her hart it seemes little, in respect of her great deuotion, and the person of whom it is bestowed, and therfore Quod habuit hoc fecit; she did the best she could.
If therfore (deare Mother) my gift be neither in it selfe of worth, not yet pro∣ceed from such an Hart as may grace and set it forth; at the least, Quod habui hoc feci: What with the best of my endeauours I can accomplish, I shall most willingly af∣foard thee; and then how can it offend, if it be fauoured by thee? How can it but please, if it haue but an only lustre from
 thee? How can it be worthlesse, if it be graced by thee? And finally how can it but be beloued hauing relation vnto thee? Besides, with this little gift of myne I hope to prouoke some richer Wit, and deuou∣ter Hart to offer vp themselues at thy shrine, and consecrate their better talents to thy prayse and imitation.
Grant therfore (O Blessed Saint) that I may not only with my vnderstanding find out the way of this thy happy Pilgri∣mage of Pennance, and discouer the foot∣steps of thy excellent Vertues, but that with my Hart I may so loue and affect them, and with all my endeauours so fol∣low them, that I may one day ariue at that quiet port, where there is no feare of shipp-wracke; and so be admitted into that Celestiall Citty, and Heauenly Pa∣radise, where thou dost inioy that Best Part, which most happily thou hast cho∣sen, and (as our Sauiour promised) shall neuer be taken from thee.
