


MEN are wonte, for the most parte, either of su∣perstition, to attrybute to muche to the holy sa¦cramentes, or of a lyght¦nes and inconstancie, to attribute to little vntoo them. Whyche thing we may easly se in the historyes of the olde auncyent Iewes, which had al∣wayes
 for an high sacramente, the Arke of the lordes couenaunt, that with plain wordes, is called the lord of hostes. For in the second boke of the kinges, and .vi. ii. kin .vi. cha. Cha. the scripture doth testifye and saye: Dauid rising vp, went with all hys peo∣ple, to fetche the Arke of God, wherup∣on the name of the lorde god of hostes. whiche sitteth vpon Cherubin, is called vpon. And this after yt phrase of the He∣brues, is as muche to say, as vnto whom a name is geuen, that it should be called Iehouah, or the lord of hostes syt∣ting vpon Cherubin: Thys verely was a great mistery, and an high sacrament. But when the Israelites dydde attry∣bute to muche vntoo it, they were ouer∣throwen, and subdued wt the warres of Philistyns, and the Arke also was taken and caried away into captyuitie. For so we do reade in the holy Bible, that Isra¦el was ouerthrowen before the Phily∣stins, iiii. M. men of them beyng slayne. And when ye people of Israel did return into the Campe, the elders and seniours of Israel, dyd say: Why hath the lord o∣uerthrowen vs this day before the Phi∣listines?
 We wyll bringe from Silo, the i Sam. iiii. cha Arke of the lordes couenaunt, yt it maye be in the middest of vs, and saue vs from the handes of our enemyes. The people therfore dyd send to Silo, and did bring from thence the Arke of the lorde of ho∣stes, sytting vpon Cherubin. And when the Arke of the couenaunt was come in to the Campe, all Israel gaue so great a shoute, that the earth did quake. Which crie and noyse, when ye Philistines herd and had alsoo knowledge, that the Arke of the lorde was come into the Campe, they were sore afrayde, sayinge: God is come into the Campe. Wo be vntoo vs. Who shall delyuer vs from the hand of these straunge goddes. These be the god des that dyd smyte Egipt with somany plagues, yet notwythstandynge, be of a good chere, and fyght lyke men. So the Philistines did strike battaile, and Isra∣el was discomfited, and fled euerye man intoo hys tente, and there was a greate slaughter done. For .xxx. thousande of ye Isralites footemen were killed, yea, and the Arke was taken. Now haue ye herd what the Israelites did attribute vnto ye Arke, and what misfortune both for this
 erroure, and alsoo for other synnes, they dyd then suffer and receyue of theyr e∣nemyes. For the Lorde had not gyuen therefore the Arke vnto his people, that they shoulde put theyr truste in it, or be∣leue that it moughte delyuer and saue theym from the handes of theyr enemyes: but that it shoulde be a sygne and to∣ken of the presence and helpe of GOD and was therefore called the Lorde of hostes, because it shoulde be a certayne testymonye and wytnesse of the coue∣naunte made betwyxt God and the peo¦ple. For it dyd teffyfye that god would be presente, alwayes fauourable and fa∣mily are vntoo hys people. In the same Arke, the tables of the couenaunte were contayned and kepte, wherof it dyd get hys name, and was called the Arke of the couenaunte. Whyche when they dydde contrarywyse handle irreuerent∣lye, hauynge it in lesse estymatyon then they oughte, manye more of them were slayne then when they dydde attrybute too muche vntoo it.
For when the Phylystynes beynge plagued with foul diseases, had brought i. Samuel .v. and .vi. Chap. the Arke agayne, and restored it too the
 Israelytes, the people whyche loked in it irreuerently were slayne. For the scrip¦ture saythe: The Lorde dyd plague the Bethsemeites, because they had looked in the Arke of the lorde, and he did strike fiftye thousand and thre score and tenne men. For it was forbydden by the lawe (as it is wrytten in the boke of Numery ii. king .vi. cha the forthe Chapiter), that no man shuld searche or loke in the Arke of the lord of hostes, wyth prophane and irreuerente eyes. Wherefore in the exposytyon and ministring of the sacramentes, that one∣lye whyche is prescribed in the worde of GOD, and the scryptures muste of ne∣cessytye be folowed. But nowe let vs cō¦pare thys worlde wyth those auncyente tymes, and we shall in thys matter fynd theym in all thynges lyke. For thou shalte fynde some whyche attrybute all As if a manne forsaking pro¦digalitie shuld fal into beget¦ly nigardship or forsakynge vngodlynesse, shulde fal into superstition. maner of thynges too the Sacramentes and agayne there be some other whych doo attrybute nothinge at all vnto them Soo that in thys poynte, that whyche the heathen Poete Flaccus doth wryte proueth moste trewe. Fooles whyles they doo flye from one synne, they doo runne intoo an other contrarye vyce.
 For there be many whiche doo adscribe vnto the sacramentes, grace, iustyficatiō health and saluation most seruillye, as. S Angustine doth say, worshipping and ve¦nerating the signes, for the thinges, whi∣che by the signes are signified. Such mē haue, and not without sacrilege and spy∣ritual thefte, taken a waie from the faith full, the cuppe of the lordes bloude. Be∣sides that, all men doo knowe that they Ye shall rede in their masse bookes howe thei said Mas for mesel swin for scalde hor∣ses. &c. haue abused the lordes supper too heale diseases, to driue away foule spirites, too make fayre weather, and to many other vile and filthy things. And agayne how they vtterly subuerting the outward sig¦nes, dyd contende and affirme, that ney∣ther breade nor wyne did remaine, but ye body and bloud of the lord onely. Of the whyche maner of beynge in the Sacra∣mente miraculouslye, they haue dys∣puted manye thynges, whyche thee a∣postles neuer knewe, beatynge into the ignoraunte peoples eares, this opynion, that is too saye, that these thinges were offered of the Minyster in theyr Masse, for a satysfaccyon of synne, bothe of the quycke and of the deade, as ye shall see in the decretalles of the hyghe Tryny∣tye
 and catholyke fayth, Titu. firmiter cre¦dimus. Reade ye boke of yt decretals in the title fyr¦miter credi∣mus All men doo alsoo knowe and see what worshyppe hath bene done, and is dayelye done too the mystycall breade of the Lorde: Therefore we do synne no lesse nowe in the Sacramente of the bo∣dye and bloude of Christe, then the aun∣cy auntye dyd synne in the Arke of the Lordes couenaunte. Wherefore the righ¦tuouse Whithe lord dothe at this presente time so horibly pla¦gue ye world. lorde, doth wythoute doubte pu∣nysshe nowe the worlde, wyth greate & horryble plagues. But nowe that these vngodlye and superstycyons opynyons of the Sacramentes, are oppugned by theym, that haue syncerely preached the iustyfycatyon of faythe, and truth of our Lorde and Sauyoure Iesu Christe, not too thys entente that the Sacramentes shoulde be taken awaye, but that the abuses whyche are aboute theym, super¦stycyouslye and vngodlye taughte, moughte be cleane abolysshed: lo, by and by spryngeth furthe a newe sorte of people, whyche is fallen intoo Scilla Scilla and C¦ribdis are, i paros ro¦kes in the e of Scicilia. couetynge too sonne Caribdis. For saye they: yf the breade be not made and turned into the verye naturall bodye of
 Christe, and the wyne intoo hys verye bloude in deede, yea, yf the Sacramente dothe not iustyfye, and brynge grace of it selfe, then it is but bare breade and wyne, nor it skylleth not whether we re¦ceiue it or not. Thus these irreuerent per¦sons do atrybute to little vnto the sacra∣mente, as the other dydde attrybute too muche. Wherefore the Mynystre shall What meane the Ministre ought to kepe in ye sacramēt. wyth a wyse and reuerente symplycytie kepe a meane betwene, and reiectynge all those superstycyons and peruerse o∣pynyons, shall teache that twoo thyn∣ges in the Sacramente, muste be obser∣ued and consydered, that is too saye, the sygne or earthelye elemente, as breade and wyne, wyth the outewarde myny∣stratyon, and the thynge whyche by the sygne is represented, as the feloweshyp of Christes churche, the body and bloud of oure Lorde, whyche beyng offered for vs on the crosse, haue recouered vntoo mankynde, the loue and fauour of God in so muche that we be nowe made, tho¦rowe faythe, and the holye spiryte wor∣kynge inwardely, the members and hey¦res of Christe, partakers of euerlastynge lyfe, and of all the benefytes of the one∣lye
 begotten sonne of GOD, oure sa∣uynge healthe. Wherefore it is not y∣noughe The bare syg¦nes onely  ought not  be set furt to the p for the Mynyster too preache and set furthe onely the bare sygnes, ne∣glectynge the verye thynge it selfe, as thoughe in the supper of the Lorde, the faythefull shoulde be onelye partakers of breade and wyne, as on the contrarye syde, it is too muche, yf he subuertynge vtterlye the sygnes, dothe teache thee people to venerate and worshyppe the sygnes, for the thynges sygnyfyed by theym: for as the sygnes and tokens oughte circumspectlye too be lymytted, soo we muste haue alwayes a greate re∣specte too the thynges signyfyed.
In the matter therefore of the Sacra∣mente, The chief and principal thin¦ges in ye mat∣ter of ye sacra∣ment must b earnestlye re∣hersed and se before ye eye of the people. the chyefe and pryncypall thyn∣ges therof, must be with a due reuerence set furthe and commended vnto the peo¦ple, that is too saye: the heauenlye and gratuite benetytes of god, wherwith he doth ouerwhelme vs daily & hourely v∣sing in the meane season thys outwarde signe, as a certaine token and testimony of hys benefycence and lyberalytye to∣warde vs. For with the sygnes as wyth vysyble wordes he dothe put befoore
 our eyes his benefites, by theym testify∣inge and declaryng what he wyll do for vs, if we come vnto him, with adue faith Wherfore it is most necessarye that the What the pa¦stoures are bound to doo when the con¦gregation go¦eth aboute to celebrate the maundye. pastores do, with the promise of God, & swete sentences of the gospell, styrre vp the fayth of the congregation, whē they go aboute too celebrate this sacramente, for without fayth, the sacramente dothe not profyte, but hurte, not of it selfe, nor through the fault of the faithful minister but throughe the vnfaythfulnes of hym that receiue it. Secondarelye in this sup∣per, yt people must be exhorted to thank∣fulnes, to laude and prayse God, for the death of our sauyoure Iesu Christe. For Paule sayth: as often as ye eate of thys i. Cor. xi, chap breade, and drynke of this cuppe, shewe furthe the lordes deathe tyll he come.
And for thys cause it was called partely Eucharistia, that is too saye: thankes ge∣uyng. Moreouer they must seriouslye & Why the lor∣des supper is called Euch a¦ristia. earnestly inculcate and beate into ye hear¦tes of the people, charitie, loue, studye of concord and true innocencie. Vntoo the which thinges, the sacrament if it be due¦ly ministred, dothe in a maner of it selfe, moue and rauysshe all men. For who is
 so dul, and without vnderstanding, whi∣che with this most earnest rehearsall of the benefites of God,, be sydes that, the goodnes of Christe, with a visible appea¦raunce, signe and token, beynge put be∣fore hys eyes, would not be moued too thankefulnes, and mutuall beneficence? Who would not kepe him selfe from the vncleannesse of this worlde, when he se∣eth and heareth that he is made a mem∣bre of Iesu Christe? Againe▪ who would not louingly embrace his Christian bre∣thren, whome he heareth also too be the lymmes of Christ? and to be before god so highly estemed, that he gaue hys one∣ly begotten sonne, too suffer deathe for The Sacra∣mēt is a test∣monial or wit¦nes of mutu∣al faith & loue them? And truely the sacramente is a te∣stimonyal, wherewyth we do testyfye a mutuall faythe betwene vs, and are in a maner confederate together. We do eat all of one breade, and drynke of one cup The bodye and bloude of Christe dothe fede vs all to euerlastyng lyfe. We are all quyckened wyth one spirite. We are al the members of one bodye. Therfore we ought not to disagre amonge our sel¦ues, but in Iesu Christ to loue one an o∣ther, and to haue al one mynde, and one
 fayth. Suche thynges dyd the Apostles intreate vpon, when at anye tyme they dyd minister the sacrament of the bodye and bloud of Christ, without any subtyl Whosoeuer seketh the pro¦fyte of Chry∣stes churche, must ensue & folow ye exam¦ple of the apo¦stles. disputatyon or reasonyng: Whose exam¦ple, whosoeuer seketh the profyte of the congregation of god, he shall folowe. Al his intent and endeuoure shall be that ye churche may vnderstand the right vse & institution of this sacrament, and flie frō suche curiouse and vaine questions, one∣ly studying to be, throughe faithe, parta¦kers of the thynge sygnified in the sacra¦ment: That therfore the commune peo∣ple whyche is vnlearned and knoweth not the tongues, maye the better vnder∣stande how they ought to receyue thys sacramente, all superstitious peruerse o∣pinions, beyng vtterly extirpated and ba¦nisshed from emong the faythful subiec∣tes of this victoriouse and illustre realme I haue at thys presente tyme compyled and translated out of Latin into English the sayinges or opinions of ye auncyente faythfull fathers vpon the sacrament of the boody and bloude of Christe. Wher∣by al men may learne in what reuerence this sacrament, as a seale of the lyuynge
 god, ought to be had, and how the pure The pure and sincer antyqui¦tie did alwais kepe it selfe wt in the inclosu∣res of ye word of god, in the matter of the sacramentes. The antichri∣stes do treade doun the ordi¦naunces of Christ yt theyr vngodly inuē¦tiōs, & dremes may be set vp. and syncere antiquitie, did kepe it selfe al¦wayes within the limites and bondes of the sacred scriptures and worde of God beyng in this poynte farre from the im∣pietie and vngodlines of our antichristes whych treading vnder fete, the instituty∣on and ordynaunce of our sauyour Iesu Christe, the eternall wisedome of the hea¦uenly father, did studye for naughte else but to set vp their owne inuentions and dreames: Wherwith the myndes of ma¦ny men are so intoxicated and poysoned that it is almoste impossyble to cure and heale them. But I trust that when they haue read this small treatye, whych con¦taynethe ye myndes of the olde doctours which almoste all, were by and by after the apostles, beyng faythfullye transla∣ted for theyr erudition into their mother tongue, they (I meane them which of ig¦noraunce, and not of malyce do erre, wil be the more ready to forsake theyr blynd error, and to folow & embrace the truthe which our most soueraigne lord, ye King & his honorable counsail hath set furthe. And now because yt I do know yt youre mastership hath bene alwaies a louer of
 the truth, and a hater of superstition, and vngodlines euer, as a valiaūt champione of ye lord, wt the sweard of the spirit, whi∣che is gods word, defending the veritye, to yt vtter ouerthrowing & subuersion of al vngodly errors, which wt the vehemēt & godly spirit of such worshipful men, as your mastership is, being plucked vp by ye rootes, wtout any doubte, the kyngdō Vngodlye er∣rours beynge plucked vp bi the rootes, Antichristes kyngdom can stand no lon∣ger. of Antichriste, can not stand no longer, but vanish away as the mist, with ye bea∣mes of the bright shining sonne: I haue thought expedient and mete to dedicate this litle work vnto you, in tokē of grati¦tude & due beneuolence toward your ma¦stership, beseching moste mekely, yt ye of your wont goodnes & facilitie vouchsafe to accept this my rude labour. Herafter wyl I set furth better thinges, in youre masterships name, wt the grace of the ly∣uing god. Who of his infinite merciful∣nes preserue your good mastership, & mi good Lady, your trew louynge spouse & wife, and with his holy spirit so rule and guide your hertes in all your affayres, yt what so euer ye thynke or do, may be to the glorye of god, and saluation of youre soules. Amen.
