



Honorable and my very good Lord,
GOD who is the God of order and not of con∣fusion, from whom all good things descend, hath placed here below sundry sorts of people; the Ants are a people notProv. 30. 25. 26. 27. 28 strong, yet they prepare their meat in the Sum∣mer;
 the Conies are but a feeble folke, yet make they their houses in the Rocks; the Locusts haue no King, yet goe they forth all of them by bands; the Spider taketh hold▪ with her hands, and is in Kings palaces▪ this sort of people dif∣fer very much, for some of them are , which provide onely for the present day, but lay up nothing against the morrow; the Gras∣hopper provideth not against the winter as the Ant doth; there are others of them who liue by rapine, as the Caterpillers who devour all and then flie away; and Nahum compareth the Mer∣chantsNahum 3. 16. of Ninive to these, that carry all the wealth away with them▪ and there are some of those people which are insatiable, as the Horsleach, that hath two daughters who cry continually, Giue, giue; This sort of people areProv. 30. 15. governed by instinct onely; the Locusts haue no King, yet they goe out in bands; the Ant hath no guide, overseer, or ruler, yet shee provi∣dethProv. 6. 7. her meat in the Summer, and gathereth her foode in the harvest, although they haue no King or ru∣ler to command them, and oversee them, nei∣ther a guide to direct them, yet they are ruled by instinct.
There are a second sort of people that God hath placed here below, and they are men; and there is a greater difference amongst this
 people, than amongst the former, for looke upon some of them, and yee shall hardly dis∣cerne whether they be men or not, and as the Philosophers say, there are some sorts of creatures that we cannot tell whether they liue the sen∣sitiue or the vegetatiue life onely, there is so little life in them, as in the Shel-fish; so it is hard to discerne whether those liue the reaso∣nable life, or the brutish onely, they haue no lawes, they lodge in the caues of the earth, goe naked, eat raw flesh, and although they haue the shape of men, yet they haue but the heart of beasts in them, as Nebuchadnezzar had. There are other men who are ruled by reason, and politicke government, for their God hath taught them, he may be called their God in this respect, as the Prophet Esay calleth him theEsay 28. 26 husband-mans God, because he teacheth him how to manure the ground, and so God commeth neerer to them; they are a people here, but yet they are not Gods people, and it is better to be a dorekeeper in the house of God, than in high∣estPsal. 84. 10. advancement amongst such.
There is a third sort who liue in his Church, and this is the highest societie in this life, and here we shall see policie, justice, frugalitie, and all vertues, because Gods worship is here, and as the inferior faculties of the soule are
 eminenter by way of excellencie contained in the superior, so are all those comprehended in Religion, and as the shadow followeth the bodie, so doth policie and order follow Reli∣gion; if a man would learne frugalitie, let him looke to Ioseph, who taught the Senatours ofPsal. 104. 22. Egypt; if he would learne policie, let him looke to the government of Salomons Court and his2 King. 4. house; if he would learne to be a good war∣riour, let him see what order the Lord hath placed in the Campe of the Iewes; and if heNumb. 0 10. would learne justice, he shall see it exactly de∣scribed in the Law of God.
My Honourable Lord, I haue made choise of your Lp: to recōmend this Treatise to your Patrocinie, because yee know what it is to be amongst Gods people; many great men if they get their portion in this life amongst thePsal. 17. people of this world, they care not to be De∣nisions in the societie of Gods people, and they content themselues with the portion of this world, and say, Bonum est hic esse; but this is a freedome which is bought at a higher rate, it cost the chiefe Captaine a great summe ofAct. 22 28. money▪ to be made a freeman in Rome; but to be made a freeman in the Church of GOD, it cost the price of Christs bloud. Great men desire to be out of this first societie, they de∣sire
 not to liue like beasts; but if they come to the second societie, to liue like civill men, that doth content them; they giue GOD thankes (perhaps) for this, that they are men and not beasts, and that they haue beene bred civilly, but few giue God thankes for this, that they liue under the Gospell, where they may learne Christ, not many Noble are called.1 Cor. 2. Sometimes they may tremble and feare, as Fe∣lixAct. 24. 25. did, and put off their conversion to anotherAct 26. 28. time, and some of them are like Agrippa, who almost are perswaded to be Christians; butAct. 13. 7. few like Sergius Paulus, who was converted at Pauls preaching.
My Lord, you haue had still the practise of Religion in your house, and one of the best helpes to further you, your worthy and reli∣gious Lady, whose name smelleth now likeHosea 14 7. the wine of Lebanon, when shee is gone, and now she enjoyeth the fruit of that, when nei∣ther her Nobilitie, birth, or worldly honour profited nothing; and this I write unto your Lp: beseeching you to goe on in that Chri∣stian course, that both by your place and ex∣ample, you may draw others unto the truth. The Lord promised that he would giue thePsal. 2. 8. uttermost parts of the earth for a possession to his Sonne; this is the Motto of this Iland, and the farther
 North, it is the nearer to the ends of the earth, studie therefore my good Lord, that Iesus Christ may haue his possession enlarged in the North, and this shall be your crowne in the latter day, when all your possessions shall faile you.

