



Right Honorable,
THE auncient Jewes Talmud l. Iuchsin. Folio. 13. testifie, that there were three Crownes, which made ISRAELL renow∣med: The first was the Crowne of the Law; the second, the Crowne of the King; the third, the Crowne of the Priest: And of those three Crownes, they say, that
 the Crowne of the Law was most glorious; because Pro. 8. 15, 16. it is said, By me Princes Raigne. It was this Law of God, which David made his Counsellour, Psal. 119. In the morning when he rose, and at night when he went to bed. It was this Law which made not onely Kings and Princes wise, but also States-men and Counsellours: as Esa. 22. 20 Eliacim the Chancelour, er. 38. 7. Ebed-melech the Ae∣thiopian (King Zedekiah's Courtier) Tit. 3. 13. Zenas the Lawyer, Col. 4. 14. Luke the Physitian, Act. 17. 34 Dionysius Areopa∣gita the Philosopher. So that, from him that sits vpon the Throne, Deut. 29. 11. to him who hewes the wood, and drawes the water, (that is, from the highest to the basest) this Law should ever be their di∣rector.
The Scriptures of God, haue beene directed to divers sorts of persons, both noble and base: Luke Dedicated his Gospell, and Acts of Luke 1. 1. Act. 1. 1. the Apostles to noble Theophilus: Iohn dedicated his second Epistle to the Elect Ladie: and his third Epistle to his Hoste Caius, a meane man,  Ioh. 1 1. but yet a good Christian. Some make choyce of Patrons onely for Nobilitie, but haue no respect of vertue, then it were better to chuse such a Patron as Caius: but where Nobilitie is grac'd with vertue, such a man is a most fit Patron, as Theophilus. Now because I find both those combin'd in your Lordship, I am bold
 to put these my latter gleanings vnder your Lordships Patrocinie.
A second reason, which moved me to of∣fer these my travels to your Lordship, is this: I remembred that Apologue in the Talmud: Talmud Cholin. 62. 1. The grapes in Babell sent vpon a time to the vine leaues in Iudaea, desiring them to come and overshadow them, otherwise the heate would consume them, and so neuer come to maturitie. Your Lordship knowes well the mythologie of this Apologue: If learning be not sheltred by those who are in eminent pla∣ces: and if they cast not their shadow over it, it will soone perish: but where they favour it, then it prospers. If the spring be cold, then plants, herbs, and the blossome of the Trees wither; but where the influence is seasona∣ble, then all things reviue: So where great men are averse to Learning, the spirits which otherwise could blossome, wither, and deay: but where it is vpholden by men of higher place, it is like a Fountaine of liuing water. Ioh. 4.
A third reason, which moved me to offer these my travels to your Lordship, is, your Lordships ingenuitie, who will cover such things as are said amisse here, (for who en∣treating of such Antiquities, and so diverse, will still touch the truh) If any thing be said
 to the purpose, your Lordship will soone note it, who vnderstands matters of deeper insight then these are. For these and many moe rea∣sons, and your Lordships vndeserved favour towards me. I offer most willingly these my travels to your Lordship, craving of God that you may continue like Eliacim, as a fastened nayle Isay 22. 23. in a sure place, to doe good in that place, which God and his Maiestie haue placed you in. I rest

