



WHen I had finished this short Sermon, touching the spiritual combate, betweene grace and re∣maining sinne, amongst all my Christian friends, I thought of you two as fittest, in whose name I might publish it to the world. For I called to minde how you had beene exercised in this battle, betweene the flesh and the spirit, betweene grace and corruption: Though all your daies haue beene daies of peace outwardly, yet yee haue abid a
 great fight of afflictions within: as Re∣becca selt a strife in her wombe, the two twinnes strugling together: so you haue felt in the wombe of your heart a bitter and tough combate betweene the old man and the new.
There be a great number of Christians in the world very like those Israelites whom wee read of in Iudges 3. That they knew not all the warres of Canaan: I say likewise, of innumerable Gospel∣lers, they be vtterly vnacquainted with all the warres of Christians, being at a league with iniquity and hell, they neuer strooke stroke against sinne and satan, but full many for them. It is farre o∣therwise with you: For euen as it is said of Dauid, that hee was a man of warre and did fight the Lords battles: so (though yee be a paire of weake women) yet your hands haue beene taught to war and your fingers to fight; you haue and that valiantly fought, and still doe fight the Lords battle against the whole host of your sinnes, vnder your Captaine and
 Generall Christ Iesus, who as once in himselfe, so now in you (as in all other his members) is still more then a Con∣querour ouer the power of Satan and sinne. Dauid prospered not better in his warres, then you haue done in yours, through the power of Christs might. Heerein yet are yee vnlike to that godly King, that his warres hindered him so as he could not build a Temple to the Lord: this worke required times of peace, and a man free from such distractions as ac∣companie warres. But in the midst of your bickerings and hot skirmishes you haue had the mercy from God to build him a Temple, euen a spirituall house, your bodies and soules, being the habita∣tions for his honour to dwell in, where he maketh his mansion by his spirit which is in you, aad delighteth to rest there, en∣abling you to endure the combate with your soule-enemies, furnishing you with that cōpleate harnesse, instructing you to the right vse of your weapons, framing
 your hearts graciously to repentance vp∣on fals and wounds receiued in the fight, raising you vp and renewing your strength and courage daiely. And fi∣nally making you fruitfull in euery good worke to the praise of his owne name; of whom it is ye haue both the will and the deed, both meanes to doe much good, and a minde to imploy your talent to the best aduantage for your Lord. Giue God the glory, & hold on in your course, wor∣king out your saluation in feare and trembling; so being humbled and made afraid by sight of your inbred corruption and great infirmities, as that yee looke vp to Christ with the eie of faith, and in confidence of his might bee bold and couragious. Finally, fructifie in all good works, as trees planted by the Riuers of water, doe bring foorth mature and sea∣sonable fruit, and as they who be plan∣ted in the house of God, still flourish like a greene Oliue, and bring footh more fruit in your age, standing firme and vn∣remoueable
 as Cedars of Libanon, knowing that your worke in the Lord shall not be in vaine. To whose protecti∣on I commit you.

