



SIR,
I esteem it a singular happiness, to be the first, who presents to your
 ROYAL HIGHNESS, these first principles of learning, virtue and Christian doctrine. That natu∣ral vivacity, these not faint glimmerings, but lively flashes, of that rising light, and dawning day of reason, far more advan∣ced in your ROYAL HIGHNESS, then is ordinary in those of your age, with that firmness of me∣mory, able already to repeat exactly long prayers in latin, are certainly fore-runners of a great wit, and a sound judge∣ment. To Which if piety and solid vertue be joined, as we have all reason to hope they will, both by the inclinations you shew al∣ready, and the judicious care your Worthy Lady Governess
 takes of your education, we can∣not but be comforted with the hopes of having one day in your R. HSS'S person as glorious a Prince as ever Great Brittain saw. Hasten then most Gracious Prince, and even surpass as you have done hitherto our expecta∣tion. Exhibit to the world by those charming draughts of your most sweet and comely face, by those handsom features of body, but much more by the noble qualitys of your mind, exhibit, I say, a perfect resemblance of your Royal progenitors. But above all hasten to learn their rare and unparalleled virtues, and to grow not only in grace and favour before men, accor∣ding
 to the expression of holy scripture, but also in the sight of God. Make hast to learn these first principles of Christian do∣ctrine and cheif mysterys of Faith, that you may the better come to know, love and serve your sovereign lord, to whom alone we ow you, and to whom you ow all. Proceed then most hopefull Prince as you begin, and lift up daily to God those innocent hands of yours: the more innocent they are the more victo∣rious they will be. Seek first the Kingdom of heaven, and crowns, scepters, riches, prospe∣rity and even a sudden and glorious restoration of their sacred Majestys, followed by a
 long and happy reign, haec om∣nia, all these, according to Christs promise, and much more, adjicientur, shal be given from above. And to your self after a long happy and prosperous reign a numerous posterity to cary down your name vertues and glory to future ages. These are the most hearty wishes of him, who is with a most profound respect,

