



Right Honourable,
IN the Histories and Books of Fame, Relating to this Ancient Kingdom, there is
 Found a Poor Mans King, and he Attended with a poor Mans Bishop: wanting as yet Officers of State, whereof I hope the Chronicles of this Age in after Times shall plentifully store him; At present were a Draught to be Compiled, by suf∣frage, your Lorship should be Enrolled, the Poor Clergies Chancellor, Your care for them is such, and your Justice given them is so Just, that we have often heard the oppressed
 Loyall Levite, solaceing Himself in this, I'le tell my Lord Chancellor, and is not asham∣ed of his Hope, neither is his ex∣pectation cut off.
My Lord, I have some∣times Asked from you, and ne∣ver was Denyed the Suit en∣treated for; I now beg this, That being to publish my Doxologia; A point Truly Ancient, and pure∣ly Ecclesiasticall, it might be Emitted under the wings of your Lordships Name, Autho∣rity
 and Patronage, for mor Strongly Fencing it against th assaults of such Mutiniers who in the Church attempt t Levell whatever is Church-like: Grounding my petitio upon this Rock; That as you Honour stands for it in Text Your Goodnesse will not disdai to stoop to it in Comment.
This, My Lord, shall Ob∣lidge the Author to implore the Persons, whose Glory is here∣in Treated of, to Beautifie an
 Irradiate your Lordships Worth, in Becoming a Brazen Wall, for Securing and Perpetuating the Memory of your Ancient and New House of Leslie, by Aug∣menting vertue, and Entailing Honour alwayes upon Its Sons and Daughters, Its Daugh∣ters and Sons.
May the First Sex, by Di∣vine favour, procure the Worlds Respect to that Height, which that Famous German Count Leslie (a Cadent of your Lord∣ships House) Purchased, who
 in that late and great Turkish Embassie, by his Stately Counte∣nance Graced the Christian Em∣perours Cavel-cadewith such Beaming Reverence, that the Sultan himself in admiration protested, He had never in all things seen the like.
The Compiler of that Affair speaking of the Counts Vene∣rable Hair, Enforceth me to add, that in Piety and Renown, they may Number the Days of that late Reverend Prelate
 John Lesly, Bishop of Clogher, whose Epitaph Expressed this,
Aetate hâc nemo tot vixit Episcopus Annos,
Aevi nemo magis mole Gravatus obit.
Dying An. D. 1671. in his Hundreth years Compleat, yet of so vigorous and active a Body, as it but Refreshed (though after∣ward decayed) him, to post from Dublin to London, in Anno 1660. Where I had the Honour to confer with him, and the Passion to admire at him.
Both Church and State in
 Voto, being thus Replenished, what remaineth, but Industry, that the other Sex may have Graven in Verity upon their Tombs, what by one (it seems no Flaterer) was uttered in the Funeral Oration of a Ver∣tuous Lady, (viz.) I knew se∣veral women in this place that I had Good thoughts of, but of her, I say that of Solo∣mon, Many Daughters have done vertuously, but thou Katherin Leslie excellest them all. So be it said of all your Ho∣nours
 Off-spring: Ʋnto whom, It shall be my Ambiion to be ever Accounted, what now I am, in you the Root, that is,
Right Honourable,

From my Study, May 28. 1672.
