



Worthy Sirs,
THE Favourable Reception this Discourse gene∣rally had at its delivery, and the particular Approbation you all did me, the extraordina∣ry honour to express of it, might perhaps be Arguments to men of a temper different from mine, to affect the gratifying themselves farther in the publicati∣on: But I have so great and just a Consciousness of my own weakness and inability, that truly I had not the least imagination of so doing, had not you all Gentlemen in an especial way (uncapable of any denial) laid your commands upon me.
That it appears therefore at all is in obedience to you, that it comes abroad so soon, was one part and pressure of your Injunctions. And yet it will be impossible for me to acquit this hastiness of Printing, from unpardonable Levity and Vanity, unless you interpose your Favour and Authority betwixt me and Censure.
For pray let me presume to say, that the following Discourse, now is no longer mine, the Case is wholly al∣tered, so that what was lately my Sermon is now entire∣ly become your Book.

These considerations have forced me upon the great hazard of exposing these weak lines to the deliberate and dangerous tast of Ocular Perusal, where such faults will be sure to be stopt and arraigned, as made a shift (in the late hast and hurry) to escape the notice and censure of your Ears.
However, Here it is verbatim, the same as at its de∣livery; nor have I dared to add or diminish (though even my weak sight discovers many loose lines and abrupt Periods) least I should belye the Title Page.
I shall (I fear) have great need of your Patronage and Protection, to temper and alleviate such Cavils and Ca∣lumnies as will be thrown by some unreasonable men of these unbridled headstrong times. Who, if toucht (tho' never so gently) sharpen their (reverberating) tongues like a Serpent, and have Adders poyson under their lips, Psal. 140.3.
I conclude with my most humble thanks for your many honourable Favours to me, and with my hearty Prayers to God to encrease and prosper in you that Piety, Loyal∣ty and Courage, which you so zealously express; (as far as in you lies) to advance the Peace and Prosperity of this Church and State. I am
Honourable Sir, 
