


My Lord,
I Am very sor∣ry that my indisposition cannot per∣mit me to o∣bey the com∣mand which you have in∣joyn'd mee, and to bee my selfe the Bearer of the Booke which I send you. Yet since you receive it from better and more worthy hands then mine, and that M. the Bishop of Nantz hath done mee the honour to carry it, I need not fear it should run any hazard in my absence.
 If the King vouchsafe to cast his eyes upon it for the testimony you beare it, I dare promise my Lord, that he will finde some∣thing that will please him for the remembrance of what is pass'd, and that his vertue being without example, he will take pleasure to see that I speake thereof after a manner which is not altogether common. I pro∣test freely that the considerati∣on of so high a vertue, hath gi∣ven me thoughts which I can∣not expect from the mediocrity of my wit: and I have bin so extraordinarily transported, that oftentimes I knew not what I was about to write. It alone, hath discovered to mee the Idaea of this Art which commands all others, which excites and calmes the passions
 as seemeth good to it; which is not content to please by the pu∣rity of the Style, and the graces of language, but which under∣takes to perswade by the force of learning and abundance of reason. I have sought it hither∣to unprofitably; the Life of the King hath taught me more then all the precepts of the Rhetori∣cians; and I owe all the merit of my work to the happinesse of his raigne. It is at least one advantage which I have above those who have lived before me. Their memory is other∣wayes venerable to mee; and since I honour men of three∣score yeares, I have no mind to contemne the Antiquity of ma∣ny Generations. For strangers that believe themselves to have the possession of wit, we are not
 bound to yield them the same respect; and I think I may say without offence, that as they have not a Master of so much worth as ours, neither would it be reasonable for us to be infe∣riour to them; and that the worthiest Prince of the world should command a people of lesse worth then others: In my opinion you will state this que∣stion in our Favour: But I hope more My Lord, if you take notice of the carriage of the discourse, and consider how I get out of ill passages, you will do me the honour to avow, that though I walk upon thornes I am not prick'd, and that in the most dangerous matters I have kept that temper which ought to be held Inter abruptam audaciam, & deforme obsequium: Between
 presumptuous boldnesse and deform'd flattery. If sometimes I have most free expressions, me thinkes my Libertie is like that of well polliced Repub∣lickes, where they leave not off to obey the lawes, and together withall to preserve their Liber∣tie.
When I shall be at Milan or at Brussels, I shall not know how to handle the Princes of the house of Austria with more re∣spect and reverence then I doe; and it is in my opinion all that they can expect from the di∣scretion of a man that is not their Subject. For not to dare to speak of the Ambition of the Spaniards, of the Maximes of the Counsell of Spaine, and of the Designe to conquer, which the King will change when he shall
 please, into a necessity of defen∣ding themselves; would be al∣ready one beginning of slavery which wee should pay them; and they are, I assure my selfe, too just to be willing that wee should thanke them for the wrong they have done us.
There may be some other passages which ill Interpreters will wrong in the explication, chiefly where it is spoken of Ministers and Favourites: But keeping my selfe in generall Thesise's, and not designing the persons in particular, my proceeding seemes to mee very innocent. Neither can I hinder those that find themselves guil∣ty to have remorse, or that wounded faces should not see their scarres when they behold themselves in a glasse. If it were
 forbidden to make profession of Truth, I should not present∣ly turne Rebell, nor oppose my self to an established order: I would obey so perverse a Law, because I am a good Citizen, but it should be by my silence, and not by my cowardlinesse, and at the charges of not speak∣ing at all, but not of speaking a∣gainst my conscience. God be thanked, we are not upon these tearmes; and I also injoy the good fortune of the times, and knowing well, that whatever falls out, servile spirits are su∣spected, that their Testimony is not received, and that they do injury to Reason it self when they make use thereof, I would be bold sometimes, to be cre∣dible alwayes, and to make that passe for absolute Truth, which
 otherwise might be disputed.
There are that accuse mee of a contrary vice, and who say that I flatter because in some places I strive to adorn truth: I would not do an ill office to a∣ny person; But assure your self, my Lord, that these kind of Peo∣ple are Enemies rather of my Subject, then of my Book, and wish more against the Prince, then against the Oratour. I pro∣test, had I bin able to expresse my self in a loftier strain, I could have made it appeare in this oc∣casion; neither had it beene as was sometime said to imploy the Arrowes of Philoctetes to kill birds, nor to raise stormes upon a Rivulet: It is not fit to speake meanly of that which is the highest next under Heaven, and Soveraignty which is ado∣red
 all alone, deserves without doubt a double veneration when it hath vertue for a Com∣panion. One cannot write of the King in tearmes too high nor too magnificent; and wee may for many just reasons al∣low him that, which heretofore hath been conferr'd upon wick∣ed Princes meerly in respect of their Character. I will not re∣present you My Lord, with what honour and what humility, or rather with what worship and religion the Romane Princes have been entertained by their Subjects. I will not trouble my selfe to make you consider that they bestow'd upon them Eter∣nity and Divinity; as wee give our Soveraignes, Majestie and Highnesse, that what is now cal∣led the Crime of Felony, was in
 those times called the Crime of Impiety, and that our Rebels were their Ungodly ones.
I will not alleadge that in the Code of Theodosius, the An∣swers of the Emperours are sti∣led Oracles; their Edicts Di∣vine Letters, their Aspects a Celestiall splendour, their Pal∣lace, the Divine House, their Closet the Sanctuary: I onely intreat you to remember that this Style is the Style of the Ro∣mane Empire, which had alrea∣dy received Christianity, and that not only the Courtiers and the Oratours have spoken thus, but also the Holy Fathers and the Councels. Saint Gregory Nazianzen in his first Invective against Julian, calleth Constance most Divine Prince, though this most Divine Prince had perse∣cuted
 the faithfull, driven the Popes out of their Seate, and dyed in the Arrian Heresie. Anastasius was also an Heretick Emperour, and was slain with a Thunderbolt by a just punish∣ment of Heaven; and yet Sabas the good servant of God speak∣ing of this wicked Prince, said, that he was come to adore the steps of his Imperiall Piety: and an Historian of his time called him Saint Anastasius. The Fa∣thers of the sixth Councell of Constantinople, do call Justinian, Saint Justinian, and his Wife Saint Theodora, though the Life of both of them was fuller of Monsters, then of Miracles, and that Theodora particularly made use of the power of the Empire onely to doe mischiefe to the Church: After the same man∣ner
 Theodorick the Arrian is called Saint Theodorick by the Councell of Rome, and accor∣ding to the relation of Eusebius; Dennis of Alexandria, the Mar∣tyr of our Lord, gave the Title of most Holy, to Valerian the Pagan Emperour, though wee attribute it now only to the Su∣preame Head of Christian Re∣ligion.
Now if this be so, and that the Fathers and the Councels have spoken of the holinesse of Heretiques and Pagans, which proceeded only from the Cha∣racter and unction which they received, and which conse∣quently was externall and came from without; why is it not lawfull for me to acknowledge another holinesse joyned to this? a Holinesse which is not
 superficiall and borrowed; but which hath its foundation in the innocency of life; which is not tyed to the Dignity, but in∣herent in the Person; which is not an impression of the finger of God upon a fortuitous mat∣ter, but an effusion of his grace in a soule chosen and pre∣destin'd. Whoever finds ex∣cesse in my words, knowes not what is the duty of a Subject, nor has that opinion which he ought to have concerning his own Prince. He carries his sight too boldly upon so elevated a greatnesse, and measures not the distance which is betweene his Judgement and the worth of the King. Provided that the honour which is rendered to these Sacred Persons be not in∣jurious to God, there can be no
 excesse in honouring them; pro∣vided that the Praises which are given them, do not offend a greater Majestie then theirs, they cannot be immoderate; wee ought to reverence even their shadow, & bow the knee before their picture: All that comes near them ought to ap∣pear to us more pure, and more full of luster by the participati∣on which it receives from their rayes. The respect which is born them ought to proceed e∣ven to their Liveries and ordi∣nary Servants, and with grea∣ter reason to be extended to their Affaires and Ministers: For whom you may remember if you please, that the ancient Christians were wont to pray publikely, and to ask of God their preservation, though thereby they intreated for the
 preservation of their persecu∣ters, and of those who exposed them daily to Lions in the Am∣phitheater.
After this Example I have no mind to murmure against the Government of my Coun∣trey, nor to find fault with that which passeth over my head. I am alwayes content with the present honesty, and the wise∣dome which is in use; I never dispute against the Pilote that carries me, nor am curious af∣ter a novelty, to which, though it may chance prove good, I shall have much trouble to ac∣custome my selfe. I suffer Ty∣rannie, and desire the upright administration of Justice: When my Superiours are froward and perverse, I have docility and patience; when they are such
 as they ought to be, I have thankfull acknowledgement, & love. To those that are bad I give my silence and discretion, but neither do I forbeare to speak well of those that are good, nor to praise things that are praise∣worthy. For what concernes you, My Lord, I know that you endeavour more for the solidity of vertue, then for its pompe, and that you had rather fight, then triumph. Yet since your modesty is such, that it often∣times rejects truth, you ought not to be believed in your own cause, and I lawfully except a∣gainst you. Your Moderation must not hinder our acknow∣ledgement, nor must wee be ungratefull, because you are shamefast. It is true, there are certaine bounds within
 which the most violent affecti∣ons ought to containe them∣selves, and because I have be∣gun to quote Latine, I will owe you that saying of Tacitus, Pessi∣mum Inimicorum genus Laudan∣tes: Praysers are the worst kinde of Enemies. But communica∣ting to no other what is due to the King alone, nor bestowing the honour of successes else∣where; they cannot take it ill that I represent you as a wise and faithfull Minister, that acts by the orders and commands of a great Prince, and who seeks for no other glory but that of o∣beying and serving well. Men need not be astonished, that a∣mong so many unjust passions and groundlesse murmurings, there are found free judgements and voices that blesse your car∣riage
 of businesses. And cer∣tainly, in a time when you are so powerfully and so violently assaulted, there would be a want of the duties of humanity not to study to finde out some con∣solation for your displeasures, and to see an Innocent suffer without giving him one sigh, or comforting him with one word. It is not enough, My Lord, that you are assur'd of the Protection of your Master, and of the good state of your Con∣science, you have still need of the opinion of men, and of the Testimony of the Publicke. You apprehend not the danger of your Person, nor the ruine of your fortune, but you ap∣prehend blame, and evill repu∣tation; You are afraid of disho∣nest things though you con∣temne
 dangerous ones. And therefore this ought to bee a sweet sadnesse, and a misfor∣tune, which you may stile glo∣rious; to know, together with all good men, that you suffer for Justice, and that your cause is that of the King, and of the State. If it grieves you that you are not in the favour of a great Princesse, at least you have not any remorse for being unfaith∣full to her; and if you have not had complacencie enough to performe all her desires, wee know that you have too much honesty to have done any thing against her service. It is no small comfort to your mind, that the taking of Rochell, where you did most profitable service; and the reliefe of Cazal, to which you contributed very much, are
 the onely Crimes which make you guiltie; and that the luster of what you have done abroad being not able to be supported at the Court, strangers are come to mingle themselves in this domestick Jealousie, and to try to ruine him, whom they could not gain.
This is the fountaine of our last evils. The Credulity of the best Queene in the world hath serv'd for an innocent Instru∣ment for the malice of our ene∣mies, and the Request she made to the King, to remove you from his affaires, was not so much an effect of her indigna∣tion against you, as the first blow of the Conspiracie framed against France, and which was disguis'd to her under the vaile of devotion, that she might be∣lieve
 she merited in ruining you. The King would have given her all the reasonable satisfa∣ction hereupon that shee could desire. Hee was many times your Advocate, and Interces∣sour towards her: Hee would have bin your surety, and have answered for your fidelity. On your part My Lord, you have forgot nothing wherby to en∣deavour to asswage her spirit; she hath seene you at her feete asking her favour, though you might have demanded justice: she hath seene you make your selfe guilty and wronging your owne Innocency to give her place to pardon you. You have put your selfe in all postures of duty to move her, and if she would have believed no body but her selfe you had prevail'd
 with her: But those evill spirits which environ'd her, and who more desired your destruction then her contentment, made new batteries, thereby to har∣den her heart, which began to be mollified: They hindered the effect which wee expected from your submissions and from the Kings intreaties, they wrought upon her good disposition which began to yeeld and re∣lent, and had it not beene for their devilish slights we should have seen her full of glory and Majestie, bearing a part in all the thoughts of her Son; and wee should see you again receiving ordinarily from her mouth the commands of your Master: But she disrellisheth the one and the other, and will remain still in her former perswasion. The
 King, who hath granted her the pardon of more then forty thousand guilty persons, could not obtain from her the favour for one Innocent; and hee that is come to the end of the obsti∣nacie of the Rebels, nor hath undertaken any thing without successe, hath petition'd his Mo∣ther to no purpose. This made Him oppose a necessary constan∣cy against so strange a resoluti∣on, and to resolve not to plea∣sure his Enemies with the ba∣nishment of his servants. Hee retain'd you then, when you press'd him to give you leave to retire; and being ready to yeeld to the times, and to give place to envie, hee made it appeare that he was stronger then ma∣lice, and that he could change the time when he pleas'd: Hee
 did not believe that hee offen∣ded Nature not to abandon ver∣tue, nor that it was a sin against maternall Duty, not to violate friendship: and remembring perhaps that our Lord called his disciples his Mother and his Brethren, and said in the same place, That he that doth his will, the same is his Brother, and Sister, and Mother, He consi∣dered that Kings ought not so to respect Proximity, as to make no account of affection; and that to raigne, they have indeed need of Alliances and Kindred, but neither must they let passe servants and obedi∣ence.
Behold then your selfe, My Lord, maintain'd by the neces∣sitie of your Services, and the Interests of State, behold your
 selfe above the winds and tem∣pests. The complaints made a∣gainst you have onely assured your Master, that you are more to him then they could desire; The blow wherewith they thought to make you fall, serv'd onely to set you the fa∣ster, and that force which gave the shock to your fortune, with∣out being able to shake it, shew'd us the solidity of its matter. Neverthelesse being good and vertuous as you are, I imagine you are not content with this Fortune if you pos∣sesse it not with the consent of the whole world: It cannot be more powerfull and more firm then it is, but it may be more sweet and delightfull. You ne∣ver received so great honours, but you have tasted purer joyes:
 Never were there more victo∣ries nor more advantages over the Stranger, and never more intestine mischiefs and tumult in the House. This disorder which you have no way caus'd greatly afflicts you, and I know you would with all your heart that every thing were in its place. I doubt not but you be∣waile the misfortune of a Mi∣stresse whom you have condu∣cted by your Services to the ut∣most degree of felicitie, and that having laboured so long and so affectionately the perfect Union of their Majesties, it is a sensible displeasure to you at this day to see your labours ruin'd, and your worke fallen to the ground: You would be willing I assure my selfe, you had dyed at Rochel, because till
 then you were in the Queenes good opinion. I believe amidst the complaints that she makes, all the praises that come to you from elsewhere are importu∣nate, and that even your merit is in some sort odious to you, since it hath not her approbati∣on. God will dispell one day these clouds, and will send her more upright thoughts of your fidelitie.
But expecting till this bee brought to passe, and that bu∣sinesses receive some accom∣modation, it shall not trouble you if for some houres I turne your eyes from these sad ob∣jects which afflict you, and pre∣sent you with the Image of a happier season then this here present. I thinke I am inspir'd by my good Angel to bound
 my design with the first voyage for Italy; Before, My Lord, that your prosperitie was envied, that your friends fail'd of their fidelitie, that the Queene had changed her affections, and that the exploits of the Armie were weakened by the close dealings of the Closet. I meddle not with these hatefull Subjects, nor have the heart to handle wounds so fresh and bleeding. I will onely speak of what hath preceded our miseries, and in all this I will onely warrant my intention. It is very good, My Lord, and hath nothing for its object but the service of the King, but perhaps it is ill ma∣naged, and arrives not whither it tends. I know I am a good Frenchman, and extreamly love my Countrey; but I know not
 whether I am a good Politi∣cian, or sufficiently acquainted with our affaires; without doubt I have more courage, then strength, and more zeale then knowledge: And this pro∣testation I made at the entrance into my worke; that no body might de deceiv'd, and that they might search there rather for something which may ex∣cite love towards their Coun∣trey, then which should instruct them with things new and cu∣rious. I declare from the be∣ginning that I have not any bo∣dies assistance, that I have recei∣ved neither Notes nor instru∣ctions, and that I walke with∣out a guide or a Companion; And therefore if I commit any faults, I have onely done what I should, and they must be ta∣ken
 as proceeding from a man who sees things afar off, and from without, and stayes at the appearance of publicke af∣faires, without penetrating into their inward parts which are hid from him.
I could enter presently upon my matter, and take a shorter way then that which I have fol∣lowed; but I had a designe to prepare their minds by a plea∣sant discourse to one more se∣rious, and to deferre something after the manner of the Anti∣ents. You know my Lord, that the most part of them, make Proems to their bookes which have no agreement with their Subject, and which are like heads fastened on, which you may put upon all bodies. And this is so true, that Cicero writes
 of himselfe that hee had a vo∣lume of reserves whence hee drew out when hee had any need for the beginning of his workes. So that by chance ha∣ving prefix'd before his booke of Glory, the same Preface which hee had already put to his third booke of the Acade∣mickes, hee requested Atticus very pleasantly to cut off that first booke, and put another which he sent him in its place. In these Prefaces they did ordi∣narily discourse of the affaires and Government of the Com∣mon-wealth, they complain'd of the corruption of the Age, they related to the world their imployments in the City, and their exercises in the field; and after that, instead of descen∣ding gently, and as it were by
 degrees into their matter in hand, you would say that they precipitated themselves, so sud∣denly and all at once doe they fall upon it. All the Exordiums of Salust are of this kinde, and would as well fit Cicero's Books, as his: After hee hath declaim'd of vice and vertue, and has thrown himself upon an infinite reasoning, hee goes not out at the doore, where he sees himself shut up, but escapes forth by a breach, and breaking off on a suddaine where they thought hee would have gone on; let us come saith he to the businesse in hand; The Greekes are more licentious herein, then he. Dion Chrysostome en∣ters not ordinarily upon his subject till the end of his dis∣course; and if we take from his
 Master Plato his long Prefaces, his fabulous narrations, his im∣portunate Digressions, we shall make him shorter by halfe then he is: Both of them are like lit∣tle women undrest, who having put off their Tyres and their Cheopines, are but a piece of themselves. Plutarch doubtlesse is one of the most advised and most judicious of the latter Greeks, but yet he is fallen into the vice of his age and of his Countrey; and he who can rid himself of the Treatise which hee hath made of the Familiar spirit of Socrates, shall easily be able to get out of a Labyrinth. Christian Authours ought to be more austere, and lesse cu∣rious after strange ornaments, yet they cease not to give some∣thing to custome, and to wan∣ton
 it out of their Subject.
And not to trouble you with a tedious ennumeration: The Dialogue which Minutius Felix hath made to justifie our Reli∣gion against the Calumnies of the Pagans, hath a beginning no whit at all serious, and very far from the gravity of his matter. And Saint Cyprian in that letter so much esteemed which hee wrote to Donatus being a very severe Censure of the manners of his age by a description purely Poeticall, and by a Discourse as gaudy and florid as if hee would have spoken of Love or rehearsed a Fa∣ble.
As for mee who have un∣dertaken a labour of a long breath, I would not altoge∣ther imitate the Antients,
 which to their workes fa∣sten others, neither would I altogether avoid them. I have made a Preface where I have spoken as pleasantly as I could of the pleasures of the Autumne, because it was the time of the concep∣tion of my Prince: Neither have I forgotten the Coun∣trey where I was, because it is the place of his birth, I have beene very glad to give account upon occasion of the entertainment of my Soli∣tude, and to justifie the leisure of a retired person against those that accuse him of sloth and idlenesse. Besides that by the Conclusion you may see the whole businesse is to my purpose, and the adventure which gave occa∣sion
 to my designe, and which is Historicall and true, happening to mee at the River side which I de∣scribe, whereof my de∣scriptions which are not per∣haps tedious, are sometimes necessary, and may be con∣sidered as Circumstances of the Action which I represent, &c.

March 3. 1631.
