



MY LORD,
I Have presumed on this Dedication, upon a three-fold Account. 1. In reference to the Reverend Author. 2. From reflections up∣on my self. 3. And especially with respect unto the subject Matter of the Treatise.
1. The Author, when obscure and scarcely known by Persons of Honour, (being ne∣cessitated to ly hid in a corner, by reason of prelaticall Persecution) was owned, ap∣proved, and honoured by Your Lordship, for his high Parts, and eminent Piety, being a Learned, well-studied, self-denying Or∣thodox Divine, zelous of Gods Truth, then maligned, studious of the Churches Peace then disturbed, and very able to appear an Ad∣vocate for both, by strenuous Disputation. In this regard, my Lord, I am confident you will not be offended, finding Your Name prefixed before the Work of this worthy man.
2. As for my worthless self, I have for many years been look∣ed upon, not only as related unto Your Lordship in publique ser∣vice
 (when You sincerely improved and adventured Your Person, Your Interest, Your All, for Religion and Englands Liberties) but also obliged by manifold Testimonies of respect, both then, and since received: And upon the remembrance hereof, I judg it my duty, so to declare my gratitude and honourable respects unto Your Lordship, that this testimony hereof, may abide, when my body is laid in the dust.
3. The Subject Matter of this Book, is that which hath princi∣pally prevailed with me, to present it unto Your Lordships Pa∣tronage, because true godliness, in the Doctrine and Practice of it, hath been, and still is, befriended by You. Mr Jer. Burroughs did long since represent Your Lordship, unto the world, under this Character:Epistle Dedi∣catory before his Treatise of a gracious Spirit. Malice it self cannot but acknowledg, that godliness in the strictness of it, and natural excellencies in the eminency of them, have a blessed conjunction in Your Honour. And he ap∣plieth unto Your Lordship, that high commendation, which Nazi∣enzen gave of Athanasius, that he was Magnes & Adamas. A Load-stone in his sweet, gentle, and drawing nature; And yet an Adamant, in his resolute, stout carriage against those who were evil. Dr Spurstow hath more lately Dedicated his Treatise of Gods Promises to Your Honour, desiring that it may prove in Your hands, as the Rod of Myrtle in the hand of the Traveller, which as Historians report, doth keep him from growing weary.
And now (my Lord) I make bold to commend this Book un∣to Your perusall, as a further help, for Your guidance and en∣couragement in the path of Piety, that none of the Temptations of these shaking Times (whereby Multitudes are drawn aside, some to the right hand, and others to the left) may in the least pre∣vail against You. Hitherto, Your steddiness in holding close to Your old Principles, Profession and Engagements, doth render You a Christian established by Grace, in their account, who see many others of all Callings and Conditions, turned round about (like giddy men) in their Opinions and Conversations.
Your Lordship hath seen and felt, the assaults of sundry changes, and yet neither the frowns, nor the fawnings of men, neither the showrs, nor the Sun-shine of the Times, have caused You to change Your Habit, to put off Your Robe of Righteousness, which hath been Your Honour amongst men, is Your comfort, in Your most secret, serious retirements, and will be Your Crown of rejoycing in the Day of Christ.Principium, me∣dium & finis Christianae vi∣e. Calv. in 1 Tim. 4.8. 1 Tim. 6 5, 6. Verissima sunt, non pauca, quae tamen sunt mi∣nimè veri. mi∣lia. Arist. Rhet.  Meionymia subjecti ocu∣pantis. (vid.) Sussi∣cienria pro opi∣nione sufficientia (Piscator.) Prov. 14.14. . Gen. 17.1. Heb. 13.5. Godliness is profitable for all things, in the beginning, progress and conclusion of a Christian Course. And, though the world saith, Gain is godliness, yet St Paul turneth the proposition backward, affirming, that godliness is gain. And there is much reall Truth in this Assertion, how∣ever it be commonly and impudently contradicted in the world. The Apostle insinuateth a convincing Argument, to conclude the
 great gain which cometh in by godliness (viz.) because it produceth and continueth true contentment. The Original Language hinteth, that there is an All-sufficency in Piety, unto which Solomons ex∣pression seemeth parallel. A good man shall be satisfied from himself. Yea, the Heathen Philosophers placed a kind of satisfaction in Vertue.
By godliness, we are made possessors of Gods All-sufficiency, and by the Rules of godliness, we may know our selves to be happy in the enjoyment of him. The Apostle moveth contentment with such things as we have, by this Argument; For, he hath said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee.Psal. 16.5, 6. And Gods Servants have attain∣ed this gracious frme of heart, by this Consideration. The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places; I have a goodly Heritage. The Lord is the Portion of mine Inheritance.Ʋltra summum bonum non est locus. Senecu. Nemo faelix est, qui judicio suo miser est. Salvian. Eccistinos ad te Domine, & inquietum est cor dence requi∣escat in te. Aug. Psal. 116.7. Eccl. 12.13 Est. 3.1, 2. with Est. 5.13. 1 Kin. 21.1, 4, For what kind of true good, can possibly be needed, or desired, which is not vertually en∣joyed in God? And, as that soul only, which is thus perswaded, can be judged happy: So it is not possible, that an awakened, well-informed conscience, should conclude its satisfaction without God. The Dove which Noah sent out of the Ark, found no rest, till she returned back: So neither could David, nor Solo∣mon his Sonne, take up with contentment, till they found a resting place in God. Histories, both Sacred and Prophane, do report experiences of men deeply distempered with discontentments, in the midst of creature-greatness and possessions. Haman the fa∣vourite of Ahasuerus, could take no comfort in Court-content, fretting for want of Mordecai his obeysance. And King Ahab could not eat, but goeth sullen-sick to bed, because he could not get Naboths Vineyard.
Alexander the Great, having conquered the World, sat down and wept, because not satisfied, and yet there was not ano∣ther World to conquer: Yea, in the midst of all his abun∣dance he was disquieted, because he could not get green Ivy to grow in his Garden at Babylon. But what need is there of Histo∣ries,Majore tormen∣to pecunia possi∣detur, quam quaeritur. Seneca. when our own Times do yeeld us more then a good many of experiences, of the torment which racketh and per∣plexeth the spirits of the greatest amongst men.
In the mean time (My Lord) Godliness bringing content∣ment, is sound reall and durable gain, as I hope your heart doth experimentally understand. My Lord, you know that Theodosius did more rejoyce in being a Member of the Christian Church, than in being Emperor.
Go on, (my much honoured Lord,Tit, 2.12. Haec tria perpe∣tuò meditare Adverbia. Pauli.) undauntedly and un∣weariedly in the waies of True Religion, and while others contend and scramble for sublunary unsatisfying vanities, con∣tinue, yea increase Your care to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, and to enrich Your self and all
 Yours with the incomparable gain of godliness.Haec tria fiat vitā regula Sancta tuae.
This (My Lord) in reference unto Your Person, is the de∣sign of this Epistle Dedicatory, which will be followed with his hearty Prayers, who is,
My Lord,

April 27th 1657.
