



IT is published to the whole Nation, whether I will or no, that I have endeavoured, according to the Laws, to serve the established Government in Church and State. And that I have met with affronts for what I have done, which I have ever slighted, because the respect I have found among wellwillers to Loyalty, hath counterpoised all the unkind usage I have met with. And I should not at this time in the least murmur at my being openly traduced by the Pen of a Licentious Libeller, but that my friends are made to partake in the intended Infamy, and suspected the being no Protestants, in being my friends. Which thing I hope justifies my expostulating the matter with my ac∣cusers, what it is I am chargeable with, that looks like Popery, at a time very inconvenient to be suspected of it.
I do confesse, I never was a Friend to a Toleration of Dis∣senters of what denomination soever, in their open and daring transgression of the Laws. Now, if for this I must be Popish; then by rule of Contraries, the Papists that were lately Execu∣ted should be Protestants, for they were zealous for a Tole∣ration: and one of them declared at his Tryall, that they in∣tended not the introducing of Popery by the Kings death, but by a Toleration. I know the Papists were onely for a Toleration for their own ends, nor were any other that I ever heard of, any longer for it, than till their turn were served by it. They who at this day take more Liberty than I am sure the Law al∣lows them, would not Tolerate in the late times their Lawfull King his own Chaplains, nor his Subjects the use of the Com∣mon-Prayer in their own houses, nor the Clergy that read it, houses of their own to live in. And I know the end the Pa∣pists proposed by a Toleration is as unlike the mean, as one Term of a Contradiction is to the other, for what likeness is
there in a Toleration, to the Popish Inquisition? and the cer∣tain prospect I had of the danger there was of a Tolerations ending in an Inquisition, from the fierce opposition I met with from some projecting Papists for my zeal on the behalf of the Government, I do solemly protest to be the chief motive of that zeal.
And of that opposition, if it were a thing to be argued in any Court, I could produce considerable witnesses. But before his Majesty I should not need any.
For the Popular objection I have often heard of, that the Clergy are onely to preach people to Church, I ever thought it the Shepherds work as to provide his flock of Pasture, so to pre∣serve it from being devoured of Wolves, and to keep his Sheep from stragling. But for the task of Preaching people to Church, where shall we do it? when they will neither come to the house of God, nor to ours, nor receive us with the respect owing their Pastours into their own houses. This puts me in mind of Archimedes his undertaking to remove the Earth, which he could not do, without a place to plant his Engines on. No more can we preach people to Church, though we think it more practi∣cable, than to remove the Earth, till a place be assigned us for it. The preaching that is in publick, is not thought inferiour by those who will hear it, to what Dissenters have in their private apartments, but we cannot preach by the Law in any place, to any number of them, where Common-Prayer is not read, and this makes the dull Earth it will not move; So that the coun∣sell to the Clergy would be more proper, Bribe your Consciences, dispense with your Subscriptions, and Oaths of Canonicall Obe∣dience. But this we cannot do our selves, and we have no Pope to do it for us in the Church of England. But whence is it that Common-Prayer is so frightfull? The thing pretended is, that it is Popish, when yet it was compiled by them who were burnt for Protestants; and had they not been so served, it is much to be questioned, whether they would have preserved down to these times, the repute for Protestants: for it is not Confi∣scation of goods, Imprisonment, Banishment, that will satisfie some men at this day, that the Clergy of the Communion of the Church of England in the late times were Protestants: for they wanted for none of these tryals, and yet though they persisted
stedfastly in the defence of the Church of England against Popery, even in the time of their Exile, to the hazard of their lives from Papists, they are not allowed the name of true Pro∣testants.
It is worth the relating here, what we are told of the Excel∣lent Bishop Bramhall, by the Right Reverend Person who writes his Life, how that during his Exile, intending to travell into Spain, because by his disputes on the behalf of the Protestant Religion, he had so incensed the Papists in Flanders, that they would no longer permit him there the least use of their Libra∣ries, the Bishops Journey being known to the Papists, they sent his picture before him into Spain, that so soon as the Bishop came where the Inquisition took place, he was saluted by the Woman of the Inn, by his name; he desiring to know, how she came by his name, she told him that she could also shew him his picture, and that there were more of them upon the Road, and that her Husband had a Commission to apprehend him, and carry him before the Inquisitors. I suppose that if he had been apprehended and put to death, he might have had the good luck to have been accounted a Protestant; and whence was it, that escaping the snare with his life, Mr. Baxter in his Grotian Religion, could have the heart to represent him to the world, for a person Popishly inclined? Who would not judge by this usage of so great an opposer of Popery, that let men do what they can that way, their being of the Church of England is the thing that makes men Papists? And then how strangely was it provided by a late Act of Parliament, to make the receiving of the Sacrament according to the usage of the Church of Eng∣land, the Shibboleth, to distinguish a Protestant from a Papist? Now, if the being of the Church of England makes us no Pro∣testants, it must be upon the occount of some fundamental mis∣carriage in our reformation, which was not in other Reformed Churches, who were first called Protestant, and what that was, except it be this, that we reformed regularly, we are utterly at a losse about it: Our Church was Reformed at the first by the Care and Conduct of our Lawfull Governours, in the way the Jewish Church was Reformed in the Reign of the good King Hezekiah, and the Clergy of her Communion have not been at∣tainted of any Disloyalty from that time to this: but this, I
know, our Adversaries will be ashamed at least to say they dis∣like in our Church and Clergy. If they do dislike it, we are resolved (to use the words of Job) That our righteousness in this matter, which we account our Glory, we will hold and will not let it go. And I do heartily wish, that all sober persons who have any Interest in the men of this Age who do so strangely confine and distinguish about Protestantisme, would persuade them by all means to let the Church of England have the first share at least in the Protestant Religion, because of the constant Loyalty of the men of her Communion, as they desire to keep up the honour and reputation of it; For, if they may not be permitted to be Protestants, where are Protestants to be found of any other Communion in these Nations, upon whom the late Rebellion, and the many dismall consequences of it, the Rapine, Perjury, Sacriledge, Murthers, and the King's hor∣rid Murther too, may not be charged? And how unanswerably then must the Protestant Religion suffer reproach and scandall for all these things all the world over? But it is suggested that the Clergy of the Church of England are parte per pale Po∣pish and Protestant, which would be very strange, when they have all the same laws, and are all under the same Oath to observe them; If they hope there are some who do not observe these Laws, though they are under the Oath of God to do it, and will vote these the Protestants, how bravely have they pro∣vided for the Protestant Religion, to lodge it amongst such as they imagine and hope are Dissemblers with God and the World?
I am sorry for the occasion given me to reflect as I do upon these things, and it may be thought impertinent, because none but imprudent men will thus distinguish about Protestantisme; But these imprudent persons having once by this Artifice of voting things and persons Popish they have no fancy for, wrought the inconsidering Vulgar into a despising, and deposing of Digni∣nities, it's enough to make a dumb man speak, to see them at∣tempt it the second time in the same methods. And some grains I hope will be allowed me, in speaking for my self, be∣cause of the Indignation I may justly have to be so misrepor∣ted to the world as I am; it is but a year yet since I searched a suspected house for Jesuits, pursuant to his Majesties Procla∣mation,
within three weeks after which I was assaulted by four men with Swords and Pistols, being at supper in my own house; what their design was I could never yet learn; But if I had not escaped by a convenient back door, I believe they would have made me a Protestant. You are my witnesses, how readi∣ly I concurred with you about the same time in the setting up of a Lecture (our Bishop approving of it) for the last Summer half year in Sudbury, where we met with a very kind reception from the Magistrates of that Town from first to last. We agreed upon that place because of the many Papists there are in the ad∣jacent Towns, and I am not ashamed to let it be known that our design by this Lecture was not the bare opposing of Popery, but to promote also, if it were possible, a better understan∣ding between Ʋs and Dissenters of other Perswasions, which if it could be effected all the Nation over, would be the certainest way to defeat all Romish designs that are on foot against us.
I am not so vain, as to imagine, that this little Narrative of my self will satisfie evil minded men, Nay, I rather sus∣pect it may occasion another Libel, but I am advised to despise that, rather than my Innocency (for my Friends satisfaction) should not be a little vindicated. Now, I hope, it may suffice to justifie my Innocency, if not to anticipate all replies, onely to offer this one thing to be considered of, If it be a thing to be imagined, that my Adversaries (who do not seem to be men of any great mercy,) if they had had any considerable thing a∣gainst me, would ever have undertaken a frivolous Indictment about an Oath of mine, made in Michaelmas Term 78. which as it slept so long, so it had ever slept in quiet, onely that in Easter Term last I indicted a Friend of theirs of Per∣jury, and it might very well have slept still for any harm there is in it, for they have sworn nothing that in the least contra∣dicts it, however it happened that the Grand Jury did not perceive it, for the Oath where they lay any stresse, is onely in these words, that there being no Sessions for Ipswich at the ac∣customed time in July 78. I desired the Magistrates of Ipswich there might be a Sessions at the accustomed time after Michael∣mas. Now it is sworn against me that there was a Sessions held at Ipswich upon the 10th. day of July 78, which was no more the accustomed time than the 10th. day of any other Moneth,
as the Statute of the 2d. of Henry the 5th. ch. 4th. will satisfie any man that will take the pains to consult the Almanack, which was the week after the Translation of Tho. the Martyr (as the Statute calls him) in that year. I dare say the Grand Jury did not foresee, that when they had found the Bill, I was in∣stantly to be tryed by Libellers.
Whereas it is suggested that I am deserted by the Protestant Clergy, I am bold to say, that I am sure of the contrary. I do not see, how the preferring of one friend is a deserting of ano∣ther; we live as Friends, ready to serve one another, and the publick as we have opportunity; we live as we are taught to pray; and that we may continue so to do, in the true faith and fear of God, in humble obedience to our King, and in Brother∣ly Charity one towards another, and so by well doing put to silence the ignorance of foolish men, is the hearty prayer of

Hitcham, Jan. 21. 1679.
