




RIght dearly beloved! My hearts desire & dayly prayer unto the God of Israel is, that you may be saved: these lines will testifie more desire than abilitie to benefit. My aim herein hath been, as to point at all false wayes, so to describe the Old-good-way to heaven.
That there is but one God, is a truth so fully proved & universally beleeved, as that it needs no confirming additions; who hath prepared one certain place of so∣lace & rest, for the souls of his servants af∣ter death.

This one God, to this one place, hath appointed one way, means or rule to guid all those by, that travell thitherward.
As we beleeve the unitie of the author & the end, so should we all beleeve the unity of the means. Yet mans perverse nature longs to tast of forbidden fruit; is ready to go out at every turning; nay, to make some wayes where none are found; either out of blind Devotion or singular invention.
Every age & Church affords passengers pretending for heaven, to aim at the first & sovereing happines, but more doe miss, than hit the way; choosing by a disorder∣ly carriage the last misery, which is an eternall banishment from the life God. One great reason is, because most follow their Predecessors, upon traditionall infor∣mation, without any serious examination, what they did, or should have done: & many will undertake to be Guids for lucre sake, not knowing the way themselves.
Moved I was to treat of this Subject, to rectifie the judgment of some, in a two∣fold opinion not more dangerous than common; viz, First, that Poperie is the old religion, furnisht for her defense
with the consent of Antiquitie: than which, there is no one conceit more false or hurtfull. Secondly, that strict Walking with God, according to the rule of his word, is a new device, to be condemn'd as factious singularity; than which, the devil hath no greater engine whereby to root out the power of Religion.
In the reading whereof, be entreated to take with you these cautions.
First, that among the many Fathers whose authority I have made use of & have not by me. I have taken in air at the win∣dow, & borrowed help from others, yet such, whose fidelity I have found (& the stream will direct to the fountain) by for∣mer experience, having upon occasion compared some of those quotations with the authors themselves. Secondly, when you meet with those terms of Universal∣lity, all the Fathers, Councils, or private learned & holy men, understand it with this limitation, All that I have seen, read or heard of. Thirdly, that all those hu∣mane testimonies of Fathers & Councils, are not cited here for All. Papists indeed rely most upon their authority, boasting
of antiquity; for their sakes I have laboured to shew how the Fathers (who lent the light of their stile in their writings to illu∣strate truth) have interpreted Scripture, in the received fundamentall points of faith, & how Councils stood affected, be∣fore Anti-Christ violently advanced his bloodie banner above them. But for those who will take Gods-word alone, without other sureties, the authorities we speak of may be passed over, as not belonging to them. I have not interposed the opinion of the learned as a prop to strengthen Scripture, or because I would have any to make them the rule of their faith, but for the weaknes of some ignorant & seduced persons, who think & say, that Scripture was never expounded as it is by us of later times. The Lord grant my aim may be pro∣fitable to all, offensive to none, other waies ready to distate the wheat for this Chaff, as some are pleased to term it. As for the names of Hereticks, which were inventers of strange opinions inseverall ages, added only for the illustration of the first Conclusion, if they seem tedious as unnecessary, heed them not, & they cannot hurt you. Some
may chance to peck up a pearl out of that dunghill. Fourthly, whereas my testimonies throughout, are but pointed unto only, not set downe at large, (it would require far more time & charge, which I studiously decline) I must request you to take that pains with the honourable Bereans (Acts 17.11.) to search the places; especially for the chiefest author, the book of God. What you find to dissent, after deliberation, re∣ject, what agreeth, receive with thanks∣giving.
My request further is, that these may be taken,
First, for a mean in some measure to al∣lay the furious heat of some, fruitles, con∣troversies, very frequently broached about the way to heaven. That least such as with Martha be troubled about many things, fall under the neglect of the most necessary. Se∣condly, for a help to such that are or may be students in Divinitie: if they shall not have many books, they may here see what is gathered out of many: that so they may know which is not, which is the right way to heaven. These dead letters will be to them, as the lively voyces which Drusus
heard in his wars, Goe no further. Thirdly, for a Guid to the whole Church; that all to whom they may come & want them, may discerne the house of God from a den of thieves; the Militant from the Malignant Church, & the truely old Religion squared out & bounded by the Divine rule from all other that are so in name only; pretend∣ing Authoritie without Truth, succession in Dominion, not Doctrine, with number of reasonles voyces, speciall emblemes of the Anti-Christian-Monarchie. For your be∣nefit [my Mothers children!] have I un∣dertaken this work of a watchman, though weak & unworthy, to Guide Passengers in the ready way to heaven. To you are these Directions sent, the summe of twice three years study, with some experience. Either reprove them by sound argument, or ap∣prove them by your Practice.
And First, to you O Papists, poor sedu∣ced souls, whose good is one main part of my aim; an adversatie I am to none of your persons, to every one of your errors; heartily desiring your conversion & salva∣tion; which cannot be attained but by the old-way. The oldest I find is here described;
take this, or shew me one more grey. The reasons disswasive I have given, why you should forsake communion with that Church. If you admire the Beast, Anti-Christ, the successive Bishop of Rome, a∣dore his Image, submit to his lawes, re∣ceive his mark, or the number of his name, (be you what you will, Greeks or Latins, learned or unlearned,) & so live & dye, you cannot be saved. The way they goe, is not, nor ever was esteemed the Old-way. The Doctrine they now teach, was never taught as the truth of Christ. Let not pre∣tences prevail without authority, erronious custome without an impartiall guid. Beleeve not what men say, examine why. Stand in the wayes, make diligent search for the old-way, the good-way; having found, walk in it, as you hope to find rest to your souls.
To you Protestants, professors of the Truth; either joyn wholly with the Roman-Church, or cease to plead for her. Why should pen, pulpit or Press, send forth stu∣died toyes, school-quirks or superstitious conceits, to divide or stretch the seamles-coat? Walk in peace; be not secure, lest Sa∣tan ensnare you. Be not too credulous, lest
false brethren mislead you; neither be over∣busie with curious unprofitable questions about things unrevealed or truely indiffe∣rent. Lest fighting about shadowes, you lose the substance Mark that old-way which the worst men tread, Job 22.15. Avoid, turn from it & pass away. There will be some searching tryall overtake the world: where∣in the faithfull shall stand & be fully pur∣ged; the faithles shall cleave unto & perish, with the Romish Hierarchie. Blessed are those that walk not after the Counsel of the ungodly, that stand not in the way of sinners, nor sit in the seat of the scornfull.
To you profane Christians (so I must speak) Papists or Protestants! withall Sec∣taries on either side, who have long gone astray, as Satan, the world, & your own flesh have misled you! Now make a stand, submit sense to reason, reason to grace, all ro the revealed will of God: run not you know not whether; ask for the old-way that leads to heaven; hearing, be not idle or ill employed; Pray with understanding & zeal, every day, that God would enable & guid you in walking according to the Rule which limits the Way.

To you Magistrats, hearken to what the rock of Israel hath spoken. (2 Sam. 2.3.) They that rule over men, must be just, ruling in the fear of God. Bear not the sword in vain. Be like the fierie Cherubims, turn the edg every way to keep sinners from running into by-lanes, from the Tree of life. Be vali∣ant for God! Permit not idolatrie to seat her self any more within this British Isle. Suffer not idle Officers any longer in the Church. Let none command but such as are commanded by the word of God to guide the travailing woman. Make an en∣quirie every fifth year; see what warrant men have to bear offices of pride without profit. Call not the lowest of the people to the highest charge. O ye Patrons of the Church, tremble to take mony for Presen∣tations. What will it profit you to gain a little treasure with the loss of many souls? To Present unworthy persons by word or writing; to Present artificers, young unsea∣soned Schollars to holy functions (who can hear no other voyce calling them, but that of exteriour lustre or temporall commodi∣tie) is not only in it self a great corruption, but the evident cause of much & great evill
in the Church. Use your power to place faithfull Stewards over the house of God. Call home such as are absent or let them leave: Non-residents from Courtly sports to countrie-service; from the Bench to the Pulpit, from Papal-pomp to Apostolicall Vigilancy. Residencie in person & execu∣tion of office, is of absolute necessitie. Re∣form homebred evils, that Rome may the clearer see her errors & returne (is it possi∣ble?) into the Old-way againe.
To you Ministers appointed to be guids, watchmen, shepherds, over your particu∣lar flocks. Be vigilant, the charge is great; keep not silence; spend the remainder of your spirits in seeking the glory of Christ & the safetie of souls. First learn the way your selves, then direct others. Take not the office without a lawfull call, abilitie, willingnes, free-choyce, with due approba∣tion. Force not your entrance with an arm of silver: compound not for your admis∣sion to a charge, neither by present pay∣ment, promised debt, nor by a concomi∣tant Union; to obtain a spirituall with a cor∣porall wife, lest both prove unlawfull. Such pills, though gilded for a time with cu∣stome
& consent, may prove in the end bitter to your tast, when time shall take away the scarf which now veileth your eyes, & conscience light a thousand tor∣ches to see your punishment. Seek not ma∣ny, make not the Church a prey to your inordinate desires: it is the property of fruitles ambition. Will the Olive-Tree leave her fatnes, the Figtree her sweetnes, the Vine her wine & go to be promoted? None but the Bramble, will doe it. Let the power of the Cedar, crush these aspiring Briars. The least is charge enough. See what evidence you can find in your selves, of a lawfull Call to any one particular Cure, without which there can be no true comfort. Many Li∣vings, high Titles, great & many friends, a heavy purse with big looks & full barnes, will not bear you out in the great day of accounts. Feed that flock seasonably of which the holy Ghost hath made you over∣seers, that none perish through your de∣fault: tell them the Way impartially, re∣prove strangers meekly, walk before un∣blameably: if you are entrusted with admi∣nistrations of word & Sacraments, begin first of all to dart the rayes of sanctity in
that firmament of honour wherein you are placed. Let the simplicitie of the gospel be dearer to you, than any other worldly honour. Relye not on Dispensations to at∣taine preferment, your greatest honour is in your selves & calling. You are the light of the world, the salt of the earth; answer your titles.
To you Husbands, that you dwell with your wives as men of knowledg; be not bit∣ter unto them: abuse them not: give them honour, as to the weaker Vessels: teach them at home what good you learn abroad. If they stray, recall them lovingly. Wrested looks, hasty words, inhumane blowes, are not able to bow such weaknes; tye them with the cords of love, then you may mould them into all due observance.
To you Wives, that you reverence your husbands; be not loud in their presence; a sharp runs through the head. Oversee diligently the wayes of your houshould: instruct your children & servants: observe the hours for prayer, notwithstanding bu∣sines. Let your adorning be with inward ornaments of a sober, quiet, religious, humble mind. Women that fear the Lord shall be praised.

To you Parents, that you bring up your children in the fear of the Lord. Reprove not what they doe, but teach them what they should doe, with meeknes. Sin is de∣ceirfull, youth frail. Say, nor doe any un∣seemly thing in their presence: tender wax takes any impression. Pluck them from the pathes of death. Lead them in the way to life. Provoke them not to wrath by a gree∣die restraint of necessaries. Promise no more in mariage with them, than you purpose to per FORM
To you children, that you honour & obey your Parents. They represent the power of God. Next under him, let their presence be respected; next unto his Word, their good words & actions should be guids un∣to your feet. A means they were to give you life in the beginning, be you instru∣ments to prolong their life in the ending.
To you Masters, that you command not harshly, reason not imperiously, suspect not causelesly. So order your work, that your servants may have time with you to serve our Common master. They must walk this way, as well as you: leave them not behind, you will be questioned for them.

To you Servants; that you be obedient to them that are your masters according to the flesh. Doe what is commanded, with∣out replying, in singlenes of heart, not eye-service. So follow your busines, as if none saw but God alone, to whom you owe your chiefest service. No good servant, but is Gods servant. O happy Common-wealth with such Magistrats! Flourishing Church with such Ministers! Heavenly family with such inhabitants, where each one hearkens to other & all to the word of God! To such Christians, death will be as welcome as an Inne to a wearie traveller. Live every day as if it were the last; so shall you come to the bed of Rest in an happy hour. Expect it not in this world; have ye not read, Up & get you hence, here is not your rest? I conclude with the Apostle, Silver & gold have I none, but such as I have, doe I give unto you freely: in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ of Nazareth, Rise up & walk!
