



My Lords,
I Here present to Your Lord∣ships view, Two small Tracts; the one shewing the Quakers presumptuous Claim, to the Title of being themselves the only True Catholick Church of Christ, the Elect People of God, and Church of the first Born; and that the A∣postolical Order of the Church of Christ is Re-established amongst them; and them only, which whe∣ther so or no, let the World judge, when they have heard, and come more and more to know their Te∣nents, Principles, and Practises,
 which are now every day more and more exposed; and in order to a farther discovery of their pernitious Errors, I have (according to my small Tallent) cast in my Mite; which I hope will not be unaccep∣table to Your Lordships, who are set as Overseers of the Church; and cannot but be affected with sorrow, when you see so many, (and some of them well meaning Souls) incorporate themselves into the Communion of this Erronious Sect; and indeed the most dange∣rous, because the most prevailing: But, I hope, they are at the heighth, and their Folly is so manifest, and their Errors are so discover'd; that as St. Paul writing to Timothy said, that as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses; so did many in his days hold dangerous Errors; and so
 willfully persisted in them that they resisted the Truth; who were Men of corrupt minds, and not only so, but Reprobates concerning the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ: But St. Paul comforts himself, and his Son Timothy (to whom he had given di∣vers things in charge) saying, They shall proceed no further, for their Folly shall be made manifest to all Men: And I am perswaded, that both the Folly and Danger of this erroneous Sect will be so manifest in a little time, that the gangrene of their Heresie shall prevail no fur∣ther, which God of his mercy grant for Christ's sake. Amen.
The second Tract mentioned, which I now call the second Part, is a Correction of the late General History of the Quakers, &c. Wrot by Mr. Croese, wherein he has been
 very partial in many things, which I charitably suppose might be done, partly for want of a thorow know∣ledge of their Tenets, and partly thorow wrong Information; and thereby have both reflected upon the Government, and Church of England, to the advantage of that willingly ignorant and pernicious Sect of the Quakers; and which I have endeavoured to set right accor∣ding to that knowledge I have of that People: Their Books, their Principles, their Practices, and way and manner of their Church-Go∣vernment which they pretend to be Apostolical.
My Lords, I have not leisure to trace them in all their by-pathes, from the very beginning of their rise, and to shew how they branched forth from the Seeds of the Ran∣ters,
 Levellers, and other Latitudi∣narians; nor do I certainly know that the Jesuits had a hand in their forming, but will say with my Lord of Worcester, in his Book En∣tituled, A Discourse concerning the Ido∣latry of the Church of Rome, &c. p. 282. viz. Any one who compares them (i. e. Jesuits and Quakers) would imagine the Life of Igna∣tius had been their great Exam∣pler. I know not whether any of that innocent Order of Jesuits had any hand in forming this new So∣ciety (i. e. Quakers) amongst us, as has been frequently suggested; but if one may guess the Father by the Child's likeness, Ignatius Loyola, the Founder of the Jesuits, was at least the Grand-Father of the Quakers, &c. To which let me add an Abstract of a Letter from
 the Right Reverend, J. Bramhall, Bishop of Derry, aftewardr Pri∣mate of Ireland, to the Most Re∣vered James Usher Archbishop of Armagh, July 20. 1654. viz. I thank God I do take my Pilgri∣mage patiently; yet I cannot but condole the change of the Church and State of England; and more in my Pilgrimage than ever, because I dare not witness and declare to that stray'd Flock of our Brethren in England, who have misled them, and who they are that feed them. But, that your Lordship may be more sensible of the Churches Ca∣lamities, and of the danger she is in of being ruined, if God be not merciful unto her, I have sent you a part of my Discoveries (i. e.) That in the year 1646. by Order from Rome above 100 of the Ro∣mish
 Clergy were sent into England, consisting of English, Scotch, and Irish, who had been Educated in France, Italy, Germany, and Spain, in each of those Romish Nurse∣ries. These Scholars were taught several handicraft Traids and Cal∣lings, as their ingenuities were most bending, besides their Orders and Functions of that Church. They have many yet at Paris a fitting up to send over, who twice in the Week oppose one the other; when the Romish Orders do thus Argue pro and con, there is appointed one of the learned of those Convents; and to take Notes as he find their Fancies, for This, That, and the other Opinion, new Tenents; so accordingly they be to act, and to exercise their Wits; accordingly upon their permission, when they
 be sent abroad, they enter their Names in the Convent Registry; also their Licences if a Franciscan, if a Dominican or Jesuit; and for assurance of their constancy to their several Orders, they are to give monthly Intelligence to the Fra∣ternities of all Affairs where-ever they be dispersed: So that, the English abroad know News better than you at home: All which is left to every Man to judge as he finds reason to do. And being loath to detain your Lordships, I beg leave to subscribe my self,
My Lords,

May 3.1697.
