



SIR,
THE Design which the Plain Discourse ensuing aims to pro∣mote, is so much for the Good of this City and Kingdom, that I am satisfy'd it needs no Recommendation, to induce you to afford it Countenance and Encouragement. The vigorous En∣deavours of a number of sober Persons to detect the Profligate, who break the Laws of God and the Land, and to bring them to deserved Punishment, to the deterring of others, and averting the Displeasure of the Almighty, give so hopeful a Prospect, as cannot but be highly pleasing to such as have Your Concern for the Publick Welfare.

If we may believe the wisest of Princes, One Sinner destroyeth much Good. How much Mischief then will Troops of daring Criminals Occasion! Should there be none who had Courage eno' to oppose them, soon would they un∣dermine the Foundations of the best establish'd Community. Those there∣fore who Regularly set themselves to Countermine them, deserve to be Honour∣ed as COMMON BENEFACTORS.
The Dissoluteness of our Age, is a matter of frequent and sad Complaint. They who would go about to confine it to any one of the Parties whereinto we are unhappily divided, would but pro∣claim their own Folly. A General Conflagration calls for every Man's Bucket; And our spreading Immora∣lities for all Hands to check them. And it is an hopeful Prognostick in the pre∣sent Case, that those who differ in Ri∣tuals
but with too much Vehemence, should unanimously join together in forming those Societies for Reforma∣tion, who aim at the Checking those Vices which threaten to over-run us, which are heartily detested by Good Men of all Perswasions.
It would look very black upon us, should so laudable a Design as this, meet with Discouragement; and those who engage in it be roughly treated by any in Power. Nothing can be more evi∣dent, than that this would embolden Wickedness, and make it Triumphant; Subvert our Good Laws, Cross the End of Magistracy, and open the Sluices to the most Flagitious Villainies. If any in Commission have herein bin tardy, I pray God forgive them. I know none concern'd in this Affair, but who much rather desire that such might be Convinc'd, than Expos'd.

But it is hop'd that You (Worthy Sir) won't easily be induc'd to lend an Ear to the Whispers of those, who employ their Subtilty in finding Sub∣terfuges for Notorious Offenders, or devising specious Calumnies against their Prosecutours. Your Patronizing any who are Litigious, or who pretend∣ing to a Zeal for God, only vent their Malice against their Neighbours, is no way desir'd. But the Continuance of Your kind Regard to them, who (all Circumstances consider'd) cannot fairly be conceiv'd, to be Acted by any other Principle, in their Opposition to Pro∣faneness and Immorality, but a Con∣cern for the Divine Honour and a Ge∣neral Good; Your Directing them where their Conduct may be hazardous, excusing them in any Innocent Mistakes, teaching them, upon Occasion, the most Regular Methods, and protecting
them when their Enemies would over∣power or perplex them, is humbly de∣sir'd by the foremention'd Societies, and expected by all that know you.
Your Steddiness and Impartiality, in the Administration of Publick Ju∣stice, which hath procur'd you so Great and General a Respect, naturally pro∣mises as much; and is the Reason why they who wish well to a Reforma∣tion of Manners among us, do so ear∣nestly long for Your Advancement to the Chair; when it's hop'd Your Zeal for Suppressing Vice will be as Ex∣emplary, as Your Integrity, Genero∣sity, and Publick Spiritedness, with∣out undue Regard to any Particular Interest, have bin hitherto.
May You become more and more a Terrour to Evil Doers, and an En∣courager of Vertue in this City:
May you be enabled to Discharge what∣soever Trust either is already repos'd in You, or awaits You, to the Glory of God, the Satisfaction of our So∣vereign, and the Comfort of his Faith∣ful and Loyal Subjects: May Your Name be transmitted to Posterity with Honour; Your Family be enrich'd with the best of Blessings, and be Famous both for Piety and Prosperity for Many Generations,
Thus heartily Prays,
(Honoured Sir) 

