



YOƲ I think (Sir) know me too well, to judg that by the Publication of these two Sermons I design any thing of name to my self, or thought to supply any vacuity in the World. I am so well acquainted with Books as to know there are Treatises enough in the World on this Argument, and that nothing new can be said in it: What can be said after so many learned holy Men, and many of them disputing for their lives? Yet the most of what they have said is either in Latin, which all understand not, or in great Volumns which every Purse will not reach, and for the most part mixed with other Heterogeneous Arguments.
The Real Presence not of Christ
 only, but the Body and Blood of Christ in the Sacrament is now made a Theam for every Coffee-house. I thought those that under∣stood not Latin, nor how to take an Argument out of a long Dispute, nor could lay out four or five Shillings, might possibly spare Four-pence or Six pence for a little Vade mecum in the case. But, Sir, this was not all. About a year and a half since a stran∣ger came to me, but such a one whose Parents, Family, and Education I very well knew to be as averse as is imaginable to Popery, (when he had once told me what he was, to be sa∣tisfied in this Question, Whether one might not be saved in the Ro∣mish Catholick Religion? Being startled at the fruit of a Branch from such a Root, I craved leave before I directly spake to his Question, to in∣treat him to tell me, What temptation he could have to such a thought? He be∣gan the usual harangue of the Anti∣quity and Unity of that Religion. I
 askt him if he had been bred a Schollar or had travelled? He denying both; I quickly stop this mouth as to those pleas, telling him they were both false, but if true, they could be to him no Argument, because he could have no evidence of them; and therefore he did but trifle with me. I told him we were upon a Que∣stion concerning Eternal Salvation, and it became him to be serious. He then told me, He could never go to Meetings with his friends, but was perswaded of the truth of the Arminian points, and found that the Church of Rome better agreed with them than the Doctrines of the Church of England. I told him, All of that Church embraced them not, though in that I thought he spake truth. This, Sir, made me remember, the Soveraign Drug, the Father Rector long since told us they had planted in England, (the vertue of it, it seems, was to purge us of the Protestant Religion). Coming to the Question I freely told him, If he un∣derstood his Question of one who had been bred in a knowledg of the Scrip∣tures,
 and under the free Preaching of the Gospel, and apostatized to Popery, my opinion was, Such a one, so living and dying, could not be saved. He, as I hear since, resolved to venture it, I fore∣saw I should be judged Durus pater A∣postatarum, and therefore thought my self a little concerned to justifie my self as to that sentence. If Apostatizers to gross Idolaters so dying cannot be saved, surely they cannot. This gave the first rise to my thoughts of Printing these popular Discourses, Preached more than a year and half since. That the World saw them no sooner is none of my fault, though it will possibly be a just admiration to you Sir, why (especially in such a time) the publication should be hindred, by any who would be thought the only enemies to Popery. I will assure you, Sir, there is not a line altered, no not a word from what they were when first offered for the Press. Besides, Sir, you know what a cry is made as if Non-con. were rather fa∣vourers of Popery, than adversaries t it, & none of them would either preach
 or write against it. It is not ingenuous to hold their hands, and then to cry they will not write. At length it breaks through to help to stop that clamour. You Sir, are so well versed in things of Reli∣gion, as to know, that there is no ground to suspect them of favouring Popery, who are fixed in these Doctrines.
1. That every private Christian hath a judgment of private praical discre∣tion, and cannot do ought which his Con∣science tells him is sin, nor believe as the Church believeth, meerly because it so be∣lieves.
2. That our Justification before God is through the Righteousness of Christ reckoned to us for Righteousness, not for any works of our own, either done be∣fore or after Regeneration.
3. That justifying Faith is not a bare assent to a Proposition, but a receiving Christ as Priest, Prophet and King, and a siducial adherence to him, & him only.
4. That though there be a Real Pre∣sence of Christ in the Sacrament, yet there is no Real Presence of the Flesh
 and Blood of Christ there, further than as in the Signs. These things, Sir, you know, Non-con. generally hold. When these things, Sir, had encouraged me to publish these Sermons, I saw another ad∣vantage I might have, by Entituling you to them, once in my life to prescribe to him who hath so often prescribed to me and mine; not that Sir, I think you need any such antidote, being your self able to do much ore than here is done, and to dispossess as many of the Romish Principles as another, (no Doctor but Practitioner in your art) in this Coun∣try, is said to have possessed with them. 'Tis only done, Sir, for a testimony to them, of the zeal I know you possest with for the Protestant Religion, and of the respects which he owes you whom you have made so much,

