



May it please your Lordship,
OF all the Studies, to which Men are drawn either by Inclination or Interest, perhaps no one can pretend to such an agreeable pleasure as the Descriptions of Countries. By a variety of Prospects, they feed us constantly with fresh Satisfactions; and the Objects they present, are so chain'd together, that a Curious Reader has much ado to break off. This is the advantage of that Subject in general: but when we come to our own Affairs, the re∣lish is still heighten'd in proportion to every one's Love for his Native Country. And to whom then can our BRITANNIA address her self with a better assurance, than to your Lordship; whose Life is one continu'd Zeal for her Honour and Happiness? She's sensible of your Favours; and in return, has pickt up these Rarities of Art and Na∣ture, for a Present to your Lordship. They are the Choice of her whole Stock; and she hopes there may be something in them to divert you in that multitude of Business, wherein you are daily engag'd for her Peace and Preservation. But if there should not, she's sure however by dispo∣sing thus of her Treasure, to lay an universal Obligation upon her Sons. She still remembers, how they all bless'd you for your Defence of her di∣stressed Prelates; and how, upon your Lordship's Advancement, a general
 Joy ran through her whole Family: But that a more particular Sa∣tisfaction appear'd among the Learned, to see the Honour conferr'd upon a Leading Member of their own Body. She was pleas'd, to hear them say, That by such Promotions, they as well as their Neighbours, might at last have their Richlieus and Colberts.
The Dress wherein she appears, is true Native English. She has been a great Sufferer by foreign Modes and Fopperies; but now resolves to quit them all, and convince the World that she has every thing within her self and can live without borrowing. In this homely Ha∣bit she comes, to beg the continuance of your Lordship's Protection; upon which your wonted Tenderness has made her presume so far, as to encourage even the meanest of her Sons to hope for the same Favour, and to write himself

