


Gentlemen,
I Have for Twenty four Years, used my endeavours not only to prevent the Loss of your Trade in the Woollen Manufacture (set up in France, with English, and Irish Wooll) and the Impor∣tation of French Silks, Stuffs, and Lace, &c. But also used my utmost to regulate the abuses in the Aulnage (notwithstanding the objections against me) what Steps I made in both, are in part contained in the following Discourse.
In which I have demonstrated, that my labour was not alto∣gether Fruitless, against the designs of France; notwithstanding all the Craft, and Bribes of French Agents, by all the Interest they had in our Court the two last Reigns; both by secret disguise, and open violence, and also endeavouring by a Law to ruine our Trade under a very fair and plausible pretence: Which, give me leave to say, that had not the War fell out as it did, we should have hard∣ly been able to keep that Trade we now have; although I had frequent Access to that Government, and did by that means put a stop at several times to it, as in part, in the close of this and ano∣ther Discourse doth more fully appear.
You cannot but know (at least many of you) that I Printed my sentiments in the Year 1669. and Re-printed the same in the Year 1671. with some enlargement of what evil consequence the Ex∣portation of Wooll to France was.

And in the following Year, (viz.) 72. Wrote an Advertisement to you therein, an Abstract of which is included in this Paper, to∣gether with what past in the Years, 1676, and 77.
But, Sirs, I am now growing Old, being upward of Sixty Years, having spent the prime of my Years in your Service, with very many hardships, Watchings, and Dangers, when you have taken your Rst, and improved your time, for your particular and pri∣vate advantage: It cannot in reason now (at this Age) be ex∣pected that I should act in that Post much longer; and although upon that account it's not probable I may be able to perform those Services in Travels and Watchings, as formerly on the Sea-Coast, yet nothing shall be wanting on my part (here at the Helm) which I am capable of, for the promoting of your real Interest, and by in∣structing such as may for the future be employed by you.
Having given some hints about the Trade of France, of my en∣deavours to prevent it, I shall crave leave to speak something about the Aulnage. When I was attending the Council and Parliament about the Wooll-Affair, I was by some Merchants and Drapers in London, put upon the Redressing those abuses then complained of, and was by them desired to Print a Paper containing the same; and by my omitting a Licence, was for that reason clapt up in the Gate House, which was not a little cost to me; notwith∣standing that discouragement, in pursuance of the Deputation, I afterwards received, both from Drapers and some others dealing in the Woollen Manufacture, (Viz)

WEE Whose Names are Subscribed Woollen-Drapers, of Winton and Alsford, having been for several Years last past exposed to great trouble, with the Officers of the Aulnage;  their entring our Shops, and carrying away our Goods from us, to the disturbance of us in our Trade, and prejudice of our Goods, thereby to force us to a Composition with them; which we have been forced to do. some of Ten Pounds, others Five Pounds, and Annually, sme Thirty, and others Twenty Shillings, to free us from future trou∣ble: Do therefore Authorize our Worthy Friend Mr. William Carter,
 as our Agent, and Atturney, to Appear, Petition and present for us, unto, and before His Majesty and Council, and before the Parliament, whensoever they shall be Assembled for the removeal of the aforesaid abuses, and preventing of such abuses for time to come; and to do all other things Lawful in and about the same, and to all and do for us, in such Lawful way and manner, as by Council shall be ad∣vised, as fully, and effectually as if we were, or might in our own Persons do the same:
Witness our Hands the 14th Day of June, 1671. 

Another Deputation from the dealers in the Woollen Manu∣facturies, of several Counties in England, and particularly of Exon, thus Worded, (Viz.)

WE whose Names are Subscribed Manufactures of Wooll, for the Counties of Devon, and Summerset, &c. Having considered as well in what we know, as by the Information we have received from other parts of this Kingdom; the great abuses that have been done to us, and other Manufactures, by such as have been employed in the Office of Aulnage, &c.
The Deputation is Verbatim as before, only the Date is the 12th of May, 71. 

I say, in pursuance of the said Deputations, when prosecuting some of those abuses, and being in the Court of Exchequer, in the Year 1673. tho' then complained against by the Council for the then Farmers of the Counties of Suffolk and Essex: Yet was then justified in open Court by the then Lord Chief Barron, pursuant to a Report to the King and Council made by his Lordship Two Years before; as may appear by a Copy thereof, in Page 6th. I am sorry, I have the occasion to make an Apology to you upon this Head, whom I have so freely served; and to say some∣thing first of the occasion of the Bill▪ by which so much trouble was about it, and to no purpose but rather prevented another Bill which would have past, to have put the Laws in Execution
 against the Exportation of Wooll, and also to have Regulated the abuses of the Aulnage.
The reason of the complaint in Parliament, was occasioned by the differing lengths of some of Gloster Cloths, not to say by a Clothier himself of that County; but before the Bill was brought into the House of Commons, I had several meetings with the Agent, and told him that if he would attend the Kings Council, I would persuade the Farmers to consent to such a Bill, as that no opposition could be made against it. I remember, I was then go∣ing to Maidstone Assizes, to prosecute some Exporters of Wooll, and whilst I was there, the Bill was brought into the House of Commons, which hath occasioned so much trouble, not only to no purpose, but also prevented such a Bill which would have an∣swered the ends of all parties.
The Bill which was so long depending, was to Transfer the Collecting the Subsidy of Aulnage at the Custom-House; and to subject it to all the Laws against Frauds in the Customs, and the duties to be paid there, by the Merchant, and by him to be dis∣counted with the Clothier, for the same, upon a supposition that it would save charge, and by that means pay the D. of Rich∣mond, and those concerned in Interest; and also be an overplus to defray the necessary expence in preventing the Exportation of Wooll; which Bill, after the several Hearings and Examinations, instead of doing both, it did not answer one in that manner, be∣sides the inevitable Trouble and Controversie betwixt the Mer∣chant and Clothier, for that some of the Woollen Manufacture, pays Custom by weight, and some by the piece; when at present the Aulnage pays all by the piece.
