



May it please your GRACE,
TO Pardon the Presumption of sending abroad the fol∣lowing Papers under the Pa∣tronage of your Name. Not that by the advantage of your Graces Authority I de∣sign to cover any Mistakes or Failures that are in them; or that I think any Authori∣ty, how great soever, can protect even the most usefull and innocent Undertaking from the Censures of the Envious and the Malicious: But that I should esteem it a sin∣gular Honour and Privilege to have them own'd by a Person, who by his excellent Learning is as able, as by his Place he is oblig'd to defend those Great Catholic and Apostolic Truths, whose hard lot and por∣tion is Historically represented in the fol∣lowing
 Book. The Doctrines, I mean, of the holy and undivided Trinity, and the Divinity of our blessed Saviour, together with the appendant Articles, so vigorously persecuted in the Age we write of, and now again oppos'd in the Age we live in.
Nor is this the only instance, wherein the Church needs your Graces Learning, and wise Conduct; no less now, than it did that of Athanasius, Basil, or Ambrose of old. Our Times, like theirs, are troublesom and unquiet, full of disorder and distra∣ction on every side. The common Laws of Charity are broken down; and Religion, in it self the strongest Principle of Peace and Unity, is made the Instrument of Feud and Faction, and of a bitter and in∣temperate Zeal. The Church of England, incomperably the best Part of the Catho∣lic Church at this day visible upon Earth, is miserably torn in pieces, hated and ma∣ligned; secretly undermin'd by Enemies from abroad, and openly assaulted by pre∣tended Friends at home. Altar is erected against Altar, and private Congregations kept up in opposition to the publick Con∣stitutions. Her Liturgy and Forms of Di∣vine Administration derided, odiously tra∣duc'd, and run down with nothing but Noise and Clamour. Her Rites and In∣stitutions, though the same that were used in the Primitive Ages of Christianity, de∣cried as Antichristian. Her Discipline and
 Authority weakned, and by the obstina∣cy and perverseness of Men made inef∣fectual. The small remains of Her En∣dowments (the Monuments of the Boun∣ty and Piety of elder Times) envied, and greedily gap'd at by those who again ex∣pect and watch for a lucky Revolution of Affairs. Her Governors and regular Cler∣gy reproach'd, belibell'd, and affronted upon all Occasions, though generally for no better reason than doing of their Duty, and daring to be honest in an evil time. And in persuance of these ill designs, Ca∣lumnies are fram'd without any regard to truth and justice; and no arts, how bad or unwarrantable soever, scrupled, that may serve to wound either Her Interest, or Reputation. And as Schism in the Church seldom fails to draw on Faction in the State, we find the same evil Spirit fer∣menting, and mixing it self with Civil Af∣fairs, and that Character which the A∣postle fixt upon the Schismaticks of old, too notoriously reviv'd amongst us, to de∣sise dominion, and speak evil of dignities. Pre∣sumptuous are they, and self-willed, and seem dispos'd quite contrary to the mild and gentle Spirit of the Gospel, to beat their Plough-shares into Swords, and their Pruning-hookes into Spears.
This is our case; and as sad was theirs in the Age we are speaking of. The Faith once delivered to the Saints, as the noblest De∣positum that could be committed to the
 Church, and which was secur'd and settled with all the Care, which the Piety of the Great Constantine could bestow upon it, was yet not only shaken, but attempted to be pluckt up by the roots, and though Truth can be but one, was broken into a thou∣sand Blasphemies, and lewd Opinions. The Ark of God was toss'd and driven from place to place, and the honour and interest of the Catholic Church run down with all the force, which an insolent and powerful Faction could raise against it. But I had rather your Grace should take the account of their deplorable state from Nazianzen's Pen than Mine.Orat. XXIII. p. 417. Arianism (says he) though it began like a little Spark at Alexandria, yet like Wild-fire it quickly overran the World; and however for the present stopt and quench'd by the de∣cisions of the Nicene Council, yet it broke out again in the next Reign, like a Wound slightly cur'd, that opens and runs afresh; when grievous Wolves from several quarters invaded us, and made havock of the Church. Priests were up in Arms against Priests, and one part of the People furiously engaged against another, and under the countenance of the Imperial Authority Laws were made against the Ca∣tholic Doctrine, and that too by the procurement of those who were neither Men nor Women, a Genera∣tion that govern'd all in that Court. Who can suffi∣ciently represent the Tragical face of things at that time? the Banishments, Confiscations, Disgraces, the Assemblies kept in the Deserts, the vast Multitudes of Persons, yea whole Cities forc'd to sojourn in the Fields, and open Air, and there to contend with
 Hunger and Cold, with Wind and Weather, and yet not secure there, the very Wilderness not affording them Safety and Protection; and what is yet more lamentable, the Torments, Deaths, and Triumphs of Bishops, contemplative Ascetics, of Men and Wo∣men, and those both young and old. Who can set forth the great Ministers that contriv'd these horrible Actings and Sufferings, and those who studied in this kind to out-do one another, and who had this ad∣dition to the honour of their Enterprize, that they far outwent in Cruelty the design of the Prince that employ'd them. And then lightly passing over the Reign of Julian (whereof he had suffi∣ciently spoken elsewhere) he proceeds to describe the Miseries which the Catholics endured in the time of Valens, which I shall not here represent. In short, so Calami∣tous was the state of those Times, that Re∣ligion must have sunk under its Pressures, or been stifled in a crowd of Heresie and Prophaness, had not God rais'd up an ex∣traordinary race of Men, who set them∣selves to oppose that Impiety and Licen∣ciousness that was become Epidemical, who by their diligent Preaching rescued the Minds of Men from Errour, and by the Learnedness of their Writings, and their great Acumen and dexterity in Disputing contended earnestly for the Faith, baffled and con∣vinc'd Gainsayers; who by the exemplari∣ness of their Lives ballanc'd the iniquity of the Age, and by their Prayers to Heaven arrested that Vengeance that was ready to overtake the World. 'Twas the Patience
 and Constancy of Athanasius, the Vigour and Activity of S. Hilary, the Prudence and Temper of S. Basil, the Learning and Elo∣quence of the Gregories, the Courage and Impartiality of S. Ambrose, the Zeal and Ve∣hemency of S. Chrysostom, that supported the Catholic Cause, while they liv'd, and ever since rendred their Names Venerable to Posterity.
Of all these Matters I have endeavored to give some competent Account in the following Lives; but with what Success and Satisfaction, I know not. May the Work prove so happy, as in any measure to gain your Graces Approbation, (so great a Ma∣ster in Church-Antiquity) and I shall be less solicitous about others; being well as∣sur'd, I may much trulier say in this case what Sozomen told the younger Theodosius, (to whom he dedicated his Ecclesiastic Histo∣ry) Whatever shall seem right and acceptable to you,Praefat. ad Hist. Ec∣cles. p. 397. will certainly appear good and useful to all other Readers; nor will any venture to find fault with what has once past your Graces judgment and examination. But whatever becomes of the Book it self, if it shall serve to no other purpose, 'twill at least to this, to convey to the World a gratefull Sence of those Fa∣vours, wherewith your Grace is pleas'd to oblige
My Lord,

