



Madam:
IN the beginning of Times, there was an Equality of Condition amongst All, It was Vertue which after∣wards made the Distinction, and gave the Preheminence, which as it did re∣flect a generous luster upon Posterity, so this luster by the Access, and Degrees of Knowledg was wonderfully improved by Education.
It is every Day disputed amongst the Professors of Philosophy, Whether the seed of Morall Vertues be lodged in our Hearts by Nature, or not; which
 although it be granted to be true, yet it cannot be denied but Education doth a∣waken and quicken them into growth, and fruitfullness: It is that which doth give an addition to them, and doth ren∣der them as usefull as they are beautifull. It being the Constant Method, and the Business of Art, and Knowledge to pro∣fit and to perfect Nature.
And indeed without Education, there is such a winter, and a Sloth of Igno∣rance upon our understandings, and such an extravagance in our Practise, that either, little, or Nothing doth spring up, or the Production is so unseasonable, that it runs into such wild Seeds of Errour, and Licentiousness, that raunting Fals∣hood will put on the Face of Truth, Im∣pudence will pass for good Manners, and the fowlest deformities for the greatest Beauties. Education is that Noble, and unwavering Light which abundantly doth comfort and confirm us in the way of Honour, and doth faithfully admonish, and direct us when we are out of it.
And although the Experience, and the Practise of it doth Crown old Age
 with Happiness, yet it is Youth that must be seasoned with the Principles of Know∣ledge. Youth as it is more tender, so it is more tractable and more apt to re∣cieve, and to retain Instructions. But it is the Infelicity of the best Natures to be soonest wrought upon, and the female Sex being of a more delicate Constitution than the Masculine, is exposed to greater Dangers of Temptation; for by how much the Complexion is the purer, by so much it is more subject to be stained; And, indeed, in most Beauties there is a secret Flattery by which they do tempt themselves, and whiles they desire to be commended, they do begin to be seduced.
Madam: These Considerations, and some others like unto them, have prevai∣led upon me to undertake this Treatise of the Education of young Gentlewomen which I hope will prove as profitable as I have found it difficult; for although there are extant in Greek, and other lan∣guages, many excellent Books concern∣ing the Institution of Youth, yet I never have read any that have precisely treat∣ed of the Education of Gentle women. I
 here most humbly prefer it to your Ac∣ceptance, and protection, and to the growing. Honour of her Fathers House, your most accomplished Daughters, not that she needeth any Precepts, ha∣ving so Incomparable an Example as your self, but that making it her business to imitate you, others may prefer it to be their Happiness to imitate Her, and so by the Community of Practise, and the Benefit of Instructions, some Credit may peradventure arrive to these rude Indea∣vours of Him who is,
Madam,
 Feb. 10th 663/4.
