



Honorable,
IT may be matter of mar∣vell, that any thing of Law should now be heard but to whisper amidst the noyse of lowd Instrument of Warre, this may Apologize, that both sides professe the mayntenance of Laws. If
 again it seeme strange to any that I joyne for Patrons of a Lawbooke a Sword-man, and one of the long Robe together: let this suffice, that the last is well known to have bin longer time a Mecoenas of Schollers, then a Commander of Souldiers and men are also well perswaded that the points of these swords are bent onely against the adversaries of those Laws which are written upon their hilts. These Laws are now in danger, and the Common-wealth with them who can sit still and do nothing like old Cre∣on, when his house was on fire em∣bracing his only daughter, but helped nothing till himselfe and shee were consumed in the flame. With my e∣state I cannot helpe, that was long since taken from mee by the injustice & oppression of the Popish Northern Army and our own malignant Coun∣trymen who called in that Army, and assisted them. With my body I can do little being somewhat in yeers and
 more unfitted by a sedentary life, be∣sides uncalled upon for such services. I both approve and somwhat resemble the Spaniards posture, who when he is bleeding his last, and so weake hee cannot stand to fight, yet while any life is in him hee will be brodding at, and pottering upon the ground, every way with his Rapier or Dagger point as if hee would doe somthing, wound his enemie, &c. if he were a∣ble. These weake essayes shews a minde to doe good to the publike; In them little new Law can be found, they ra∣ther shew how to use the old, the Lo∣gick of the Laws which is to be instru∣mentall to all other Sciences, and cal∣led by the Philosopher Organon Or∣gánon. If these observations shall have any use that way or any else, I have my ends: Your honourable fa∣vours to me who are so much one for the publike hath been reason enough to me to joyne you in this Dedication, Eadem sentitis, eadem agitis, in foro
 & in campo. The Romans called some of their Worthies Gladii Ro∣manorum, so Marcellus, other Cli∣pei, so Fabius Maximus, both goe together, both usefull now. I shall not need much to implore your pro∣tections who cherish every sparke ap∣pears for the publike. The Lord make you ride on with good luck for the re∣joynting again his Majesty, and the great Councel of England, the Head and the Members, and that the Laws, one part (whereof is priviledge of Par∣liament) may be maintained and du∣ly executed, for as Bracton saith, Parum est jus in Civitate esse, nisi sint qui possint jura gerere, which if I mistake not, is a main ground of this bloudie Quarrell, which God end in due time, and in the accomplishment of Peace and Truth, which shall be the continued prayer of
 From my chamber in the Inner Temple.
