


Honoured Sirs,
GOD having been pleased to bring us forth in such an Age of the world, wherein we have seen, through mercy, not only his work of power in dethroning of unrighteous men; but likewise in a measure the arising of the Son of Righteousness with healing in his wings; and, I trust, to take to himself his great Kingdom, and to reign.
The business committed to you (by and next to the Supreme Authority of the Nation) being of very great concernment, and indeed that which relates to him who is the most Supreme, He who is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings: Notwithstanding I find there have been many Proposals unto your Honours, it might be altogether needless for such a one as I to propose any thing unto your Wisdoms; yet not doubting your willingness to hear what the weakest may propound in this great business, though by it nothing be added to you; I providentially and occasionally coming to this City, could not with good conscience depart from hence without presenting some∣thing unto your Honours, as to the thing in hand. If in it, to you or any others, I do appear a fool, let me be excused; I have performed in this my duty both to my Lord and you. My desire is, that the former presidents of miscarri∣ages in changing times, may be a warning unto us, viz. The plucking up of one Form, and planting of another by the Magisterial power. Every plant that the Heavenly Father hath not planted, must be plucked up. My desire is, not to be tedious: but in a word, out of tenderness to the honour of the Lord Jesus, and the Authority of the Nation, that there may be given to GOD those things that are his, and to Caesar those things that are his, have I humbly presented these following Proposals unto your Honours.

 1. Whether or no Jesus Christ be not the alone Spi∣ritual King in and over all Cases of Conscience relating to Worship? Psal. 2. Rev. 15. 3, 4. Act. 3. 22, 23. Mat. 28. 18.
2. Whether he hath surrendred up any part of this Authority to any Civil Magistrate under the Gospel? Jam. 4. 11, 12. Rom. 14. 4.
3. Whether, because the Jewish Magistracie, according to the command of God, took cognisance of such things, they with all the rest of their Ordinances being typical in their anointing, power and rule, &c. it being all swallowed up into Christ the substance, he being the alone King of his people; be any ground for Magistrates now to do the like?
4. Whether to do the like, be not to deny Christ to be come in the flesh, and to deny his Kingly Authority?
5. Whether the work of the Magistrate, as a Magi∣strate, do not primely relate to the bodies of men, and things of this world; that so they may be for the praise of them that do well, and for the punishment of evil doers? Rom. 13.
6. Whether it be not the work whereunto God hath called them, to protect all that live peaceably and civilly, in obedience to the Civil Law of the Nation; and to encou∣rage and protect the Servants of the Lord alike, in the Preaching and professing the Gospel, though differing in their apprehensions; leaving the judgment of Cases of Conscience unto Christ, as before?
7. VVhether a State-maintenance for the Ministery of Christ, be agreeable to any Rule in the Gospel?

 8. VVhether it hath not been, and is a way to make men rather State-Ministers, then Christs Ministers?
9. VVhether this hath not proved dishonorable to Iesus Christ and the Truth, having drawn so many into the worldly Ministery for love of gain?
10. VVhether it be not the duty of the Magistrate to permit the Jews, whose Conversion is promised, and we pretend to expect it, to live peaceably amongst us?
FINIS.

