



Madam,
WHen this Sermon was first preach'd, your Honour was pleased to entitle your selfe to it, conceiving it (which indeed was composed for my selfe) to have been pre∣pared and suted to the temper of your Ladiships spirit, at that time. So farre my Ma∣ster onoured me that day,
 as to doe him a double work with the same hand. Truly (Madam) it was a salve pro∣vided for my owne use, and not intended further, than for my friends, in that assem∣bly where first I published it; and accordingly was laid up in my closet, till I brought it forth privately, for the use of some other noble friends, who were better able then my selfe to judge of the effi∣cacy of it; having received from some of them a proba∣tum est, and God having made it acceptable, and in their estimation more use∣full, than my own low opi∣nion
 of the workman's pains in it conceived it. They were pleased to desire the recent, which (to spare my owne paines in transcribing it) was the onely cause of my least thoughts of the publication of it. Truly (Ma∣dam) in these unhappy times, wherein the Presse is become such a prostitute, I think I may easily be excu∣sed of my ambition, to have this or any other worth∣lesse notes of mine come under it. To abate the noise of many things in Print, (which, believe it, sounds not at all sweet in my eares)
 I have desired it should be added to some former Ser∣mons which before were in the Printers hands, in which also I satisfied but his de∣sires, in denying my selfe in my owne: But to those worthlesse precedent pieces, it comes in a fit place. The first of the Sermons tels us what is the state of the E∣lect by nature. The second, what is their estate in Christ, and describes their way of Restauration. The third, points out their duty, as re∣deemed ones, to lean upon their beloved. The fourth, minds them of the Saints great
 duty of selfe-denyall. Now in regard that the soule re∣conciled to God, may bee sometimes saying, where is my God become? and as there is none lives and sins not, so none shall live, but at one time or other shall meet with trouble; I have added this to the other, in which I have endeavoured to disco∣ver to a Christian, how hee may recover his quiet, and in the midst of those trou∣bles, which in the world hee shall bee sure to meet with, find that peace which passeth all understanding. The first of these Sermons shews
 us our originall want of peace, being not reconciled to God. The second describes our Peace-maker, and his se∣verall acts, both of purchase and application; by which he both made peace for his elect in generall, and applies it to each of them in particular. The third discovers the in∣strument, and directs the soul, in the particular use of Faith, which is the instru∣ment to convey this peace to the soule upon all occasions. The fourth will teach the soule, how to keep its peace. And this, in case the soule hath lost its peace, and the
 spirit of the Christian bee over whelmed with trouble, wil in some measure direct him how to find his peace, and how to come out of trou∣ble by the hand of Christ. (Madam) this is a great Go∣spell mystery; It is a subject that deserved a more lear∣ned pen, and one more ex∣perienced in the wayes of God, to have discussed and resolved it, than that poore worthlesse creature who hath undertaken it. That in the world the Saints must look for trouble, your Honour knowes (I believe) by as sad experiences as most of
 those that tread the wayes of God. That in the midst of these troubles, in Christ the soule of the Christian may have peace, This Text and Sermon (Madam) I trust wil sufficiently make good both by generall proofe, and parti∣cular demonstrations. In trou∣bles to have peace, is no cha∣racteristicall note of a Saint; To come out of troubles, and reduce the spirit to a quiet composure, is a worke may be done, by those that have not tasted how good the Lord is: But in the midst of oppressing troubles to draw peace from Jesas Christ, and
 to come out of worldly trou∣bles with a Gospell-peace, to have a soule calmed upon Gospell-principles, Hic labor, hoc opus est, This is a work worthy of a Saints indea∣vour, and a wages worthy of his paines. Disturbed spirits may quiet of course; nature may be out of breath with sighing, and the foun∣taine of teares dried up; the spirit of a man, meerly as a man, of an heroick, high∣borne, gallant temper, may beare his infirmitie, and hee may break through an host of troubles, meerely by the strength of his owne spirit,
 or the force of his owne rea∣son: But to come out of trouble this way, shall bring no comfort to the soule. This is but breaking prison, with∣out a faire dismission, or pay∣ing the Jaylors fees; Troubles will overtake such soules, with an hue and crie, and fetter them in a worser man∣ner; and God will againe arrest them upon quare clau∣sum fregit, an heavier action than before. But by this shall a Christian know, if the wound of the spirit bee healed, it is with the balme of Gilead; if he hath come out of trouble fairly, hee hath
 come out upon Gospell-consi∣derations. The peace in trou∣ble, that is not found in Christ, is not worth the ta∣king up; and from it a Christian shall extract no comfortable evidence of peace to his owne soule, but in his peace hee shall have great bitternesse. I have often thought that a watching Christian might bee justly troubled, to consider some∣times, how hee comes off a trouble; for it is usuall with us, either to let nature tyre out it selfe, and when our Passions are ridden off their legges, then they lie downe.
 or else, to conclude it upon morall principles. Thus if our spirits bee sick, as if there were no God in Israel, wee for the most part send to Bel∣zebub, the God of Ekron, and forsake the cistern of living waters, to digge up to our selves ciflernes that will hold no water, or if any, none long. O that those, that professe to live above nature, and carnall reason, would also act above them. If our bodies be sick, nature prompts us to a Phy∣sician, and our reason forbids us to use an Emperick. O that Gods children would learne this reason, in the midst of
 all trouble to runne to the balme of Gilead, to the Physi∣cian there, for all other Physi∣cians are of no value; and will professe much, but doe little, to the setling of a di∣sturbed spirit. (Madam) I have presumed, out of all those noble friends which God hath made mee happy in, to pick out your Ladi∣ship, to present this worth∣lesse piece of my labours to: partly, because I know it holds out to your Ladiship a great piece of your Honours gracious practice; and part∣ly, because it hath seemed good to our wise God, to

 nothingnesse of the creature. I am afraid the City will runne out at the Gates, I shall therefore add no more, but humbly offering it to your Ladiship, shall take my leave and rest,

Chaplyfield-house, Septemb. 3. 1649.
