


many of that Order have not the, Advantage or the Opportunity to ac∣quire this Knowledge from the Ori∣ginal Authors, and therefore are forced to seek it in the Roman Edi∣tions of the Councils, and the Modern Historians of that Church: Where every thing is misrepresented and placed in so False a Light, that its hard to find out what is Truth. Some of the genuine Remains of Antiquity they have concealed, but they have falsified and altered more, and added so much to the Primitive Records, especially in the first Four Centuries, that near Three Parts of Four (both in Baronius and the Councils) are modern Forgeries, manifest Legends, and impertinent Excursions into Sophistical Vindica∣tions, of the later Doctrins and
 Practices of Rome. It would there∣fore be a Work worthy of this ex∣cellent Church in so Learned an Age, to make an acurate Collection of that, and only that which is true and cer∣tain in the Primitive History and Councils. 'Tis true, divers Eminent Men have made some steps toward it; but it is too great an Ʋndertaking for any One Man to accomplish, as appears by that generous Project of Dr. Thomas James, Proposed to the Most Learned Primate of Ireland, to employ a Select Company of both Universities, with due Assistances and Encouragement for the perfecting this Design: Wherefore in the mean time, it may be serviceable to gather together some Materials for so Noble a purpose, and that first encouraged me to make these Observations as I
 was Reading the Annals of Baro∣nius with the Councils: Which I have (by the Advice of some of my Friends) Methodically digested in this little Tract; and I hope it may be useful, not only to direct such as apply themselves to this kind of Study, but also to confirm others of Our own Communion in their firm Adherence to their Excellent Religion, when they see so many plain Evidences, That all the Roman Churches Pretences to Antiquity (both in Doctrin and Worship) are founded on, and main∣tained by little else, but those Forge∣ries and Corruptions, by which they Imposed upon the Ignorant and Easie World for Six or Seven Centuries together. These Pious Frauds (as They counted them) did indeed then advance their Interest, and establish
 their Errors; but now when they are detected by this Discerning Genera∣tion, they prove their utter Shame; and did not Secular Advantages and Implicit Faith, or Fear and Inquisiti∣ons hinder those under their Yoke from being acquainted, or however from owning these unfaithful Actings of their Spiritual Guides; These Discove∣ries would not only secure Our People, but make many Converts from Them.
But (My Lord) whatever the Work or the Success be, I am obliged to lay it at Your Graces Feet, as the first thing I have made Public since Your Graces happy Advancement to the Government of this Church, whereof I am a Member, and wherein by Your Graces Influence I shall study to serve the Primitive-Protestant-Church of England. Which I beseech Al∣mighty
 GOD to defend from all its Enemies, and long to preserve Your Grace, to be a Support and an Honour to it. So Prays,
MY LORD,
York, Aug. 20. 1689.

