



Madam,
THe deep sense that I have had of those Engagements by wch it hath pleased your Honour to oblige me to your service, hath imboldned me to com∣mand these Papers to wait upon your Ladiship to pay a debt, by incurring  further
 one (if your Ladiship shall please to honour them with Acceptation.) These Sermons (Madam) were but ordi∣nary labours, and very unfit for a publicke view, in this extraordinary time. It was only a Sermon before publi∣shed upon the Text, that tempted out these to beare it companie, yet did I not part with them without some parly. The world is full of Writers, and the Presse as much overgrowne with Au∣thors, as the Age we live in is with Professors: But as the appearing spiritualnesse of many carries with it too
 much suspition, that they would have the spiritualnesse of a Christian meerly to consist with a luxuriant wit, and the superbiency of fancy; so too many Writings seeme to have forgot the plainnesse of the Gospell, which they so much pretend to, and would make it the worke of a Christian meerly to gape for Notions, and turne Reli∣gion into speculation: To be able to speake high Notions of Christ, and to wrap up the mysteries of truth in Parables of wit and expression, is al∣most growne to be thought the All of a Saint. And we
 may sadly feare, lest wee should be about to study more to admire Christ than understand him, more to con∣template Saints dignity than remember the Saints duty; lest we should make it all our worke, as Kings and Priests, to be so taken with our Honour, that we should forget that we are thus of Grace. Humilitie is the Saint in Great. If any one thinks he knowes any thing, he knowes nothing as he ought to know it. The high spirit is infinite∣ly more below Christ than he thinks himselfe above others. Lest in these privi∣ledged
 daies, whiles so many are proclaiming before the Saints, Thus shall it be done to the persons whom Christ de∣lighteth to honour; Christians should so farre admire their beautie, that they should for∣get their dust, I have been content to let these unpoli∣shed Sermons goe out to fol∣low their Triumphs, with Christiane memento quid fueris, Christian remember what thou wer't. It is as much a duty, and will one day be found as Beneficiall, to keep a Saint humble, as to make him thankfull; to learne him to abase himselfe, as
 well as to admire his fel∣lowes; to shew him, that all he hath is of Grace, as well as to tell him what he hath in the possessions of grace, and the Reversions of glory. I wish professors carriages spake not too much heart-Popery, as if they thought their dig∣nity were earnings, not Almes; and I am sure, no soule is truely thankfull that is not throughly hum∣ble. This for the subject of the Sermons. For the phrase Madam, I remember it was Pauls glory that he came not 1 Cor. 2. 1, 2, 4. (to the Corinthians) with ex∣cellency of speech or wisdome to
 declare unto them the testimo∣ny of God. And his speech and preaching, was not in entising words of mans wisdome, but in demonstration of the spirit, and in power. Gospell Misteries had not need be darkened with a misterious phrase. It doth not please me to see Religion in a Lantskip. Christ crucified, was plaine English. Seneca-Sermons, are for the most part but like the super∣fluous dishes of the table, that serve meerly for sight, but must not be tasted: Preaching surely was never ordained to tickle the eare, it's businesse lies deeper
 then scratching an humour. Wit is the soules worst car∣ver; and pieces of wit, are no better than peices of selfe. Christ never intended us an interpreter for every Sermon. Madam, as they were preached, so they are humbly presented to your Honours hands. I know your Ladiships humility to bee such, that it will spare an eye to look upon them though not commended by any no∣velty of matter or excellency of Phrase. I trust thus far the meannesse of their worth will advantage the worth∣lesse author, viz. By letting
 your Honour know how much that weak nothing of a preacher stands in need of an improved interest in your Ladiships prayers, who so much as he is, truly is,
Madam,

Chaplyfield house, May 21. 1649.
