



Madam,
SOme time since, I presumed to present this Ser∣mon to your Ho∣nours hands; your Ladi∣ships acceptance then hath emboldened mee now to present it againe, with some (though very small) altera∣tions. It presents your Ladi∣ship
 with a great piece of your Honours duty and pra∣ctise: Faith (Madam) is al∣most the Christians All; the Life of Faith is distinctively the Christians life; and if e∣ver there were a time for a Christian to live this life, surely this time in which the Lord hath cast our lot is the time. The whole Church of Christ is this day in the Wildernesse; the Israelites way to Canaan lay that way; And for my part, I look still, that the Church should keep the beaten path: and as all that have lived godly in Christ Iesus hitherto have,
 so I expect that all that will live godly, should still suffer persecution. The portion in this life, (surely) is not the portion of the Saints; here, and hereafter is too much. After Christs Suffering time we quickly read of his As∣cension. The mountaines of Edom are given to the chil∣dren of Esau for a possession. Immediately after the dayes of Tribulation shall the Sonne of Man come. And truely, the little experience of the best Saints temper in this breathing time that England hath had, hath made me as little to de∣sire, as to expect an Earthly
 happinesse. Saints have Na∣ture in them as wel as Grace: Wantonnesse is the Daugh∣ter of Peace; and in our time the Mother hath brought forth twinnes. The extrava∣gancies of Opinion, and e∣strangements of affection, the cooled love of truth, and for∣getting first love, of which wee have had, and have too large experiences, I confesse have made mee little lesse than an enemy, I am sure an Infidell, to the Churches continued Peace. Broken me∣talls must bee melted before they will runne together a∣gaine; it must be a fire that
 must throughly purge away our drosse, and take away our tinne. And as I expect for the whole, so for every member, at least I would have them expect it for themselves. Let us seeke the Kingdome of God, for the , all things else , if they come, let them be thrown in; let us blesse God if wee receive them. It is a Benja∣mins double Messe to have earth and heaven too. Let us not build our expectations high; if we have them, we shall but have  & ,  quasi . Dogges meat (God feeds his Dogges with such Crums,)
 and they will bee losse unto us: Much lesse, let us make it our worke, to get great things for our selves. (Ma∣dam,) to mee it seems a busi∣nesse of farre greater concern∣ment to enquire and learne rather what to doe in a streight, than whether wee shall have a time that shall bee without streights. I had rather be prepared for the worst, than filled with expe∣ctations of the best. Here is Isa. 43. 2. our comfort, that in the flouds, and the flames, hee will be with us, that will not suffer the flouds to drowne us, nor the flames to kindle upon us.
 This short Sermon will di∣rect your Ladiship to a po∣sture that in every condition will afford your Honour ease. It need not trouble us, that there is a Lion in our way, if wee have strength to en∣counter him. We need not be troubled, that our way to Canaan lies through wilder∣nesses, if we have the cloud, and pillar of fire. Much fear will argue little faith. Yet a little while Madam, and hee that shall come will come, and will not tarry. Yet a while, and we shall be beyond the feare of drownings; more a∣bove feares than wee are
 now below enjoyments. The great God that hath directed your Honours steps towards him, multiply the dayes of Peace to your Ladiship, that you may finde a nearer way to heaven, than through much tribulation; and goe Iacobs way, betwixt Egypt and Ca∣naan. But if for triall the Lord shall carrie your Ho∣nor the way of the Israelites, it is more triall, and may ask more time; but in heaven there cannot be a Saint missing. Iniquity onely shall bee pur∣ged Fsa. 27. 9. away, and this shall bee all the fruit, to take away sinne, and when the Lord shall make the
 stones of the Altar chalke∣stones that are beaten in sunder, the Groves and the Images shall not stand up. The Lord in e∣very Wildernesse preserve your Ladiships faith, by his power to salvation; and if he brings your Honor in, doubt not (Madam,) but hee will also bring you out of everie Wildernesse leaning on your wel-beloved; Which may be your Ladiships assured faith, and shall be (Madam) the con∣stant prayer, of

Chaplyfield house, May 21, 1649.
