


THIS Relation, which cannot but divertise you may serve for Instruction, to many peo∣ple, who talk at present of the Court of Rome, and tor∣ment
 themselves to disco∣ver the Causes and Conse∣quences of the Murther committed on the Ambassa∣dor of France. Truly, that act was very strange: a great King to be out-ragiously wronged out of a Frolick, and those Sage Worldlings seem to have renounced both their Ho∣nour and Judgment, since they yet speak of it scof∣fingly; they fancy and say, all will be made up again; that the business at last will come to a Negotiation, where the French cannot fail of having satisfaction:
 How can those wise Heads ponder so long upon one thing? they will cut them∣selves out some other work; they will evaporate their Choller in singing fine Songs of us, their sury will vanish, and he that had the blows may bear them; the King shall be satisfi'd with the hanging up of three or four Catch pole Serjeants; and if at last, those rash ones should put the business home, the Emperour and other Princes, whom the Pope is sure of, will not fail their Holy Mother at her need: and then do they
 count it nothing to have Eight Red Hats to bestow, and with the which they might—;But let those Ministers stand fast? If the wound can be healed with words, so much the better, those Bagatels will serve. However, Sir, I do not think I acquit my self of what I owe you, nor do I pretend you should be obliged to me, when I pre∣sent you with a Book that comes from your own Clo∣set, and can teach you no∣thing new. You are, Sir, of an Illustrious Family, where Virtue, Science, Politness,
 Riches, Reputation, and the most Refined Judgment in Affairs of State,  Na∣tural and Hereditary. I can∣not be suspected of flattery herein, since I have Crown'd Heads and Sovereign Prin∣ces for my Witnesses; whom, as I may say, have found themselves honoured by the Embassies and Em∣ployments wherein your Eldest Brother acquitted himself with no less praise to him, than satisfaction to them: this is no more then was said by the Queen of Sweden, and is yet spoken of in France. Nevertheless,
 I believed this Treatise, which is no less curious than sol deserved to bear the name of a Person that hath acquired so much Reputa∣tion by the Commerce of all the Learned, by Travail, by choice Books, by his good Nature, and the wel∣come Reception he gives to all Studious men. The Au∣thors name speaks his com∣mendations, it is the Il∣lustrious Senator Corraro, for whom there are no Em∣ployments too high in Ve∣nice, that Politique Astrolo∣ger, who judges of the Mindes of Men with a Sub∣tilty
 worthy his penetrati∣on, and the judgment of a Man thorowly versed in the affairs of the world, and with that liberty of truth natural to all Republicans. I beseech you, Sir, to ac∣cept of my respects, and give me some tokens of your good-will by honouring me with your Commands.
