



IF either Religion or Civility have any virtue to oblige, cer∣tainly I am much your debtor; it would be but a Complement (which usually derives its Pedigree from the vainest assentations) to promise any adequate satisfaction for those many favours you were plea∣sed to make me the subject of. The designe of these few lines is to testifie
to your selfe and the world, that I am really thankefull, or heartily de∣sire to be so.
The following Treatise which con∣cernes the Covenant of Grace, I commend rather to your Practice then protection; It's true, it is an Orphane, entertaine it for the Fathers sake, and I shall undertake you shall gaine no mean satisfaction for your paines.
The two smaller Tracts at the end, are of good use to those for whom they are intended▪
In the first the Reverend Author undertakes a good Office, which is, to become Ʋmpire betwixt dissenting Brethren; Next to their not falling out, the best thing is to agree: I have often thought, that if men did more attend to the interests of grace, and were lesse particular in their ends, the quarrells about the way would not be so endlesse.
As to that latter Tract, about the
Magistrates power in matters touch∣ing the first Table; Of late dayes it hath fallen much under Question; wise and good men who have attend∣ed to the Scripture with a single eye, have looked upon the Magistrate as The Minister of God, a revenger to Execute wrath upon him that doth EVILL, Rom. 13.4. un∣der the name of Evill comprehending. Aristo Eth. 5.13. whatsoever is committed about ho¦ly things: Children are command∣ed obedience to their Parents in all things, Col. 3.20.Felius (inquit A∣gustinus) Reges  s∣am potest tem ad De∣cultuū m imè dilat dum, maj∣stati ejus  mulam f ant. De  vit. Dei. 5. c. 14. All things, comprehend holy things, and the command of a father is lesse then that of the Supreme Magistrate.
That which relates in this little Book to the Covenant of Grace, I com∣mend to your speciall meditations; every truth hath its value, but not of equall concernment unto all.
Amongst all the parcells of sacred Word, none more justly challengeth our serious study, and affectionate in∣quisition,
then this mystery that ha been id from ages and Ge∣nertions, Coos. 1.26. compre∣hnded in the Covenant of Grace, whh is a Constellation of great and precious Promises, communi∣cating the most beneficiall influen∣ces of rich, everlasting and undeser∣ved mec es, by Jesus hrist the Me∣diator of this Covenant, to the needs of lost, heavy loaden sinners.
This is the City of Refuge, and surest, Sanctuary, to which distressed soules have alwayes fled, and found security when the bllwes and the waves of temptation have beat upon them; here they have successfully cast the Anchor of their hopes; for The Mountaines shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my kind∣nesse shall not depart from thee, neither shall the COVENANT of my peace be removed, saith the Lord that hath mercy on thee. Oh thou afflicted and tossed with
tempests, and not comforted, I will, &c. Isai. 54.10, 11, 12. They onely know how much sweeter then the honey and the Honey-comb, theGen. 33.9, 11. Esau lookes up∣on his sub∣stance, and saith, , I have much, or abun∣dance. Jacob looks upon his portion in Jehovah, & saith, , I have all things. Thus it should be Transla∣ted. large contents of the Covenant of Grace are, who have tasted the grace of that Covenant.
The spirituall sense which you have of these things, hath been so rightly exercised, that your experience ex∣ceeds all the Arguments of knowledge that I am able to administer. But this Covenant being our Grand Charter, and the great reason of our hopes for another life, I refer you to the perusall of the following Treatise, and shall in the mean time bespeak a blessing from Heaven upon your meditations in it.
I Question not but still you pursue that thriving course in Religion, which many are wanting to them∣selves in; and that is to keep off from unedifying disputes and Que∣stions, which have added nothing to
Christianity, but discord, scruple, and a losse of the vitalls of Godli∣nesse, besides the expence of preci∣ous houres, which you have impro∣ved to more considerable advantages. You run well, let nothing hinder you.
Hold fast that which you have wrought, that you may receive a full reward: Live as much as you can to the interests of another world; For the Land of IMMANUEL is an excellent soyle, the purest aire is above, where the Spirit breaths freely, and the soule injoyes a condition pro∣portionable to it selfe, in as much as nothing can fit it, but that which bears some similitude to its being.
Your warfare is not yet accom∣plished, as you must wrastle with God by prayers, so you must wrastle with principalities and powers de supercoelesti∣bus Eph 6.12. vide Mar. 10.32  mei causâ illi∣us causa. vide Mat. 26.31. All ye shall be offended be∣cause of me. . A∣BOVE [or because of] heavenly things: The nature of Satan is to tempt, and we have that in our na∣tures
fitted to comply with any temptation: Let him be conquerour, or conquered, he is restlesse: He may goe away for a season, till God is pleased to let out his chaine, and then he comes againe. Be we faithfull to the death, and there is a Crowne of life provided for us. Now the God of all grace,1 Pet. 5.10. who hath cal∣led us into his eternall glory by Christ Jesus, after you have suffe∣red a while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you. So prayes

