



THat there is a Summum Bonum, or chief Good to be enjoyed by Man, all sorts acknowledg; Philosophers and Divines, Ancient and Modern. De∣sired by all (as naturally as the greatest flames and the little sparks of Fire ascend to their Sphere) either confusedly, or distinctly; at∣tained only by some, and in the fruition whereof, true Happiness consisteth. But what that is, all agree not. Varro out of Philosophers, and St. Augustin out of Varro, maketh mention of two hundred eighty and eight Opinions about it. Some placing it here, others there, and have according∣ly pursued their own conceits. Error in this Point is not more common than dangerous, being attended with variety of Ʋncertainties; every one striving to maintain, what he doth most af∣fect; whether an independing real-Good, appre∣hended
 and presented, by an Ʋnderstand∣ing rightly informed, or an apparent Good only, offered by an Erring faculty. Sense and understanding in Act, is by union between the Faculty and the Object; the Soul is said to be what it understandeth; if the Object be a real Good, the Soul by virtue of that union, hath an answerable denomination. In this, Philosophy is an insufficient Guide, looking only on this Life, and the felicity of the more ignoble part of Man, duing his abode here in the Visible World. A supernatural Revelation is needful. Reason cannot fathom, nor the light of Nature reach unto the end for which Man was made. Divinity discovers this, and Faith comprehends it; That Man was created for God, to be like and enjoy him. Christ is the Means to bring this to pass. Man is made perfect, but mutable. He falleth, Christ steppeth in to raise him again. A new Covenant is established, whereof Christ as Head, undertakes to perform Conditions. The Humane Nature must be united to the Di∣vine, in his Person, that Christ might suffer what Man had deserved, and Man might receive what Christ merited. The Hypostatical Ʋnion is the ground or medium of another Mystical Ʋni∣on, whereby every Penitent Believer is made a par∣taker of the Divine Nature, and of all the privi∣ledges of Christ's Obedience, as if they had done it in their own Persons; as, of Adoption, Justifi∣cation, Sanctification, Glory. The End was first, the Reasonable Creature thought on next, and
 the Means last. All which were foreseen and ordered by an eternal Act of the first Cause; not that for this, or this after that; not the Means first, for the End, nor the End so first, as a mo∣tive to the Means; but the End, Object, and Means together, according to the freedom and counsel of his Will; foreseeing still to preserve an order in the means, both of Precedency, and instrumental Efficiency. He willed the Law and Gospel should be Preached, that Knowledg and Faith might be wrought in his; he willed Faith, that they might be justified; he willed Justification, that they might be sanctified and glorified. He willed all these joyntly, that the End might be attained after all, viz. The Communication of his own Ex∣cellency, for the compleating of Man's Felicity.
It is not these Titles therefore, can make Man happy. The line of his Life being drawn forth with so many uncertainties, and the height of his Power laid on so weak a foundation. At one time or other, of the best it may be said, and the greatest on Earth may say of himself, I was all things, and yet nothing, part of the Emperor Severus his Speech to his Council and Captains at York, where shortly after he died; leaving behind him this Testimony, as many others have have done, That Man's chiefest Good is not here be∣low. The Earth in her most glittering furniture is but Earth, Fabulous and Enthusiastick, and can afford but brittle Happiness. Honour, Riches, Pleasure, are but deceitful Toys: So far from being Man's happiness, that they often prove greater
 letts than helps towards Happiness. Our chief∣est good is Bonum immobile & immutabile: but Riches make themselves Wings, and are un∣certain; like the Swallow in Winter season, sud∣denly bidding farewel, never perhaps returning again; as a word once spoken, nescit vox mis∣sa reverti. Our chief Good is Bonum aeternum & perfectum; while Carnal Pleasures, even the deepest here, are most empty, frothy, and momen∣tany; like Comets made fat with smoaks and vapours of the Earth, and in stead of giving Light and Brightness, they bring forth Murders and Contagions. Our chief Good is Bonum Im∣mortale; firm and ever flourishing, always the same; but Honour is fading, and often buried in the Dust, or quickly swallowed up in Oblivion. Man was happy by Creation, while the prime faculties of the Soul had that blissful Object to reflect upon the true God , in whom only is found a satisfying sufficiency, to fill unto contentment, the infinite appetite of the Soul. When man turned from the Creator to the Crea∣ture, he lost a real for a seeming Happiness; on∣l in this happy, that the footsteps to true Hap∣ps are left imprinted in the Fall: Let him but once think whence he is fallen, and return, and he cannot miss of Happiness. No regaining it without returning. Return, return, O Shula∣mite, return. How often and earnest doth the Lord call for it, as that one Thing necessary, which should be most intended by us? How vain and empty is the Creature? How full and solid
 the Creator? Deformity in the one, Beauty in the other; Bitterness in this, Sweetness in that. To fear God, and keep his Commandments, is the whole of Man: The Duty and Dig∣nity, Honour and Felicity of Man; to know Thee, and whom thou hast sent, is Eternal Life: In his Presence is fulness of Joy, and at his Right Hand are Pleasures for evermore. In him are all the Perfections of all Creatures by way of Eminency; Quicquid convenit enti qua∣tenus ens; illud maximè competere in pri∣mum ens, quod est Deus: Who may be enjoy∣ed, either by Faith, properly termed Felicity here in the Way; or by Sense, in our Country, more fitly called Beatitude. Here is a short and sure Way, return to God by Christ, and be happy for ever.Eph. 1.10. Col. 2.10. How this is brought about, and how it may be discerned, is the subject of the fol∣lowing Discourses; unto which I have taken leave to prefix your Name; and by this poor way endeavoured to serve you, since more ample De∣monstrations are wanting to my weak Abilities. Not doubting but your Noble Disposition will be satisfied with such ordinary Acknowledgments, I commend you to the Blessing of Heaven, and re∣main,

