


SIR,
PROPHECIES concerning publick Events near at hand, were used to be first communicated to the Prince, who was to have the first hand in their Accomplishment. This gives Your Majesty a Right to the Dedication of the Inter∣pretations, which I here present. They come to bring You a Prospect of a speedy Revival of the Reformation where it has been extinguished, which is from thence to go on continually advancing upon the Ruines of the Roman Church to her last end. And then Your Majesty's peaceable Triumphs here must be con∣cluded to be the immediate Hand of God out of the Cloud for the first opening of that Glorious Scene.

SIR,
The first discovery in this kind came from a worthy Man then under Your Protection; And this gave You an antecedent Claim to all the accessory improvements of it. His Attempt for want of a distinct settlement of the first grounds of it had the ill fortune in these parts to be received but as his Conjecture. The importance of the thing did there∣upon inflame my Curiosity to enter upon a more strict Enquiry after the foundations of these hopes, having before been encouraged by some Learned Men in a Method, that I had chosen for securing the Explication of the more lightsome parts of the Pro∣phecy.
In pursuance of this I have more distinctly stated the first Principles of the Grounds, that have been for∣merly given, and have added other Evidences to them, which seem more clearly to fix the begin∣ning of this happy Revolution, than the light that the main Prophecy it self does offer for it.
But that which makes the fairest promise of the near approach of this time, is, Your Majesty's unexpected success in these Nations, which has given a per∣fect new turn to all the Affairs of Europe, and in Concurrence with them does already show the World a plain Prospect of such a state of things
 near at hand. It is manifest, That in all appearance the next causes are now in Action.
It is for this reason that I have found it neces∣sary to look out for sufficient Testimonies, that these Predictions were Penned long before Your Majesty's Expedition into these parts. They would otherwise run the danger of being thought to be nothing but the Glozing Flatteries of an unsincere Pretender; Which Your known aversion for such servile Arti∣fices might assure me You would reject with Displeasure.
But after such Testimonies, if there be any strength in these Interpretations, it may be of Use to Your Majesty's Government to have them divulged before they come to be fulfilled. To those, that believe them, they will be like a Voice from Heaven not only for present comfort to themselves, but to call for their best assistance to Your Conduct; And what is it, that a Nation can think too much for a Prince, whom they believe to be designed by God for the Deliverance of his Church from the most de∣plorable Slavery, that ever was yet heard of, from the very shadow of Death, and of Hell it self.
It is no hard thing, Sir, to have this generally believed of You. The defence of the Reformation is known to go inseparably along with the Lineal descent of Your Illustrious Family. They have been called away from their Native Seats to watch con∣tinually
 for this very thing; And Your Majesty's. late removal into tbis Land in the time of such a distress of the Neighbouring Churches, as never was since there was a Nation, seems to be Dan. 12. 1. chiefly to give You a convenient Post to be the Re∣viver of that oppressed Cause, which next under Heaven owed its last firm Setlement in the World to the Arms of one of Your Ancestors of the same Name.
We have already seen Your Majesty in those Cir∣cumstances of the Prophecy, which presage the sud∣den Accomplishment of that promised Deliverance. We have seen You at the Head of almost all the several kinds of Peoples, and Nations, and Rev. 11. 9, 10, 11, 12. Tongues, that would not suffer the dead Bodies of the Witnesses to be buried. We our selves were thereupon in a manner made the First-fruits from the Dead before their approaching Resurrection.
The immediate Effect of this we see, is, that it not only cuts off all hopes of Assistance from the great Oppressor, but does also let loose upon him the Forces of an abused Kingdom, at a time when he is going to be attack'd by such a general Storm on all sides of him, as can hardly be paral∣lel'd in the Histories of falling Empires.

 After this it will be easie to believe, that Your Majesty's appearance in behalf of the Oppressed must make their Adversaries think of diverting the Fury of a Million of the most enraged of their Ene∣mies within their own Bowels; especially when the only way that they can hope to compass it by, is that, which will cost them nothing, viz. A Liberty of their Religion. Though their hopes of any considerable success in it may be never so vain, yet they will find themselves forced to make tryal of it, when all other ways will but strengthen the interest of an appearing Enemy. And then will the Resurrection of the Witnesses be accomplished.
Who can think that the Gallican Church will after that endure to be enslaved any longer to those Supersti∣tions, which they have long since nauseated, and have forced their Consciences to put false colours upon? This will make it easie to conceive, how the Witnesses should ascend into the Throne, and, as the Prophecy concludes, How the whole Kingdom should be converted without any violent Methods from the revived Reformation.
If we should once see that happy Change, none would question, but that so great an encrease of the Interest of the Reformation would soon bring on such a general mortification of the power of the Roman Church in all parts of its Domi∣nion,
 as would make it sink by degrees into no∣thing.
All Men may see from Your Majesty's publick Testi∣monies of it, how firmly Your Heart is set upon the Means, that do the most naturally tend to this end; And there seems to be as promising a concurrence of the Hearts of Your People towards it, which still con∣firms the likelihood of the Event. That all Your Majesty's Designs for this end may meet with as great Encouragements both from God, and Man, is the hearty Prayer of
SIR,

March 25. 1689.
