



MADAM,
THE Intent of these Papers is to make a more certain Discovery of the Sense of some Divine Oracles, which have foretold the Successive Revolutions of all the Great Empires, in which the Church of God was to sojourn, till it should come to triumph over the Kingdoms of this World. If they prove to be satisfactorily clear, Religion and Empire being the Subject-matter of them, They seem to be the most proper Object of the Meditation of Christian Princes. We are now in the concluding part of the Last of these Empires; And Your Majesty's Late Wonderful Successes have so promising an A∣spect
 on that part of the Predictions, That they seem to appropriate all Addresses of this kind to Your Royal Court.
I have therefore thought it a duty to offer that, which I have already published on this Subject, to the Hands of His Majesty; And Your Majesty's peculiar Share in the Throne does seem to demand This of me, as the Re∣mainder of a Debt from one that has once ap∣proached it.
This Part is indeed the whole Strength and Foundation of the former, and for that reason ought to attend it to the same Place, to con∣firm the Hopes of a Glorious Success of both Your Majesties Endeavours for the Revival of the Oppressed Reformation. Madam, We have already seen a very surprizing beginning of this Recovery, in the late Providential man∣ner of the Return of the Protestants of Savoy through the midst of their most Inveterate, and most Powerful Opposers. The first date of that General Suppression of the Protestant Pro∣fession in Roman States, which in the Prophecy is called, The Death of the Witnesses in Sackcloth, is supposed to commence from the Last Conside∣rable Abjurations of the new Converts abroad, some while after the Revocation of the Edict
 of Nants; And then, That which in the Pro∣phecy is called, Their Resurrection three days and an half after their Death, must fall just about the time that the Vaudois did Revive, and Re∣settle the Publick Profession of their Religion, after their return to their Ancient Habita∣tions.
The Vaudois, and their Neighbours, have been so much the Main Body of the Witnesses for many Ages before the Reformation, That since the first Revival is agreed from the Pro∣phecy to be in one particular place only, they may safely be allowed to be the first promising beginning at least of that Revolution. The Pro∣per Kingdom of France did indeed seem from the present Posture of Affairs, to be the most likely to be the first Scene of this Revival. The other Treatise, pag. 139, 140. But it has been shewn, that there is nothing in the Prophecy that does fix the first be∣ginning of it there; And that the Persecu∣tion in France, and Savoy, being executed by the same Instruments, may very well pass for one and the same thing.
This, Madam, is the first encouraging Earnest of that Great Deliverance, which the Oppressed Church does groan for, and
 look up to Heaven, and to Your Protection to accomplish.
But whatever may become of these re∣mote Conclusions relating to present Affairs, it will be no prejudice to what I here offer, which is the only necessary and Great Con∣cern of the Protestant Interpretations, and the sole foundation of them. It will here appear to remain still firm, and unshaken, That the Church of Rome is the main Object of the Judgments of this Prophecy. The Foundation of a Building may be setled up∣on a Rock, though some parts of the Su∣perstructure should fall for want of an im∣mediate and close coherence with it. And if this first Foundation be but once agreed on, and well regarded by all Parties of Protestants, it is easie to see how influen∣tial it must needs be for the strengthening of the Common Interest of the Reforma∣tion. The dreadful Characters that are here set upon the Common Enemy, and the Di∣vine Intimations of the joint concern of all the Reformed Churches in the League a∣gainst them, as the Witnesses, and People of God, And the Present Crying Miseries of their Enslaved Brethren, are more than
 sufficient to make them silence all their lit∣tle Unnecessary Heats and Animosities against one another, and to make them unite with zeal to strengthen the Hands of Your Ma∣jesties against the most refined Barbarities of the Great Oppressor, that were ever yet heard of.
There are indeed but small Grounds to hope, That Protestants will of a sudden a∣gree upon this Foundation, whatever Evi∣dence there may be for it. The Enquiry into these matters is so out of fashion, and lies under so general a prejudice, that I found the Press every-where affrighted from un∣dertaking the Charge of this Publication. And I am bound to acknowledge, That nothing less could persuade them to it, than the warm Recommendations of a Per∣son, whom Your Majesty's Favour has emi∣nently rewarded for his Long continued La∣bours in all the ways, by which the Church can be either piously edified, or learnedly de∣fended. It is indeed owing to My Lord Bishop of Chichester, if any thing here does prove to be of Publick Use.

Madam,
This General Unconcern seems chiefly to be the effect of the Popish Marriages in the Three Last Reigns. Nothing was more the Doctrine of our Church to the end of the Reign of King James the First, than the Charge of Babylon, and Antichrist, upon the Roman Church; but it seemed something too rude a Charge, both to Church and Court, when the Queen came to be concerned in it; and none but some very few of the most Sincere and Disinterested amongst the Learn∣ed, would appear in it.
I have therefore apprehended it to be the most effectual way for the making this the Currant Study of the Age again, to pro∣cure the Royal Stamp upon it, by Your Majesty's favourable regard of this Perfor∣mance. I am encouraged to hope, That it may not displease the Impartial Exami∣ners of it. And Your Majesty's Pious Zeal to promote True Religion and Vertue, has already began to make all good Designs for the Protestant Interest, the Fashiona∣ble Study of all about You. That we may
 long have the Powerful and Charming In∣fluence of this Great Example for the im∣provement of all Useful Knowledge, is the Zealous Prayer of,
MADAM,

