



IT is the saying of a wise man (right Worshipful and wor∣thy Compatriots) that Preaching and Printing are excel∣lent means to beget knowledge and increase faith:Dr. Hug s. the one like ashour of rain, waters for the present; the other like snow, lyes longer on the ground, and may speak when the Author
 cannot. This Sermon, this Child of mine, hath laid in its Cradle dormant, dumb a long space; for the bringing forth, and making it speak publickly to the world, I have been besought as long, (Si liceat magnis componere parva) as Troy was be∣sieged; and now at last overcome as that was.
Omnia per∣versae pos∣sunt cor∣umpere mentes O∣vid.It hath but one Father, yet so many God-fathers as were pre∣sent at the initiation or presentation in the Church; who (I make no question) will defend it against the fiery darts of furi∣ous tongues; being it hath been their desire to bring it upon the Stage of the World, which is full of malignant censurers, and si∣nister Interpreters; meeting now and then, here a Bavius, and there a Maevius,Virg. Bucol. as its elder Brother did,Aspi∣cies illic positos ex ordine fra∣tres. quos studium cunctos evigelavit idem. Ovid. Trist. Eleg. 1. which I lately put forth,Yet I will say of them as Cornelia said of her Cracchi, sunt ornamenta mea. but my comfort is it hath had the approbati∣on of as good Schollars, as the most critical Aristarchus amongst them: and will be supported by the first receivers of it, whose Patronage I am sure I have, being importun'd by the most of you and them, to put in Print that which I then uttered; for the good of my absent as well as present Country-men: whose eager∣ness in the business was such, that some of them borrowed my co∣py, with a pretence to read it over, and ruminate upon it, but they had it to the press. I hearing of it fetch'd it thence, as fear∣ing to b toss'd upon the dangerous seas of the world, with the stormy blasts of mens different opinions, and various conceipts.Aestu∣at, & lento miserima turba veneno liquitur, ut giacies incerto saucia sole.
Upon which they desired my loving and learned friend, Mr. Hudson of Putney, to borrow it of me, only to see it, which I sent him, and he approving of it, it was carryed once more to
 the Press, and part of it composed, which I hearing of acci∣dentally, obstructed the business once more,
Yet at last, I was had to the Press my self, and pressed so hard that I yeilded to the efflagitations of divers worthy Persons amongst you, especially my loving friend and Brother Steward Mr. Edward Jackson,Hoc responso. Parve (nec invideo) si∣neme liber ibis in orbem to whom I surrendred my copy to be at their disposal. Insomuch that as the Prophet David saithPsal. 75.7. Promotion cometh neither from the East, nor from the West, nor yet from the South; so may I say of the promotion of this Sermon to be Printed, coming only from (the North) my North country friends; which now being come forth by their means, if it please any, let them have the thanks, if not, let them have the blame.
Onely this I must tell you (by way of digression) that as theNec aranearum textus ideo melior, qui x se fila gi∣nuntur, nec noster ideo vilior quia ex alienis libemus, ut ape Lipsi∣us. Spider workes his web out of his own bowels, and the Bee gathers honey of every flower,Floriseris ut apes in saltibus omnia libant. Lucretius. so Divines make their Sermons after both fashions: I am for the latter sort, picking out of every Author those things which I thought fit for my pur∣pose, and as a reverend Bishop saidB. King. Ep. ded. his lect. on Jonas. Where I liked the waters of other mens wells, I drank of them deeply: so where the flowers were the sweetest, I gathered most plentifully. insomuch that as he saididem ibidem. nihil nostrum & omnia, synony∣mous to that of Democritus junior out of Macrobius,Dem. to the Reader. Omne meum & nihil meum.
Such as it is (my loving Country men) as you have brought it fourth, so I pray bring it up, and maintain it against all those Qui Lectorum nomen ferunt, & Lictorum naturam gerunt. Whose mouths are sheathes for Hanuns raisors2 Sa. 10.4. wherewith they shave and cut off what they please, to disfigure the most
 holy intents. For (as I said) this Sermon was mine, now tis yours; let my words in it, be your deeds out of it; it was calcu∣lated for the Meridian of Westmerland; let them that heard it, heed it; them that heard it not read it, for whose sake it be∣ing now printed in Lines, it may be the better imprinted in their Lives, consider what I say, and the Lord give you un∣derstanding in all things. 2 Tim. 2.7.

