



'TIS for your Perusal that this Treatise is publish'd: To you I dedicate these Collections, as the most sutable to your Generous and Martial Dispositions. No Nati∣on under the Sun have taken a greater Delight in War than ours, and none have been more successful in former Ages, and purchased more Honour in the Field than the English. But this is remarkable in History, that their Nota∣ble Victories were gotten more by their
plain Valour, than by their Policies. The Strength of other Nations consists in Subtilties and Ambushes; there are are few that dare face an assaulting Enemy in the open Field, and oppose their naked Breasts to the Showrs of the Murthering Shot. Behend a Hedge, a Ditch, or a Breast-work, and when they have the Advantages of Number and the Ground, they may venture a Battel. But the English have been ta∣ken notice of for their Ʋndaunted Courage in the midst of the greatest Difficulties, and have often snatcht the Victory out of the Hands of their In∣sulting Enemy. But if the English Courage alone, without the Assistance of Art, hath been so Victorious, what Wonders would it not be able to per∣form, if it were seconded by Policy and Craft? I conceive therefore it may not be useless to you, my Brave Countrymen, to have an Abstract, or a Collection in your own Language of the
Stratagems which have been practiced in War by the most experienced Com∣manders; that when you may happen into the same Difficulties and Dan∣gers, you may understand what others have done to wind themselves out, and by what means they have purchased Safety, Honour, and Victory to themselves and Followers. I doubt not but some of you may have as sharp and subtile Wits as good Courages, and that you will be able to use both in the business of War. But I believe none can deny, but a Collection of such Ex∣amples as these, both Antient and Mo∣dern, will be able to advise, direct, and encourage your Invention to inge∣nious Contrivances: For that purpose I have Translated Frontinus, who, be∣ing a Roman Warriour, and of the Order of the Consuls, Collected the most remarkable Stratagems of the Persi∣sians, Greeks, Romans and Cartha∣ginians. Their manner of Fighting
and Weapons differ much from ours I confess; nevertheless we may learn from them, and be directed by them in many cases; for we meet with Ene∣mies subject to the same Passions and Infirmities as they, and we may im∣prove the same Accidents and Oppor∣tunities which happened to them. But for the compleating of this Treatise, I have added a Collection of the most ap∣proved Histories of divers brave Ex∣ploits and cunning Stratagems, success∣fully employed by later Generals for the purchasing of Victory, that you might have here a Prospect of the War∣like Policies of the first and latter A∣ges together, and that in the perusal of the Noble Actions of our brave Pre∣decessors, you may see the ready, and path-way to Honour.
You know not how soon the Interest of the Kings Majesty, and of this Kingdom, may call you, my Valiant Countrymen, into the Field. It is
therefore your Wisdom now amongst the Delights of Peace, not to forget the difficulties and dangers of War, and to mind a judicious preparation for the lat∣ter as well as the Enjoyment of the for∣mer. You especially, are in reason to be ready for the Service of your Prince and Country, whose brave An∣cestours have by their Valour purchased for you Titles of Honour and Estates together; You, who are to be Exam∣ples of Virtue and Courage, and who have the greatest Interest in the Coun∣try where you live. This Preparati∣on ought to consist not only in War∣like Provisions, in good Arms, and in the understanding the Duties and Arts of Officers and Soldiers; but if you be, or expect to become Leaders of Men, the Knowledge of the Warlike Strata∣gems of former Captains, and how to ensnare an Enemy without hazard, will furnish you with an excellent Skill for the Services that may be required from you.

I shall only desire that you would em∣ploy the Arts and Policies which you may learn from this Compendium for the Advancement of the Glory of your God, for the Preservation of the pub∣lick Peace, Quiet and Happiness of the Nation, for the Security and Ho∣nour of our King, and for the Defence of the Interest of the Royal Family, which God of his Mercy Bless with all increase of Temporal and Spiritual Blessings. This shall always be the Prayer of him, who wishes that your Religious and Loyal Ʋndertakings may ever be Crowned with Victory and Success.

