



TO You (Gods Vice-gerents on Earth, over all Persons, whether Ecclesiastical or Temporal, next under god within Your own respective Dominions Supreme Governors,) I conceive fittest to Dedicate, and Direct the ensuing Papers; to You (Most Illustrious,) they address themselves, as to persons most concern'd in the Subject they treat about; whereby is endeavored the Vindication of Gods Honor, where∣in as his Vice-gerents You are highly concern'd; also Your own Supreme Powers and Au∣thorities, which in former Ages, (and yet still in the Doctrinal part,) have been of∣ten Invaded by the Bishop of Rome, and their Abettors; amongst whom the Jesuites have been still in the Front, as the principal Champions against You; and for those Bi∣shops from whom all Anti-Monarchical Principles have proceeded under the veil and cover of other Religions, —as Quakers, Anabaptists, Independents, &c. which se∣veral Sects have been Abetted by several of the Roman Clergy, (thereunto Authorized and commanded by the Bishops of Rome,) to prevent a Reformation amongst themselves (always a terror to them,) and the better to dvide the Reformed Churches over the World, according to that Maxim, Divide & Impera, —whereby they have not a little impeded the Christian Profession, in the Inlargement of the Kingdom of Christ, and thereby given occasion to the Enemies of God (the Turks, &c.) to Blaspheme, and enlarge their Dominions and Territories; hereby the Isle of Rhodes and Candie has been lost, to the Eternal reproach of the Christian Profession; for while Christians are disjoyned, the common Enemy takes the advantage, which by a happy Ʋnion, ho would lose.
I shall here add a few particulars out of the History of France, in the Life of Lewis the Thirteenth; Fol. 1295. Ʋpon occasion of the Murther of Henry the Fourth of France by Ravilliac; the words be these. —This wicked Murtherer confessed no other motive of his crime, but the Book of Mariana, a Spanish Jesuite; which Book by a decree made by the Colledge of Sorbonne, and confirmed by a Sentence from the Courts of Parliament, was for that cause condemned to be publickly burnt before our Lady Church in Paris: the tenor of the Sentence was;
[The Court, the great Chamber the Turnelle, and the Chamber of the Edict being Assembled, having seen the decree of the faculty of Divinity assembled the Fourth of this Month of June, according to a Sentence given in May last, upon the renewing of the censure in matter of Doctrine made by the said faculty in the Year 1413. Confirmed by the Holy Council of Constance; that it is an He∣resie full of Impiety to maintain that it is lawful for Subjects or Strangers, upon any pretence or cause whatsoever, to attempt against the Sacred Person of Kings and Sovereign Princes, the Book of John Mariana Intitled, De Rege, & Regis In∣stitutione, Printed as well at Mentz as in other places, containing many execra∣ble Blasphemies against the Deceased King Henry the Third of most happy Me∣mory, the persons and Estates of Kings and Sovereign Princes, and other propo∣sitions contrary to the said decree: upon the conclusion of the Kings Atturney General, the matter being propounded; the said Court hath and doth ordain, that the said decree of the Fourth of this present month of June shall be entered
into the Registers thereof, and heard at the instance of the Kings Atturny Ge∣neral, and read every year on the like day, on Sunday, in the Parishes of this City, and Suburbs of Paris; it doth also ordain that the Book of Mariana shall be burnt by the Executioner of Justice, before our Lady Church in Paris; for∣bidding all men, of what Estates, Quality and Condition soever they be, upon pain of High Treason, to write or cause any Books to be Printed against the said Decree and Sentence; it doth also enjoyn, that Copies taken out of the Origi∣nals of the said Decree, and this present Sentence, shall be sent unto the Baile∣wicks and Seneshaushes of this Jurisdiction, there to be read and published after the accustomed manner and form. And moreover, at Evensong in Parishes, in Towns, Suburbs, and other Burroughs, the first Sunday of June; enjoyning all Bayliffs and Seneshalls to proceed to the said publication, and the substitutes of the Kings Atturny General to have a care of the Execution, and to certifie the Court of their Diligence.]
Ʋpon A Declaration, or Letter from one Cotton the Jesuite to the Queen Regent, to wipe off that Aspersion from their Society, An Answr is framed unto it, by the name of Anti-Cotton, which you will find in Fol. 1298. The words be as follow.
Anti-Cotton, the Doctrine of Je∣suites for Mur∣thering Kings.[Francis Ribadinera writing of the parricide of James Clement, he saith, forasmuch as the resolution Henry the Third took upon him, was the advice of a Polititian, and a Machiavilist, not con∣formable to the rules of our Saviour, behold the reason, that by the judgment of God, the said Henry was kill'd by a young Monk, and dyed by the stroke of a Knife.
Carolus Scribanius, a Flemish Jesuite, who calls himself Clarus Bonarscius, in his Book Entituled Amphitheatrum honoris, sayes, that if it so fall out, that a Denis, a Machonidas, or an Aristotimus, Monsters of their Age, oppress France, shall not the Pope have absolute power to animate against them some Dion, Timoleon, or Phil∣poemen, that is to say, tamers and suppressers of Monsters? And afterwards speaking of a Tyrant wasting France, will no man (sayes he) take Armes against that Tyrant wasting France? Will no Pope set free that Noble Kingdom from the stroke of the Axe?
He cites Bellarmine, who although he condemneth Treason against Princes, yet in ambiguous terms he seems to approve it, by commending Garnet the Jesuite, in these words. Wherefore was Henry Garnet, a man unmatchable in all kinds of Learn∣ing and Holiness of Life, so punished in the highest Degree, but only for that he would not detect that, which with a safe conscience he could not? And the same Author, in his Book De Pontifice Romano, sayes, the Pope may dispose of Kingdoms, taking from one, and giving to another, as being the Superior Prince Ecclesiastical; and the Jesuite Gretzer sayes, we are not such Dastards, as that we fear to affirm openly, that the Pope of Rome may (if necessity so require) free his Catholick Sub∣jects from their Oath of Obedience, if their Sovereign intreat them Tyrannically; yea he adds, in the same place; that if the Pope do it discreetly and warily, it is a meri∣torious work; after all this, he quotes the Doctrine of Tolet, Mariana, and John Guignard, a Jesuite Priest residing in Paris, who had written a Treatise in praise of James Clement, with divers motives to make away the King which last dyed; for the which he was Executed. But Francis Verona Constant, exceeds them all; he affirms,
that notwithstanding the Council of Constance, it is lawful for any private man to Murther Kings condemned of Heresie and Tyranny: And Emanuel Sa writes, that that the Rebellion of a Clerk against the King is no Treason, insomuch that he is not Subject to him; the which Bellarmine in a manner confirms; saying, the Pope of Rome hath Exempted Clerks from their subjection to Princes: Kings are now no more Supe∣riors of Clerks. And to prove their Doctrine of killing Kings more plainly, he produ∣ceth the equivocations and evasions of Garnet, being apprehended for the Powder-Treason; the which is justified by many of that Society: John Henreux writing thus: When any man is drawn into question under an unjust trial, no man standing bound to inform against himself (as the law of nature teacheth us plainly) he may peremp∣torily, and freely deny that for which he is called into question, without any tergiversation, because he always understands this Clause, [Ut tenear dicere] which Doctrine is confirmed by divers other Jesuites; One of them affirming, that the Doctrine of Equivocation is grounded upon the memorable Example of St. Francis: in the end he shows their opinion touching concealing of Confession, which they hold ought not to be revealed. John Henreux, writing of that Subject, sayes: That a thing Sealed up with the most holy Signet of Confession, cannot be broken without detestable Sacriledge: and that there cannot fall so great a mischief, for the avoid∣ing of which it can be lawful to bewray a Confession. And Suarez adds; yea though the safety of the whole Common-weale should stand upon it; by all which proof he shews, that it was not Mariana's Doctrine alone to Murther Kings, but that all the Jesuites have erred with him in this; whom Father Cotton connot justifie, in ge∣neral. Anti-Cotton having set down the Jesuites Doctrine, he proves it by their Actions, and first, by the Fact of John Chastel, Clerk,Confirmed by the Actions. brought up in the Jesuites Colledge; who having Stabbed the King in the Mouth, the 27. of December, 1604. being examined upon sundry Questions, and among others, wh ther he had studied Divinity in the Jesuites Colledge; he answered, that he had been thre undr Fathr Gueet, with whom he had continued two years and a half: And being askd if he had ever been in the Chamber of Meditation, (whither the Je∣suites use to bring the greatest Sinners, there to behold the Representation of many De∣vils, set forth (under colour to reduce them to a better Life) thereby to cause a per∣turbation in their minds, and consequently, upon such resolutions, to thrust them forward to the undertaking of some grat Action) His answer was, that he had often been in the Chamber of Meditations: And being questioned, whether the killing of the King were not an ordinary disc urse amongst the Jesuites, answered, that he had heard them say, it was lawful to kill the King, and that he was no member of the Church, and that we ought not to obey him, nor hold him for our King, untill he had receiv∣ed approbation from the Pope.
Peter Barriere being apprehended at Melun, in April, 1593. being d scovered by an honest Fryer, Confessed, that he came purposely to Court, to kill the King; and that he had been prswaded thereunto by one Varade, a Jesuite, whose dayly practice was to dfame the King with vle Speeches, by wh se perswasion he had provided a Knife to do the Fact: he first of all discovered his intent to Aubrey, Curate of St. Andrew des Acts, who directed him to Varade, Rector of the Jesuites Colldge, who confirmed him in his Resolution to kill the King; assuring h m that in case he were put to death, he should obtain in Heaven a Crown of Martyrdom; and adjuring him unto this Action,
upon the Sacrament of Confession, and to Holy Communion. And (omitting many Actions of Jesuites, both at home, and abroad, to prove their damnable Doctrine) he concludes with Garnet, Hall, and others of the Sect, who were Complices in that Pow∣dr-Treason which was practised to ruine the King, and the whole Estates of Eng∣land.
In the end, he seeks to prove by many pregnant presumptions, that the Jesuites are guilty of the Murther. First, by an Advertisement sent from M. de la force, the Kings Lievtenant in Bearn, that a Spaniard, described by him was come into France with an intent to kill the King; which Spaniard was brought unto the King by Cotton; but the King having received these Letters, shewed them to Cotton, and commanded him to bring the Spaniard again, but he could not be found.
2. Secondly, the seditious Preaching of Gontier, and Hardy, both Jesuites, the Lent before the Fact was committed; insomuch that the Marshal D'Ornano told the King, that if Gontier had Preached so at Bourdeaux, he would have caused him to be cast into the River; and yet he was as very Zealous Catholick.
3. Thirdly, the Confession of Ravilliac, who justified unto Father Aubigny, that he had told him in Confession, that he had been sent to give a great blow, and that he had shewed him the Knife, having a heart graven upon it; But the Jesuit protested, That God had given him the grace to forget that presently which was revealed to him in Confession; whereby he saved his Life.
And last of all, the Predictions before the Kings death as at Bruxelles, it was spoken of twelve, or fifteen days before it happened. At Prague, it had been given out, that the King was dead, before it fell out so; and moreover, it was told them, that after his death the Daulphin should not be King, but the King of Spain; and that for some reasons, which Gontier gave in his Sermons in Lent last; and then the Prediction of the Provost of Pluviers, that the King was either slain or hurt that day. He was a Jesuit in Faction, and had a Son a Jesuit.
To conclude, I think it not amiss to say something concerning the first General Council that ever was in the Church of Christ; you have the whole Story of it in the 15 Chap. of the Acts of the Holy Apostles; I shall take notice, that it was not called by the particular direction of any of the Apostles, but that all of them did con∣cur thrunto; and this was, doubtless, the Method of the Christian Church, during it's greatest Purity and Integrity; and the truth is, no other way could be used, while the Church of Christ was under Persecution: but in process of time, when supreme powers did receive, and protect the Christian Faith; and that (as the Scripture saith,) Kings and Queens were Nursing Fathers, and Nursing Mothers, of the Spouse of Christ; then were General Councils summon'd by them, and by them were these Councils left to their free De∣bates and determinations; whose Decrees were afterwards confirm'd by the Supreme Au∣thorities, whereby those Decrees, which before such a Confirmation did only oblige the Conscience, had then the Coercive Power of the State to compel their Observation; and this Method did continue, till the Ʋsurpation of the Bishop of Rome upon all Powers, both Civil and Ecclesiastical; for he now takes upon him to assume unto himself the power of calling Councils, of presiding in them, and Confirming their Decrees; saying, that with∣out His Confirmation, they are invalid. Thus does he make his own Will to be of more Autho∣rity than a General Council; and this same Will of his to be Superior to all Supreme Powers and Authorities whatsoever: But I shall add no more upon this Subject, but proceed to what
I at first proposed in the beginning hereof; where I shall take notice of some things in the 15th Chap. of the Acts of the Holy Apostles, where we read of the first General Council that ever was in the Church of Christ; (and therefore most likely to be a direction for all others.) It was occasioned by an Appeal made by some Converted Gentiles, to this General Council; for some Pharisaical Christians would impose upon these Converted Gentiles the whole Law of Moses; therefore to this General Council they do appeal; the words of the Council are these. — The Apostles, and Elders, and Brethren send Greeting unto the Brethren which are of the Gentiles in Antioch,Ver. 23. of this 15. Chap. and Syria, and Cilicia.
24. Forasmuch as We have heard, that certain which went out from us, have troubled You with Words subverting Your Souls; saying, Ye must be Circumcised, and keep the Law, to whom We gave no such Commandment:
25. It seemed good unto Us, being Assembled with one accord, to send chosen Men unto You, with our beloved Barnabas and Paul.
26. Men that have hazarded their Lives for the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
27. We have sent therefore Judas, and Silas, who shall also tell you the same things by word of mouth.
28. For it seemed good to the Holy-Ghost, and to us, to lay upon You no greater Burthen, than these necessary things.
29. That Ye abstain from Meets offered to Idols, and from Blood, and from things Strangled, and from Fornication; from which if ye keep your selves, ye shall do well; fare ye well.
These be the words together; We shall now take them into parts. — The Apostles, and Elders, and Brethren, [There is no Primacy in St. Peter, or in any body else; either first, as to calling this Council; or Secondly, In degree it self; or Thirdly, by way of Confirming this Decree of the Council; Apostles, Elders, and Brethren, are all alike concerned;] Send Greet∣ing, unto the Brethren, which are of the Gentiles in Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia. [Now here I cannot but take notice, that the Church of Jerusalem treats the Churches of Antioch, &c. not with a Maternal, but a Fraternal Appllation; not like the Church of Rome, (cer∣tainly if ever any had been the Mother-Church, it must have been that of Jerusalem, St. Pe∣ter, and all the rest of the Apostles; yea, even a General Council there residing,) which makes her self the Mother-Church, and all others she will have to be esteemed but Her Children; and yet in this General Council St. Peter was present, as appears by the 7. Verse of this 15. Chap. and yet St. Peter does not pronounce any Judgement; contenting himself rather with relating matter of Fact; and Paul and Barnabas do the same, as it is Ver. 11. But the A∣postle St. James proceeds further in Ver. 13.14.15.16.17.18. and in the 19. Ver. is very bold, saying: — Wherefore my sentence is, that we trouble not them which from a∣mong the Gentiles are turned to God; — and Ver. 20. He proceeds. — But that we [here St. James is equal with St. Peter, or any of the rest] write unto them, that they ab∣stain from pollutions of Idols, and from Fornication, and from things strangled, and from Blood; — And to this Sentence of St. James the whole Council acquiesces, not any one speak∣ing after St. James; [— Forasmuch as certain which went out from us, have troubled you with words subverting your Souls, saying, Ye must be Circumcised, and keep the Law, to whom We, not St. Peter alone] gave no such Commandment, it seemed good unto Ʋs, being assembled with one accord; [This Council you see was not called by St. Peter alone,] to send chosen men unto You, with our beloved Barnabas and Paul, Men that have hazarded their Lives for the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ; We have sent therefore Judas,
and Silas, who shall also tell you the same things by word of Mouth; for it seemed good to the Holy-Ghost, and to Ʋs; [you see the Holy-Ghost is not tyed to St. Peter's, or the Pope's Chair, nor the Colledge of Cardinals, but remaining with the General Council;] To lay upon you no heavier burthen than these necessary things, that ye abstain from Meats offer'd to Idols, from Blood, and from things strangled, and from Fornication; [all this, the Sentence of, and Opinion of St. James delievered to the Council, and thus ap∣proved of by the Council,] from which if ye keep your selves, ye shall do well; fare ye well.
