



SIRS,
SEeing at last you have taken such an ef∣fectual Course to oblige me to com∣ply with your Requests, in making this Sermon public; (which was the far∣thest thing from my Thoughts, when I pen'd and preach'd it,) I am sorry that I resisted your Importunities so long, because, That which at first chiefly commended this Discourse, I mean the Seasonableness of it, is much worn off since it was deliver'd.
Not but that the Subject of it, Commu∣tative Justice, will ever be Seasonable, and the just Balance always in Fashion, but the ill Occasion which has of late so busily em∣ploy'd
it, and so foully corrupted it, is now de∣clining and far spent.
It is well for us that it is so; for we have labour'd too long under the mortifying Effects of Corrupt Practices, those especially relating to the Coin, and the Balance.
To prevent, and put a stop to the growing Corruptions of this latter, was the Design of this Composure; and, I thank God, I had my End in Preaching it, beyond what I cou'd hope for: I wish you may have yours in Publishing it, viz. that it may be an acceptable Moni∣tor to all Tradesmen, that it may excite them effectually to Resist the Impulse of Covetous Af∣fections, That the treacherous Dealer may deal no more Treacherously, nor the Land tremble and mourn for Fraud and Oppres∣sion.
What Occasion there is, and of late has been for Discourses of this Nature, I need not say; nor wou'd I seem to lay this as a particular In∣dictment against this Parish. The kind Enter∣tainment that this plain Sermon has generally
found among you, purely for the sake of Justice, is an evident Proof of your Love of that Vertue.
I am bound to thank you for the exceeding Good-will with which you receiv'd it, and for your Respect and Kindness, which I know you intended me, in your repeated Wishes that it might be made Public: But indeed you have no reason to thank me for my forced Obe∣dience.
I shall ever readily obey you in any Instance relating to my Calling, and limited within my Compass, but when you wou'd oblige me to launch out beyond my Bounds, and incur the Hazard of public Censure, you must give me leave to dispute your Commands. I am not so well assur'd of the Charitable Construction of Others, as I am of Yours.
However, You stand hereby engaged to be ac∣countable for this Adventure: And, for my part, I shall concern myself no further then to accom∣pany it with my Prayers, that it may have the same good Effect upon others that it had upon you, and in all Temptations be a Remembran∣cer
to you of the Sacred Rules and Measures of Justice.
And now, my Brethren, may the Blessing of God upon your just Dealing, make, or rather continue, you a prosperous People; and may all your Kindness to me find its Reward in the hap∣py Success of the Ministry of,
GENTLEMEN,

