


MY LORDS;
THer's a Time for every thing under the Sunne, and if any; for to bee abrupt and breife in ever, tis NOW when Time so precious is with your Lordships: under the Sunne
there is nothing but a supernaturall Course to be taken, Touching the Cure of such un∣naturall condition'd Times: The Almightie his VVord the only Balme then, and Sove∣raigne remedy when ye have tryd all: If any therefore doe amisse and miscarry of you. Blame your selves none but the Parliament: For I shall of no little Burthen discharge my selfe here who can but say, and tell you. I have a receipt of such rare opperation and vertue given me; That within few dayes it shall bring Him againe to Himself, I meane the KING; after absent so long from his Parliament: whose Character if ye please to observe; This is his:
He that no Chaines could binde him, (Marke Evangelist the 5th.) That had been often bound with fetters and with Chaines pluck'd assunder by him. And the fetters broken in pieces, neither
could by any man be tamed; as much to say, neither Oath, nor word, or promise availing, or any reason of force to parswade with Him, as the Holy Ghost speaking plaine: by that adjuring in Gods Name; and by asking his Name too, saying, LEGION, for they were many, who spake not with the Lest: Neverthelesse, not more feirce then fearefull of the Lords com∣ming, this man wounding himself thus.
And thus have made tender unto your Lordships, Of my service, whether or no yee accept thereof: for to bring His Majestie to you, Setting as afore time cloath'd, &c. And doing withall what Ye shall aske or de∣sire. As for the Caveliers what They shall doe all of them, even crave a Passe here, to take Shipping for the Low-Countries, and Germanie to be gone away; the Boors will entertaine them willingly, St. Matt: the 8.
gives Notice of two, so exceeding feirce that none might passe by that way, to wit, that Dutch Duke, or Prince possessed with an uncleane Spirit, out of his VVITS; he to returne also without delay Home againe, beyond Sea.

1642. The 3d. of January.

The Holy Ghosts New-yeares-gift.

