



My LORD,
IT was one of the most prudent Actions of Virgil's Life, to bestow the fruits of his admired Genius, and prostrate the Labours of his Honoured Muse at the feet of a more Honoured, Witty, and Learned Patron; for Mecaenas was a Man of an unbiass'd, impartial, and generous nature; and knew as well how to Judge and Applaud an Ex∣cellent Poem, as the Poet himself knew how to write what was fit to be Applauded.
This therefore causes our Modern Authors (instructed by his Wife Example) to make an humble offering of their Works to the most de∣serving and knowing Men of the Age; cunningly implying, That as they have most Wit and Judgment to find out their faults, they have also most modesty and good nature to excuse 'em.
Amongst this tribe, my Lord, I must humbly confess my self one, and acknowledge these two Reasons for my presumption: First, A secret pride to have my Play grac'd with the great Name of the Honoured Berkeley, lineally descended (for many Ages past) from the Royal Blood of the Illustrious Harding; and thence flowing through the veins of One and twenty Noble Families, to the Honours he now deservedly wears, and which his Sacred Majesty could not more justly bestow. And, secondly, to be impartially Judg'd, by a person who knows as well how to write, as to atronize.

Your Lordship did me once the favour to present me a little book of your own Writing, Entituled, Historical Applications, &c. where he that reads may find an exact serenity of Fancy, a vivacity of Wit, a refin'd Elegance in Language, and observe it to be adorn'd with certain Jems of Morality and Divinity, and other maxims of Rational Wisdom, and true Collections of History, that render it a piece fit to be admired by the most Wife and Learned, and lov'd by the most Re∣ligious and Loyal.
I make this little digression my Lord, not out of any insolent belief, that I am fit to commend either the Book, or its Author, for that be∣longs to a far better Genius and Pen, but only out of an impatient de∣sire to do my self Justice in applauding you, though 'tis impossible I should do you any.
Sola virtus vera Nobilitas, is a Maxim in which Seneca and your Lordship fully agree; for would any man be Pious and Morally good, let him make you his pattern; would he be bless'd with a sweet, benign, and modest disposition, and show a perfect Character of true Nobility, unsway'd by the powerful vices, Pride and Folly, let him make you his pattern; Or would he be loyal and honest, a faithful lover of his King, and an unmovable Pillar of his Country, still let him Copy you, and make your Actions his Examples, you that had rather be Just than Popular; and had rather follow the dictates of a good conscience, than gain the service and applause of a numerous and potent party.
This, my Lord, is so great and undoubted a Truth, that with the most nice apprehensions 'tis impossible it should leave the least impression of flattery; that being a thing as difficult for me to do, as for you to endure; for all that know ye will say thus much; and therefore 'tis probable all that love ye will speak much more.
As to this Comedy, it had the Honour to please one party; and I am only glad, that the St. Georges of Eighty-one got a Victory over the old hissing Dragons of Forty-two; 'tis a good Omen, and I hope portends future successes, though some fat Whiggs of Sir Barnaby's tribe made all the interest they could to cry it down.
My Lord, 'tis not only a nice, but a very difficult thing to write a good Comedy, and therefore a tolerable one should be the more excu∣sable; for there is not only Wit, but Plot, Invention, and a quick and ingenious fancy requir'd: Fancy! the brightest Jewel of Poetry, of which the Famous English Spencer was the great and only Master,
 as we may see in all his Descriptions, but more particularly in his Legend of Temperance, when he speaks of Mammon or Covetous∣ness.


At last he came into a gloomy Glade,
Cover'd with Bows and Shrubs from Heavens light;
Whereas he sitting, found in secret shade,
And uncouth salvage and uncivil wight;
Of greizly heiw, and fowl ill-favour'd sight,
His Head and Beard with Soot were ill bedight.
His Cole black hands did seem to have bin sear'd
In Smiths fire, spitting forge, and nails like Claws appear'd.



And round about him lay, on every side,
Great heaps of Gold, that never could be spent;
Of which some were rude Ore not purified
Of Mulciber's devouring Element.
Some others were new driven, and distent
Into great Ingots, and to Wedges square;
Some in round Plates withouten Monument.
But most were stampt, and in their Mettal bare,
The antick shapes of Kings and Kezars strange and rare.

But this is a sort of Poetry of a different nature from Drama∣ticks; and therefore the fancy must of necessity vary, because in one it is digested into Characters, that are to speak before a carping Au∣dience: and in the other, perhaps, only to be read or spoken of before one or two persons. But suppose the fancy to be good, that will not now serve turn; for in this Age 'tis not a Poets Merit, but his Party that must do his business; so that if his Play consists of a Witch, a Devil, or a Broomstick, so he have but a Priest at one end of the Play, and a Faction at 'tother end of the Pit, it shall be fam'd for an excellent piece. And the Mobile either encouraged by their Grandees, or treated by the Poet, shall throng to it with as much zeal, as they once
 did to the Committee, when the scale was turn'd, and Loyalty began to come in fashion.
This, my Lord, is the World, and the Worlds Nature; but you, I may boldly say, value Merit for its own sake, and not through interest, or to please a faction, you will not hiss or clap a Play in the wrong place, nor use an Arbitrary Power to carry a Cause by Popular Interest or Parties: I say you will not do this, and I wish all others were of your mind. But since they are not, your Lordships acceptance and patronizing of this Comedy, is the greatest Encouragement and Honour that can possibly happen to,
My LORD,

