


THE great complaint of the Poor, (the greater of the those that Maintain them) their constant increase, and the multitudes of Beggers and idle Vagabonds, to the great abuse of the Laws and Scandal of the Country, are Causes sufficient to excuse an Essay, in order to a Remedy, being the Duty of Parochal Officers. And the slender attempts of some of great Parts and Quality, is not so much a Discouragement, as Grounds for a more vigorous Onset, their Qualities for the most Part being too great, and their Notions too high, for so low a Subject.
Our Chronicles tell us, that about 800 Years since, when after a long War, the Country abounded with Thiefs and Robbers, and other idle and disorderly Persons. By King Alfreds dividing the Kingdom into Shires, Hundreds and Tythings, a Boy or Girl, might openly Travel with a Bag of Gold and Silver, and carry it safely all the Country over. If neglect, or the length of time have attracted some Rust on the Officers of Tythings and Parishes, Yet there are many Laws made since that time, which if duly put in Execution, would soon rub it off, and whilest the first Institution of one of them, had such good effects, their In∣formation would have much better, seeing 'tis easier to Improve than Invent.
Many who seem Well-wishers to an attempt for the better Imploy∣ing and Relieving the Poor, say there must be a Stock, a large House, &c. And withall do not forget to add, that the Stock as well as House, require a great Charge in Raising, hazard and care in intrusting and Managing, and thence conclude they will abide by the harm they have, and not leap from the Frying-Pan to the Fire. Indeed, were those Affairs duly Considered, a good Stock
might be well Imployed that way; and yet I must crave leave to ob∣serve, That a bundle of Cords is not so soon broken as one, nor a disorderly Crew, when brought together, so easily Reformed as when singled out and seperated from contagious Company.
In some places, a Publick Stock seems so necessary, that a fit Provi∣sion for the Poor cannot be made. But in Devon, and many other Countries, there are Tradesmen in or near every Parish, who have Stocks already, wheron they Imploy all that are willing to Work, and can, and would, for their own as well as the Publick Intrest, Imploy more, if more orderly Persons might be had. Therefore here is no great need of more Stocks, but of reforming the looser sort, so as to make them honestly industrious, and how that may be done by legall Discipline, without Arbitrary Severity, is the design of this Paper, which is humbly submitted to your Consideration and Cor∣rection, by the unworthiest of your Servants.
Jan. 27. 1697/8.

