


THese Mournful Lines (my dear Eliza) were Writ o'er thy Grave (whilest I was a Widower) and are now Dedi∣cated to thy Pious Name, as a Memorial of our Constant Love. As for the—Essay— Annex'd, 'twas Writ presently after thy Death, to mitigate my Sorrow for it, which is in some part Justified by the greatness of my Loss, in being separated, after so long Con∣versation, from so kind a Wife. 'Tis no wonder that Phil. who Lov'd thee so much on Earth, shou'd attempt to Prove,
He shall know thee again in Heaven.
We are taught by the Holy Scriptures, That Love is strong as Death; and that the Love of Christ to his Church, who gave Himself to the Death for her, is proposed to Christian Husbands as a Pattern of Love to their Wives.
 He lov'd his Church with an Everlasting love, and so must I thy Memory, my Dearest, while I continue to be, and think. It is no more possible to rob my Soul of thine Idea, than to deprive it of its Immortality; Death, which hath made a Separation betwixt our Bodies, is not able to Separate our Souls; thou wast lovely and pleasant to me in thy Life, and therefore can'st not be divided from me by thy Death; though the unspeakable Joys where∣of thou art now made Partaker, make thee ig∣norant of me, because thou art wholly taken up with Transports of Heavenly Love. If it were otherwise, I am sure thy Happiness could not be compleat 'till thy other half were also Transported into Heaven. I don't envy thee, though I groan also to be delivered from this Earthly Tabernacle, which hinders me from partaking of Heavenly Society with thee, which if I may make bold to say so, makes Heaven it self the more desirable to me.
But for that, I must stay 'till the Decree of the Eternal take effect, and therefore seeing thy place here on Earth knows thee no more, that I can no more enjoy sweet Communion with thee, 'till we meet in Heaven. I have no other Relief at present, but to refresh and torment my self at the same time with the remem∣brance of thy Virtues. Did Religion allow any Sacrifice to thy Shrine, or Adoration at thy Tomb, my head-strong Affection would push me on to it; but that isWe are sure there is neither Com∣mand, Exam∣ple, or Promise in all the Scri∣pture to encou∣rage us to make our Application to the Saints departed. Mr. Rogers's Dis∣courses of Sick∣ness and Re∣covery, p. 79. reserv'd for Him alone who is the Author of our Being, and blessed me with such a
 Meet-help, as I found thee always to be, till the arrival of that fatal Moment which made the cruel Separation. I call it so, as 'twas my frequent Wish, we might expire in each others Arms, that we might imitate herein the Mayor of Litomentias's Daughter; who leaping into the River where her Husband was drown'd, she clasped him about the Middle, and expires with him in her Arms; and what is very re∣markable, they were found the next day em∣bracing one another. The same Instance we have in the Captain and his Wife, who were last Week cast away in the Tilt-boat; for they were taken up so closely Lock'd in each others Arms, that 'twas hard to part them. Thus had Heaven seen it meet, that as we were Vnited in our Life, we shou'd not have been Divided in our Death; it would have per∣fum'd the Arrow of Mortality to me, and made that King of Terrors a King of Pleasures. But thou wast Riper for Everlasting Joy, and therefore sooner transported thither, and I must not repine. For those whom God hath joyn'd together, no Man must put asunder; yet when he that made the Union makes the Separation, there's no saying What doest Thou?
Yet the Holy Spirit which hath taught us, that the Righteous shall be had in Everlasting Remembrance, will not be offended if I perpe∣tuate thy Memory to my self, and carry the
 Idea of thy Vertues constantly in my Mind, that I may do nothing unworthy of my better half, which is in Glory, as I have read was the Practise of a certain Great Person, who constantly carried his Father's Picture about him, that he might not do any thing unworthy of such a Progenitor. I shall imitate this Example, by always carrying this Essay in my Pocket, to Re-mind me daily of that Pattern you set me, and as a Memento I shall see thee again, which I can't but passionately de∣sire, as I enjoy'd both Worlds in Dear Eliza; and were I to wed again (and this I speak after Ten Years Tryal) I'd preferr thy self to the Richest Nymph (God saw thee mostThis was the Posie of our Wedding Ring. fit for me) and I cou'd not find such another, had I a thousand Advisers, and as ma∣ny Worlds to range in, to please my Eye and Fancy. Thus you find (if you Saints above know what's done below) how constant my Love is, and that even in Death it self you can die but half, whilst I am preserved. And tho you're gone to Heaven before me, yet I hope I shall speedily follow after
Thither, Eliza, will my Soul pursue,
When I like you have bid the World adieu:
There, if my Innocence I still retain,
My Dear Eliza, I shall Clasp again.
And there, when Death shall stop her Pious Race,
With a more Charming and Angelick Face,
I shall behold theWitness Her Ingenious Answers to the Letters I sent Her about the Miseries of Humane Life. Matchless Daphnes Face:

(And when, dear Friend, so near to Bliss you be,
Remember Cloris, and remember me.)
But cou'd the Fair Eliza see me mourn,
From that Bless'd Place she wou'd perhaps return.
But vain, alas! are my Complaints, thou'rt gone,
And left me in this Desert World Alone:
For ah! deprived my dearest Life of Thee;
The World is all a Hermitage to me.
Let ev'ry thing a sadder Look put on;
Eliza's Dead, the lov'd Eliza's gone.
Philomelas Poems. p. 53.
What a melancholly thing does the World now appear? However, Eliza, I can retire to God and my own Heart, whence no Malice, Time, or Death, can banish thee. The Variety of Beauty and Faces I have seen since thy Death, tho they are quick. Ʋnder-miners of Constancy in others, to me are but Pillars to support it, since they then please me most when I most think of you. I've grav'd thy Virtue so deep in my Breast, (as is seen in the following Essay, sent to our Friend Ignotus) that 'twill near out, till I find the Original in the other World. Don't think, My Dear, that Con∣jugal Affection can be dissolved by Death. The Arms of Love are long enough to reach from Earth to Heaven; Fruition and Possession principally appertain to the Imagination; If we enjoy nothing but what we touch, we may say farewell to the Money in our Closets, and to our Friends when they go to Agford. Part us, and you kill us; nay, if we wou'd we cannot part; Death, 'tis true, may divide
 our Bodies, but nothing else, and scarce that: For (to use your Words, whilst alive) We may on Earth lawfully please our selves with Hopes of meeting hereafter, and in lying in the same Grave, where we shall be happy together, if a senceless Happiness can be call'd so. But sup∣pose Death shou'd part our Bodies, yet we have Souls to be sure; and whilst they can meet and carress one another, we may enjoy each other, were we the length of the Map asunder.
Thus we may double Bliss, stoln Love enjoy,
And all the spight of Place and Friends defie:
For ever thus we might each other bless,
For none cou'd trace out this new Happiness;
No Argus here to spoil, or make it less.
'Tis not (properly) Absence, when we can see one another, as to be sure we shall, tho in a State of Separation.
'For sight of Spirits is unprescrib'd by Space,
'What see they not who see the Eternal Face?
Vid. P. 54. in the Essay.
The Eyes of the Saints shall out-see the Sun, and behold without Perspective the extreamest distances; for if there shall be in our Glorified Eyes the Faculty of Sight and Re∣ception of Objects (as I prove to Ignotus there shall) I cou'd think the visible Species there to be in as unlimitable a way as now the Intellectual. St. Augustine tells us, The Saints of God, even with the Eyes of their Bodies closed up, (as now Yours are) shall see all things not only pre∣sent,
 but also that from which they are Corporally absent; for then shall be the Perfection, whereof the Apostle saith, we Prophesie but in part, then the Imperfect shall be taken away. Whither this be so I cannot say (tho you know who have shot the Gulf) yet sure I am that nothing can de∣prive me of the Enjoyment of thy Vertues, while I enjoy my self: Nay, I have sometimes made good use of my Separation from thee, we bet∣ter fill'd, and farther extended the Possession of our Lives, in being parted, you lived, re∣joyced, and saw for me, and I for you, as plainly, as if you had your self been there.
The World may perhaps censure this as a piece of Flattery, or at least as the Fruit of unwarrantable Passion; but had they known thy Worth as I did, they would not pre∣sume so much as to blame me. The Letter you sent mePrinted in Mr. Turner's History of Remarmable Providences, p. 146. in your last Sickness shews thou'rt above Praise, I'll insert it here as a Proof of this, and as a Pattern for other Wives. Thy Letter's this. Viz.

I received (my Dearest) thy obliging Letter, and thankfully own, that tho God has exercised me with a long and languishing Sickness, and my Grave lies in view, yet he hath dealt tenderly with me; so that I find by Experience no Compassions are like those of a God. 'Tis true, I have scarce Strength to answer your Letter; but see∣ing you desire a few Lines, to keep as a Memorial of our Constant Love, I'll attempt
 something, tho (by reason of my present Weakness) I can write nothing worth your Reading.
First then, As to your Character of me, (Love blinds you;) for I don't deserve it, but am pleased to find you enjoy (by the help of a strong Fancy) that Happiness, which I can't (tho I wou'd) bestow. But Opinion is the rate of things; and if you think your self happy, you are so. As to my self, I have met with more and greater Comforts in a Marry'd State, than ever I did expect. But how cou'd it be other∣wise, when Inclination, Interest, and all that can be desired, concur to make up the Har∣mony? From our Marriage till now, thy Life has been one continued Act of Courtship, and sufficiently upbraids that Indifference which is found among Married People. Thy Concern for my present Sickness (tho of long Continuance) has been so Remarkably tender, that were it but known to the World, 'twould (once more) bring into Fashion Mens loving their Wives. Thy WILL alone is a Noble Pattern for o∣thers to Love by; and is such an Original Piece as will ne'er be equall'd. I next come to consider the Imprudence of — where I must say, I am so far from blam∣ing your Conduct, that I admire the Greatness of your Conjugal Love, (in that very Particular) which shewed it self to be like the Apple of the Eye, which is disturbed with the least Dust. But, my Dear, be concern'd at nothing; for I am pleased
 with all you say or do, and have such a Kindness for you, that I dread the Thoughts of surviving thee, more than I do those of Death. Cou'd you think I'd marry again, when it has been one great Comfort under all my Languishments, to think I should die first, and that I shall live in him, who, ever since the happy Ʋnion of our Souls▪ has been more dear to me than Life it self? —
I shall only add my hearty Prayer, That God wou'd bless you both in Soul and Body; and that when you die, you may be convey'd by the Angels into Abraham's Bosom; where I hope you'll find


This Letter shews what a Wife thou wert, and justifies this Address, but to shew thy Piety was the same in Health as on a Sick-bed, I'll trace thy Life from the Cradle to the Grave. And here, when I remember you Unmarried in your Father's Family, in your Blooming Years, and Flaming Piety. How does it pierce my Soul with fresh pangs of my first Love, and sometimes transports me so far with the Thoughts of my Beloved Object, that I am ready to forget I have lost her, and willing to indulge my self, as Men do in a Dream, that they actually are in Possession of that which they admire; but when I come to my self again, and consider that I have lost thee, the Thoughts of thy Excellency renders me inconsolable.

Again, when I reflect on the Love of our Espousals, our Mutual Affection and En∣dearments, [which many Waters couldWhen I went beyond Sea I gave Eliza a Ring with this Inscription, Cant. 8.7. not quench] nor distance of Place di∣minish; I fancy my self in the midst of Greater Pleasures than the Poets ever fancied in their Elisian Fields, My old Joys begin to revive, and their Fruit is sweet to my Taste; but when I consider that God hath poured out such a bitter Cup to me, as the depriving me of one half of my Soul, I am not able to contain my self, nor to express my Grief.
In the next place, when I think on the Sweets I enjoyed by thy Excellent Society, who didst prefer before all things the pleasing of God and thy Husband. I am unwilling to be diverted from such a delightful Subject of Contemplation, but like the Men in a Dream, who is pleased for a while with his fancied Enjoyment of things delicious to his Palate: Naure will not be so put off, tho the Imagination may; but presently convinces him that his Enjoyment is but a Dream, and that his Body must needs have a more substantial Support; so my real Want of that Happiness, which I formerly enjoy'd, quickly renews my Grief, and redoubles my Desires to be where thou art.
Should it be my Fate to be engaged again in another Marriage, which my Inclinations are at present wholy averse from, because I think it utterly impossible for me ever to
 find such another as thy self, who wert a Meet-help for me of Gods own providing; but should it, I say, be my Fate to draw again in a Matrimonial Yoke, and meet with one of a Temper opposite to thine, I should look upon it as one of the Greatest Plagues that ever befel a Man, Yet this one Comfort, it should, in spite of ill Nature, afford me; that is to say, It would be a Foil to set off thy Vertue with so much the Greater Iustre; and as it is impossible for me ever to Race thy Idea out of my Soul, tho God knows whether a Se∣cond Marriage, may not be made necessary for me by his Providence, as it is lawful for me by his Word; but if it should be so, it must necessarily be a piercing Grief to me, and that also more sensible than to another Man, if I should meet with one of a Cross Nature after one of thy Mild Temper; and tho the Sence of my Duty will never suffer me to be unjust, yet Heav'n will pardon me if I cannot express so much Kindness to her as I did to thee; for when a Man's House all on a sudden is turn'd from a Family of Love to a meer Billings∣gate, it may be allow'd to alter his Natural Temper (for a kind Wife makes a kind Hus∣band) neither can such Alteration detract from his Kindness to his first Wife, or to a Third; shou'd he marry so often, which will scarce be my Fate, my Design being to imitate the Primitive Widows, who wou'd not hear of a Second Husband. If we look back into anci∣ent Times we find there was hardly a Wi∣dow among the Primitive Christians that com∣plain'd of Solitariness, or sought Comfort in a
 Second Marriage. Second Marriage then was counted little better than Adultery.Dr, Horneck's Lives of the Pri∣mitive Christi∣ans. I think they carry'd this Point too high, tho I must say, Second Marriages (for the most part) are a sort of Who bids most; for my own Share I am such an Ene∣my to 'em, that I question whether I shall ever be brought to draw again in the Con∣jugal Yoke. 'Tis said by one of the Rabbins concerning Methusalah's Wife, that she had Nine Husbands in one for Age and Years, so I may say of thee that I had Nine Wives in thee alone, for Matrimonial Sweetness and Love, and have no need to marry a Tenth.— 'Tis true, the World is a Desert without the So∣ciety of Women, and my self no Enemy to 'em (as Argus thinks) but for all that they are [ay that they are] dan∣gerous things to meddle with, especially [for better for worse] whatsoever Gold one bestows upon Fetters, and how Glorious so∣ever Servitude may be, yet I perswade my self, for all the Glittering Shew, that Shackles and Slavery are but a couple of bad Masters, and therefore will dance no more to the Musick of Fetters (except Phoenix like) from thy Ashes a New Eliza could arise, and then I can't say what I might do; for I love to look on thy Image, tho but in a Friend or Picture, and shall ever receive thy Kindred with honourable Mention of thy Name.— Then no wonder (now you are dead) if I
 live and pine like the constantAs is men∣tion'd in the following Essay. Turtle — Thy Love deserves a great deal more. King Charles the I. told his Queen that he had never strayed from her, either in Thought, Word, or Deed, and I am apt to believe him, for I am such a Platonick my self, as never to touch the Lip or Hand of a Lewd VVoman, and as much a∣verse to a Second Marriage; Now Eli∣za's Dead I shall fly the Sex in general; there's Pitch and Birdlime in their Lips and Fingers an Itch of Amourousness of Skin all over; Democrates put his Eyes out, to avoid the Sight of 'em:—These Patterns I design to imitate, for thy Love was that Nonsuch Love we were prest to in our Wedding Ser∣mon; and I must add, (as the unknown A∣riadne told Leander)
— Thou art much above
The Vulgar World in Sence as well as Love.
This was thy true Character, and I knew it too, which are two Blessings that seldom go together; but Miracles are ceased, and I must not expect such another. We find the First Man Adam, the Righteous Lot, the Meek Moses, the Philosopher Crates, and the Ora∣tor Cicero, were all either over-reach'd or afflicted with Women; and I am not so stu∣pid to think I should meet with a better Fate, or find a Second Wife that can match the First.

But shou'd I marry again, and meet with a Shrew— The General Pity— I shou'd have from those that knew how well thee and I lived, wou'd not be Vindication enough, I'd therefore (in my own Defence) write—A Parallel 'tween a good and a bad Wife, and prove (by a Narrative of her Carriage ev'ry day) that as a Ver∣tuous Woman is a Crown to her Husband,Prov. 12.4. so she that makes ashamed is as Rot∣tenness in his Bones— But God forbid I shou'd meet with one, whose Folly shou'd urge me to this (for 'tis nothing but what's unsufferable shall ever do it) but if I shou'd I'd lay the Saddle on the right Horse, and clear my Innocence in the Face of the Sun. If this works her Conversion, That's the Thing I drive at.
Oh! with what Joy wou'd I receive the Re∣turning Prodigal!
But this Happiness I can't expect, for I am pretty sure (from an Instance in our Street) that the most Soft, Constant, and exact Hu∣mourings, wont cure a Grumbling Wife, or a Scraping Miser; such (having no other Cause for their Discontent) will quar∣rel with their good Fortune, and suffer even Happiness it self to disappoint them; I am told, Eliza, that the kinder I am to such a Wife (if 'tis my Fate to have her) the deeper she'll bite; and if I oppose her she'll rave, that she'll make my very Love the Cause of her Hatred, or the occasion of some
 Mean-reflection,— A Prudent Wife (a) is from the Lord,Prov. 19.14. but such a Spirit is from the Devil; should such a one be my fate (I mean a Devil in Petty-coats) what must I do (for I am but Flesh and Blood, and tho I can bear long, can't bearThe Protestant Mercury (Feb. 23. 1897) tells us, that an Ale-draper near Barnet, having the continual plague of a Scolding Wife, cut his own Throat last Sunday, chu∣sing rather to destroy himself, than to live with such a Contentious Woman. always?) I hope you'd send some stout Angel to tame her; I know you will if you can, but if not permitted, the Lord give me Patience, and when overwhelmed, lead me to the Rock that is higher than I (Psal. 61.2.) But methinks I hear thee reply, why (Phil.) are you averse to a second Marriage? for suppose you shou'd meet with a Brawling Zantip∣pe (where you expected a kind Wife) yet you know Disappointments are good sometimes; besides 'tis your own fault, If which Socrates, You don't learn more by a Scolding Wife, than by all the precepts of Philosophy. Consider, Phil. no man had all he desired in this Life, then if you marry again (as I desired you wou'd on my Death-bed) whether Spouse be good or bad,
In that state be happy and rejoyce,
Which either is thy fate, or was thy choice. If your Wife be good, you'll be ready to fol∣low this advice, but if bad, consider,
(1.) That God hath a special hand in this Affliction, he made the Match in Heaven before it was made on Earth, and therefore is to be eyed in all the consequences that at∣tend 

(2.) Consider tho this be a sharp Trial, yet it is for good where it is sanctified; a Furious Wife perhaps may drive you nearer to God, wean you from the World, keep you humble, and learn you to be piti∣ful to others.
Again consider, That tho this Cross be heavy, yet Patience and contentedness will make it lighter; the more the Beast strives the more the Yoke pinches him, the more quiet he is the less it hurts him. If this don't quiet your mind, then consider in the next place, that Death will soon put an end to this Cross, it won't be long before you must come to your Dear Eliza, the thoughts of which (I'm very sure) will make death wel∣come to Phil. and support him under all vexa∣tions. But if it does not, consider in the last place, you may ease your mind with thinking, all is righteously ordered by God, and therefore all must be content∣edly undergone by you. Read Dr. Jacmob'sIn the supplement to the Morning Exercise. Sermon, ('tas given your Eliza great Relief) and there you'l find how Christians may learn in every state to be content.
Answ. This is kind advice (My Dear) (and all of a piece with thy former love;) but shou'd I marry a Vixen after such a Wife as thou wert, I should scarce go further to seek a Grave. 'Tis true, I have heard of those that have weathered such a Point as this, that cou'd laugh faster than their Wives scolded, and that under all their GRINS, cou'd fit like
 Patience, smiling at Grief; and by this (con∣quest of themselves) got the Victory, but I am no Stoick! and much fear (tho the Heart is a tough thing) that I shou'd sink un∣der such a Plague, not but I have more to sup∣port me under such a Vexation than some I know; for it could not but be a very great satisfaction to me, that I attempted (as to be sure I should) to make a good Wife of a bad one; for this is to do my duty, which is its own reward, and the best preservative against mur∣muring, repining and dispair and perhaps a presage that God would cut down the Crab∣tree, or change its Qualities; and as it was in Job's case, make the latter end of my life more happy than the former. And who knows (my Dear) but the Sun that sets may rise again, and there may be one opportunity more of making happy your mournful Spouse, who lives (if he lives now you are dead?) on nought but Hopes.
And none can be unhappy, who,
'Mongst all his Ils, a Time does know,
Tho' nere so ill, when he shall not be so.
But I am weary of this Subject as much as I shou'd be of a continual dropping in a very rainy day, to which Solomon compares a con∣tentious Woman; for I am satisfied, that it is better to dwelt on a House top alone, than in the finest Palace with such a Companion (Prov. 21.9.) But my Dear Eliza fully Answers Solomon's Character in the 30th of Proverbs, and has had no Equal since the World
 began. If any come near thee, 'tis the witty Cloris (mentioned in this Essay) but shees an Angel grown, and won't be tied to a Clod of Earth, or if she wou'd, I'se too much a Platonick to tell her Twice I am flesh and blood; no my Dear, (tho the Re∣verend Plenipotentiary that appeared once is generous enough to appear twice) yet now you are gone, I can easily part with every thing; my leave now is soon taken of all but my self — never did any man bid adieu to the World more absolutely and purely, and shake hands with all Women in it, than I can do now thou art dead.
I love Eliza, 'cause she pleases me,
And therefore only pleases, 'cause 'tis she.
But I need not bring Arguments to prove I love you, seeing your charity for me (whilst on Earth) made you say, I out-lov'd every thing, and your self to Excess, (as you exprest it) if such a thing could be 'tween Man and Wife, But so much for Love and Wedlock first and second Marriages. I now return to the further contemplation of thy Vertues.
Thy Early Piety was nothing abated by thy Married Life: and to convince the World thou really wert that extraordinary Wife here∣after described, I'le insert here what I find in one of thy Diaries, it being the Rules you Writ whilst a Virgin, and which you pun∣ctually observed for the whole time I was married to you. Your words were these, viz.



FOr the Choice of a Husband, his Person shall be such as I can entirely love and de∣light in. His Humour, as near as I can judge, suitable to mine; so that we may delight in each others Company. I would not have him Hasty, nor Passionate, no not to others. A Com∣petency of Estate, so that we may live, and not be beholding to Friends, is all I desire: For I do not, nor never did reckon, that the Comforts of ones Life, will, or doth consist in having abun∣dance of the World. I would chiefly, and above all, have one that doth truly fear God; not only a Professor, but one that is seriously Godly, and whose chief Delight is, as near as I can judge, and learn by others, in the things of God. I will, if I can possibly, have my Judgment go before my Affection, in the Choice of a Hus∣band. If it please God my Parents live to see me married, I will not entertain any Dis∣course with any that I intend to marry, with∣out their consent and liking. If I am able to keep Servants, they shall be, as near as I can discover, and by enquiring, know of others, those that truly fear God; at least they shall be Civilized. As for Men-servants, if I should marry a Citizen, I shall think it
 my Duty, to let my Husband alone with them; but if he doth neglect his Duty to them, by not calling them to an Account, for the Sermons they hear, Reading, &c. If I can't per∣swade him to it, I shall then think I may, and must take some care of their Souls. As for Maids, I'll, before ever I hire them, tell them, they must go with me to hear at the same place I do; but if they are joyn'd with any others, then I'll let them go sometimes there, and sometimes with me. They shall give an Account of what they hear, until the Affairs of my Family are such that I can't do it; They shall read to me, at least, once a day; or else I'll ask them about their Reading: for I shall think it to be my Duty, when I take any into my Family, to take some care of their Souls, as well as for their Bodies, and to do all I can for their Souls good, by admonish∣ing them, and giving them all the good Coun∣cil I can, and giving all Encouragement I can in what is good. If they grow wicked and careless, and will not bear Reproof, I shall look upon it my Duty to change them, and not to mind what People say of my fre∣quent changing of Maids. David would not abide a Lyar in his sight: and I am sure that is most pleasing to God, to have, as near as I can, all in my Family that fear him, and delight in his ways. As for Children, if it please God to bless me with them, I shall look upon it to be my Duty, if I am able, to Nurse them my self▪ and to take all the care of them I can in their Infancy, and betimes to check the Buddings of Original Sin, by not
 encouraging of Revenge or Pride in them; and as soon as they are able to learn, to teach them their Catechism, and what is good; but so as not to tire them, but make it as plea∣sant to them as I can, by giving them all the Encouragement and Praise when they do well, and timely Correcting them when they do what is sinful.
As for my Carriage to my Husband, I shall reckon it both Prudence and my Duty, to study his Humour when we first come toge∣ther, and then to do all I can without sinning to please and oblige him, to obey him in all things that are not contrary to the Commands of God. — If I should light on one that is wicked, I'll endeavour what I can by my Car∣riage to engage his Affections throughly to me, and then to make use of that tye to engage him to God, and by my Christian Carriage to try what can be done to win him over to Christ by re∣proving of him with all Meekness, and acknow∣ledging my great Love to him, and that 'tis Love that makes me do it, and my desire of his being happy for ever. I shall reckon it my Duty, if I have a good Man, to be willing to learn of him, and to do what we can to engage each other more entirely to God, to make use of our Love to one another, to inflame our Souls with Love to Christ. — Being convinced from Scripture and Reason that 'tis my Duty to give to the Poor, I now resolve when I marry to give according to my ability. Tho' I cannot Resolve upon any Sum, yet I'll give according to my Ability. — When I make any Provisions that I'de have kept, I'll give some to all in the Family,
 that so I may not put 'em upon the Temptati∣on of Stealing. And as for other Victuals they shall have sufficient, but none to waste if I can help it. This is a thing that I hate for People to repeat my words after me: I will not therefore allow any under my care to do it; and if ever it please God that I keep Servants, I now resolve to endeavour to do my Duty towards them, though they should not do theirs towards me, and to en∣deavour conscientiosly to discharge my Duty towards all Relations; begging of God that he would now help me to do it: O that I could now do all with an Eye to God, and be wil∣ling always to be at his dispose in every thing.
My Dear, by these your Rules for rendring Marriage happy may not only be seen what a suitable Wife thou wert (for you fully pra∣ctised 'em,) but also the happy Effects of a regular course of Piety, for certainly never was there seen (on a Sick bed) a greater In∣stance of a willing Resignation to the Will of God as to either Life or Death. — You would often say to Philaret, Oh my Dear, tis a solemn thing to dye, but I can freely leave all the World but you, (and at saying so you would still burst out into Tears,) you would say at other times — Sickness is no time to prepare for Death, were my work now to do, I were undone for ever. — Neither Marriage, nor the troubles of it could make thee less serious than thou wert in thy Ver∣gin-state. Thou mad'st Conscience of taking care, that the Incumbrances of this World should not make thee neglect the weighty
 Duties relating to the other. Thy Kindness to other Relations was not diminished by a fond Affection to me at first, as is usual with other Young Brides, because thou didst look upon due kindness to thy Relations as an act of Duty to thy Maker, and their Gene∣rous Favours to me did mightily heighten your esteem for them.
Thy Closet was the Withdrawing-room wherein thou didst most delight, because there thou didst entertain Communion with Heaven; and many times when thou retiredst thither in sadness, thou camest out again re∣freshed.
Oh how it pierces my Soul to think I have lost such an Heavenly Companion, an Help∣meet indeed, not only as to the things of this World, but as to those of another? How Fervent were thy Prayers for my Self, and all thy other Relations, for the Church of God, and mankind in general?
How seasonable have I found thy directions to my self when under affliction? And how pow∣erful have I found thy Joint-prayers to our Common God and Saviour.
Thy Devotion had more of Seriousness than Pomp, and the Seasons of it many times stoln to avoid Ostentation, not like those fluttering Women, who will be sure to fre∣quent Publick-Prayers Morning and Evening, and hug their Prayer Books in their Hands as they walk the Streets, and tuffle them over in their Closets, without any thing else that looks like Religion in the whole Course of their Lives. Thy Closet was furnished with
 the HolyWherein thou hast marked a milion of re∣markable Texts. Bible and Practical Books, instead of Dead, Lifeless Formu∣laries, Play-Books and Romances.
When thou camest from thy Retirements, it was perceptible to thy Family that thou hadst been with God; thy first Visit in the Morning was to Heaven, and the sweet smell of that was not to be worn off by any other Visits throughout the day: Thou wast like Martha, not slothful in business, and at the same time like Mary, fervent in Spirit ser∣ving the Lord. — Thou knewest that thy Soul was more excellent than thy Body, and therefore didst spend the chief of thy time about the affairs of Eternity, and wast more frequent at thy Prayers, than at the Toilet or Glass; the Review of which made thee say (in thy last sickness) — were my work now to do, I were undone for ever.
Thy Carriage in thy Family was Mild and Gentle, not provoking but encouraging to Servants, both by Example and Precept. Thou shewedst thy Goodness by thy dutiful behaviour to my self, and remembredst that thou wast a Subject as well as a Companion and didst exactly resemble Sarah and Rachel, in thy loving and dutiful deportment to∣wards me; thou didst bear with my Infirmi∣ties, coveredst them in love, didst not run to this Neighbour, and that with abusive or silly stories (a) but overcam'st me by gentle He that will but one de hear,
Tho he judge right, is no good Justicer. Herbert.
 Exhor∣tations and Intreaties, and in all thy Pray∣ers my Soul was minded as thy own.
Thy Words nor Carriage were never disre∣spectful to me. Tho thou wert 'kin to a No∣ble Family yet the Blood that fill'd thy VeinsSee Mr. How's Sermon at Mrs. Ham∣mond's Funeral. did not swell thy Mind. Thou wast always ready to gratifie me in all my law∣ful requests, and thoughtest nothing below thee that might tend to my satisfaction and advantage.
When I was abroad thou longest to see me, and wheh I returned home, I was received with Smiles. If at any time I was perplexed in mind, thou wast not quiet till I was so too. Thy Sympathy with me in all the Distresses of my Life, (both at Sea and Land) will make thy Vertues shine with the greater Lustre, as Stars in the darkest Night, and as∣sure the World you lov'd me, not my For∣tunes.
Fair course of Passions where two Lovers start,
And run together Heart thus yok'd in Heart.
In my Health thou lovedst me as a Wife, and in my Sickness attended'st me as a Nurse.
My Head no sooner ak'd, but thy Heart felt it; and had I faln Sick (in your dying
 Hour) you'd e'en then haveEliza spake often to this Effect in her last Sickness. crawl'd up Stairs to have seen me.
Thou wast afflicted with all my Sorrows, and delighted with all my Joys. When Man and Wife love so little, that the one is uncon∣cern'd in the others Tryals, there follows a Hell of Disquiet in the Mind, a greater Clog up∣on the Conscience than Man is able to bear, and ordinarily a Blast upon the Estate, besides Guilt and Shame unspeakable; but thou (like a Wife, who studied duty, in order to practice) didst not expect God would bless thee in any thing, whilst you saw me unea∣sie, and did not attempt to remove it, or lessen it, by taking part of the Grief. And indeed all our Distresses of Body and Mind were so equally divided, that all yours were mine, and all mine were yours; we remembred we married for better for worse, for richer for poorer, and that we were one Flesh, and therefore were no more offended with the Words or Failings, and Wants of each other, than we wou'd have been, had they been our own. And this made thee as careful to conceal my Losses, as thou wast forward to repair them.
A Woman of Sense knows she must shine by her Husband's Honour, and must be darkned if he suffer an Eclipse; and therefore did'st ne∣ver keep this Joynture for the sake of thy
 Husband, that House for the sake of a Brother, and this Bag for the sake of some She-Cousin; no, if my Occasions requir'd it, they were all forc'd into my Lap with—My dear, I re∣joyce I am able to serve thee, and as long as I have it, 'tis all thine. In this you imitate Madam C—y, who sold her Estate (unask'd) to oblige her Spouse, and indeed the Design of Jointures, is to defend against bad Husbands, and not to ruin those that are Sober, and wou'd be Honest if their Wives wou'd let them; and therefore didst often say, What does a Jointure signifie to a Woman that loves her Husband? Thou wert not SordidlyAs is hin∣ted in the fol∣lowing Pages. Covetous (or as Cowely calls it) so Empha∣tically poor, as to talk of want∣ing in the midst of Plenty; under all my Distresses thy Motto was— God will provide.

When I into thy Closet look,
Wherein you greatest Pleasure took,
I find i'th' Front of every Book,
God will provide.


Let an Anatomist with Art
Dissect each Member, and each Part;
He'll find this written on thy Heart,
God will provide.

God will provide—was ever in thy Mouth (as a Cordial to ease thy Cares and Mine) —This encourag'd thee to a generous Charity — with this you cheer'd the Spirits
 of those that had lost their Friends and E∣states—'twas from this we both of us received a fresh and full Supply under all the Losses we ever met with; and in a word 'twas to this Motto, and your Prayers for me, that (in some measure) I owe all the Blessings I now en∣joy, or hope to receive hereafter.
How oft would you chear Philaret with saying; See how the Birds of the Air do all depend upon God! and the Sparrow that hath dined, and knows not where to get his Supper, yet chearfully waits on Divine Providence, and shall not we? God hath (my Dear) Provided for us hitherto, then why should we mistrust he will not pro∣vide for us for the future?—Our Unbe∣lief indeed may make him hold his Hand, and hinder him from doing any mighty Work for us; but what can we fear, if in the Use of Lawful Means we throw our selves upon him? How often have we been in Straits and Exigencies, and God hath found some way or other to deliver us? and shall we by our Unbelief hinder him from wor∣king such another Deliverance for us? Of how many Men have we read and heard that have trusted God in despight of all Improbabilities, and God hath succour'd and assisted them beyond all Expectation? How oft would you say, Come Phil. we do not want for the present, why should we believe we shall want hereafter, when we know not whether we shall live a Day to an end? Come, come, tho your Bag is empty to Day, 'twill be fill'd to Morrow. You never yet wanted Money when you had occasion to use it; those unexpected Friends
 I met with when you were in America should cure us of all Distrust of Providence; besides, what did we ever get by immode∣ate Carckings, but torment of Mind? Is it not much sweeter to rest upon God's Good∣ness, and enjoy Content? We are never the nearer a Supply when we have afflicted and vex'd our Minds, and why should we put our Spirits into an Agony for nothing— Rest satisfied, (Phil.) God will provide—This was yourWhich you learnt from Dr. Horneck's great Law of Conderati∣ons, Pag. 320. Advice to me in all my Straits; Then how much should this endear thy Memory to me? And as thou didst perform the Duty of a tender Wife, by thus easing me of my Worldly Cares, so this made me (for a kind Wife makes a kind Husband) ready to part with GarmentMy voluntary and frequent Engagements for Eli∣za's Sister is a convincing Proof of this. after Garment, strip my self to my Skin; yea, Mortgage my very Flesh to serve thee. You know, my dear, I did not pretend Af∣fection, and carry on two Interests, and I'll say this for Eliza, that she wan't false enough (her self) to mistrust me in any thing, but so Remarkably kind, that I must turn your own Words upon you, and say; That I have met with more and greater Comforts in a Marry'd State than ever I did expect, and how (as you express'd it) cou'd it be other∣wise, when Inclination, Interest, and all that can be desired, concurr to make up the Harmony: So that were thy Tender∣ness known to the World, 'twou'd once more bring into Fashion Womens loving and trusting their Husbands. My Dear,

'twas thus throughly performing thy Duty as a Wife that gave thee Peace on thy Death∣bed, and such Hopes of Heaven, as has scarce been heard of.
In a word, thou wert such a Wife as fully answer'd the Description of a good Housewife given by Solomon.
[My Heart did safely trust in thee, be∣cause I knew thou wouldst do me Good, and not Evil] thou wert true to my BED, didst discover P — ps, W — t, and all that attempted thy Cha∣stity; and as true to my PƲRSE, didst not deceive and cozenWhole Duty of Man, P. 301. me, by imploying my Goods to such Uses as I allowed not of. [You work'd willingly with your Hands] witness your Curious Bed; to this I might add, you did that in my Ware∣house in a MonthsWhilst I was at Tunbridge, in the Year 1696. time, which I could scarce have done in a Year — [You rose while 'twas yet Night;] didst often 'wake me out of my Sleep by thy early Devotions. [You look'd well to the way of my Houshold,] and eat not the Bread of Idleness; such you was—but where is such another? For Solomon himself, who had try'd as many as most, says, after all, Who can find a vertuous Woman? And therefore, when I had thee, I made as much of thee as ever I could, for I thought I should never get such another.

Being bless'd with such a Wife as lov'd both God and me; I was easie when abroad, and de∣lighted to be at home. Were there nothing be∣twixt us but Sea and Land; or if thou wert to be found in the remotest parts of the Earth, the Raging Seas, and howling Wilderness, should not keep us asunder. Nor should the most dange∣ous Rocks and Shelves, nor the fiercest of wild Beasts deter me from undertaking the Voyage or Journey; but our Separation is of another Kind, and not to be remedied till this Earthly Tabernacle be dissolv'd. But cou'd I see thee again on Earth, (but why should I have such a vain Wish?) I should think my self still in Paradice, or had met with this Life but as an Earnest of the Happier to come. Again, When I consider the Calm∣ness and Quietness of thy Temper [How thy Mouth was opened with Wisdom, and the Law of Kindness was in thy Tongue] I cannot but pity the Unhappi∣ness of their Lot, who have Wives of a Boisterous Temper, that speak whate∣ver their Passion and ill Nature suggests, to the disquieting of others, and fretting their own Bowels, you avoided this Brawling and Discontent, which makes the Wife (as the DutyP. 301. of Man tells us) the Burthen and Plague of the Man, instead of a Help and Comfort. Thou knewest, my Dear, if 'twas a Fault to carry it rudely to Stran∣gers, 'twas a much greater to carry it so to thy Husband, to whom a greater Affection is due. How many MenWhole Duty of Man, p. 302. to avoid the noise of a froward Wife
 fall to Company-keeping, Poverty, and a Mul∣titude of Mischiefs. But thy winning Carri∣age kept me from these Evils; thou wert no Fool, Gossip, or Scold, didst never THƲN∣DER away my Friends, or fright them with WRY FACES. A meek and a quiet Spirit is a vast Ornament to Religion, and of great Va∣lue in the Sight of God and Man.
All we know, o'th' blest above,
Is that they sing, and that they love.
Herbert.
Then why should they that hope to live in one and the same Glo∣ry,See Mr. Ro∣ger's Discourse call'd Fall not out by the Way. now Revile, or reflect upon one another? All their differences will be compos'd when they arrive there; and why should they now differ? There Luther, and Calvin, and Dr. Owen, and Mr. Baxter, will be all of one Mind; there will be no mis-understanding of one another in Heaven, nor no giving of Ill Words; no thinking the Wife Distracted, or calling the Husband N— gate, but all will be as kind and friendly there, as Eliza was to her Philaret; and I think they can scarce be more, for you were Mistress in the Art of Obliging, in which you at∣tain'd that Soveraign Perfection that you reign'd over all Hearts, with whom you did converse. And this brings me, in the next Place, to consider thy Words.

Thy Words were far from being idle or affe∣cted, but always useful to the Edification of others; nay, I may truly say it, that thou had'st neither a Thought, a Word, nor a Look, contrary to the strict Rules of Vertue. How far wert thou from receiving or delighting in Tale-bearers, who separate chief Friends — or in entertaining Visiters with censures upon the Failures of other Women, which is too much the Practice now adays. Talkativeness, the common Failure of the Sex, was no ble∣mish of thine; thou wert far from Monopo∣lizing all Conversation to thy self, but wert readier to hear than to speak. And could'st bear of hearing thy Faults, (if thou hadst any) without thinking thy self affronted; neither cou'd the Greatest Abuse make thee impla∣cable, as knowing 'twas the Glory of Man and Woman to pass by Infirmities; for as we pray daily to God to pass by our own, so God expects the same from us one to another.
Thy Visits were not tedious nor trivial, but design'd for the Advantage of Conversa∣tion, and the Continuance of Friendship; and when thou wert visited thy self, thou en∣tertain'st thy Friends not with a starch'd Formality, or foolish impertinent Trifles, but with something that might be useful to their Minds, as well as to exercise their Tongues.
How serious were thy Preparations for Pub∣lick Worship, and how much concern'd to have thy Family deliver'd from those Incum∣brances which might hinder them to attend the same; thy Care to have thy Soul in readi∣ness, to hear what God had to say, was grea∣ter
 than that of having thy Body adorn'd, con∣trary to the common Practise of our Age. How attentive wast thou when at Sermons? and with what Greediness didst thou suck in the Sincere Milk of the Word, and how Conscien∣tious to see that thy Servants took heed to what they heard, and that they perform'd their Duty to God as well as to the. — Neither didst thou think to compound with Heaven, by being thus zealous in Religious Duties, that thou may'st Slander, Co∣vet, Lie, and act other Sins with the greater Freedom here, (and in other Places) none but the Guilty are meant, and none but such will wince; but these (Eliza) will have more Wit than to publish their Guilt, by declaring their Innocence.
The Extensiveness of thy Charity is another Character, which endears thy Memory, and makes it precious to me, as well as to many o∣thers, who felt the Effects of it. How like to the Author of all Good did that excellent Grace make thee, and how did it Adorn thy Holy Profession. Dionysius the Tyrant won∣der'd at his Son, that with all the Gold and Silver he had in his House, he had made no Man his Friend; but thou wast innocently frugal, that thou might'st be bounifully Cha∣ritable. And the Truth is, the best and surest way to have any outward Mercy, is to be con∣tent to want it, or to make good Use of what we have; when Men's Desires are over eager after the World, thy must have so much a Year, and a House well furnish'd, or else they will not be content; God usually, if not
 constantly breaks their Wills, by denying them, or else puts a Sting into them, that a Man had been as good he had been with∣out them. If a Man have but a little Income, if he have a great Blessing, (and like Eliza,) have a Heart to do Good with the little he has; that's enough to make it up; alas! we must not account Mercies by the bulk, what if another have a Pound to my Ounce, if mine be Gold for his Silver, I will never change with him. 'Twas you, my Dear, that cross'd the Proverb, That Fortune sees not where she bestows her Gifts; that most commonly they fall to the Share of those who have not Hearts to use them; for your Great Charity brought that exellent Character upon you, of being Kind and Generous beyond others—you'd often say, We1 Tim. 6.7. brought nothing into this World, and shall carry nothing out; so did all the Good you could whilst you liv'd in this; imita∣ting Sir John Frederick, who made his own Hands his Executors, and his Eyes the Over∣seers.—'Tis observed that Covetous∣ness is the only Sin that grows young as Men grow old; But 'twas not so in you; you liv'd in the World so much a∣bove it, as was an Evidence of the Real Greatness of your Soul, and that you thought that a little thing wherein others place Great∣ness, this made Charity so natural to you, that 'twas scarce a Vertue. There was in your Nature an Aversion to a Covetous Person, as he is one which the Lord abhorts. Psal. 10.3.

When I read, That 'tis easierMat. 19.24. for a Camel to enter thro the Eye of a Needle, than for a rich Man, who sets his Heart on his Riches, to enter into Heaven, I am almost frighted with the Expression. Cou'd Aristippus throw his Gold into the Sea, and say, It's better I shoud, drown thee than that thou shouldst undo me; and shall I who have one Foot in the Grave, be a Slave to my Wealth. I com∣plain of myDr. Horneck. Neighbour for being hard hearted, and un∣kind to People in Distress; and is that a Vertue in me which is Vice in another?
A good Bishop (says a late Writer) cou'd have preached an Hour together, in saying nothing but Beware of Covetousness; And so charitable was Dear Eliza, that her whole Life seem'd to be one continued Satyr against A∣varice. You durst not rake together what you cou'd in your Life, to bequeath it to your self at your Death. I say, to your self; for who that has half a Soul, wou'd creep to a Miser all his Life for Wealth he may lose with the next Breath, neither will he obtain it if the Wretch can carry it to the other World, as is seen by the following Instan∣ces. Hermocrates (a Grecian Philosopher) dying, bequeathed all his Estate to himself, his Mind being fix'd immoveably on the Trash he had scraped together.—And Cardinal Angelot was so wrapt up in Covetousness, as by a Trap-Door to get into his Stable, and so steal the Corn his Groom had given his Horses. And I knew one my self so wretched∣ly covetous, as to steal Candle-ends in the Church
 (after Evening Lesture was over) to serve his Occasions at home; and this he did, tho worth soveral Thousand Pound. Well, what shall we say?
There is (saith the Wise Man) a Man, to whomEccl. 24.4. God hath gi∣ven Riches, Wealth and Honour, so that he wanteth nothing for his Soul of all he desireth, yet God giveth him not Power to eat thereof, but a Stranger eateth it, This is Vanity, and an evil Disease. 'Tis clear from hence, (that tho a little sufficeth Nature, and less Grace yet) that Covetousness is ne∣ver satisfied, and is certainly curst. The con∣tented Man is never poor let him have never so little. The Discontented Man is never rich, let him have never so much. Tho I have a IustSee the Case of the Young Lady, P. 40 Title to 6000 l. (as mayTHAT'S ONCE. appear in Conjunction with my own Birth-right) and so much clear from any Encumbrance, and have neither Child nor Chick to waste it, and my self as great an Enemy to Extravagance, as to what's Sneaking; yet if I an't contented with this Estate, I am poorer than he that begs, if content with the Scraps he gets.
Content is all we aim at with our Store,
And having that with little, what needs more?
But the Covetous or Disconted Man (for they are all one) always thinks himself miserable, and so he can never be happy. But Eliza
 was none of these, had nothing in her mean or little; no, my Dear, had thy Purse been as large as thy Heart, you'd ne'er been rich whilst any Man was poor; and I am sure Eliza, you had more Piety than to think your self undone, had we lost all but one another. Would the MiserSee Dr. Hor∣neck's Great Law of Consideration. study Eternity, he'd see 'tis little material to him whe∣ther he is Poor or Rich: Your Generous Temper, Eli∣za, might fully convince him of this. Nei∣ther was thy Extensive Charity any Let to thy strict Justice, or to the Punctual Performance of all thy Promises in thy Dealings with Men; you knew that none must dwell in the — HOLYPsal. 15.1, 2. HILL—but those that walk uprightly, and speak the Truth in their Heart, (at least to the best of their Knowledge) and therefore thy Promises (like the Laws of the Medes and Persians) were unalterable; neither cou'd Passion, Interest, or the Greatest Affronts (either Pretended or Real) make thee break 'em; and I thought thy keep∣ing thy Word none of the least of thy Ex∣cellencies — for Promises are Sacred Things, as appears by this. If I invite a'Tis common for sil∣ly Women to underva∣lue their Husband's E∣state; tho superi∣or to their own, or atleast not inferiour to the ac∣count given, and to blast that Reputation that sup∣ports them, I say, Sup∣ports them, for Man and Wife are Inseparable in all they enjoy or suffer. These Instances are common in some Coun∣ties, as will appear by the following Passage in Mr. J—n's Letter to his Client, for it runs thus. I receiv'd yours, and am now to tell you I cou'd not have an Answer from M— till last Monday, but now I have an Ac∣count of Mr. Carter∣son's Estate according to his own Particu∣lars; which is all at present from—your Servant—J—n
— Could it ever be thought that any Parent that had received such an Ample Account from her own Creature, would privately have lessen'd her Kinsman's Estate. But thus was this Gentleman serv'd, tho his Lands in present Possession and Re∣version may be worth Four Thousand Pound, notwithstanding his great Losses at Sea, by Sureti∣ships, by lending Moneys to a distressed Friend, and paying some Hundred Pounds for Fines and a deceased Heir. La∣dy to my House, and tell her if she marries my Son, I'll give him 4000 l. at my Death. If this Promise was to en∣courage
 the Match. If I fly from it when effected, I live in a known Sin, which (without Repentance) is certain Damnati∣on, and the present blasting my Reputa∣tion, as I'm charge∣able with all the Dammages, attend∣ing the Breach of my Promise, which was so solemnly made, that I told the Lady I'd make it good under my own Hand, in case I marry'd; and 'tis no Gift, but plain Iustice, if I do so; seeing this Ladys trust¦ing to my Word, made her reject those
 would have made her Rich and Easie; from all which 'tis plain, that Promises made by WordAs I may prove here∣after from an Origi∣nal Letter. or Let∣ter, tho they are not binding at the Lawyers Bar, yet are so in the Court of Conscience; neither can any small Pett, taken with or without Cause, Cancel the first Promise any more than the private Lyes of a Wife or a hasty Word can untie the Marriage Knot. They that doubt this to be Scripture, let them read Nehe∣miah 5th. from the 11th to the 14th Verse, which is such Advice as I took my self; for (you know Eliza) being once blamed for not performing a Promise, made by my own Father, (which I rejected, as made against my Con∣sent) but afterwards finding His Promise necessary, I fulfill'd it to the Persons Con∣tent: How much more then is a Promise binding which is made by my self, confirm'd by Letter, and repeated in the hearing of several, and more especially so, if made to influence such a Solemn Thing as a Mar∣riage. How punctual wou'd Eliza have been to such a Promise, (for she was so to all) and how uneasie till perform'd.
But as the End Crowns the Work, and Perse∣verance deserves the Reward, thy Constancy in the Exercise of Grace and Good Humour compleated thy Excellency, thou diedst as thou livedst, and no Change of Condition could make any Change upon thee; thou never insultedst over me in my Affliction, as is the
 Custom of too many ill natur'd Wives; but in all my Afflictions thou wast afflicted, and lov'dst me to the last breath.
But tho' these are mighty Instances of a Pure Love, yet all inferiour to thy Garden-WalksTwo hundred every Night for the space of a whole Year., and something else I forbear to mention: Nothing can Love like the Dear Eliza, or be so Constant as Phil. who strove to become [not thine alone, but even the same with theeThis was the Motto in a Ring I gave Eliza, before Mar∣riage..] There was such a Vnion between us, from our first Interview to thy last Breath, that we seem d as two Souls in the same Body, or rather two Souls transform'd into one. This made such an even Thread of Endearment run through all we Thought or Did, that as you ever commanded me in any equal Matter by your constant Obeying of me, so I as readily scrupled every thing that was not agreeable to your Will; but nothing happen'd that was not so; for like Spanbeimi∣us's Wife, thou wert willing to be Govern'd by me in all things. If any Quarrel hap∣pen'd, 'twas who of the two shou'd live the most Content: we prov'd a Chain of Hearts, and the first Link was Heaven.
Let no Man then Censure me as Idolizing thy Memory, when I draw up such a faint Resemblance of thy Character, seeing Infinite Wisdom it self hath given us this Character of a good Woman, that She is more Precious than
 Rubies; A Ship of Iewels would not have been such a Blessing to me as thou wast. Thou didst not cool my Zeal for God with Vanity and Games, and needless Diver∣sions, but quickenedst me to good. No Man could be rough and harsh to a Person so mild and submissive. No Man could be so much a Brute, or Rocky-hearted, as not to be soften∣ed by so Constant a Love — What reason have I to be thankful to Providence, that when a Good Woman is not to be found among a Thou∣sand, Eccl. 7.28. that yet one of them should have fallen to my share; and seeing it was next to impossible to over-value such a Bles∣sing, I have more reason to think that it was want of esteem enough for thee (though I lov'd thee beyond Life, Liberty and E∣state) than Idolizing of thee, that provok'd God to deprive me of thee.
Was it possible, my Dearest, to over-value a Child that never once disobeyed a Parent, or to over-value a Wife that would never give Ear to those that went about to divide, even in the least thing betwixt her and her Husband. Could I have too high an Esteem for a Wife that liv'd so near to God, and lov'd me out of a Principle of Conscience and Judgment, more than from a fond Affection, or from the ordinary Motives of an agreeable Person and Competent Estate, &c. I confess that my Interest in thee, and height of Affection to∣wards thee, may make my Testimony con∣cerning thee suspected, but if I should be si∣lent, thy own works would Praise thee; thy Ser∣vants, Relations and Acquaintance, know I don't flatter thee; and certainly so many Indiffe∣rent
 Persons cannot have their Tongues and Affections brib'd, to conspire so Unanimously to assert a Falsehood.
It hath not seem'd meet to the Divine Pro∣vidence that thou shouldst leave any Pledge of our Conjugal Love and Society behind thee, but what is Indelibly Impressed upon my Soul, I have not the Comfort of any Child by so blessed and sweet a Yoke-fellow, to be a li∣ving Evidence of our Mutual Endearments, then God and Man I hope will pardon me, if I en∣deavour to have the Idea of thy Perfections al∣ways before me, and that I have drawn this faint Shadow of 'em with my rude Pen, as a more useful and valuable Portraiture of thee, than any that could be drawn by the Pencil of the most Famous Artist; that is but the Out∣side, but this is the Inside— and what I was taught by the Divine Records, That the King's Daughters are Glorious within; I found it to be true by Experience in thee; you convinc'd me what Charms there are in a Vertuous Spouse! What a Mine of Pleasure! What sprightly Life and Vigour did my Dear give to all my Thoughts, Looks, and Actions? How many new Satisfactions in every thing you did? How did I even live in your dy∣ing Words? Oh the kind and tender Farewells you gave me with your last Breath; such as, Poor Rogue, thou art the kindest Hus∣band that ever lived—Ill love thee as long as I live—Thou art a dear Child to me—I love thee dearly —I pray God bless my dear Yoke-fel∣low, and give him Grace—I pray thee give him Grace to live so here, as he may live with
 thee hereafter; which you repeated over and over very earnestly, further begging that God would make me his, for there was Grace enough in store. To the last Minute of your Life you spake nothing so sensibly as when you spake of Heavenly things, and all this you utter'd at the time when you were actually dying.
It would be a pleasant and delectable Sub∣ject for me further to expatiate upon thy Graces and Moral Vertues, but I shall conclude with the Wise Mans Character of a Vertuous Woman, that Many Daughters have done Vertuously,Prov. 31.29. but thou excellest them all; and therefore, tho it should be my Lot to engage in a Second Marriage, yet it will be impossible for any other Wife to deface the Impression which thou hast made upon me; and seeing I can no more enjoy thy sweet Fellowship here on Earth, I will contemplate upon thy Perfections, and view this Picture which my Affection hath copied from the Original, that thy Vertues had im∣pressed upon my own Soul — And thus (my dearest) I must with unexpressible Grief bid thee a long Adieu; but that which still comforts me is, that we shall meet in Hea∣ven, where there shall never be any more perplexing Separation.
And it shou'd be a great Satisfaction to me to consider, That the Providence of God order'd thy Death when I could be pre∣sent, and perform the last Offices of my Love. That it did not happen at such a time when I was in Holland, and at a great Distance
 from thee: So you had the Comfort of my Love to the last moments of your Life. And doubtless it pleased and comforted you much, and allay'd your Affliction, to see that you enjoy'd in your distress the con∣stant Attendance of so dear a Friend. And if this softned your Affliction, it may just∣ly lessen my Sorrow for what you endur'd. I may be satisfied too in this, That I sought and procur'd for you the best Means and Helps to recover you, that Art & Nature could afford, and sure I am, could any Physitian or Friend, have sav'd your Life, it had been Dr. T—, Mr. C—, and Cousin J—n, whose un∣wearied Endeavours to preserve thy Life shall beAs you desired on your Death-Bed. (thankfully) acknowledged to my Dying Day; but it being evidently God's Will to take you from me, no Care or Ten∣derness could retain you amongst us; but my Comfort is, that as you was Virtuous and Pious, you was in the same measure willing to Die; and able to receive your Death with an undanted Courage and Resolution. Vir∣tueSee Mr. Doring∣ton's Con∣solations to a Friend. is an Essay, a kind of Pre∣ludium of Dying: As it morti∣fies our Affections to this vain World, and fixes them on bet∣ter Objects, the Gifts and Felici∣ties of Heaven. Eliza was pra∣ctising Death by Degrees while she liv'd▪ and mor∣tified first one Affection, then another, To make the Burden of Dying more easier to bear, you took it up by Parcels; and so having deli∣vered
 your self from them, you did not bear it all at once. Thus it came to pass, that Eliza was no sooner sensible she must die, than willing to do so. She was ready to resign up her good Soul into the Hands of a Faithful Creator. Eliza, whose Death I am tempted inordinately to Lament, did not at all Lament for her self. Your willing Submission and Resignation to the Divine Disposal, should teach me the same thing. You went away perhaps, not only conten∣ted, but joyful that you was to go. Tho your Love to me, and your Wisdom, might make you Conceal that you was willing to leav me; yet you was glad, I may believe, to find that you had finish'd your Course, for you had such Foretastes of the Heaven∣ly Bliss, as even ravish'd your Soul away! Then 'tis very incongruous that I shou'd at∣tend your Triumph and Ioy, with my immoderate Sorrow and Tears; the Remem∣brance of your Happiness in the unseen World, should give Comfort to me under the great Loss I have by your Death.
Have I not taken Satisfaction heretofore, to reflect upon the obliging and charming Conversation of Eliza, when my Affairs have kept me absent from her? And have not such Reflections sweetned and allay'd that Absence? Why then should not such Reflections do me the same Kindness still? If I let this Impertinent Thought afflict me that I must no more enjoy the same De∣light, it will deprive me too of all the Use, and Comfort, and Pleasure, of what I once
 enjoyed in Eliza, which would make my Condition still much the worse.
Then why shou'd I grieveSee the Note at the end of the Dedication, with this Mark * thus, seeing Eliza is only departed from me for a while; she is not lost, nor annihilated. Thy Body (Eliza) is laid in the Dust, to rest in the quiet Grave, and is there watcht by the careful Eye of Divine Omnisience: And wheresoever any Parts of that may happen in Ages to come to be scatter'd, the Divine Power will certainly collect them all again, and thou shall be perfectly restored to Be∣ing and Happiness.
But the mean while thy better Part, the noble Soul, is return'd to God that gave it: And since so much of thee still lives, I may say, thou art gone to thy Celestial Kindred. Upon your Depar∣ture from the Body, I do believe you imme∣diately found your self, like the Soul of good Lazarus, attended by kind and glo∣rious Angels: And they, I must needs think, were not silent at their meeting you. They congratulate your Delivery from this World, applaud your Patience in suffering the Evils of it; your Diligence in doing Good, your bold Conflicts against the As∣saults of many Temptations, and your Per∣severance to the end of your Life.
If I could look within the Veil, and view the Celestial Temple, I shou'd see you there, in Transports of Joy, surrounded with a Glorious Ring of Rejoycing Spirits. Then how unsuitable is it that I should immode∣rately grieve for Eliza; when she is gone to inhabit a Joy unspeakable and glorious Eliza,
 while I am mourning for thy Death, thou art giving Thanks for it; you are overjoy'd to think that it is over with you; and that you have finish'd your last and worst Conflict with the Enemy of your Sal∣vation. How happy soever your Conditi∣on was on Earth, it is much happier now. The Place and Condition you are in, is re∣presented in the Divine Writings, by all that is great, pleasant, and glorious in this World; but we are also told there, that all these Representations fall short of it. I cannot know then how happy Eliza is till I go to see; and that must be now the Care that engages me. With all my Sorrow, with all my vain Wishes, I cannot bring you back again from thence, and I should do you the greatest Diskindness if I could: I must then, if I am truly sorry to have parted with you, be earnestly concern'd to meet you again. And that I may do so▪ I will earnestly concern my self to serve and promote the Glory of God among Men, and to do all the good Offices to the World that I can: And I will, as often as I think of Dear Eliza, who is gone before, excite my self to these things, in Consideration that this Course will bring me to dwell with her again.
And if I make such Resolutions as these, and perform them, then I may promise my in a little time, to meet you, where the Spirits of Just Men are made per∣fect, where we shall love again, and that with an Affection more pure, and more ar∣dent than before. Where both of us shall be more happy than ever we could be
 here: We shall have no Griefs to commu∣nicate, no Complaints to make to one ano∣ther: No Burdens or Cares to divide hetween us, no'Tis the Saying of one that to distrust the word of an honest Man is not only to expose him to H — C — but to rank him in the number of V—lets; such Carking Jealousie justifies the severest Resentment, as Reputation is a tender thing, and dearer to a good Man than his Life; then what Conscience must that Person have that makes those Resentments a Cime, which were occasioned by the Provocations given: But I stop here for the Barbarous Treat∣ments that  and oth; meet with (in this kind  sufficiently proves at what Door such Quarrels lie. Distrust to allay our Happiness, or damp our Joy, no Distance ofAs I hinted before in P. 8. Place shall part us there, or hinder our delightful Communion with one ano∣ther: We shall be of one Fa∣mily, in one Sacred Temple, and in one rejoycing Quire; joyning to pay Eternal Adorations, and Thankful Praises to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. We shall never be parted more.
Within a little while this happy Meeting may be, It cannot be far off, since it will come at the end of my Life. Then seeing a Part of me is now in Heaven, I shall take Mr. Rogers AdviceSee Mr. Rogers Cha¦racter of a Good Wo∣man▪ P. 163. to his Friend; Make this Ʋse of my Loss more diligently to prepare to meet you in Heaven, where our
 Conversation will be infinitely more pleasant, and more durable than it ever was on Earth and there (as you told me on your Death-Bed) We shall meet, and never part.
This is also the Opinion of our Friend H—n; for in his last Epistle He wishes he may so live this Year, and the Remainder of his time; That at last he may meet Eliza, &c. and the rest of the Saints—There we shall have Joys eo the full! And I think (adds he) this will be ONE HAPPINESS to have sweet Conversation with Pure and Spotless Creatures, without Hindrance or Disturbance for ever, &c.
Some Hope that they in Heaven their Learning share,
But sure Love and Friendship enter there.
I am impatient till I find it again in Eliza, and till that happy Minute come (as I told your Brother) All my pleasant Days are over. 'Tis true, I have been at Agford since your Death, (and you saw me there if you know what's done on Earth) to see that Dear un∣known you so much admir'd (and as you thought cou'd have made me happy) but when I arriv'd — My Heaven was still as di∣stant as before; all I got was Joy in Reversion, and scarce that; For ever since that Fatal Afternoon I first saw Cloris, Madam Shute, and Madam W—ch, I have not tasted a Mi∣nutes Joy, nor expect it now till I meet Eliza, and she's gone to Heaven.

Poor Miserable Phil! If Fate happen to guild o're one Inch of thy Ʋnhappy Span, and lend a Glimpse of Heaven in a Wife, how soon does the Beauteous Vision, vanish out of Sight.
Ah Cloris! must we part then, first let me close thy Eyes; bedew thyThe Chinese al∣ways before they bury their Dead, if he was a Married Man, bring him to his Wife, that so she might first kiss him, and bid him farewel. Cheeks a little, compose thy Body for the Grave, follow thee thither, see thee put into it, be one of the last that shall come thence (as I desired of thee if I died first) and then farewel, till we meet in the Silent Grave; where,
I'll visit thee, and when I leave this Light,
Come spend my time in the same Cell at Night:
Till then farewel, farewel, I cannot take
A Final Leave until thy Ashes wake.
Dr. Brown applauds those ingenious Tempers that desire to sleep in the Ʋrns of their Fathers, and strive to go the nearest way to Corruption.

'Twas the late Request of a great Divine, to lie by his Wife in Shoreditch, and for that reason he was buried there; and Sir Nathani∣el Barnardiston in his last Will desires his Exe∣cutors that the Bones of his Father might be digged out of the Earth (where they were bu∣ried) and laid by his own Body in a new Vault he ordered them to erect for the same purpose; that tho he could not live with his Father as Iong as he would have desired, yet he designed their Bodies should lie together till the Resur∣rection. As it is good to enjoy the Company of the Godly while they are living, so it is not amiss, if it will stand with Convenience, to be buried with them after Death. The old Prophets Bones esca∣ped a burning, by being buried with the other Prophets; and the Man who was tumbled into the Grave of Elisha, was revived by the Ver∣tue of his Bones. So good it is to be buried with those that are accounted Pious. 'Twas for this reason I formerly desired to Lie in the Chancel of —with my Reverend Father, but Love to a Parent, tho ne'er so tender, is lost in that to a Wife. And now, (as is mentioned in the fol∣lowing Essay) if I can mingle my Ashes wi h thine, I have nothing farther to ask those few Hours I do survive thee (but can I word it so when your Letter says, When dead and gone you sha still live in Phil. who is dearer to you than Lfe it self) thy Tomb shall be my Breast, till on six Shoulders I am brought to thee and — n, as the only Companions of my long Home — So that now leaving All Pleasures behind me, and my Dear fast asleep in her Grave, I'll drop a few Tears on thy Coffin, and so de∣part
 to my own House; which tho once so plea∣sant to thee and me, will now (whilst thou art found in no room of it) appear a very melancholy thing.



SAcred Urn! with whom we trust
This Dear Pile of Sacred Dust:
Know thy Charge, and safely Guard,
'Till Death's Brazen Gates unbarr'd:
'Till the Angel bids it rise,
And remove to Paradise.


A Wife Obliging, Tender, Wise,
A Friend to Comfort, and Advise.
Vertue mild as Zephir's Breatb,
Piety which smiled in Death.
Such a Wife, and such a Friend,
All Lament, and all Commend.


Most with Eating Cares opprest;
He who knew and loved her best:

Who her Loyal Heart did share;
He who reign'd Unrivall'd there.
And no Truce to Sighs will give,
'Till he die, with her to live.


Or if more we woud comprize,
Here Interr'd ELIZA lies.


Thus you see, my Dear, (if you can see from Heaven to Earth) how loth I am to give the bec∣k'n of Farewell, the best of Wives, and my Tru∣est Friend, is but part of your Character, and I can't leave such a Treasure in Post haste.
I had kinder things to add, but my whole Fa∣mily (Friend J—n, and honest N —y,) call me down, so must reserve the rest 'til we meet in Heaven,The Primitive Christians buried their Saints with Hymns and Psalms of Joy. Chrysostom on the Hebrews saith, We are to glorifie God, and give thanks to him, that he hath crown'd the Deceased, and freed them from their Labours, and chides those that mourn'd. And the Days of their Death were called the Birth-days of the Saints. And Hierome in his Epitaph on Holy Paula, saith, That at her Funeral no Shreeks were heard, but Multitudes of Psalms and Hymns were sung in divers Lan∣guages. See Mr. Henry's Life, p. 206. but here's enough to let you see, that as in Life, so in Death I am wholly Yours, and shall so continue, as long as I am

From Eliza's Grave, July 10th. 1697.

