


RIght Reverend Prelats, and Venerable Fathers,
I may truly say with chast Susanna:
Dan. 15.42 Angustiae sunt mihi undique, I am perplex'd on all sides: If I comply with Your Commands, I incurre the high indignation of those noble persons, that contrived the late reje∣cted Peace: If I sleight them, I am argued of disobedience unto you, my venerable Superiours. If I speake the words of truth, I am reprehended, even by those, whom in my soule I other∣wise honour: If I conceale the truth; whole kingdomes stand up, and give testimony against the iniquitie of the said peace, and against the irregular proceedings of the Authors thereof. But its better for me to fall into their hands, than to offend in the sight of my God. Truth begetteth hatred; but against the venome thereof I am Antidoted by this divine Conservative: pro anima tua ne confundaris: dicere verum est enim confusio adducens pecca∣tum, & est confusio adducens gloriam & gratiam: though it were to the hazard of thy life be not ashamed to tell the truth; for there is a shame that bringeth sinne, and a shame, that bringeth glory and grace; fight for iustice with the hazard of thy life, and unto death strive for iustice: for God will overthrow thine enemies for thee: if any cen∣sure or sindicate me of too great freedome and libertie of spirit in delivering the truth in this present worke; I let them know, that I have, as patterns to imitate in the like occasion, whole troupes of Martyrs and Confessors, who boldly spoke the testi∣monies of our Lord, in the sight of Kings, and were not confounded.
Psal. 118.46. 1. Cor. 10.25. Vt quid autem libertas mea iudicatur ab aliena conscientia.
Yet having had experience of the profound humilitie of those Noble gentlemen accompanied with learning and ver∣tue,
which I seriously observed in them, while the whole pas∣sage of this treatie, was in discussion before you at VVaterford, I cannot dispaire of their benigne interpretation, and favou∣rable construction of any thing that may seeme distastfull to them in reading this Survey. pax multa diligentibus legem tuam, & non est illis scandalum.
Ps. 118.125. Nothing can offend them that pre∣ferre the honour of God and the publique good, before their owne honour, and any private interest. Humanum est errare, diabolicum autem perseverare. Though those Noble Gentlemen have erred (an imperfection incident to human frailtie) yet have they not persevered therein, having humbly captivated their Iudgment to the Iudgement of holy Church, being mind∣full of that lesson of Christ Iesus:
Eue. 10.16. Qui vos audit, me audit. No confederacie on earth can have so strict an union, as that, which is betweene the Blessed of heaven; yet are we enformed by the propheticall oracle, that the Prince or tutelar Angell of the Per∣sians was at contention with the tutelar Angell of the Iewes, and resisted him for the space of one and twentie dayes,
Dan. 10.13. & Inter∣pret. ibid. Ephes. 4.3. yet did they alwayes preserve the unitie of the spirit in the bond of Peace. What marvaile is then, that among the Confederate Catholiques some contention should arise, seeing so many Ingins have beene invented by the Enemies of truth and Religion to dissolve that happy union, which God himselfe hath wrought in their hearts for the reparation of the Catholique faith, secu∣ritie of our Soveraigne and conservation of His kingdome? yet wee hope, that such small division shall never burst into a∣ny rupture, but that God (who familiarly produceth good ef∣fects out of bad causes,) will produce a more strict and happy union among the same Confederate Catholiques out of such petty divisions. Pater sancte serva eos in nomine tuo &c. ut sint unum,
Ioan 17.11. sicut & nos. Ah let not the wound grow wider, let not the Canker fret farther into the body. God hath put a division long since betweene our Enemies in these three Ilands to pull downe their proud Babel, and erect his owne Arke: ah let not our division destroy Gods worke. Wee begun for God, and & our beginnings have been seconded by his powerfull hand, let us end with God, and he will crowne our conflicts with ever vernant laurells. The eyes of Christian Princes abroad doe
looke in the Confederate Catholiques of Ireland, as on the Champions of Christ, the Reparators of Religion, and Con∣servators of Monarchie, let us not sad their hearts and draw teares from those eyes by recoyling from Gods cause, and yeelding unto our declining Enemyes on sordid Conditions, least wee become spectaculum indignum mundo & Angelis & ho∣minibus. Know,
1. Cor. 49. our Enemies cruentall doome against us is uni∣versall, their mercilesse sword admits no distinction betweene the Catholique Irish Noble-men or Gentle-men, between the Cittizen or Countreymen, betweene sex, age, or other condi∣tion; the Orphans innocent body is as welcome to theirs, as it was to Herods sword; and when wee thinke our friends (in whom we have too presumptuous a confidence) will helpe us, be assured they will let us sinke in our owne miseries. Nothing lesse will satiat our unsatiable blood-thirstie enemies, than to drench themselves in our blood, to share our lands, destroy our pofteritie, and eradicat our memorie from the face of the earth. Nothing (under God) can prevent their furie, but union. See the declaration for avoy ding distinction betweene old and new Irish.
I am forced (Right Reverend Lords, and Venerable Fa∣thers) to dispatch this first part of my Survey of the Articles of the late rejected Peace, which proves the iniquitie and inju∣stice thereof, and to expose the same to publique view be∣before the second part, which proves the invaliditie of the same peace; because, I heare,
Mat. 13.25. Inimicus homo superseminavit ziza∣nia, &c. the Enemie man hath sow'd the tares of division among our Armies neere Dublin, and made use of some of our own Ca∣tholiques, as active Instruments to promove his designe: Vti∣nam saperent & intelligerent, & novissima providerent. The Mar∣ques of Ormond appeares not in the businesse: The Lord Digby hath assumed his Excellencie the Marques of Clanrickard, to act this tragicke scene: he without authoritie promiseth much, but alas is able (in the condition of these times) to performe little; without Commission undertaketh all things; yet while he hath no other prop, than Digbyes parolle, he is able to per∣forme nothing.
His Excellency the Marques of Clanrickard might reasona∣bly
suppose, that the Nuncius, the Clergie and Confederate Catholiques of Ireland have more power, and can prevaile more with the Popes Holynesse, our Queene, and the State of France, than any one particular Subject in England or Ire∣land. By his engagement nought else is to be expected, but a fatall division betweene the Confederate Catholiques of Ire∣land to the destruction of Religion, prejudice of His Majestie; and ruine of this distressed Nation, which the God of mercie a∣vert. The politicke dayes of Elizabeth are revived in these our woefull dayes, and Catholiques are assumed as instruments to raise up heresie and pull downe Religion. Was it to that end his Holynesse spent his moneyes to rescue Connaught from the Scots?
Our Nobilitie, and centry of the Pale were not intrusted by those of Dublin with armes to defend themselves, and in the progresse of these warres they have been pillaged, burned, de∣stroyed and banished, above all others of this Nation, not∣withstanding they in time past assisted by a sociall warre to settle His Maiesty in a full and secure possession of Vlster. Being forgetfull of this foule remuneration they would now precipi∣tate themselves into an unwarrantable and unsafe Peace with those very persons, that thus afflicted them. Venatione cepe∣runt me quasi avem inimici mei gratis.
Thren. 3.52 I beseech them (for their owne good, and the good of their posteritie) that they would consult with disinteressed Lawyers, who may truly enforme them, whither by the Articles of the Peace rejected, or the En∣gagement of the Marques of Clanrickard, they are any way se∣cured of their Religion, Lives or Estates. The indictements & attainders of their persons, and the offices taken on their land remaine still in full force: the act of oblivion will not be gran∣ted, till the next Parliament: how many of their heads may be chop'd off before then? They are indeed call'd backe to their lands, but there to live, as Tenants at will, seeing no solid as∣surance is given them to possesse the same without interrupti∣on; whensoever it shall please the present Lord Lieutenant or his successors, they may be ejected, and forced to give an ac∣compt of the maine-Rates during the time they possessed the same by intrusion, and withall they themselves may be arraig∣ned
for their lives. Let them turne themselves what way they list, they are like to be a prey on all sides, if they adhere not (according to their oath) to the Catholique Confederacie. They ought not for any injurie pretended to be done them by any their fellow-Confederates, concurre to any act destructive to themselves, and their Religion. Redresse may be had by more lawfull wayes, and a Course layd downe for prevention of any future injurie. Vae illi, per quem venit scandalum.
Math. 18.7.
How shall wee avoid Gods just indignation, the infamous note of perjurie, and everlasting disgrace among all Nations, if (having proclaimed unto the world, and accordingly taken a solemne oath) that wee would maintaine the Catholique Religion) wee should reject all the graces granted unto us by our Soveraigne for the maintenance of the same Religi∣on, and adhere unto his Subject and unto a Peace, de∣rogatory to all the said graces? His Majestie grants us the re∣peale of the penall lawes made against Religion: the subject denyes it. His Majestie commands the suspension of Poynings act, which might otherwise be a hindrance unto us and unto the Catholique Religion the next Parliament: the subject sup∣presseth it: His Majestie grants unto us a Catholique Vice-Roy to governe us; a thing knowne abroad in Catholique Countreyes, and by all Catholiques passionatly desired; the Subject invents wayes, to reject it. Shall wee ad∣here to the King or to the Subject; to our Religion or to heresie; to the Conventicle of Malignants, or to our Catho∣lique Confederacy; to our solemne oath and publique prote∣stations, or to perjurie and perfidie? Perditio tua ex te Israel. These human policies have hitherto produced no other ef∣fects, than the distracting of the subjects from assisting their Soveraigne, and are like for the future to produce no better. When great ones preferre their owne private interest before the Kings securitie, what hopes are there of any reliefe to be sent him? If ever the Catholique Confederats send over succour for His Majestie, (as by their protestation they have vowed) they resolve never to give the honour of their labours and charge in that expedition to any Protestant subject breathing; for that were to fall into the old servitude; when the Catholiques con∣tributed
well nigh a million of money to His Majestie, the Protestant or Puritan Ministers of Iustice assumed all the ho∣nour of such Contributions to themselves, and represented the Catholiques as Refractories.
Here (Venerable Prelates and Fathers) I must offer violence to mine owne Genius, and stop the vent of many occurring ar∣guments, which might be propounded in this weightie mat∣ter. To you this Survey is addressed, because from you the au∣thor received Commands and encouragement to attempt it; as it is composed to justifie your Religious endeavours in pro∣moving the cause of God; so I pray, it may be patronized by your favourable acceptance. Hee that is not with you, is against you;
Luc. 11.23. hee that gathereth not with you, scattereth. God hath ap∣pointed you to support his Arke, when others withdrew their shoulders from so sweet a burden. Preserve (Venerable Pre∣lates and Fathers) preserve it, by your selves and your con∣stant Adherents, from the foule hands of the Philisthims, least the Gentils invading our Lords inheritance pollute his holy Tem∣ple! nolite dare SAVCTVM CANIBVS! suffer not ravening wolves to possesse our Lords fould: rescue from their devouring Iawes the flocke committed to your charge:
Ezech. 34.. that which was lost, seeke after, and that which was cast away, bring backe againe: and that, which was broken, bind up; and that, which was weake, strenthen; and that, which was fat and strong, keepe, and feede in Iudgement; that once that joyfull day may shine in our hemisphere, when we may all say; est unus Pastor & unum ovile. How prodigiously God hath seconded your humble and weake beginnings histories shall communicate to future ages, ut qui gloriatur, in Domino glorietur. The enemie hath beene brought in, and seated in the chiefe Citie within your owne Quarters, whilest you mo∣destly resisted by your Fatherly admonition. Agents are sent unto you to VVaterford by the late Supreme Councell and Committees to treate of a friendly Composure, if possibly it might be, interim they invite the Marques of Ormond, and present him ten Thousand men to Conquer Mounster, and to enforce a Peace,
. Reg. 27.4. no lesse unjust, than invalid, on his Majesties faithfull Subjects. O persidie! at fugit hostis nemine perse∣quente.
Et Domim nutu dissipatum est Consilium Achitophel uti∣le, ut induceret dominus super Absolom malum. Your armes were onely prayers and teares;
Heb. 5.7, & exauditi estis pro vestra re∣verentia: God, who searcheth the secret angles of mens hearts, knew your religious intentions to ayme purely at the repara∣tion of Religion, the securitie of our Soveraigne, and preser∣vation of his kingdome. I wish, that others of inferiour qua∣litie and lesse power in Ireland, than the Marques, did take no∣tice, how his deerest friends did abandon him, when the Cler∣gie resisted, and the Cause of God was brought into hazard; how much more would the friends of those others desert them, in case they attempted any thing to the prejudice of the Church, and without the consent of those, that intrusted them. Mihi autem adhaerere Deo bonum est.
Psal. 72.28
But these and such like (Renowned Prelates and Fa∣thers) are Immissiones per Angelos malos.
Psal. 77.40 1. Cor. 10.13 God will give cum tentatione proventum. Goe on forward with Machabean spirits, and as you succeede unto them in pontificall dignitie; so imitate them in heroicall fortitude: Let your zeale against impietie parallell that of Phinees, and your aversion against heresie and idolatrie, that of Mathathias. Fight our Lords fight, and while the Catholique armies are in the field with Iosue, let your prayers and oblations be offered unto God on the mountaine with Moyses.
3. Reg. 19.18. 2. Paral. 20.17. Reliquit Deus sibi septem millia virorum, qui non curvaverunt genua ante Baal. It shall not be you that shall fight, but onely stand confidently, and you shall see the helpe of our Lord over you: Ioyne both swords together (the spi∣rituall and temporall) and let one sword helpe the other, as our ancient fundamentall lawes,
Hoved. hist. Angl. prescribed by the glorious Con∣fessour Edward sometime King of England, doe warrant you. Then is the power from God, well ordered, when one sword (the temporall) is subordinate to the other, the spirituall, and by the spirituall reduced into practise.
Extrav. Commun. l. 1. tit. 8. & obed. c. 1. Both are in the power of the Church; but the temporall sword is to be unsheathed for the Church by the hands of Kings and souldiers. That God of hosts, who gave you to begin well, will give you also to ac∣complish well, to the Consummation of the Saints,
Ephes. 4.12. unto the worke of the ministerie, unto the edifying of the Body of Christ,
which is his Church; that having fought a good fight, preserved the faith, and consummated your course in his militant Church on earth; you may be Crowned with a diademe of iustice in his triumphant Church in heaven. So wisheth, so prayeth and in the fervour of spirit desireth

