



My Lord,
THE Idea and Plan of the Royal-Society, ha∣ving been first con∣ceiv'd and delineated by a
 Great and Learned Chancel∣lor, which High Office your Lordship deservedly bears; not as an Acquisition of For∣tune, but your Intellectual Endowments; Conspicuous (among other Excellencies) by the Inclination Your Lord∣ship discovers to promote Na∣tural Knowledge: As it justi∣fies the Discernment of that Assembly, to pitch upon Your Lordship for their President, so does it no less discover the Candor, yea, I presume to say, the Sublimity of your Mind, in so generously honoring them with your Acceptance of the Choice they have made.

A Chancellor,Lord Viscount Brounc∣ker, Chan∣cellor to the Late Qu. Consort, now Dowa∣ger. The Right Honourable Cha. Mon∣tague, Esq; Chancellor of the Ex∣chequer. and a very Learned Lord, was the First who honoured the Chair; and a no less Honorable and Learned Chancellor, resigns it to Your Lordship: So as after all the Difficulties and Hardships the Society has hi∣therto gone through; it has thro' the Favour and Prote∣ction of its Presidents, not only preserv'd its Reputation from the Malevolence of Enemies and Detractors, but gone on Culminating, and now Triumphantly in Your Lordship: Under whose pro∣pitious Influence, I am per∣swaded, it may promise it self That, which indeed has
 hitherto been wanting, to justifie the Glorious Title it bears of a ROYAL SOCIE∣TY. The Emancipating it from some Remaining and Discouraging Circumstances, which it as yet labours under; among which, that of a Pre∣carious and unsteady Abode, is not the least.
This Honor was reserv'd for Your Lordship; and an Honor, permit me to call it, not at all unworthy the Own∣ing of the Greatest Person living: Namely, the Esta∣blishing and Promoting Real Knowledge; and (next to what is Divine) truly so called; as far, at least, as Humane Na∣ture
 extends towards the Knowledge of Nature, by enlarging her Empire beyond the Land of Spectres, Forms, Intentional Species, Vacuum, Oc∣cult Qualities, and other Inadae∣quate Notions; which, by their Obstreperous and Noisy Disputes, affrighting, and (till of late) deterring Men from adventuring on further Dis∣coveries, confin'd them in a lazy Acquiescence, and to be fed with Fantasms and fruitless Speculations, which signifie nothing to the specifick Na∣ture of Things, solid and useful Knowledge; by the Investigation of Causes, Princi∣ples, Energies, Powers, and Ef∣fects
 of Bodies, and Things Visible; and to improve them for the Good and Benefit of Mankind.
My Lord, That which the Royal Society needs to accom∣plish an entire Freedom, and (by rendring their Circum∣stances more easie) capable to subsist with Honor, and to reach indeed the Glorious Ends of its Institution, is an Establish∣ment in a more Settl'd, Ap∣propriate, and Commodious Place; having hitherto (like the Tabernacle in the Wilderness) been only Ambulatory for almost Forty-Years: But Solo∣mon built the First Temple; and what forbids us to hope, that
 as Great a Prince may build Solomon's House, as that Great Chancellor (one of Your Lord∣ship's Learned Predecessors) had design'd the Plan;Verulamii Atlantis there being nothing in that August and Noble Model impossible, or beyond the Power of Na∣uare and Learned Industry.
Thus, whilst King Solomon's Temple was Consecrated to the God of Nature, and his true Worship; This may be Dedica∣ted, and set apart for the Works of Nature; deliver'd from those Illusions and Impostors, that are still endeavouring to cloud and depress the True, and Substantial Philosophy: A shallow and Superficial Insight,
 wherein (as that Incompara∣ble Person rightly observes) having made so many Atheists: whilst a profound, and thorow Penetration into her Recesses (which is the Business of the Royal Society) would lead Men to the Knowledge, and Admira∣tion of the Glorious Author.
And now, My Lord, I ex∣pect some will wonder what my Meaning is, to usher in a Trifle, with so much Magni∣ficence, and end at last in a fine Receipt for the Dressing of a Sallet with an Handful of Pot-Herbs! But yet, My Lord, this Subject, as low and despicable as it appears, chal∣lenges a Part of Natural Hi∣story;
 and the Greatest Prin∣ces have thought it no Dis∣grace, not only to make it their Diversion, but their Care, and to promote and encou∣rage it in the midst of their weightiest Affairs: He who wrote of the Cedar of Libanus, wrote also of the Hysop which grows upon the Wall.
To verifie this, how much might I say of Gardens and Rural Employments, preferrable to the Pomp and Grandeur of other Secular Business, and that in the Estimate of as Great Men as any Age has produc'd! And it is of such Great Souls we have it record∣ed; That after they had per∣form'd
 the Noblest Exploits for the Publick, they sometimes chang'd their Scepters for the Spade, and their Purple for the Gardiner's Apron. And of these, some, My Lord, were Emperors, Kings, Consuls, Dicta∣tors, and Wise Statesmen; who amidst the most impor∣tant Affairs, both in Peace and War, have quitted all their Pomp and Dignity in Exchange of this Learned Pleasure: Nor that of the most refin'd Part of Agricul∣ture (the Philosophy of the Garden and Parterre only) but of Herbs, and wholesome Sallets, and other plain and useful Parts of Geoponicks, and
 Wrote Books of Tillage and Husbandry; and took the Plough-Tackle for their Banner, and their Names from the Grain and Pulse they sow'd, as the Marks and Characters of the highest Honor.
But I proceed no far∣ther on a Topic so well known to Your Lordship: Nor urge I Examples of such Illustrious Persons laying a∣side their Grandeur, and even of deserting their Stations; (which would infinitely preju∣dice the Publick, when wor∣thy Men are in Place, and at the Helm) But to shew how consistent the Diversions of the Garden and Villa were, with
 the highest and busiest Em∣ployment of the Common∣wealth, and never thought a Reproch, or the least Dimi∣nution to the Gravity and Veneration due to their Per∣sons, and the Noble Rank they held.
Will Your Lordship give me Leave to repeat what is said of the Younger Pliny, (Nephew to the Naturalist) and whom I think we may parallel with the Greatest of his time (and perhaps of any since) under the Worthiest Emperor the Roman World ever had? A Person of vast Abilities, Rich, and High in his Master's Favour; that
 so Husbanded his time, as in the Midst of the weightiest Affairs, to have Answer'd, and by hisSi quid temporis à civilibus negotiis, quibus totum jam intenderat animum, suf∣furari potuit, colendis agris, priscos illos Romanos Numam Pompilium, Cincinna∣tum, Catonem, Fabios, Cicerones, alios∣que virtute claros viros imitare; qui in magno honore constituti, vites putare, ster∣corare agros, & irrigare nequaquam tur∣pe & inhonestum putarunt. In Vit. Plin. 2. Example, made good what I have said on this Occasion. The Ancient and best Magistrates of Rome, allow'd but the Ninth Day for the City and Publick Busi∣ness; the rest for the Country and the Sallet Garden: There were then fewer Causes indeed
 at the Bar; but never greater Justice, nor better Judges and Advocates. And 'tis hence ob∣served, that we hardly find a Great and Wise Man among the Ancients, qui nullos habuit hortos, excepting only Pompo∣nius Atticus; whilst his Dear Cicero professes, that he never laid out his Money more rea∣dily, than in the purchasing of Gardens, and those sweet Re∣tirements, for which he so of∣ten left the Rostra (and Court of the Greatest and most flourishing State of the World) to visit, prune, and water them with his own Hands.

But, My Lord, I forget with whom I am talking thus; and a Gardiner ought not to be so bold. The Present I humbly make Your Lordship, is in∣deed but a Sallet of Crude Herbs: But there is among them that which was a Prize at the Isthmian Games; and Your Lordship knows who it was both accepted, and re∣warded as despicable an Ob∣lation of this kind. The Favor I humbly beg, is Your Lordship's Pardon for this Presumption. The Subject is mean, and requires it, and my Reputation in danger; shou d Your Lordship hence suspect that one could never write so
 much of dressing Sallets, who minded any thing seri∣ous, besides the gratifying a Sensual Appetite with a Vo∣luptuary Apician Art.
Truly, My Lord, I am so far from designing to pro∣mote those Supplicia Luxuriae, (as Seneca calls them) by what I have here written; that were it in my Power, I would re∣call the World, if not altoge∣ther to their Pristine Diet, yet to a much more wholsome and temperate than is now in Fashion: And what if they find me like to some who are eager after Hunting and other Field-Sports, which are Labori∣ous Exercises? and Fishing,
 which is indeed a Lazy one? who, after all their Pains and Fatigue, never eat what they take and catch in either: For some such I have known: And tho' I cannot affirm so of my self, (when a well drest and excellent Sallet is before me) I am yet a very moderate Eater of them. So as to this Book-Luxury, I can affirm, and that truly what the Poet says of himself (on a less in∣nocent Occasion) Lasciva pa∣gina, vita proba. God forbid, that after all I have advanc'd in Praise of Sallets, I should be thought to plead for the Vice I censure, and chuse that of Epicurus for
 my Lemma; In hac arte con∣senui; or to have spent my time in nothing else. The Plan annext to these Papers, and the Apparatus made to super∣struct upon it, would acquit me of having bent all my Contemplations on Sallets on∣ly. What I humbly offer Your Lordship, is (as I said) Part of Natural History, the Product of Horticulture, and the Field, dignified by the most illustrious, and sometimes til∣led Laureato Vomere; which, as it concerns a Part of Philosophy, I may (without Vanity) be al∣low'd to have taken some Pains in Cultivating, as an in∣ferior Member of the Royal Society.

But, My Lord, whilst You read on (if at least You vouchsafe me that Honor to read at all) I am con∣scious I rob the Publick of its most Precious Mo∣ments.
I therefore Humbly again Implore Your Lordship's Pardon: Nor indeed need∣ed I to have said half this, to kindle in Your Breast, that which is already shining there (Your Lordship's Esteem of the Royal Society) after what You were pleas'd to Express in such an Obliging manner, when it was lately to wait
 upon Your Lordship; a∣mong whom I had the Ho∣nor to be a Witness of Your Generous, and Favour∣able Acceptance of their Ad∣dresses, who am,
My Lord,

