



BELOVED,
AFfliction, the Rod God useth to correct us with, for he scourgeth every Son he receiveth, Heb. 12. being laid on me, it made me in Jan. 8. 1651. to search and try my wayes, and to turn unto the Lord, and because no man as David saith, knoweth his errors, therefore I prayed in the words of Elihu, Job 34. 32. that which I see not, shew thou me, and if I have done iniquity, I will do so no more; and knowing it a truth by experience formerly, which he spake Job 33. 15. That God speaketh in a dream, in visions of the night, when deep sleep falleth upon men, in slumbring on the bed: then he openeth the ears of men, and sealeth their instruction, &c. (though I ab∣hor those filthy Dreamers St. Jude speaks of, and those Enthusiasts condemn'd by Eusebius, Eccles. Hist. Tripart. lib. 7. cap. Epiphan. scholast. Interpr. Hi enim cujusdam Daemonis operationem expectant, & hanc sancti spiritus presentiam arbitrantur: whose successors most of our Ranters and Quakers are, who believe things contrary to the written Word, and practice what the Scriptures condemn, as did these old Messalians, Euchitae, for by all these three names they are call'd there. After which God shewed me (according to my Prayer) my not performing my Oath and Covenant in a Sermon by acci∣dent I heard in Bathe, as I was travelling through that Town: and shortly af∣ter moved me exceedingly in a Dream to write against the sin of Perjury, and to add it to my former Tract in my first Book I delivered to the King, 1647. against this sin, for sith the Lord punish'd him for this sin; how can he spare us unless we repent of it. And though I humbled my self for this sin presently, yet was I not resolved to print it till in March following, reading Ezek. 9. 4. that we ought not to mourn for our own sins only, but for the sins of the Land: I be∣thought my self of them, and then was moved, (as I conceive by Gods Spirit) for his glory▪ and his Churches good, and the discharge of my duty, to mak a Vow to write against the sins in this Book specified; and then I prayed for
 direction and assistance, for grace, wisdom, and prudence, for strength, health, and means to effect it, so as it may accomplish the ends desired, &c. And though Satan hitherto hath much bindred me, together with mine own infirmities, whilst I too much looked on the things seen, and conferr'd with flesh and blood. Yet now Christian Reader, for he ends alone above-specified, and to pay my Vow with fear and trembling at Gods Word, and the judgements that hang over our heads, and not for any by-interest to any Person, or malice, or hatred against any, or out of pride, prejudice, or self-seeking have I imprinted this (as God is my Record, whom I serve in the Spirit, I speak the truth, and lie not.) And therefore what is of God, and agreeable to his Word, I desire thee only to hold fast, and practice; What hath not warrant thence, impute it to my igno∣rance and weakness, (which in Christs name I desire thee to pardon) but before thou judge any thing, prove it by the Word to be an error, without partiality, or hypocrisie, self-love, interest, or fear of Man; and the Lord grant us both the Spirit of Discerning, to know the things that differ, and to approve the things that are most excellent, and to walk in the light when we have it, with∣out detaining the truth in unrighteousness, lest the wrath of God be revealed from Heaven against us for it: but grant that we may be sincere; and without offence now, and hereafter in the day of Christ, which the Lord grant for Christs sake. AMEN.

