



SIR,
I Was earnestly desired to print this Sermon soon after it was preached; but I refused, and thought it would not have been urged any more: but one Friend lately brought me the Sermon as it was taken in Short-hand, desiring me that I would look it over that it might be printed. I thought now I had a Reason that would satisfy, alledging that it was an un∣usual thing to print a Funeral Sermon so long after the preach∣ing of it; but that would not satisfy. Then I intreated your self to take off that Friend and others from their Importunity; but instead of that you told me, that it would be printed with∣out my Consent, and desired me not to withstand it any longer. Therefore now I leave it wholly to your dispose, and if it be made publick, the Lord bless this poor Labour, that it may be for his Glory, and the good of those that shall read it.
I have been long acquainted with you, and have been much obliged to you; God called you by his Grace in your young Time, and you are now an old Disciple of Jesus Christ.
You have found Christ precious to your Soul here; but how precious will he be in Heaven? Now we love to think, and
 speak, and hear of him, of his Person, and of his Benefits; but O what Love and Praise when we shall see him as he is, when we shall be with him to behold his Glory in Heaven!
We grow old, and through the infinite Mercy of God in Christ, hope to come soon to our everlasting Rest.
God hath lately taken away the desire of your Eyes with a Stroak, she was a Mother in Israel, one that feared the Lord, and served him in her Generation above many. Be thankful to God, that you so long enjoyed such a comfortable Yoak-fellow, such a Meet-help for Heaven and Earth. All Relations must have a Parting, and that a final One for this World; but the Saints shall meet in Heaven, where their Com∣munion will be far sweeter than it was on Earth, where God, blessed for ever, will fill them with everlasting Joy, and there shall be no more Sin, no more Sorrow, no more Temptation, but admiring and praising God to Eternity.
The God of all Grace carry us an end in his Ways, make our last Days our best Days, for Holiness, and Joy, and Peace in believing; guide us by his Counsels, and afterwards receive us to Glory.
SIR,

