

SIRS,
YOur ready acceptation of my former Labors for you, hath incouraged this second and last in∣deavor of mine this way to serve you. I have for many years been convinced of the great use and need you have of the following Discourses: But the Motives that quickned me to their Publication at this time, were especially these two.
First, The hand of the Lord hath gone forth with terror against you this Winter, many of your Compani∣ons
 are gone down to the bottom. Such a doleful account of Shipwracks from every Coast, and such sad la∣mentations as have been heard in al∣most every Maritine Town, cannot but deeply affect every Heart with Sorrow and Compassion, and hath ingaged me in this Service for the remnant that is left.
Secondly, The seasonable and pru∣dent care His Majesty hath at this time manifested for the regulation and preservation of your Newland Trade, and incouragement of your honest industry therein; hath also provoked me to hasten this design, for the regulation of your lives and man∣ners, without which, all external means will signifie but little to your true prosperity.
This little Manual contains the sum of your duty in the several parts of your imployments, and faithfully discovers the Temptations and Dan∣gers attending you in them all. Ʋp∣on
 which consideration it is fitly, in∣tituled, The Sea-mans Compani∣on.
As God hath cast my lot among you, so he hath inclined my heart stu∣diously to promote your welfare. I have been by long observation con∣vinced, that one principal cause of your miscarriages, is the neglect of God in your outsets. Did you pray more, you might expect to prosper better. Indeed, if that Epicurean doctrine were true, That God con∣cerns not himself about the affairs of this lower World, but leaves all things to be swayed by the power of Natural causes, your neglect of prayer might be more excusable, but whilest Successes and Disappointments de∣pend upon his pleasure, it cannot but be the most direct course you can steer to ruine all, to forget and neglect God in your enterprises. To cure this evil, and prevent the manifold mis∣chiefs that follow it, the First Sermon
 is designed. And if the Lord shall bless it to your Conviction and Re∣formation, I may then comfortably apply the words of Moses to you, Deut. 33.18. Rejoyce Zebulun in thy going out.
You often hear the terrible voice of God in the Storms; and are at your wits end; not knowing what course to take, nor which way to turn for safety and comfort: And yet, how soon are all those Impressions worn off? And those Mercies which (whilest new) were so affecting; after a few days become stale and common? I have therefore in the Second Sermon labored not only to direct and support you in those straights, but have also indeavored to fix the Sense of those Providences upon your Hearts, and instruct you how to make due Improvements of them, by answering the several aims and designs of them.

It hath been much upon my Heart, to what and how many Temptations to sin you are exposed in Foreign Countreys, where lawful Remedies are absent, alluring Objects present, and Temptations exceedingly strengthned upon you, by hopes of secrecy and concealment: And indeed for a Man whose Heart is not throughly seasoned with Religion, and awed by the fear of God, to converse in such places, and with such Company, and not be polluted with their sins, is upon the matter as great a Miracle, as for the three Children to come out of the Fiery Furnace without an Hair sing∣ed, or the smell of Fire upon their Garments. I have therefore pre∣pared for you the best preservative from these Temptations in the Third Sermon, which the Lord make an effectual Antidote to your Souls, against the Corruptions that are in the World through Lust.

I have frequently observed the mis∣chievous influence that Success and Prosperity have had upon some of you. How the God of your Mercies hath been forgotten, and his Mercies made instruments of sin against him. How apt are Men to ascribe all to their own wisdom, care, and industry; as if God had no hand in it. The Fourth Sermon therefore leads up your thoughts to the Fountain of all your good, and drops many very seasonable and necessary Cautions upon you, to keep you humble and thankful under Prosperity.
And because Men will not own God in their Success, but sacrifice to their own Net: God often teaches them the evil of it by sad Losses and Dis∣appointments. Yea, Disappointments sometimes follow the best of Men, and that in the most just and honest imployments, to caution the former sort, and support the latter, in such a case I recommend the Fifth Sermon
 to your serious consideration, not doubting, if the Blessing of God go forth with it, but it may prove a very seasonable and useful discourse to you in that condition.
And lastly, Because it is so com∣mon for Sea-men to forget the many Mercies they have received in a voy∣age, when it is over, and God hath brought them to the Havens of Desire, and among their Relations. I have in the last Sermon instructed them in their duty, and labored to workin such a Sense of Mercies upon their Hearts, as may ingage them to a due and thankful acknowledgment of God in all.
You see by this brief account, how honest the design is in which I have ingaged for you. But I am sensible, that the management is very de∣fective, it being dispatched in haste, and when my hands were filled with other work, and my body clogged
 with many infirmities. But such as it is, I heartily devote it to the special service of your Souls, and remain

Dartmouth,
Jan. 21. 1675.
