



My Lord,
IT was a sweet refreshment to me in the dayes of our late Exile to be providentially cast into your Lordships Company and Acquaintance. I savoured in your self, and your most accomplished Lady, those things which are rarely found in persons of your eminent station and quality in the World.
I have neither forgotten your tender sympathy with poor distressed Zion, nor my weak endeavours to prop up your Faith with respect to a more chearful aspect of Providence upon the Churches.
And now my Lord, we that mourned for, and suffered with Sion; are this day called to rejoyce with her. Yea, you are called to rejoyce with a joy above the common joy, in as much as your Lordship is not only a partaker of the common mercy with others, but God hath honoured you in accompanying and assisting the glorious Instrument of our Deliverance.
My Lord, It is a greater honour to be serviceable to the Interest of Christ, than to descend from the blood of Nobles. 'Tis the honour of Angels that they are Mini∣string
Spirits for the Churches good. What my apprehen∣sions of and expectations from this providence are, your Lordship will measure from the following discourse.
Let England rejoyce to behold a Protestant King upon its Throne: A King that gives more Honour to the Throne, than it is capable to reflect on him that sits thereon. His soundness in Protestant Principles, his Prudence and Equity in Government, his zeal for the Interest of Christ at the lowest ebb; speak him such a blessing to this Na∣tion as for Ages past it hath not enjoyed: And now my Lord, we may expect if ever, to find that glorious de∣scription of a just and holy King answered in him, that he shall be to us as the light of the Morning, when the Sun riseth, even a morning without Clouds, &c. 2 Sam. 23.4.
My Lord, Having in my place performed that Duty of Thanksgiving to God, enjoyned by publick Authority, with the same alacrity that Moses his Mother obeyed the Com∣mand of Pharaoh's Daughter, to nurse her own Child; I am bold (notwithstanding the imperfections that attend it) to offer it in all humility to your Lordships hands; be∣ing confident the design of it will be agreeable to your Spi∣rit, though there be nothing of External Ornament to com∣mend it to your fancy. So heartily congratulating your Lordships safe and happy return, with your pious and in∣genuous Lady, in the memorable year of Englands Delive∣rance from the Romish Yoak, I beg your Honours pardon for this presumption, and remain

