


MY LORD,
THE Jews Church-Government was so firmly settled, and their Laws so strictly observed, that no man was to take the liberty to himself to act any thing contrary to the Command∣ment and Resolution of the Sanhedrin, in any cause or matter whatsoever: it being so expresly comman∣ded in the 17. Chap. of Deut. That when there should happen any Controversie amongst them, they were to goe up to the Priest or Judge that should be in those days, and to hearken and doe according as they were told there: and from their Sentence they were not to decline ei∣ther to the right hand or the left. These words the Jews interpret thus; If they should tell you the right hand is the left, and that the left is the right, you are to obey them: for so it seems in the 4. of Levit. where it is said, That when all the Congregation should have committed a Sin through Ignorance, and that the thing should be hidden from the eyes of the As∣sembly, &c. (Where it appears to be in a Case where, by the Consent of the Sanhedrin, somewhat had been observed generally; the which afterwards by the same Sanhedrin, or by another that succeeded it, after more
 serious Consideration, was found to be unlawfull or unexpedient:) then they were to offer for the acknow∣ledgment of their Errour a Sacrifice. And the Jews, fol∣lowing their own Rule, expound here in this case the word Elders for those wise men which rule over them.  Who is an old man? He that possesseth Wisedom. And if one among them would presume to act or command others to doe contrary to the Opinion of the major part of the Assembly, although he should be in the right, and they in the wrong, yet nevertheless he was to be put to death; as it appears in the same Chap. of Deuterono∣my above mentioned. There are several Examples in the Talmud concerning this matter; and it is com∣monly received amongst them, That if there should be an hundred Prophets on the one side, and an hundred and one wise men on the other; yet the Law shall be af∣ter the Opinion of the major part: for, say they, The Law was given but once, and the Interpretation of it left to the Discretion of wise men in each generation.
I will onely here set forth a Case which is told in the Talmud, the consequence thereof being in my appre∣hension very notable, though for matter of fact each one has his liberty to believe as he pleaseth. The thing was this. There arose a Dispute and Controversie be∣tween one Rabban Gamaliel and Rabbi Josuah, whose Opinion being highly contradicted by the most part of the Assembly, he, the said Rabbi Josuah, considering the great reason he had on his side, and yet that he was so strongly opposed, expressed himself thus; If the Truth be on my side, let such and such things evident∣ly appear: which they say happened accordingly; and
 yet for all this, they would not yield to his Opinion. And when he saw this, he more earnestly said, If the Truth be on my side, let a Voice come down from Heaven and declare it: and accordingly they say a Voice came down from Heaven, and said, The Law is according to the Opinion of Rabbi Josuah; but when there are many against one, the Law must be observ'd according to the Opinion of those many.
The Children of Israel were commanded to take on the First day of the Feast of Tabernacles the Fruit of goodly Trees, Branches of Palm-trees, and Boughs of thick Trees and Willows, and there to rejoyce be∣fore the Lord their God. Yet when this day happens to be on a Sabbath, they are forbidden by the Sanhedrin to bring them, lest they should carry them  four cubits length  in a publick Place, which is a Breach of the Sabbath. But when the San∣hedrin it self imposeth a Command upon the Jews, be∣side what is in the Law, that is, that the Seventh day of that Feast they should appear with a Willow-bough in their hands, if this day happens on a Sabbath, then they remove the Feast aforehand to the day following: for this is their Rule, if the first day of the seventh month, called  the beginning of the year, falls on the first day, they then remove it to the day fol∣lowing. The reason is, because then the Seventh day of that Feast would happen on the Sabbath, being the 21. day of the month, when their Commandment could not be observed. And when they are ask'd the reason, why for the Command expressed in the Law they do not remove the Day, but neglect the Command; and for theirs, they remove the Day, lest their Command should
 be neglected: to this they answer,  The wise men added more strength for the maintaining their Commands, then those of the Law. For, say they,  The Law is strong enough of it self, being the Command of God; but theirs, if neg∣lected, may in time come to be despised.
Now I could wish the people of this Nation were of this persuasion, that we might all conform to and im∣brace those Laws that are commanded us by those that are set over us as Rulers and Directors in all Ec∣clesiasticall Affairs: and although it might not alto∣gether agree with our Persuasions, yet we might consider them to be wise men, and that to the best of their under∣standing they do impose upon us onely such Rules as are more proper for and conducive towards our Salvation.
Now, my Lord, I should much wrong my own un∣derstanding, if I should fansie my self to have so much skill and knowledge in the Mysteries of Christianity as perhaps I may presume to have in the Judaicall Laws, in which in a manner I was born and bred. Wherefore I now here humbly crave your Lordship's Pardon, as my Lord, Father and Benefactor, if I should have laid down in this my following Discourse any thing which is not conform and agreeable to the Rules of the Church of England as it is now established: I do here utterly and absolutely disown it, and am heartily sorry for it; promising to be alwaies ready to embrace that Doctrine my Betters shall instruct me in, especi∣ally the Commands of your Lordship, whom all the days of my life I will be ready and prompt to obey.

