


SOVEREIGN LORD,
IT is an undoubted Truth, That the Sacred Scrip∣tures not onely teach us those Rules whereby we are to govern our selves as to God Almighty in matters of Religion, but also how we ought to be∣have our selves one towards another: therefore our Saviour Jesus Christ declared all the Law to be con∣tained onely in two Precepts, (viz.) to love God and our Neighbour; this word Neighbour comprehending in it all sorts of men, including in it that Justice and Charity which is proper from the Great ones to their Inferiours, as also that Honour and Respect which is due from all men to their Superiours, each one according to his degree and quality.
The ancient Jews do derive that respect due to Magistrates from the first Precept, that is, from God himself, by reason their Power and Superin∣tendency over men proceeds from an express Com∣mand of God to Noah and his Sons after the Floud,
 (that is) to establish Judges and Governours: and there he doth grant and allow them so much of his own Power, that they may legally execute Justice upon all Offenders; for otherwise men could not have taken to themselves that which be∣longs only to God: but their Power being instituted and given from above, therefore Magistrates are intituled in the Scriptures  Gods; and if so, it is but reason that they should be owned upon Earth as little Gods. Hence we may judge how much Love, Honour, Fear, Respect and Obedience is due to the Royal Person, as being the Head and Chief of all Magistrates, upon whose Pleasure all the rest depend, and thence do receive all their Power and Lustre. The Jews Laws as concerning Kings are so strict, that the least Misdemeanour committed against a King was punished with Death.
The Talmudists, endeavouring to excuse King David concerning Ʋriah's death, do note, that when Na∣than the Prophet comes to declare to David God's Displeasure as to that Fact, it is there said, And hast slain him with the sword of the children of Ammon: and hence they conclude David's Sin not to be, that he slew Ʋriah, for he deserved it; but that he slew him with the Sword of the Children of Ammon. And their reason is express'd in those following words,  Ʋriah was a Rebell against the Crown, for he called Joab his Lord before the King: their meaning is, that Ʋriah was guilty of Rebellion, for before the King no man is to be called Lord but himself. Nathan the Prophet, being well skilled in the Laws of that Kingdom,
 when Adonias, David's eldest Son, would have crowned himself, the said Nathan coming then to King David's bed-side, after Bathsheba had been there a while, to know his pleasure concerning that Affair, there saith, And Solomon thy servant, &c. So that the Prophet would not call Solomon Lord before the old King, though he well knew his will that Solo∣mon should succeed him. And though this their Interpretation may be taken of some to be over∣curious; yet howsoever here it is manifest their ge∣neral Opinion was, That he that did commit such a Fault was to be punished with Death. For as in reference to God the least Imagination against his Divine Power and Majesty is a Sin unpardonable; so to Kings, that are immediate under God, and Gods upon the earth, the least Crime is reputed Treason. The Israelites were so zealous for the Ho∣nour of their Kings, that they own for a general Rule and established Law amongst them,  A King that will for∣give his Honour, his Honour is not forgiven. Their meaning is, that though a King, out of his good nature, would have pardoned an Injury commit∣ted against his Person, the Judges in this case ought not to take notice of his Mercy, but still punish the Delinquent, for fear of giving incouragement to others to presume to attempt any thing against Sa∣cred Majesty. So that all along they do derive the Honour of a King from that of God.
The Lord enjoyned the Children of Israel to bring in every year the First-fruits of the Land he had given them, as an acknowledgment that all was
 his. Your MAJESTY being under God Su∣preme Governour and God upon the Earth, I do humbly conceive it my Duty to present to Your Sa∣cred Hands the First-fruits of my Christianity, to whom they properly belong, as Defender of the Faith. Moreover, there lies another Obligation upon me more then upon any other man, which indeed gives me the boldness to presume so high in this my humble Offer.
The wonderfull Restauration of Your MAJE∣STY to these Your Kingdoms, (as I do manifest to the World in this my following Discourse) the Hand of the Lord appearing so eminently in it, was the first Motive that inclined me towards the Christian Religion: so that I receiving that Light and Influence from those Favours which the Lord hath pleased to bestow upon Your MAJESTY, how can I otherwise chuse but return them to the Fountain from whence they first sprang? From Your MAJESTY my Salvation first proceeded, and there I do humbly return the Reasons of my Conversion; hoping in Your Bounty and Benevo∣lence to reap that Acceptance which your MA∣JESTY uses to bestow upon sincere spirits, which without Craft or double intention do declare their serious thoughts. So casting my self at Your Sacred Feet, I ever remain obliged to pray to the Lord for the Health, Life and Prosperity of Your Sacred MAJESTY,

