



My very good Lord:
BLessed be God, that I have Survived this Labour, which I once feared I should have sunk under; and that I live to publish my Endeavours once more, in the Service of the Church of England; and thereby, have obtained my wish'd opportunity, to dedicate a Monument
 of my deep Sence, of your Lordship's manifold obligations upon me.
In particular, I rejoyce in the acknow∣ledgment, that I ow my Publick Station, next under God and His Sacred Majesty, to your Lordship's Assistance and Sole In∣terest; though, I cannot think, so much out of kindness to my Person (then, alto∣gether unknown to your Lordship) as affection and care of the Church; grounded in a great and pious intention, (however the object be esteem'd) truly worthy of so Re∣nowned a Prelate, and (many other waies) excellent and admired Patriot of the Church of England.
If, either my former attempts have been anywise available to the weakning the Bulworks of Non-Conformity; or my pre∣sent Essay, may succeed, in any measure, to evince or confirm the Truth in this great∣er Controversie; I am happy; that, as God hath some glory, and the Church some ad∣vantage; so some honour redounds upon your Lordship; who, with a virtuous de∣sign,
 gave me a Capacity at first, and ever since, have quickned and animated my Endeavours, in those Services.
I may be permitted to name our Con∣troversie with the Church of Rome, the great Controversie: For having been exer∣cised, in all the sorts of Controversie with Adversaries, on the other hand; I have found, that all of them put together, are not considerable; either, for weight of matter, or copiousness of Learning; or for Art, Strength, or Number of Adversaries, in comparison of this.
It takes in, the Length of time; the Breadth of place; and is managed, with the Heighth of Wit, and Depth of Subtlety; the Hills are covered with the Shadow of it, and its Boughs are like the goodly Cedars.
My Essay in these Treatises, is, to shorten and clear the way; and therefore, though I must run with it through all time; I have reduc'd the place; and removed the Wit and Subtleties, that would impede our pro∣gress.

I have endeavoured to lop off luxuri∣ant branches, and swelling excrescencies; to lay aside all personal reflections, captious advantages, Sophistical and Sarcastical Wit; and to set the Arguments on both sides, free from the darkness of all kind of cun∣ning, either of escape or reply, in their plain light and proper strength; as also, to con∣fine the Controversie, as near as I can, within the bounds of our own Concern, i. e. our own Church.
And when this is done, the plain and naked truth is; that the meanest of our o∣ther Adversaries (I had almost said the silly Quaker himself) seems to me, to have better Grounds, and more like Christian, than the glorious Cause of the Papacy.
But to draw a little nearer to our Point; your Lordship cannot but observe, that one end of the Roman Compass, is ever fixed upon the same Center; and the summ of their clamour is, our disobedience to the See of Rome. Our defense stands, upon a twofold Exception: 1. Against the Authority: 2. A∣gainst
 the Laws of Rome; and if either be justified, we are innocent.
The first Exception (and the defence of our Church, against the Authority of that See) is the matter of this Treatise; the se∣cond, is reserved.
I have determined, that all the Argu∣ments for the Pope's Authority, in England, are reduceable, to a five-fold Plea: the Right of Conversion as our Apostle; the Right of a Patriarch; the Right of Infal∣libility; the Right of Prescription, and the Right of Universal Pastorship: the Exami∣nation of them, carries us through our Work.
Verily, to my knowledge, I have o∣mitted nothing Argumentative of any one of these Pleas: yea, I have considered all those little inconsiderable things, which, I find any Romanists seem to make much of. But, indeed, their pretended Right of possession in England, and the Universal Pa∣storship, (to which they adhere, as their surest holds) have my most intended and
 greatest strength, and care and dilligence; that nothing material, or seemingly so, might escape, either unobserved, or not fully answe∣red; let not the contrary be said, but shewn.
I have further laboured to contract the Controversie, two ways.
1. By a very careful, as well as large, and I hope, as clear state of the question, in my definition and discourse of Schism, at the beginning: whereby, mistakes may be prevented, and much of matter disputed by others, excluded.
2. By waving the dispute of such things, as have no influence into the Conclusion; and (according to my use) giving as ma∣ny and as large Concessions to the Adversa∣ry, as our Cause will suffer.
Now, my end being favourably un∣derstood, I hope, there is no need to ask your Lordships, or any others, pardon, for that I have chosen not to dispute, two great things.
1. That, in the Words (tu es Petrus,
 & super hanc Petram) there is intended, some respect, peculiar to saint Peter's Per∣son: it is generally acknowledged, by the most learned Defenders of our Church, that Saint Peter had a Primacy of Order; and your Lordship well knows, that many of the Ancient Fathers have expressed as much; and I intend no more.
2. That Tradition may be Infallible, or indefectible, in the delivery of the Essen∣tials of Religion, for ought we know. By the Essentials, we mean no more, but the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, the Decalogue, and the two Sacraments: in this I have my Second, and my Reason too: for then Rush∣worth's Dialogues, and the new Methods of Roman opposition, need not trouble us.
My good Lord, it is high time, to beg your Pardon; that I have reason to con∣clude with an excuse, for a long Epistle: the truth is, I thought my self accountable to your Lordship, for a Brief of the Book, that took its being from your Lordship's
 Encouragement; and the rather, because it seems unmannerly to expect, that your good Old Age should perplex it self with Contro∣versie: which the Good God, continue long and happy, to the honour of his Church on Earth; and then, crown with the Glory of Heaven. It is the hearty prayer of,
My Lord,

