

THis is certainly the first Book that hath been dedicated to you, and you look on a Present of this nature to be so rare, its novelty will surprize you. You will possibly fancy I go about to court your good opinion, as all Authors do by their Dedications; but I assure you there is nothing of it: I neither have nor desire to have any obligation to you. This
 is the first Epistle Dedicatory that was ever made without interest; by so much the more valuable, in that it contains nei∣ther disguised nor corrupted Conceptions. I have been long weary of seeing Authors sacrifice to such as perhaps came short of you in merit, allured by hopes of pensions and recompences they scarce ever attain to; nay they seldom acquire such favors as cannot with justice be refused them; and it is not long since I saw a deserving person purchase at a very dear rate a place under a pretended Maecenas, yet was excluded by the Intrigues of a Prating Parasite, that had made a party amongst his Ser∣vants. Having heard so many Rascals in the Equipage of Great Persons, and so ma∣ny Great Persons that have the Souls of Rascals, commended, I was strangely tempted to do the like for you, and certain∣ly with no less reason than such Flatterers. How many of those they so highly vaunt, will never rightly understand themselves, till they come under your hands. They are not so honest in their Profession as you in yours; none more punctually executing the Orders of Justice; whose principal Pillar you are. I do not go about to main∣tain
 a Paradox, nor with Isocrate and other Orators, commend a Busiris, the Gowt, or a Tertian Ague. It seems to me that you may be very conscientiously applauded, if for no other reason, that you bring many into the right way, and open them the Gates of Paradise, according to the Proverb, That more go thither from the Gallows than from the Churchyard. Now to shew that your employment is not ignoble, is there not a Countrey in Asia or Africk (I know not whether) where the King thinks it an honour to hang his Subjects with his own hands, and takes this to be so inseparable from his Crown, that any that should go about to concern himself in it, would be punished as a Traytor. When the Holy Fathers called Attila, Saladin, and so many other Princes, the Executioners of Divine Justce; did they not assign you Illustrious Companions? Neither is your Dignity a little manifested by your Train, for at performance of the Functions of your Magistracy, you are attended by Guards and a multitude of Followers. How many Officers are there that labour only for you, and to give you employment?
 How happy would it be, were they faithful to you. Your Wealth were without end, could you get into your Clutches all that of right appertain to them, notwithstand∣ing whose frauds it is very considerable. No Revenues are certainer than yours, being settled on the wickedness of Man∣kind, that increases daily: you ought yet to act with moderation, because it is in your hand to extend your fortune without limits. He that is in an extraordinary manner happy, is said to carry about him a piece of the Rope in which a man hath been hanged; and who can have more of these than you? Your Merit of late comes to be so far owned, that Persons of Quality are no more scrupulous of keep∣ing you company, nor of drinking with you; your VVine being reputed excellent. Let none therefore admire to see you in∣sensibly crowded in amongst Hero's and Maecenas's, in which rank Flatterirs and Hyperbole's having of late placed so ma∣ny Theeves and Murtherers, I know not why you should be excluded, whom I take for one of their best friends; I am sure I have seen you give them very close embraces. It is true indeed, that
 soon after you use them ill. But do not Courtiers and Great Men the like? nay at the same time that they kiss and complement, betray and precipitate. If any reproach you that you strip men, you do it not till they are dead; but how many Lawyers and Ʋsurers suck the marrow out of their bones and flea them alive. In a word, all things considered, I find you merit an Epistle Dedicatory as well as many others. I should yet apprehend this would scarceluy pass for one, did I not beg something; I therefore beseech you not to deny your friendship to certain poor Au∣thors, that stand in need of your charita∣ble assistance: for the Injustice of the Age is arrived to such a height, that many of the best qualified, forsaken by their Maecenas's, starve; and unable to sup∣port contempt and poverty, are reduced to despair: now these wanting the courage of Judas to hang themselves, you by taking that pains, might ease them of a great deal of misery. I would end here, did not one thing come in my head, that usually accompanies such Encomiums of Dedications as are given in haste; which is a Promise of setting out at large the
 Life or History of their Hero. I hope one day to acquit my self of this Duty, in∣tending to write a Comment on the En∣glish Rogue; where I may properly be∣stow on you an ample Commemoration and celebrate your Prowesses and Memorable Actions. In the mean time believe that as much as your merit and condition per∣mits me, I am

