



THough you neither buy nor read this Book but for your pleasure, yet, if it afford you no∣thing else, you may justly complain both of your loss of time and money, but I can assure you, it was not writ to delight alone, but chiefly to in∣struct: As some Physicians purge with agreeable Potions, so some plea∣sant Books give profitable Adver∣tisements. Experience hath taught us the uselessness of Dogmatick Morals, and let good Maxims be ne∣ver so often inculcated, they are
 observed with no less difficulty, than attended to with impatience: but when we see Vice made ridiculous, we amend, least we become objects of publick derision. The greatest imputation against the Present I now make you, is, that it treats only of trifles, and directs in mat∣ters of the slightest consideration. But let us recollect how many preach great Vertues and decry great Vices, and how few reprehend ordinary defects, by how much more fre∣quent, by so much more dangerous, since becoming habitual, we scarce ever take notice of them. Do we not daily meet infinite numbers of fantastick brains? impertinent, covetous, and cavelling, he and she busie-bodies; yet who minds them of their follies, unless Come∣dy and Satyr, which leaving to Divines and Magistrates the care
 of opposing crimes, employ themselves in correcting what is indecent and ridiculous; and these are no less necessary, and often more profitable, than all the other serious discourses. For, as many stand in no need of Professors of Philosophy that cannot be brought up without School-Ma∣sters, so we rather want Censors of small faults, to which we all are subject, then of those great ones to which only the corruptest are liable. The pleasure we take in rallying o∣thers, makes us swallow with de∣light such Physick as is wholsom to our selves; to which purpose Histo∣ries and Characters ought to be so suited to our Customs, that, we may believe, we discern in them the per∣sons we daily frequent. And, as an excellent Picture causes our admi∣ration, though we have none for the person it represents; so, Fables
 well written and under borrowed Titles, make greater impression on us than true Names and real Ad∣ventures: for, he that in presence of a crooked man fains to be crooked, gives him greater sense of his bur∣then than the sight of another that hath indeed the same deformity; and, the Story of Lucrece which you will find in this Book, hath, as I am credibly informed, cured a considerable Maid of this Town of her love to a Lord, whose events in all probability must have been like the other.
All the favour I desire is (since I have been so careful to acquaint you there is not any thing here but what is fabulous) that you do not vainly enquire after the person whose Por∣trait or History you imagine you have found out, to apply it to such a Gentleman, or such a Lady, un∣der
 pretence of resemblance of Name or Character. I am sensible enough that reading this Romance, your first business will be to seek a Key, which yet the mixture of the wards will render useless; and when you suppose you see the Picture of one, you will find the Adventures of an∣other. A Painter that draws Fa∣ces, guided only by his fancy, shall accidentally give some of them Airs not unknown to us, though he de∣signes only imaginary Hero's; and you, when you discover in these fi∣gures the resemblances of some of your acquaintance, will be too rash, if you cry out this is he; rather be careful (here being Idea's of many Fools) that you lite not on your own Effigies.
