

A. S. To the right reverend Divines, the Authors of the Apologetical Narration.
M. S. The Authors of the Apologeticall Narration desire more of your right, though they have lesse of your reverence. Had I written a booke with so much unreverence, I would either have blotted out my title Right Reverend, or else I should never have put in that Episcopall stile, Most Reverend, and Right Reverend, seeing the Bishops are going. For to stroke in the title, and to strike in the book, is but flattery, if not grosse dissimulation. Or as to say, Art thou in health my brother? and in the meane while to strike under the fift rib.
A. S. The high esteeme I have ever had of your persons, &c. except onely in your particular opinions, wherein the dissent from al Protestant, yea all Chri∣stian Churches in the world.
M. S. Now let the Protestant Churches (to whom you say you sub∣mit) judge whether in these words, there be not a notorious untruth. For wherein doe the five Ministers and their Churches differ from ma∣ny
 Churches in England, diverse in Holland, and generally all within the Patent of New-England, if you account these places Protestant?
It may be you will object, Mr. Parkers Letter and some Manuscripts from New-England, and the Letter from Zeland. To Mr. Parker his Let∣ter we neede say little, the Letter will answer for us, though Mr. Par∣ker little thought when he wrote it, to finde an A. S. in England, or that his brother Bayly would have printed his Letter seemingly to an∣ticipate the disputation of the Assembly, as if hee meant to beg the que∣stion, though but with shewes and shadowes.
1. Mr. Parker saith not one word for a Classicall Presbyterie, (the maine difference in hand) but for a Congregationall, that he would have in some things more managed by the Presbyteries of every Congrega∣tion, without putting every thing to the vote of the people of the Congregation▪ because some confusion hath followed upon it. Doth in necessaries abuse take away the use? There was confusion in the Church of Corinth. Or is there any mention of this in the Apologie, that all businesses of the Church must be put to the vote of the Congregation?
2. That in that thing only there hath been an arguing on both sides. M. Parker & Mr. Noyse only are mentioned in the letter, to be on the one side & all the other Churches on the other, against Mr. Parker and Mr. Noyse. And 3ly. Mr. Parker doth not say he won the day, but as hee answered their Arguments (as he saith) so he confesseth they answered his Argu∣ments, and the thing is left to consideration. Yea a godly man of New-England told me that the Churches of New-England did conceive that Mr. Parker had received full satisfaction from them in that point. How ever it were, all amounts but to a private letter subscribed by one man, yet Imprimatur saith I. C. as if much to the purpose. But looke but a little afterward to our answer to a Letter from Zeland, and you shall find the judgement of New-England in Letters newly come over.
To any private copies or Manuscripts from New-England, one Mr. Rutherford hath answered, as too much jumping with the Apologie and opposite to Classicall Presbytery. Another, if it had come forth, would have beene keener against A. S. then the Apologie is. So that if he Apologie doe differ from that, it's onely because the Apologie more agrees with the reformed Churches of this Island. And for the third, it hath nothing at all for Classicall Presbyterie, but some things touching the ordering of Congregationall Presbyteries, and all these are but private intelligencers, and mutuall advisers, not determinati∣on, or nationall No more then, I suppose, Mr. Cranford or A. S. will ac∣count the strange Queries on the Apologie and Scotch Commissioners
 Reply, to bee the sense of New-England, though made by one of that Countrey.
As for the letter of Zeland, I cannot tell how to speak all the truth, & not offend some, whom by my will I would not in the least displease. Sure this will not offend to tell A. S. that in Holland, if not in Zeland, are some Churches that are fully with the five Ministers, unto which some of them doe relate. And to speake these things to the Letter it selfe, being matters of fact, I hope cannot justly offend. 1. That that Letter came admirably punctuall upon the very nick after the first re∣ply to the Apologie was out. 2. That a Scottish Knight (as it was infor∣med) nine or ten dayes before it was known abroad, that the letter was to come, said, What if ye receive a Letter from Zeland, disliking the Apo∣logie? or to that effect. 3. That there is a Scottish Church (of which one Spang is a very busie agent) at Trevere hard by Middleborough, whence the letter came. 4. That there are in it many high passages seeming to some so prejudiciall to our worthy Magistracy, that it justifies that of the Apology, saying, That the five Ministers, &c. give more to the Civil Magistrates, then tbe principles of some Presbyterians do. The said letter giving so too little to the Magistracy, that the State of England, I think, cannot approve it here among us. Verbum sapientisat est. More may be thought, upon evident grounds, but not spoken here. 5. Most happily by almost a miraculary providence, in this nick of time, came two let∣ters from New-England to countermand Mr. Parkers Letter thence, and the other from Zeland.
The first from Mr. Winthorp Governor of New England, To his reve∣rend and very good brother, Mr. Hugh Peters Minister of the Gospel, these deliver in London. Our late Assembly of about fourty Elders met, wherein the way of our Churches was approved, and the Presbytery disallowed.
Winthorp Governor. Decemb. 10. 1643.
The second from another of New-England, to another Minister in Old-England about the same time, wherein we have these passages. We have had, saith he, a Synod lately in our Colledge, wherein sundry things were agreed on gravely, as, That the votes of the people are needfull in all admissi∣ons and excommunications, at least in way of consent; all yeelding to act with their consent. 2. That those that are fit matter for a Church, though they are not alwayes able to make large and particular relations of the work and do∣ctrine of faith, yet must not live in the commission of any known sin, or the neg∣lect of any known duty. 3. That consociation of Churches in way of more gene∣rall meetings yearly, and more private monethly or quarterly, as Consultative Synods, are very comfortable and necessary for the peace and good of the Chur∣ches.
 4. It was generally desired that the exercitium of the Churches power might onely be in the Eldership in each particular Church, unlesse their sinnes be apparent in their worke. 5. That Parishes, Churches in old England, could not be right without a renewed Covenant at least, and the refusers ex∣cluded. And were not New-England so farre, the Churches of New-Eng∣land would soon send a third, punctually to approve the Apologie, unless it bee for their neerer compliance with them who notwithstanding have written a∣gainst them.
We have been the longer in answer to this clause, because wee finde A. S. to bee but the Text of other mens Commentary-discourses; who say, That the five Ministers will oppose all the visible Christian Chur∣ches in the world. If they did, it were not such a wonder, as for one Wickliff in one age, one Husse in another, and Luther in a third to op∣pose all the world.
The truth is, all Churches generally, partly by tyranny, and partly by Security, are grown so corrupt, that to apologize for a through reformation, seemes to reprove all, and so all are ready to be offended, that are lesse reformed. We have heard of sad stories of late, but true, (not teld in a corner) of the lamentable over-spreading of Popery, Athe∣isme, drunkennesse in some kingdomes, and adulterie, formality, &c. in o∣thers. If we reforme but in part, by halves, imitating Hen. 8. towards the Pope, cutting off the head of Prelacie, and sitting down in their Chaire (similia non sunt contraria) as Mr Davenport meeting with a Classicall Presbytery in his way to New-England, said they were but thirteen Bi∣shops for one) the cry of the sin against our light and opportunity, will call back our reeling Reformation (like will hasten to like) an unblest posture will leave us unhealed of our sins, and our sins will make us be∣come any thing. Had not the Abbeys been pulled downe, the Priories since had had opportunity to have risen. Therefore Moses grinds the Idol to powder, that it might be quite abolished. I speak all this by way of supposition, what shall upon full debate be found to be the Idol, the nest of Popery, the Chair of Prelacy, the half-reformation.
Thus of your charging the five Ministers with dissenting from all Protestant Churches. The expression that follows, is a most grosse one. That they differ from all Christian Churches. I say grosse, in two things: 1. To call them Churches, and Christian, that are not Protestant (and ergo are Popish) now since the Councell of Trent wherein they gave Christ a bill of divorce (as the learned assert) anathematizing most of his main truths. The Popish (notwithstanding a few Saints in secret here and there) are in a dependance on Antichrist. 2. To charge it as a
 crime on the five Ministers to differ from them, when as it is a sin and shame not to dissent from them. If you dissent not from them, you will never kindly dissent from the intituled Mo. R. A. BB. and Rt. Rev. BB. I observe that men in their Replies, secretly afore they are aware, ☜ run to the Popish markes of a Church, viz. Visibility, Succession, Ʋni∣versalitie.
A. S. You as my selfe are but men, yet ye know but in part, and consequently may erre.
M. S. Yet this one man thinks he hath more knowledge to his part, then the other five Ministers, or else sure he would not so boldly con∣demne them of erring, in a point which all the Assembly have not yet determined; and so peremptorily acquit himself.
A. S. I thought this which is the question between you and all the Churches in the Christian world.
M. S. This untruth comes thick upon us, that the Apol. differs from all the Christian world. It is intimated in the title. It is expressed in the very beginning of the Epistle, and here againe, and once more in 3. pag. of the Epist. and once in Consid. 5. and how oft more in the book I doe not yet know, till I find as I goe. We have answered it once for all in the threshold of this Epistle.
A. S. I esteemed it no lesse a part of my dutie and Christian libertie, as a man to oppose my selfe to five men: then for five men to oppose five hundred thousand, &c.
M. S. Hear ye, O all ye men on earth, that A. S. saith it is his Chri∣stian liberty to oppose the five Ministers: but the whole scope of his booke is to rebuke them upon supposition that they doe oppose others. whiles they tell them wherein they agree with them. One instance follows at the hel of his Christian liberty; to which by and by. Mean while, Reader, observe how this mans words do smell popishly (though I think the man to be a real Protestant) as if they came from Rome, in∣timating as if visibilitie, universalitie, and so pluralitie of voyces of lear∣ned men, might be an unerring, or very certain argument. He speaks as if he had forgot or never heard of Wickliff, many yeares after him Husse, long after him Luther justly opposing the whole world, as we all religiously maintain at this day. And that one Paphnutius opposed a whole Councel (mistaken in a point) which is upon record of History, to his great honour to this day.
A. S. Five men to oppose so many learned men, so many holy Divines, hun∣dreds, and thousands for one of you, no way inferiour to the learnedest and best among you, and not only to particular men and Divines, but to so many; yea,
 and those the most pure, and most reformed Churches of the world, amongst whom there have been found so many thousands who have sealed Christs truth with the losse of their goods, imprisonment of their bodies, by exile of their per∣sons, yea with their dearest blood, and lives, who if they wrote not miracles, yet God declared his almighty power in working miracles about them, &c.
M. S. Here we have in forme (and I will not say how much more) a Popish argument, I will not say a mopish argument; I abhor flying on men instead of matter. To this I will speake, and then they that will be deceived, let them be deceived. First, you Doctrines and practises prove men good, not men, do∣ctrines and practises good dub such a number of men and people Saints, most reformed, learned, no way inferiour to the learnedst, and best among the five Ministers, as if you knew perfectly all mens spi∣rits, mens lives in all places in the world, and the five Ministers parts, &c. intus & incute. Then secondly, as before you came, what R. Reve∣rend and most Reverend (I desire to speake it no other way then with a Christian griefe and anger against such Sophismes) so now you Cant to us as it were the Popish Prelaticall Letanie, and Te Deum, As if by the temptations and fastings, by the passions, by the deaths and burialls of suffe∣ring Christians; The noble army of Martyrs praising the holy Church through∣out all the world acknowledging, you would conjure us to yeeld any thing upon pluralitie of voyces, or topick arguments, that may & are turned every way, and used by all sorts good and bad for their owne waies.
1. Men living in a notorious sinne of grosse usury, unjust enclosures, monopolizing, &c. First, They will tell you of severall Ministers, &c. very holy men; and then secondly, They will tell you that those Mi∣nisters doe approve of those things.
2. The Malignants now cry, that so many good Lords, so many Par∣liament men, most of two Kingdomes are for the King, Ergo, the King doth well; beleeve it who so will.
The Papists proclaime, that they have pluralitie of voyces, Martyrs, &c. Ergo, they are in the right.
So the Prelacie tell us, that of Bishops were many Martyrs (to which Smctymnuus answers) by them was composed the Liturgie, and they have a thousand for one of them, (so they had formerly) and most of the learned Doctors, &c. Scholars, Divines and Lawyers were for them, therefore they were in the right.
Then some of our respected brethren of the reputed godly Non-Con∣formists come in a title of a Booke thus, A most grave and modest Confu∣tation A touch on W. R. his booke, called The grave Con∣sutation, &c. of the errors of the sect commonly called (as W. R. sayth) Brownists or Seperatists (so his skill writes it for Separatists) agreed upon long since by the joynt consent of sundry godly and learned Ministers of this Kingdome,
 then standing out and suffering in the cause of Inconformitie, and now publish∣ed in a time of neede VVhat now all, or the greatest part of them, come to our publik meetings, and the Apol. dis∣claims Sepa∣ration, and Brownisme? unlesse you would drive them to corners again. &c. against that pernitions evill. Published by W. R. As if their sufferings were a seale of the just length of reformation, how farre we must go, and no further. When as the most of them stood only upon the negative part, What they would not have, but onely a few declared positively, of which some for a Congregationall presbytery or Church-way, be it, or be it not, a pernitious evill, as W. R. calls it. God forbid, that if wee have suffered for Christ, in the behalfe of any piece of truth, that therefore we should pride up our selves as having done so much; or stint our selves from proceeding further in know∣ledge, or affright our selves from suffering more, if more truths bee to be contended for, as the Apostle speakes; or least of all through the sides of Brownisme or Separation, to wound the truth & Saints of Jesus Christ, just in the nick of such reproachings cast upon them that disclaime in words and practise all pernicious Brownisme, &c. It cannot bee for∣gotten that the choicest doctrines held in England, have beene called pernitious heresie. And therefore it is an high peremptorinesse in a generall title to call all those things pernitious evils, some of which are truths. We have, and doe disclaim Separation and Brownisme, properly so called.
But if the Pope or the Devill Mar. 1. 24. confesse Christ, we will not therefore call that truth, a pernitious evill. I suppose all that W. R. book sets forth in heads, and Chapters, as to be confuted, are some of those things hee means are pernitious evills. As,

1. That pag. 8. Many Parish-Churches are not rightly gathered.
2. That p. 11. That they Communicate in a false and idolatrous worship, as stinted prayers, Homilies, Catechismes.
3. That p. 17. They want that Discipline and order which Christ in his Testament hath appointed for the governement of his Church.
4. That p. 50. That it is objected against them, that the ignorant and pro∣phane multitude are admitted to all priviledges of the Churches.

Are these (we give but a tast) perniious evills? Then you condemne Smectymnuus for writing, the Parliament and Assembly for removing and about to remove these exceptions; And most presbyterian Mini∣sters in London for forbearing to give Communions to such multitudes. Mr. Calamy said that an imposed, Liturgie was idolatry. And our worthy brethren of Scotland justly stood up against these enormities. No won∣der therefore if W. R. booke abound with weakenesses and impertinen∣cies; in stead of Confutation of such thing as these. For I patronage not any false or unadvised speeches of Barrow, or &c. there used.
 3. A. S. Saying, That the Apologists differ from the most reformed Chur∣ches in the world. Some of which hee knowes are in Holland, more in England, most in New-England, all publike Churches, if hee speakes not falsly, or ignorantly; yet begging the Question, whether the Churches named, or the Classicall Presbyterian are most reformed?
To close our answer to this, tell us no more of your multitudes, the Lord keepe us all from the broad way that leadeth to destruction, though many there be therein. One Phinees, one Elijah left alone in the eye of the world, two against thousands, viz. Caleb and Josuah in the truth are more to be honored, then swarmes of swarvers (I judge none.) The time is at hand, that ten men shall take hold of one Jew Zech. 8. 23., and so on one true christian. Godly men may be hunted out of a Kingdom, not of the truth, meane while such a Kingdom may be without them, but neere the more without judgments. England was never quiet, but worse & worse, since it hunted away almost a little Nation of Saints to New-England, though W. R. joyning issue with A. S. will follow them, with a blotting pen in print, even to that Kingdome too. Yea and take in his way many Churches in old England, and some that are and lately were in Holland, and then have at New-England, none comes amisse that have gone an inch in reformation beyond W. R. his Non-Conformitie. Like him who would strike all that were next him, who e're they were that in∣jured him. And all this worke he cuts out for himselfe in his booke he calls a Narration of some Church courses in New-England.
☞ O that all Readers that will not be wilfully blind, would by the way observe, how A. S. condemnes the Apologists, as guiltie of dissen∣ting from the Churches in New-England. And W. R. condemnes them for agreeing with the Churches of New-England. So that A. S. and W. R. doe not agree betweene themselves. But you shall have an An∣swer to that booke of W. R. in a distinct treatise by it selfe, ere long God permitting. Meane while we goe forward with A. S.
A. S. I am perswaded in my conscience, that your opinion of Independency, &c. if it were admitted (pardon my expression till I be better instructed) could not but prove the roote of all sorts of Schisme and Heresie, and consequently the utter overthrow of Christs universall militant Church.
M. S. If you speake cordially, as supposing indeede that you may be better instructed, it had beene best for you to have stayd for the As∣semblies determination, or to have conferred with some of them you write against, before you had written and printed that desperate speech, lest the inke seeme letters of blood to you at your dying pil∣low. I warrant you, if what one, or many say onely, would make an ar∣gument,
 a multitude would say, that a coactive classicall Presbyterie would be the root of couched Prelacy, and Ecclesiasticall tyrannie. But I will not be one of them to say so. Probatum est; in New-England, that which you call Independency, hath not procured, but cured, or purged out heresies, schismes, formalitie, prophaneness, more then some other Kingdoms that so hate and hit at mis-called Independency.
A. S. You sue for a Toleration, and consequently for a Separation.
M. S. So then, where Papists are tolerated, there they are Separatists too. It's but the Noun of multitude between, but that the Independents in England might tolerate, and the Presbyterians might be tolerated, would they then be Separatists? Who desires separation? but rather union in the truth. If any hold the truth, and stumble, though of weak∣ness, at some smaller matters, (as you count them) it is your duty to suffer them, and to bear with the weak, and not offend the consciences of Brethen; or Gods woe is by him pronounced against you.
A. S. I may adde to all these, your undervaluing of the Parliaments great favour towards you. For yee know, brethren, how they, notwithstanding your former separation from all other Churches, &c. invited you to be members of this Assembly, had they not given you the capacity, yee had been altogether in∣capable. And not only that, but they honoured one of you with the high favour of sending one of you with their Commissioners to Scotland.
M. S. O abominable accusation, O sycophantising insinuation! Who art. A. S. Cujas. Can an English-man, unjesuited, or any Mini∣ster unprelatised, or any man honestised, say thus? I am distressed how to put home to this, and yet prudently. I tell thee, A. S. Thy accusation is a gross falshood. For their respect to the Parliament, and their re∣spect from the Parliament, let many of the choyce members of both Houses speak, they will soon prove thee a gross—. Thy probation a silly phantasie. Did ever any Vote of the Parliament, or of the Assembly, accuse the Apologie of undervaluing the Parliaments favours? None but he that hath A. S. as part of his name, would say so. For all dis∣creet men see plainly, that as the form and stile of the Apologie is most sweet; so the matter now in hand so much as is there intimated, is the Question. Can that be an offence to the Parliament, for the five Mini∣sters to propound that of the things they are to debate (by Ordinance of Parliament) which is to them the question, making it ready, and lea∣ving it for debate in the Assembly? Yea, whether the whole draught of the Apologie be to be condemned or commended by the Parliament, that is also a question yet unresolved, by Parliament, Assembly, and a considerable part of City and Kingdom. Therefore why doth one A. S.
 presumptuously make it a crime against the Parliament? Since the thrice worthy Parliament had it in debate in the House, being put on March. 13. 1643. by the Letters from Middleborough in Zeland, and upon the speech of learned Mr. Selden, and others, they resolved with a generall acclama∣tion, that the Apologie was to be left as it was found, unblamed. The God of heaven in much mercy bless the Parliament, as for all the good they have done, so for their uprightness therein, They joy of the Churches is now as high as their sorrows would have been deep, had it been condemned. For it would to them have been not only a dolefull ante, or anti, but-anticipating-presage. But blessed be our Parliament-guiding God; that as they had no hand in the Apologie, so they would have no hand against it. Therefore away A. S. Operam & oleum perdi∣disti (as the Starling said to the Emperour, having saluted him in vain with ) you have lost your labour. The Parliament despise syco∣phantising colloguing; (Are you as wise as that Bird to see that, it said?) And on the other side they do not repent of what honour they conferred on Mr. Nye, and through him on his brethren of the same For the Par∣liament in wisdom chose some Episco∣pall men to be of the As∣sembly, to plead their own cause if they could. Some of wch since cast out themselves, and others were cast out. judgement. They could not but think (what ever you dream) but that the five Ministers were in as neer a capacity to be of the Assembly, &c. being native English-men, and against Episcopacie, as either those of other Nations, or those of our own, in judgement holding for Episco∣pacie; and standing for the just and lawfull authority of Magistracy as either.
A. S. The Apol. Narration containing (how ever you name it) a singu∣lar desire of separation from them, that so cherish you, with some unworthy nick-names put upon them, who stile you by no worse names then Brethren.
M. S. What ever names A. S. puts upon this his Book, as Annot. Consid. Notes sure enough (Nigro carbone notandus. Hic Niger est, hunc tu Romane caveto,) it is not candid, but holds forth A. S. his singular desire of making division, if he could, either between the Parliament and the Brethren, or between them and our dearest brethren of Scotland, if M. S. do rightly divine what he means by them. God and man hates this thy design (O A. S.) Six things the Lord bates, yea, seven are abomi∣nation to him: A proud look, a lying tongue, an heart that deviseth wicked Prov. 6. 16. imaginations, a false witness, that speaketh lies, him that soweth discord among brethren, &c. (for I have named enough for A. S. to make his choice.) And I am informed, that the worthy Commissioners of Scotland (nobly done) do utterly dislike A. S. his Book. From whom we have far more evident and effectuall symptomes of their cordiall love, then he word Brethren. Which with A. S. in his Book is nothing but Complementall
 dissimulation; For his Epistle begins, as it were, with kissing, viz. Right reverend and dear Brethren. And his book is biting. So that as he useth the word Brethren, it is much to the same sense, as a parasiticall Minister being to preach an odde fellows funerall, did use the words of that de∣ceased mans Will, viz. In the name of God, Amen: (this story is proper for A. S. if he hath any skill in the law, for I cannot yet be certain what he is:) saith the Priest (being put to it for matter for his Trentall Pane∣gyrick) See the devotion of this deceased brother; he begins his Will, with In the name of God, Amen. A silly Goose; for it's as common for all good and bad to begin their Wills so (as A. S. knows if a Lawyer) as for A. S. to call Brethren, and to bawl forth reviling all along his book.
As for the Nick-names A. S. chargeth upon the five Ministers, with which they should nick-name, I know not whom, he names them not; which makes me think, he hath no skill in Law. He knows that Dolus latet in universalibus, or to use his own words, p. 47. Sermones generales non movent, we cannot answer to generalls; nor can he find them in the Apologie. What a Pharisee may phantasie, that will not have mens defects intimated as they stand in the crowd of all Christendome, I am sure the worthy Commissioners piously confess their Churches may be yet further reformed; and what religious men will not sigh forth the same, touching their own native Countries?
A. S. What else have yee done, but erected one Assembly in the Assembly, by private authority against publike; taking private resolutions against publike?
M. S. O gross! yet he will follow Machiavels counsell that said, Ca∣lumniare audacter, aliquid adhaerebit, If men must not speake, write, or preach any thing that may relate to something in debate in the Assem∣bly, then, (as it was excellently spoken in Parliament,) Ministers may write and say nothing at all. Divers print and preach for the Presby∣tery, yet of the Assembly. Are they all a private particular Assembly?
A. S. Sundry reasons made me to suspect, that ye would say more then ye say.
M. S. And what then? Did you think by this your Reply, to hush them? No readier way to make them or their friends to say more then either they intended, or you would willingly hear. Yet confess one truth; That there hath been two replies to them already, yet they have printed no reply (that we know of) for that you mean (I suppose) by saying more. Else, God forbid, but they should speak, and speak in the Assembly too; though one said, Hee had much ado to forbear moving to have one of them to be cast out of the Assembly, for propounding his Reason to the Question, to which he was called by order of Parliament.
But for you, A. S. you would make a stone speak (as they say.)
 If you believe not the Poet, Si natura negat, facit indignatio versum; yet believe the Scripture: Oppression would make a wise man mad. Eccles. 7. 7. M. R.
But let me tell you now of one that is of your judgement for the Presbyterie, but by far a more solid and discreet man then your self, that said, There was this good by the Apologie, that therein the five Ministers had wrapt up themselves, that they could not say more in substance oftener then was therein expressed. Nor could they recede from that compliance with you they had therein professed. So you see you Presbyterians may differ among your selves, no wonder therefore, if from the five Ministers.
A. S. I love you all from my heart.
M. S. Good Reader, compare this mans book with his heart. And good Writer, (if I do not mis-call thee) judge whether in your book you act the part of a loving Physitian, were your potion never so cor∣diall, in that you administer it scalding hot, though you flatter till it's powred down the throat.
A. S. The will is but a blind faculty.
M. S. Now, where is your Philosophie? Is there an unreasonable faculty in the reasonable soul, that hath no light but by participati∣on? This is news to considerate Philosophers, that do not take things upon trust, by tradition, of speculative untried principles.
A. S. My main aim hath been, Gods glory, and the edification of weak brethren, who may have been misled by your most learned Discourse.
M. S. Yet this man in his 1 Annot. pag. 4. saith, It comes very short, is weak and slender, and no way satisfactory. The man makes nothing of contradictions, upon contradictions; for even here also is a contra∣diction or two more. Are the five Ministers discourse most learned, and yet errour too, as you said in the beginning of your Epistle? And are they most learned, and yet less learned then you?
But indeed (saith one) Hee makes a great noyse of learning in his book, ratling his Sophistry-terms, so that though hee hath failed in his Divinity, Physick, and Philosophie hitherto, yet hee will make us know that hee is a notable Logician; or he will make our ears ring with unenglished Ergoes, with A genere ad speciem affirmativè, with A posse ad esse non valet conse∣quentia; Non possibile est esse, possibile est non esse, totum, totaliter, materi∣aliter, Page of his book, 53, 54. dispositivè; with his modifications, assumptions, &c. and multitudes of such lumber to the weake brethren. O, said one, that some body would earnestly intreat him to speak seriously, whether he thinks in his conscience this to be his direct way to that end hee here professeth, namely, to edifie weak Brethren? Alas, such things to them, if Englished, are but gibberish, and as charms.

A. S. Esteeming that during the rest of my pilgrimage, which cannot be long, having no other thing to doe, I shall doe well to doe this.
M. S. I'l tell you what one said to this. Would God he had rather no pa∣tient, then he should have no patience, then the Church should be his patient (seeing he hath no more skill in her griefe;) that he had no client, then that he should be a treacherous Advocate; that he would rather doe nothing, then evill. For it is a sad thing, said he, that good men neer their end should write some sorry peece, to be a monument of their declining in their last dayes, and of their disgrace before they are buried. As a worthy man a little afore his death, wrote in defence of ceremonies, for which formerly he had suffered. A warning to A. S. and all good men, that their good works should be more at last, and so to leave that character to the hypocrites, as one observes, to live smoothly, towards his end to doe sorily, and then to die suddenly.
