



MY LORD,
IF you will be pleased to allow me to be a Physitian in the same sense that all Morall Divines do acknowledge the Body-Politick (consisting both of Church and State) to be a Patient, then I will now give your Highness a just account, both how far, and how faithfully I have practi∣sed upon it, by vertue of my Profession. When I first observed things to be somewhat out of order, by reason of a light distemper, which then appeared by some infallible in∣dications;
I thought it my duty, to pre∣scribe an wholsome Electuary, (out of the 122. Psalm, at the 6. verse, in a Sermon which I was called to Preach in the Cathe∣drall Church of Saint Pauls, Anno, 1642. and I soon after publish't by command, ander this Title, A Patheticall Perswasion to pray for the publique peace) to be duly and devoutly taken every morning next our hearts; hoping that by Gods blessing on the Means, I should have prevented that di∣stemper from growing into a form'd dis∣ease; yet finding that my preventing phy∣sick did not work so kindly, and take so good an effect as I earnestly desired; but rather that this my so tenderly beloved Patient grew worse and worse; as not only being in process of time fallen into a feaver, and that pestilentiall, but also as having received divers dangerous wounds, which ranckling and festring inwardly, brought it into a spirituall Atrophie, and deep Consumption; and the parts ill-affected (for want of Christian care, and skill in such Mountebancks as were trusted with the cure, while my self, and most of the An∣cient
Orthodox Clergie were sequestred and silenc'd) began to gangrene: and when some of us became sensible therof, we took the confidence, (being partly embolden'd by the connivence of the higher Powers that then were) to fall to the exercise of our Ministeri∣all Function again, in such poor Parishes as would admit us: then I saw that it was high time, not onely to prescribe strong pur∣gative medicines in the Pulpit, (contem∣pered of the Myrrhe of Mortification; the Aloes of Confession, and Contrition; the Rubarb of Restitution and Satisfacti∣on, with divers other safe roots, seeds and flowers, fit and necessary to help to carry away by degrees, the incredible confluence of ill humours, and all such malignant mat∣ter as offended) but also, to put Pen to pa∣per, and to appear in Print (as in this im∣perfect and impolish'd piece, which as guilty of an high presumption, here in all humility begs your Lordships Pardon) wherein my chief scope is to personate the good Sama∣ritan; that as he cur'd the wounded Tra∣veller, by searching his wounds with wine, and suppleing them with oyle: so I have
here, both described the Rise, and Progress of our nationall malady, and also prescrib'd the onely Remedy; that I might be in some kind instrumentall under God and your Highness, in the healing of the same.
And for both my present undertaking, and dedication, St. Luke (Chap. 1.3.) makes an Apologie; It seem'd good unto me, having had perfect understanding of things from the very first, to write un∣to thee in order (most excellent Theo∣philus) that thou might'st know the certainty of those things wherein thou hast been instructed. And because we are now upon the point of recovery, and there is little visible cause of danger, save onely by relapsing: therefore in a Sermon (which I was very lately cal'd to preach at Mercers Chappel) I have prescrib'd an wholsome dy∣et (approv'd of in Prov. 24.21.) & which I have here also publish'd; and I make no question but if it be conscientiously observ'd, it will serve to prevent all relapsing in this kind for the future. Yet because Gods word is never more lively and mighty in operati∣on, then when it is countenanc'd, and assi∣sted
with the power of the Sword; give me leave not onely to crave your Lordships pa∣tronage to this poor Vade-mecum; but al∣so your gracious concurrence, & couragious carrying on of what you have already so happily begun in the name and cause of God, and his Anointed, till you have finish'd this great, and good work, and brought it to perfection: That we, and our children (a∣mong whom your name will be for ever pre∣cious) may truly say of you, as the Roman Histories do of Fabritius, The Sun may sooner be brought to alter his course, then you to alter your most heroick Resolution. My Lord, as it must needs grieve you to see these three distressed king∣doms lye, like a Body without a Head: so it may also chear you to consider that the Com∣forter hath impowr'd you, (and in this nicke of time, you onely) to make these dead and dry bones, live; You may by this one Act ennoble and aeternize your selfe more in the hearts and chronicles of these three King∣doms; then by all your former Victories, and the long line of your extraction from the Plantagenets, your Ancestors, which gave
names to the Kings of England for many generations. It is a greater honour to make a King, then to be one. Your proper name minds you of being St. George for Eng∣land: your Sirname prompts you to stand for order: then let not panicke fears, puncti∣lio's of humane policy, or State-formalities, beguile you (whom we look upon as Jethro's Magistrate, who was a man of courage, fearing God, dealing truly, and hating co∣vetousness) of that immarcescible Crown of Glory due to you, whom we hope that God hath design'd to be the repairer of the breach, and the temporall Redeemer of your native Countrey. The case of Rome differs so much from our present condition; that what prudent Fabius restor'd by cun∣ctation, you cannot now possibly compasse without expedition. All our hopes (under God) depend upon your skill at the Helme. Give me leave to conclude (as Mordecai clos'd with Ester (4.13.—) Think not with thy selfe that thou shalt escape in the Kings house, more then the rest: for if thou forbearest at this time, then shall our enlargement and deliverance
rise from some other place; but thou, and thy house shall be destroyed: And who knows whether God hath re∣serv'd thee for such a time as this? Thanke God for the power and opportunity you have now in your hands; and pardon the seasonable application by Him; who (as he is too old to fear, and too great a sufferer to flatter) hath no other ambition, but to deliver his own soul, and the Nation, by sincerely approving himself

