



Dear Friends,
GOD hath been pleased Graciously to smile upon his poor People in this Nation, in putting it into the Hearts of our Rulers to Indulge them in those smaller things, which they could not Comfortably Conform to. It will, I doubt not, be an Eternal Honour to our Present Soveraign the Best of Kings; (on whom the Eyes of all the Protestant Churches and States are Fixed, with Great Expectations) and to our Honourable Patriots who Setled this Liberty by a Law.

Surely now it behoves us to carry it with a Duty and Respect to the Present Government, and not like Wanton Children, Scratch the Breas that gives us Milk.
'Tis indeed but too evident, that some, if n ill-designing, yet weak and unthinking Men; make but an ill use of the Present Liberty, Broach∣ing unsound Doctrines, and are guilty of very Trular and Ʋngospel-Practices; Indeed, such as fall into these Practises, out of Design (as 'tis to be fear'd some do) to weaken the Dissenting Interest, and provoke the Recall of our Liberty; I leave them to be dealt with in another manner, having no hope of doing them any good; being but Protestants in Masquerade.
But such as miscarry through Weakness, or¦norance, though sometimes they may act ill, set design well, of these there is hope; and for these in part, the following Tract concerning a Gospel-Church is design'd. It would be much for the Peace and Good of Christian Societies if young Christians would mind their own Hearts more, and take care to get a Scheme of right Princi∣ples, to be well acquainted with Fundamentals in Religion; For, How many may we meet with, who have wings to fly in Airy Notions, talk much of Communion with God, and their great Experien∣es, when they are very Ignorant in the Plain Principles of Religion.
The Right Knowledg of the Nature of a Go∣pel Church, would tend much to make Christi∣ans know their places, and what God requires of
 them. As for the following Tract; the Stile is mean, the Method broken, the Whole unpolish'd; and yet it may be of use to those for whom it is design'd, viz. such as have neither Mony to Buy, nor Time to Read, nor Abilities to Ʋnderstand Larger and Learneder Discourses; short Sum∣mary's are not allways useless; for, Vita bre∣vis est, ars longa; Life is short, but the way to obtain Knowledge is long. So that Seneca, a Heathen, could say, Magnam esse dementiam, &c. 'Tis great folly, in so great a want of time, to learn things superfluous: But principally I de∣sign this for my own People; most of them are con∣fined to a Calling that affords them little time to Read; this they will Read, when perhaps a larger Tract would be little regarded: I am not very careful what others think of me, or the Work; they that like it not, may be pleased to let it alone, and, at their leasure, give us something better; only that I may remove all Cause of Offence, if possi∣ble, I must tell the Reader, I have said nothing with a design to offend any, nor to Raise a Contro∣versie, though perhaps some may think otherwise: Two sorts of Persons I expect to be displeased.
1. The Anabaptists, because I have proved In∣fants have a Right to Church-Membership and Baptism, from the Identity of the Covenant; but yet let me tell my Brethren of that Perswasion, that as I Love them all as Men; so, those of them that are sound in other Fundamental Points, and serious Godly Persons (though they differ in this Point) I dearly Love, and own them as
 Christians, and Fellow-Members of the sa Body.
2. Lay Preachers, and their Admirers and Followers: Because I have shewed them their s in Medling with a Work God never call'd the to, nor fitted them for, and yet they have no mo cause to be Angry with me, then a Man with Broken Bone, or Dislocated Joynt, hath to be A¦gry with him who offers his Help, in a Friend Manner, to Set his Bone, and Heal his Wounds However, what I have said is in Pity and Co¦passion to their Souls; and if they will not hear, I will not cease to Pity and Pray for them. heartily wish to All Soundness of Judgment, H¦ness of Heart and Life, Peace with God, Peace Conscience, Increase of Grace now, and an a¦dant entrance into the Kingdom of our Lord Saviour Jesus Christ hereafter. So Prays y Souls Friend, in our Dearest Lord,
From my Study in Potter-Pury, May 15th. 1700.

