



IT must needs be acknowledged by all to whom the Preaching of the Gospel was been the Power of God to their Salvation, Rom. 1.16. That when Christ displays his victorious Banners upon the Walls of the Sinner's proud and stony heart, and makes all, the Power of the Soul to stoop to the Sceptre of Christ in the blessed work of Regeneration; that from that very day there appears a great and wonderful Change in the whole Man; Body and Soul, Heart and Life are all changed: And as in other things, so it is very wonderful to observe what a change there is in the Mind and Judgment, concerning this own Righteousness; for whereas, before Conversion, he seeks to cover himself with the Fig-leaves of his own Duties, he thinks it easie to make God amends by his own Performances. This you may see in the Exam∣ple of Paul, when an uncoverted Pharisee, Rom. 7.9.
 I was once alive without the Law. Phil. 3.6. Tou∣ching the Righteousness which is in the Law, blameless: Yet when he is converted, he has quite other Apprehensions of himself; now he sees what be∣fore he admired, were but splendida Peccata, shining and glistering Sins; and therefore he flings all away as filthy Rags, and flies to Christ for Righteousness, and Strength, Phil. 3.7. What things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ. V. 8. Yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ. Ver. 9. And be found in him, not having mine own Righteousness, which is by the Law; but that which is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith. Henceforward, though he acts from much bet∣ter Principles than he did before; yea, though he en∣deavours to live and walk in the fear of God all the day long, denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts, living soberly, righteously, and godly in the World, working out his Salvation, adorning the Gospel with all holy and becoming conversation, highly valuing all the Fruits of the Spirit, both in himself and others; yet when he looks at future Glory, and considers what it is that gives him a right and title to it, he files from himself as a filthy leprous Creature, and his best works are esteemed as rotten Rags, Isa. 64.6. And as Loss and Dung, Phil. 3.8. Now Christ is exalted, and the Cry of Faith is, In the Lord (not in our selves) have we Righteousness and Strength, Isa. 45.24, 25.
Thus it is with all the Children of God that have tasted of the heavenly Gift in a saving manner, though
 not with all in a like measure: For some, after they are got through the Straits of the New Birth, pre∣sently get upon the wing of Faith, feeding and feasting upon the riches of Free Grace; fetching all their Com∣forts immediately from Christ, the Original of all Grace; Faith every day bringing fresh Supplies from him; they are not so much cast down with a sense of their own imperfections, and weakness in Grace, (tho' they are humbled for these,) knowing they appear be∣fore God, not in their own, but Christ's Righteousness. Hence it is they can triumph in Christ, and in the holy boldness of Faith, even dare their Accusers to bring in all their Accusations against them, Rom. 8.33, to the end; and these, of all Christians under Heaven, live the sweetest, and most joyful Lives.
Yet others, and those the greatest Number of Chri∣stians, (though the Work upon their hearts be sound, and they have heartily given up themselves to Christ, to be saved by him,) are either kept bowed down by a Spirit of Bondage, and legal Terrors, or else stay in the Rudiments of Christ in their own hearts, and neg∣lect Christ himself; are still poring upon their Graces, and enquiring after Signs and Marks of Sincerity, and accordingly are lifted up, or cast down, as they find it in themselves.
Now the Signs and Marks of Grace are of great Ʋse to Believers; for hereby we may prove our selves, whether we are in the Faith or no.
These Graces we may view with comfort and de∣light, as Signs and Tokens of the Love of Christ to us; but yet it is a great Errour among Christians, who are married to Christ, to look at Christ our spi∣ritual Husband, only by reflexion, and at second hand, through the intvention and assistance of our own Graces; whereas Christ himself should be admired above all.

For the great Work and Office of Faith, is, to carry us out of our selves, above all Graces, and in∣herent Excellencies, to Christ, to live immediately on Christ, for Pardon, Justification, and Life; as may be seen, Isa. 45.24. In the Lord have we Righteousness: Therefore, whenever we take a view of our Graces, let us be sure first to look out of our selves to Christ for Justification.
Now one great Reason why many Heaven-born Souls do so rarely and slenderly act Faith on Christ immediatly, for Justification, but are more familiarly conversant with their Graces, I take to be that of the Apostle. 2 Pet. 1.8. Barrenness in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ; and par∣ticularly this blessed Truth of Justification by the Righteousness of Christ; for I have often observed, that though it be a received Principle among Christi∣ans, that we are saved, and justified by Christ; yet there remains (too often) so much darkness and con∣fusion upon the understanding, in this Matter, that their eyes are but half open; and so cannot act Faith with that clearness and distinctness that they should do.
Now, as a Remedy against this, let us study this blessed Doctrine of Justification. The right under∣standing of this Truth, will set Matters right with us in these Cases; so that we shall be able to live in the use; and right improvement of our Graces, and yet to live above them, immediately by Faith in Christ.
The first thing that engaged me in the study of this Point, was, that I might rectifie the aforesaid Er∣rors in my self, and others. I had then no other End in Preaching, nor have none else now in Publishing, but that the savoury Knowledge of Christ may be pro∣pagated
 in the hearts of those who were then Hearers, or that shall now be Readers of this heavenly Truth.
If any desire a Reason of the Publication hereof, let them know, 'tis not a Volunteer, but a pressed Sol∣dier into the Field of the Church: For, since the Preaching, which was some Months ago, I have been much solicited to make it publick. And yet I have as mean Thoughts of it, so far as it is mine, as any other can have, and did endeavour to have had it done by a more skilful Hand. If any say, there is no need of any Things more on this Subject, it has been so well and clearly handled by several Learned Men: I Answer, This is only designed for such as have not Time to peruse, or Money to purchase larger Volumes. And therefore, whatever Weaknesses you may spy in the Author, and Ʋnskilfulness in han∣dling the Subject, the Truth it self calls for your serious Attention. It is a Truth that infinitely con∣cerns the Peace and Comfort of every one of your Souls. And therefore let me commend it to you; especially you that were the Hearers of it; it is prin∣cipally intented for your Ʋse and Comfort. And that you may the more freely and chearfully receive it in the love of it; Consider,
1. It is no new, or novel Doctrine; but what has been owned by the Church and People of God in every Age.
Ʋnder the Law it was clearly typified, Psal. 51.7. as you will find clearly proved in the ensuing Sermon. And then in the Gospel it was fully open'd, Rom. 1.17. as hereby also will appear at large. And then by the ancient Fathers it was clearly taught in the several Ages of the Church, as may fully appear by these Ex∣amples
 Hilarius saith, Faith alone justifieth,Can. 8 in Math. Fides enim sola justificat. St. Ambrose often uses the Term, Sola Fide, Faith alone justifieth. St. Chrysostom saith, the Thief believed only, and was justifiedIn Hom. de Fide & Lege Naturae.. St. Augustin saith, Works go not before Justification, but follow itContra duas Epist Pelag. cap. 21. & Tom. 4. Epist. ad Rom pag. 11 93. Non enim merito sui tanquam ex ope∣ribus sed Dei Gratia Fide Justificatus est Homo.. And here let me tell you, that although this Heaven∣ly Doctrine be much opposed by a Generation of Men, that pretend a great Tenderness and Honour for the Church; yet in Truth, are the Church's back friends, or rather real Enemies: For while they shew much Zeal and Tenderness for a disputable Ceremony, they invade the Church in her Fundamental Articles. Now that you may know what was the Sense of our first Reformers, and what is the Judgment of the Church of England in this Point of Justification, I'll here set down the 11th Article in their own Words.
We are accounted righteous before God, only for the Merits of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, by Faith, and not for our own Works and Deser∣ings: Wherefore that we are justified by Faith on∣ly, is a most wholsome Doctrine and very full of Comfort, as more largely is expressed in the Ho∣mily of Justification.
And then in the Homily of Justification, which this Article refers us to, we read, That because all Men are Sinners, and Breakers of his Law; there∣fore can no Man by his own Works (seem they ne∣ver so good) be justified and made righteous before
 God; but every Man is constrained of necessity to seek for another Righteousness to be received at God's own Hands;—and this Righteousness, which we so receive of God's Mercy and Christ's Merits, embraced by Faith, is taken, accepted, and allowed of God for our perfect and full Justi∣fication.—Christ has made Satisfaction and Amends to his Father for our Sins: And pag. 13. Three things must go together in our Justification; upon God's Part, his great Mercy; on Christ's Part, Justice, i. e. the Satisfaction of God's Ju∣stice, or the Price of our Redemption, by offering his Body, and shedding his Blood, with fulfilling of the Law perfectly. And on our part a true and lively Faith in the Merits of Christ: — And p. 15. Whosoever denieth this Doctrine of Justifi∣cation by Faith alone, is not to be accounted for a Christ-man: And again, p. 17. They that preach, Faith only justifieth, do not teach carnal Liberty. But why should I stand transcribing, the whole Ho∣mily doth clearly declare and assert the Doctrine of Justification by Faith alone. Therefore I beseech you, receive it in the Love of it; and that the rather, be∣cause in the next Place,
2. It is a Fundamental Truth. Luther calls it, Articulus stantis & Cadentis Ecclesiae, that Truth with which the Church stands or falls: And Chem∣nitius calls it, Arx & Propugnaculum Religionis Christianae, The very Strength and Bulwork of the Christian Religion. If we lost it, we lose one of the most sacred Truths in the Bible; that which has been sealed to by the Blood of Martyrs; therefore Christians hold it fast, Rev. 2.25. Hold fast till I come.
3. The right Ʋnderstanding of this Doctrine will tend very much in scatter Temptations, and settle a lasting Peace in the Souls of the Godly. I have often observed, that those Christians that are either igno∣rant of, or erroneous in this Fundamental Truth, they sink deepest into, and lie longest in those Plunges of Spiritual Horror and Soul Agonies, that the dearest of Gods Children are liable to: And they soonest re∣cover themselves from under all Satan's pressing and sinking Temptations, that by this hand of Faith can single out Christ, and hang on him for Relief, as appears, Rom. 5. when this conclusion is once clear to the Soul, that Christ died for our Sins; and rose again for our Justification, as Chap. 4. v. 25. And that we are justified by Faith, Chap. 5.1. Then the Soul can triumph, as it follows, we have Peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, v. 2. We can then rejoice in the Hope of the Glory of God; Yea; Glory in Tribulation. See Rom. 8.33.34.
4. That Opposition corrupt Nature makes against this Truth may not a little commend it to us, its a Truth that carnal Reason cannot submit to: Hence is that Saying, that every Man is born with a Pope in his Belly; i. e. Man naturally is a proud Creature; he will not be beholden to Christ for Righteousness, but would bring in his own Righteousness to have some share in the Work.
Here's nothing that may please the Curious, but much that may profit the serious: Read with a desire to profit; the Faults are the Authors, but the Truths
 are Christ's. To conclude, I shall as heartily pray that every Reader may get good by Reading, as I heartily beg that all that reap any Profit, would put up a Prayer to the Throne of Grace, for an unworthy Servant of Christ in the Ministry,

