



Right Honourable and my singular good Lord,
I Make bold to send this slender piece into the World under your Lordships Name and Patronage, presuming it shall find acceptance at your hands, because I well know the candor & good∣nesse of your Honours disposition to be such, as cannot but cherish the smallest sparks and evidences of their affections who acknow∣ledge themselves unfainedly and alwaies to be your humble Ser∣vants. My principal end in presen∣ting it to your Hoble Lordship, is,
 that it may stand for a pledge in the view of the World, of that humble respect and duty which I shall ever confess my self to owe your Lordship, for those former expressions of affection, which you have been pleased to make me, while I was a member of your family, and for that present livelyhood, which by your Ho∣nours only bounty I do enjoy. The case of meaner persons is the same with all Sublunary bodies; as these, receiving frō the Sun, Moon and Stars, much light & warmth, and vigour, can return nothing a∣gain to those heavenly creatures; so men of inferiour condition, while they receive very much frō Personages of greater place, can pay back little, if any thing again. Love they can, for, ad amandum ne∣mo
 pauper, no man is so poor, but he can love his Benefactor; and their Love they can acknowledg, but how? only in Words, at most in deeds (like themselves) poor & despicable, except (perhaps) their good intentions stamped upon their actions, like Caesars image on his Coyn, may chance to advance their price, as the Widows chari∣table mind in the Gospel, did raise the Value of her Mite. My utmost Ambition therefore in this poor tender, is no more than that Persi∣an's was,Sinaetas. who having nothing to present the King Artaxerxes with, ran to the River, and brought him his handful of water: no more t to give your honour some cause t think that there is such thankfu affection within, as would brea
 into acts proportionable without, did not the distance betwixt great∣ness and meanness make it im∣possible. Your Honour therefore will (I doubt not) courteously re∣ceive it, (as that King did that sig∣nification from his subject) for the ends sake. And so you will for the Argument too; it being a Dis∣covery of the nature and danger of presumptuous sins, with pre∣servatives against them, and re∣medies for them; things neces∣sary for all men to think of, and be informed in, but especially for great men. 1. Because they are subject to the same presumptions that others are; and in so much the greater danger of living and dying in them, by how much the more obnoxious they are to such
 temptations as use to occasion them. High mountains, tall ships, stately trees lie very open to blu∣string storms; and so doe men of high conditions to manifold and great provocations to evill. For they commonly enjoy such super∣fluities of worldly contentments, as make them more able to sin then others, if they have any mind to it, and more inclinable also; fulnesse of meat and drink, and company, begetting pride, idle∣nesse, sensuall lusts, and forgetful∣nesse of God; and these producing ill-favoured brats, contrary to true godlinesse: Besides, they are great eye-sores to the devill, when they walk in a way of godlinesse, who therfore bendeth his strength to get them down, that with their
 fall, as shrubs with the fall of a mighty Cedar, men of meaner rank that live by their example may be crusht & ruined. 2. because they are guilty also of the same mistakes that other men are, that is, to mis∣judge their sins; with the unjust Steward, for a hundred to write down fifty, & to say of their grea∣test exorbitancies, as Lot of Zoar, is it not a little one, & my soul shall live? to take presumptions for infirmi∣ties, and so to be less carefull in pre∣venting, or forsaking them. And with these mistakes they are usually more possessed, than inferiour men; partly through custome in sinningConsuetu∣do peccan∣di tollit sensū pec∣cati. which (hinc illae lachymae) Persons of quality sometimes are too guilty of; and partly through flatterers, those tame beasts, with
 which it is their unhappy chance to be alwayes haunted. 3. Because they are obnoxious to the same sentence & doom, if they sin wil∣fully, which other offenders lie o∣pen to; for so S. Paul telleth us, Rom. 2. Tribulation and anguish shall be upon the soul of every one that doth evil; and he giveth a reason of it; For there is no respect of persons with God. He is not , or , a hater of the rich and honorable, nor doth he envie thē a place in Hea∣ven, because they have a plentifull portion in earth; the examples of Abraham, Job, David, and Salomon shew the contrary; but he is , an hater of the sinful man, & a revenger of wilful impiety, where ever he findeth it. It is their duty therefore to shunne these
 rocks of proud and presumptuous sins, at which the soules that dash must needs be split or battered: and it should be their discretion to accept and use all helps which may further the discovery of them; that so, when the ships of their souls are making toward them, they may upon the apprehensi∣on of their present danger, turne and steer their courses another way, and bring their Barques with safety at last into the Haven of eternall happinesse. And this, I hope, shall ever be your Lordships chief endevour; that so the peace of conscience may ac∣company your present Honour while you live, and the fruition of Gods face in Heaven may be your portion when you die. And so with my vowes to God for your Lordship, your Noble Lady, and Posterity, I rest

