



SIR,
THe greatest, and indeed almost the only ad∣vantage, a Poet reaps from what He writes, is the opportunities he meets with of making himself known to the best, and greatest men of his Age. A Play is first made publick in the Theatre; and when it comes to the Press, if any one has spoken kindly, and favourable of it, in the Representation, the Poet chooses him for his Patron; He having before (ac∣cording to the Authors Construction) chosen him for his Poet. The distance I am at from the City, and ev'n from the Kingdom too, will keep me Ig∣norant for some time, what success this Play (which I Humbly offer to your Patronage) may meet with. If the Town is pleas'd with it, I shall be pleas'd with my self for pleasing them; if they con∣demn it, I shall be apt to conclude so many in the right, rather than my single self. You saw it in Ma∣nuscript, and I have this early and auspicious Ad∣vantage, that You approve of it. Boadicea pleas'd them, and I receiv'd a very great additional satis∣faction, when I understood how particularly it pleas'd You. I will not go to compare that Play, and this together, nor follow the custom, of reckon∣ing the last performance best; and showing the greatest fondness of the Youngest Brat. The Rhime was the only thing that recommended that; and
 for ought I know, the only thing too, that can re∣commend this. I could wish for something distin∣guishing in it, because it is sacred to you, and I should desire to be known to you at advantage. If the pains in writing will endear it to you, it cost me much more than the former. It has some sort of design besides (such as it is) but I was never very guilty of Plotting. I can hardly keep the Cha∣racters in my Play, from being as honest, and sin∣cere, as I would be my self in a Dedication. A vi∣cious Character disturbs me while I draw it, and it grates me to delineate a Villain. 'Tis certain no Po∣et can excite any Passion in another, if he does not feel it first in himself. Who then will choose to de∣scribe discontent, envy, or revenge, when they may have such fair Fields as Honour and Vertue, to range in; all there is bright before them, and the Flight the Muse takes thence, is Heavenwards? Such Characters, artfully, and justly drawn, will excite the good and great to be Patrons; and such Patrons as You (Sir) will soon teach Poets to draw such Chara∣cters. You are endow'd with all the Blessings of Nature and Fortune, and you are as Liberal of the gifts of the latter to others, as she has been to You. So great is your Estate, it would be unwieldy to have it more; and such good use is made of it, that envy does not wish it less. It is not consum'd in vain, and superfluous Equipage; but laid out in maintaining the old, open English hospitality. De∣sert, in want, is supply'd; and honesty in distress, is succour'd and sustain'd; great without Titles,
 and good above greatness; rich, rather to others than your self; and seeming only as your own Ste∣ward. Your inclinations, and endeavours are the ge∣neral good of mankind; and none ever went from you dissatisfyed; delighted in obliging others, and pleas'd to see them pleas'd with your Bounty. Wishing the welfare of all men, and speaking well of all men, is a sure way to meet with an universal return of good will and good wish∣es. He doubly enjoys his Fortune, who has it wish'd double, by all that know him.
Among the Prayers of others accept of the prasi∣es of the Poet; humbly and heartily, tho' feebly offer'd. I now begin to experience, how much the Mind may be influenc'd by the Body. My Muse is confind, at present, to a weak and sickly te∣nement; and the Winter Season will go near to over-bear her, together with her houshold. There are Storms, and Tempests to beat her down, or Frosts to bind her up, and kill her; and she has no Friend on her side but Youth to bear her thro'; if that can sustain the attack, and hold out, till Spring comes to relieve me, one use I shall make of farther life, shall be to show how much, I am,
SIR,

Londonderry, Nov. 1st. 99.
