



May it please your Lordship,
MY Pen is unable to express how much my heart hath been, and is obliged to your Lordships service; who ever since you were our most Reverend and Honoured Father and Governour, have declared your self the Pillar of the Church, in your Lordships Diocess, the Patron of your conformable and vertuous Clergy, and the great and good Example of Piety, Justice, Cha∣rity, and Religious Devotion.
The present demonstration of this my cordial ser∣vice, is a Sermon preached this last Assize in your Lordships Diocess; the which (confiding in your Lordships obliging candour) presumes to kiss your Lordships hands in this publick address.
I hope there can be no Solecism herein, upon the ac∣count either of Divinity or Morality; for one Subject
 of the Sermon is Religion, whose beautifull face would be not only sullied by the foul fingers of defor∣med Errors, but also wofully scratched, and misera∣bly torn by the poysonous nails of many-headed Schism, and monstrous Heresies, unless theApud nos, Apostolorum locum Episco∣pi tenent. S. Hi∣er. Epist. ad Marcell & in Epist. ad Evag. Apostolical Order of Episcopacy protected this Celestial Virgin from vi∣olence and rape, according to that ofAd Papianum St. Cyprian, Unde Schismata & Hereses ortae sunt? nisi dum Episcopus qui unus est, & Ecclesiae praeest, super∣ba quorundam presumptione contemnitur.
As also, another Branch of this Discourse is King∣ly Government, the real interest whereof is so twisted with the sacred Order of Bishops, that it seems ani∣mated by the same Soul; for like Hippocrates twins, they smile and weep together, and live and die toge∣ther: the which most certain truth was too truly and plainly demonstrated in the late schismatical times, which sealed with sacred blood thatConfer. at Hampt. Court. Aphorism of wise King James, No Bishop, no King.
A third Branch of the Sermon is, the Supremacy of his Majesty, in Causes Ecclesiastical; of which Royal Prerogative, inherent in the Imperial Crown, the Protestant Bishops have alwayes been the most faithfull and worthyEpisc. Eliens. Resp ad Apol. Bellarm. cap 4. Bishop White against Fisher. p. 570, &c. Hyperaspistae: whereas the Ge∣nius of Presbyterian Discipline is alwayes nibbling at the Royal Scepter.
The last Branch concerns the Law, which is Vin∣culum Humanae Societatis, and concerns Magistracy,
 which is Propugnaculum Legis, to whose due Rights none tender a more cheerfull and ready obedience, than those of the Episcopal judgement, who preach and practice passive obedience, notCal. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 20. Sect. 31. Genevizing re∣sistance, who say withS. Ambr. in Orat. ad Aux∣entium. St. Ambrose, Dolere potero— flere potero—aliter nec debeo, nec pos∣sum resistere.
Accept therefore, my good Lord, of this Mite of Duty, which upon the earnest entreaty of some Persons of worth and integrity, adventures into the Ocean of a critical world: and although I freely acknowledge, my well-intended endeavours did not merit the sprink∣ling of that florid and fluent Rhetorick, which the thenSerjeant Broom. Lord Judge (who hath a Suada in his tongue) vouchsafed in his eloquent and loyal charge to pour upon them: yet I hope your Lordship will not throw them away into the gulph of neglect, see∣ing they found a candid reception from the Pulpit, and come from him who accounts it his great honour to be a regular Son of the Church of England, and conceives it his lawfull ambition to be reputed by your Lordship, as he is unfeignedly in all Canonicall obedience,

