


Right Worshipfull,
THe evidence you have of your calling,
Multi sunt vocati, pauci verò electi.
Quae propter studo voca∣tionem & e∣lectionem tuam firmam efficere. compared with those words of the Apostle, Not many wise after the flesh, not many mighty, not many no∣ble are called; And the difference
 that Gods goodnes hath made be∣twixt you and those that are called, should often move you (me thinks) unto a holy admiration and expo∣stulation to this or the like effect; What, not many persons of quality that are called, and I one of them! What, not many that are called, that have either house or home, or conve∣nient food and raiment, and I a plea∣sant seat, possessions of lands and of great and small cattell, rich apparell, a full spread table, men and maid-servants, and the delights of the sons of men, as musicall instruments, and that of many sorts! What shall I say to these things? Shall not I remem∣ber, to whom much is given, of them much will be required? Who and what am I that the Lord should deal so graciously and so bountifully with me?
Gratia deies id quod , ut fiat sicut scriptum est, qui gloriatur in domino gloriator. Am not I lesse then the least of Gods mercies? Wherefore hath God trusted me with these things, and not others? Is it not that I might
 therewith honour him, and doe good in my life? Am not I ingaged for e∣ver to magnifie the Lord who hath freely given all I am and have unto me: To rejoice in God my Saviour, who hath fully merited the same for me, and to study and endeavour in the strength of Christ to be a good steward of the manifold grace and goodnesse of God?
The ensuing Treatise being commended for successe unto the Lord who inclined me unto it wholly and onely (if I be not a stranger unto my own heart) for his glory and the good of souls, I humbly dedicate unto your and your childrens patronage, not one∣ly as a testification of my thankful∣nesse unto you for your free love and favour vouchsafed unto me in your family for these four years past: But also as a Memoriall for you, wherein you may be both put in remembrance of such like
 principles of truth (and so be kept from errour,
Intus ex∣istens prohi∣bet alienum.
) as I have deliver∣ed unto you at severall Exercises in your Family, and minded of the holy duties requisite unto the practice of piety, that I have often advised you unto, and directed you in; I confesse the whole book is composed after such a manner, and in such a method and phrase (and purposely that it might be sutable for those for whom it is chiefly intended) as is farre below your worth; But will not you more minde the matter then the form of it? I perswade my self you will: And I beseech you to accept of it, (such as it is) and to manifest your acceptance of it, by your carefull perusall and conscionable practice of it, so far forth as it is agreeable to Gods word.
I would also request two things more of you, First, that you would often pray that you may so partake
 of temporall blessings, as that you may not lose eternall; For what is a man profited if he shall gain the whole world and lose his own soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?
Omnia si perdas ani∣mam servare memento. What a melan∣choly piece of businesse will it prove, to have this life comfortable and eternity miserable? What a sad sight was it for Dives to behold the poor begger Lazarus in the Kingdom of God, and himself thrust out? It is not usuall with the Lord to bestow two heavens upon his people, one in this life, another in the life to come;
Impossi∣bile est ut caelo & terrae appareas glo∣riosus. Hier. Secondly, I make it my request unto you that you would often ask your selves what will become of you after this life, and in what eternity you conceive you would be found in if you were to die the very day you make this inquisiti∣on, whether amongst the blessed or among the cursed? There is a vast
 difference betwixt the two eterni∣ties that immediately follow after death; The beleevers eter∣nity is one perpetuall day of joy that shall never see night;
Si Chri∣stum habes aeternitatem per Christum in te habes. Alst. The unbeleevers eternity is one ever∣lasting night of torments without day; I would not for any thing in the world that these should be the last words of any of You; I have suandered out my life in change of pleasures and recreations, and in do∣ing ill, nothing, and what I ought not to have done: I have lived unresol∣vedly, I die doubtfully, and now unto which of the two eternities art thou going into O my soul? and alas for evermore!
Anxius vixi, dubius morior, heu quo vado!
Now the great God of heaven who is greater then the greatest of your souls enemies, grant that neither the temptations of Satan, the pleasures of this life, nor any other thing may e∣ver prevail against that faith that some of you have begun to professe, nor
 choke that fruit of the word you have begun to bear: But grant that you may go from faith to faith, and that you may so abide in Christ, as that you may bring forth much fruit to Gods glory, your comfort, and the good ex∣ample of others; And the good Lord give you and your family seriously to minde the immortality of your souls, and sincerely to serve the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul: And provide for your fa∣mily while the earth remaineth a god∣ly Governour and Governesse who may endeavour to know, and to make known the truth as it is in Jesus, who may serve God without fear in holines and righteousnesse all their daies withall their heart and with all their house! It is his hearts desire and request un∣to God, who is,

