


My dear Kindred and Acquaintance,
MY hearts desire and request unto God for you is that you might be saved: I say the truth in Christ, I lye not, my conscience also bearing me witnesse in the holy Ghost, that I have great heavinesse, and continuall sorrow in my heart; For I could wish that my self were accursed from Christ, for my Brethren my Kinsmen according to the
 flesh; If God should please to put the choice into my hands, I had much rather live as miserable a life, and die as cursed a death (I mean in regard of temporall curse and misery) as ever any meer crea∣ture of mankinde ever did; then the most miserable meanest soul of you should be eternally damned: And not without cause, for one single soul is more worth then all the world;
The excel∣lency of mans soul.
Mat. 16.26. The meanest soul of mankinde that ever shall be saved cost no lesse then the life of Christ, which was more worth then all the lives of all the people of the whole world;
Mat. 20.28. Ioh. 10.15. I have presumed for your souls sake to publish this following Treatise (which was first thought upon, and long since penned for private use) notwithstanding my pre∣meditations of the inconveniencies that might follow upon it at such a time as this is;
The occasi∣on of my appearing in print I hope the Lord that inclined unto it (out of meer compassion unto such Protestants of you as in my time daily and devoutly worshipped the true God, but after a false manner, to wit after the traditions of your fathers, in Pater nosters, Ave Maria's, &c. or in an ig∣norant formall saying over the Lords prayer, the Belief, and the ten Command∣ments
 together as one form of praier) will perswade you to make that use of it for which it was intended;
The sad e∣state of thse that are not bet∣tered by the means of their salva∣tion. Mat. 11.10, to 15. It will (I fear) be more tolerable for Atheist and heathens at the day of judgement, then for some Christians in this Kingdome; (might not I have said then for some of you?) For if they had heard the Ser∣mons, and had had Bibles, Catechismes, and such like usefull books in their native tongue, as the people of England have had, and have, they would long ago have re∣pented, beleeved and practised better things then many of the people of this na∣tion ever did, or doth to this day; The people of England (and you among them) of all people in the Christian world have good books, First, to instruct them in the principles of Religion, as Mr Perkins Six Principles, Mr Balls Catechisme, Mr D. Rogers Practicall Catechisme, Mr Bifields Principles, and now the Assemblies Confession of Faith, and their larger and lesser Catechismes; Secondly, to direct them in the Practice of Piety, As Dr Sibbs Epitomy upon Mr R. Rogers seven Treatises, The Pra∣ctise of Piety, so as that the practitioners thereof do not tye themselves unto the
 formes of praier therein. D. Gouges Domesticall duties, M. Bifeilds Mar∣row, &c. Thirdly, to establish them in beleeving, As D. Sibbs Souls conflict, M. Thomas Goodwins childe of Light, &c. his Triumph of Faith, &c. M. Obadiah Sedgwicks doubting Christian, &c.
These witnes that the people of this Land do not want good books, but a heart to make use of good books. The people of England, I say, have these and many moe good books to further their salvation, any one whereof of each kinde might suffice for their pre∣sent use in the particulars aforesaid; They onely want a book to perswade them to put them into practice; If the Lord would be pleased to make this of mine (of which I am sensible there is little need) helpfull thereunto, I should thank∣fully acknowledge to God (if I could but know it) that he had fulfilled many of my desires about it;
Two things desired for the good of souls in this kingdom. If God should put it within the hearts of our King and Par∣liament (as I hope he will) to provide for every parish in this Land a Preaching Minister: And if the Lord should in∣cline the hearts of the officers of every parish in the Kingdome (as I desire he may) to provide for every family therein, a Bible, Catechismes, and one that could reade; Then it would be thought that
 the people of this Nation were in a fair way of being instructed in the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven;
Those will never in an ordinary way be sa∣ved that will take no pains for their salva∣tion. and yet in my weak judgement they would not be by these made wise unto salvation, unlesse they did diligently improve the same; The Bible and all the good books in the land, and all the men, means, and mi∣nistery of grace, cannot make a negli∣gent, sloathfull, carelesse, worldly, wil∣full, obstinate prejudiced people wise unto salvation
Mat. 13.14, 15.25.26, 30.
: But I hope better things of you, and things that accom∣pany salvation, and doe perswade my self that you will not only improve your Bibles, Catechismes, and the Ministery and means of grace that you doe or may partake of on the Lords day and in the week season: but also that you will lay hold on every advantage to further you to heaven,
How you are to make use of the fol∣lowing Treatise. and that you will make such use of this book of mine, as that it will never rise in judgement against you: which that you may, as you reade it, diligently search out, and seriously ponder upon the Scriptures (that you may know indeed whether the things are so) that are quoted to prove the truths therein hinted, and the duties therein
 advised unto, for that end that you may learn, beleeve and practise what you finde agreeable to Gods word.
And as you are children in years and in understanding, get the answers of the Questions by heart, and the Scriptures cited to prove the same, unlesse some Catechismes be commended unto you by your Ministers and the Officers of the Congregation you belong unto;
Caution which if there be, then follow their di∣rections therein, not only as you are pri∣vate Christians, but also as you are Christian Governours of families: And make use of the former part of this Trea∣tise (which I have often called a Ca∣techisme in the Directions,
Note. because of the Catecheticall method of it) in your private reading, and as you have need thereof: As for the Directions, they are and will be in part usefull for all sorts of Christians while they are on this side heaven, and you have direction in the Epistle unto them, and in them how to make use of them.
An Obiecti∣on, which should have been placed at the end of the Di∣rections.
But fear me! Some of you will say in your hearts before you have read them all over, that they direct you unto a more strict, uncomfortable, painfull kinde of
 life then you can live without being there∣with much hindered in your calling, and that you hope the Scriptures are suffi∣cient of themselves without them to di∣rect you in all things necessary unto sal∣vation.
 First, I answer, That they direct you but unto such a kinde of life as God in his word requires you to lead
Ps. 119.10, 97. Mat. 5.48. therefore you ought to follow hard after it; The most strict and righteous persons shal scarsely be saved
1 Pet 4.18. Rom. 13.12.
; They had need to live strictly that must give a strict ac∣count (g.)
 Secondly, They doe not advise you un∣to a melancholy life, but unto a holy con∣versation, which is the most comfortabl life that Christians can live
Ps. 19.10.84.1, 2, 8. Rom. 2.9.
: As tri∣bulation and anguish belongs to every son that sinneth (the Saints know it by ex¦perience) any manner of way, at any time, in any place or company; So conso¦lation and peace belongs unto all that liv by the faith that they have in the Son of God, a holy life according to the rule o Gods word
Rom. 2.10 Gal. 6.16.
: As it is the duty of al beleevers to endeavour to be perfect as their heavenly father is perfect; so it i their duty alwaies to rejoyce in th
 Lord, and to make their lives as com∣fortable as they can, so as that they be not sinfull.
1 Thes. 5.16.
 Thirdly, It is the minde of Christ that you should take pains for your salva∣tion;
Io. 6.27. eternall life is not ordinarily gi∣ven, save to those that seek it, and labour for it;
Mat. 6.33. Luk. 13.24. If you knew in any measure the nature of the two eternities that im∣mediatly follow after death, to wit either an everlasting blisse, or a perpetuall curse: you would think no pains too much, nor any labour too hard to undergoe, so as that you might thereby through Gods free grace in Christ escape hell, and obtain hea∣ven; Who would not endure seventy years hard labour, yea, and the torments of the damned in hell for a season, for a blessed eternity? But God will freely give his Christ to those that are willing to give up themselves unto him,
Isa. 55.1. Io. 3.16. and Christ will make his yoke easy to those that are willing to bear it.
Mat. 11.29.
 Fourthly, Although you can do nothing of your self, but sin against God yet you may doe all things through Christ that God requires of you for his glory and your own salvation;
Phil 4 13. when you want ability to perform holy duties, go to Christ for it.
  Fiftly, The practice of piety will not hinder you, but further you in your cal∣ling; Godlinesse hath great gain;
1 Tim. 6.6. Ʋpon what ground can you expect a bles∣sing upon your calling, if you doe not pray to God for it before you goe about it? And how unthankfull will you be for it, if you doe not in the evening thank∣fully acknowledge it? As the body, so the soul hath need of daily food;
Amos. 8.11. Im∣prove the Lords day aright for your souls,
Mat. 6.31, to 35. and then you will know the better how to improve the other daies for the good of your bodies; you should be more in∣quisitive how to live out of the world then in it; bare Christ is wealth enough;
Rom. 8.32 If you have God for your portion, you have more then then the world can afford you.
 Sixtly, Although the Scriptures con∣tain all things in them necessary to be known and beleeved unto salvation;
2 Tim. 3.26, 27. yet you ought to use all means whereby you may understand them, and make a right use of them: And therefore you ought to make use of the following Directions, be∣cause they doe not only shew you how to profit by the word: but also because they have Scripture in them gathered together
 and set in order for the help of the memory, and for the furthering of Christians un∣faith and a holy life: As for the form and method of them, if you know fitter and better, follow them, if not, make use of mine; Oh that there were a heart in you conscionably to observe them that it might goe well with you, and yours after you! In vain may England expect better times untill they have better hearts, and better houses; Bad and ungodly Masters and members of Families will never make good members of a Church or of a Com∣mon-wealth: But on the contrary, if the Governour and severall members of every Family in the Land,
If we had better hearts and better houses, we might yet expect bet∣ter times. would but be perswa∣ded to be conscionable in performing their own particular duties, then every Family would be a seminary to Church and Common-wealth: Then we in this Nation might be said to be indeed a re∣forming people, and might yet expect a happy harmony among us.
Now thou the alseeing God of hea∣ven, that understandest the thoughts of my soul afarre off, and knowest that my intention in the composall of this book was thy glory and the good of the souls of thy people, and particularly
 of my countreymen, kindred, acquain∣tance, and of those whose sins I have any manner of way, at any time, in any place or company made my self parta∣ker of: Vouchsafe for the Lord Jesus Christ sake to make it instrumentally helpfull for the obtaining the ends for which it was intended and undertaken! It is the prayer of him, who is

From my study at Lgleys in Much wal∣tham in Essex
Aril 18. 1648.
