



TO find your deserving Name prefixed to so inconsiderable  Peice, the World may justly won∣er, and term it a presumptuous Ʋndertaking: Consideration, says ne, would have made him more dis∣reet, and had he ballanced it, he must have yielded to a less bold umour. Alas! how different is hat thought from the true occasion; rom thence I had the highest En∣ouragement to proceed: For pau∣ing one day seriously upon the mat∣er, the most affecting Object so trongly seized upon my active Prin∣iple, that I found my self disposed
 in sp ite of all my force, to form with∣out delay this Dedication. I hope your goodness will prevent the Cen∣sure of the World; and of an un∣pardonable Crime, only make a too considerate Action. But had there been no other reason for it, methinks it had been an Egregious Fault to have neglected, if it could be pos∣sible, a Person in whom Beauty and Vertue are so eminently conspicu∣ous. One whose incomparable Hu∣mour, and obliging goodness, are no the least of those excellent Quali∣ties, which have acquired her the Esteem and Admiration of all tha have the Honour to know her The Considerations had been suffi∣cient to have raised me to the con∣fidence of laying this Diverting tho' Ʋnpolished Treatise at you Feet. I have heen eased hereby, o
 some few leisure Hours, purely to avoid the intruding Cares of what might happen. The Subject is Love; So much the more curious, for who is not fond of knowing what they feel, besides the natural Incli∣nation of piercing into Secrets. The Scene, 'tis true, was acted in a far distant Climate; still the more en∣couraging, for what is more pleasing to the Sense than Novelty, that ne∣cessary Appurtenance of our Na∣ture. And then the Powerful Charms of our Tartarian Prin∣cess, Her Generous, unaffected Dis∣position, and more her Noble Soul, fit, and adapted to entertain true Love, bear such a near Resemblance to yours, that it were an irrepa∣rable Injury not to repose them un∣der your Protection. Do but ob∣serve to the least particulars of
 what Relates to the adorable Taxi∣la, and I'm confident you'll find, that through every Circumstance of her Character, you may discern as thro' a Mirror, your individual Self. If the following Novel will but suf∣fice to entertain those Hours, that are disengaged from more important Business, 'tis all my Hopes can rea∣sonably wish for, and the full end of my Design obtained. Amongst the Crowd of your Admirers, be pleased to Accept the particular De∣votion of,
Madam,

