



SIR,
DEdications are so much in Fashion now a-days, that a Man cannot appear well in Print without One. Some of 'em are Fine, some Foppish and others Fullsome, to the last
 degree of Flattery and Falshood: But among all the Dresses of this Kind, I believe, a Native Simplicity will please You best; without running into Foreign Countries for gawdy Colours or phantastical Flourishes. For your Heart is entirely in the Interest of England, and will never let You sacrifice it to Hypocrisy, Vanity or new Fashi∣ons. However I am so fully convinced of your Discretion, Prudence and Humanity, that I take it for granted You will ac∣cept of this Excellent and Po∣lite Tract of Oratory, which I now address to You with all the Frankness and Sincerity in Na∣ture;
 and though it be Ori∣ginally FRENCH, yet I hope it will fare no worse, for the sake of an Honest EN∣GLISH Translator.
I shall not complement you, But I think my self so much honoured with your Name to this Translation of the ACTI∣ON OF AN ORATOR, that indeed I want Eloquence enough to express my Thank∣fullness for so great a Favour and Condescention. And yet your Goodness perswades me, that you will not discounte∣nance this Dedication, either for its Ʋnworthyness or Dis∣proportion; for you know that
 it is not within the Compass of every Man's Fortune or Capaci∣ty to build a STATƲE to his Friend.
Give me leave to think then, that I could not have Dedicat∣ed this Book to a Worthier Patron than your self, with re∣gard either to your Extract, E∣ducation or Qualifications. Your Family is both Antient and Ho∣nourable. What need I men∣tion your being Descended from the PLANTAGENETS; What need I say any thing of your being so nearly related to that Illustrious Hero, GENE∣RAL MONK? I shall only
 add this, that you seem to me to inherit your Renowned An∣cestors Virtues, as well as their Estate, even in a Private Ca∣pacity and Character.
How well you deserve of the Commonwealth of Learning, the World knows by your act∣ing so honourable a Part in it your self, and by universally encouraging the Study of Phi∣losophy, Language and Antiqui∣ty in others; by your Fruga∣lity in your own private Per∣sonal Expences, and your Munificence at the same time to publick Letters; which is to be truly Noble without Vanity,
 and Generous without self-inte∣rest: So that you seem to live in Retirement only to become a Greater Benefactor to Mankind. But now You are pleased, out of a singular Humanity, wonted Candour and a general Respect to all sorts of good Literature, to promote a little Treatise of inferior Quality to the Publick View of the World: And how well it will answer at last for so kind a Countenance and Recommendation under your Auspicious Protection, I must wholly leave to Time and Chance to determine; for For∣tune has her particular Favou∣rits.

However I could make you twenty APOLOGIES for this Ʋndertaking, and give as many good Reasons for the Publishing of it to the King∣dom; I could tell you a long Story of the Nature and Quali∣ty of the Subject; of the Ex∣cellency of ACTION in the main, and of the extraordi∣nary Merit of the whole Work: But this would look like fore∣stalling your Judgment, or prae∣engaging your Opinion of the Book at the same time, when I only invite you to the Reading on't. And therefore I entirely submit it, such as it is, without
 any further Ceremony, to your most judicious Thoughts and discerning Faculties, upon the Confidence of a kind Recepti∣on and a candid Interpretation in Favour of,
SIR,

