



THE Apostle makes it the Ministers duty,Tit. 3.1. Heb. 13.17. to put the People in mind of being subject to Principalities and Powers, as well Ec∣clesiastical as Civil. And our National Synod provided this Canon;An. 164. Canon 8, That all publick Preachers, twice every year, according to S. Paul's rule for edifica∣tion, should instruct the people, that the Rites and Ceremonies established in the Church, are lawful and com∣mendable, and that they ought wil∣lingly to submit themselves to the Au∣thority and Government of the Church, as established under the Kings Majesty. But though we know it to be
 our duty to preach Conformity, the peo∣ple think it their duty, not to hear us. Yea, too many Preachers there are, who contrary to all Christian Charity, make it their business, twice a day sometimes, to defame and condemn that Doctrine of peace and union, which we in obedience to the Laws of God and our Superiors do practise and commend: And needs must the condition of the Flock be miserable, where there is such constant contention between the Shepherds, Inter licet no∣strum, & non licet vestrum (said Op∣tatus to Parmenion) nutant & remi∣gant animae Christianorum; between our pleading for, and the insinuations of discontented persons against, communion with the Church, the Souls of the peo∣ple, as between so many impetuous and contrary winds and waves, are ready to make shipwrack of Faith and a good Conscience. And that which makes our condition more deplorable, is that we are fallen into those times, of which the A∣postle foretold; When men will not en∣dure sound Doctrine, but will heap up. Teachers to themselves, having itching ears; and the most gentle re∣proof, is as the pouring of Vinegar in∣to
 their wounds, or as our Saviour ex∣presseth it, The casting of Pearls be∣fore Swine, which inrageth them the more.L. 2. de Na∣tura Deo∣rum. And it is almost as vain to in∣deavour to cure them by the eye as by the ear, seeing as Cicero observed. Ve∣stra solùm legitis vestra amatis, caetera, causâ incognitâ, condemnatis. What∣ever is spoken or written by men of their own perswasion, is received as unque∣stionable truth, and whatever is urged by a contrary party, is without any con∣sideration rejected, as undoubted errour. Yet possibly all men are not so partial, but they may give our Writings a glance of the eye, the great difficulty is how to dispossess the mind of that prejudice, which hath prepossest it, and makes them as averse from pondering our reasonings as from hearing our Sermons. In or∣der to this, I have chosen to argue, not from the Fathers of our Church, but from the Founder of their own; a man, who is highly esteemed of, for his learn∣ing, piety, and authority, among all so∣ber dissenters, if he condemn the prin∣ciples and present practises of such as make separation from our Church, and out of our Congregations gather distinct
 and opposite Assemblies, wherein they ob∣serve new modes of Worship, of Prayer, and administration of the Sacraments; as being schismatical, and tending di∣rectly to confusion. I hope none of you will wilfully trample on the gray hairs of reverend and judicious Mr. Calvin, who here sets himself in the breach that is made, to prevent any farther separa∣tion, and to recall those that are depart∣ed to their former Communion. To which end, I beseech you to lay aside all partiality and prejudice, to examine and weigh not his authority only, but his ar∣guments from Scripture and Antiquity, from the necessity of preserving peace and unity in the Church, and the certain danger of making divisions in and se∣paration from that Church, which is so established as the Church of England is. And not to imitate Calvin in what may make only for your private profit and dignity, but for the publick peace and unity of Gods Church. Wherein alas! how are the pretended disciples degene∣rated from their Master—Aetas paren∣tum pejor Aius; little of his moderati∣on or learning survives: Calvin we know, and the first Reformers, Bucer,
 Melancthon, L. Martyr, Zanchy, &c. we know to have been pious and prudent men. But of what Spirit the Sectaries of this Age are, if they knew themselves, they would tremble at it. I desire you also to consider the great advantages which, by our present divisions, we give to our Enemies of Rome. We hear how the Turk, by feuds of Christian Princes, hath found an opportunity to invade Christendom with too great success; and how easily may the Pope enter at the breaches that we make; the more strength and numbers any Faction draws from the Church, so much is added to her Enemy, who hath no other hopes of de∣stroying; but by dividing us, it hath been your constant practice to unite against a common Enemy.Invicem divisi in Diversita∣te Ecclesiae uniti. Isi∣dorus Hisp. Sent. l. 1. c. 19. (As S. Augustine ob∣served of some, Non quia se invicem amant, sed quia eum, qui amandus erat fimul oderint) shall we not much rather unite our selves against that Ene∣my who is deservedly hated, and will be equally destructive to us all; our wea∣rying and wounding each other, doth prepare us to fall an easier prey to those that seek to devour us; we need no other spirit of Prophesie than that which our
 Saviour spake with, to assure us, that a Kingdom divided against it self can∣not stand: It is a most memorable Story which I have often heard, and found lately in a Latine Author of good note, concerning our late Soveraign of blessed memory. How that King James being like to dye, Bishop Andrews procured the Archbishop of York, Bishop Laud, and others, to consult for the safety of Religion, which was equally indanger∣ed by the Papists and Schismaticks, there being a rumour spread, that the Prince having been lately in Spain, was too much inclined to the Religion of that Country; but others supposed him too favourable to the Sectaries. For their better information, concerning the judg∣ment and affections of their Prince, they send for Dr. Wren, who had waited on him in his Voyage to Spain, whom they acquainted with the reason of their meeting, and desired an account how the Prince stood affected to the establish∣ed Religion. Of whom he gave this Cha∣racter, that he intimately knew the Princes judgment, and was well assured that although he hated the Popish errours before his Voyage, he abhorred them more
 since; and that he was a great enemy to the superstitious vanities of the Sectaries, adding, that he was of a pure faith and invincible virtues, and of a couragious mind, resolved against all opposition. Which relation Bishop Andrews seriously considering, and reflecting on the impe∣tuous and restless spirits of the Sectaries, after a short pause and with a sad voice thus bespake them; O most unhappy Prince! yea of all men most deplora∣ble! I tremble to relate the dreadful evils that shall befall this good Prince, for the Sectaries shall deprive him of his Scepter and Throne, yea and of his life also. And turning to Bishop Laud (he said) They shall not deal more gently with you: And as for you Doctor Wren you shall not go Scot-free, you shall lose your liberty if not your life. All which things were pun∣ctually fulfilled; and God grant that those evils which the minds of many good men do presage, upon a view of that spirit of perversness which still acts us, on the like principles, do not involve us in the like confusions. 'Tis a strange Romance (saith pious and learned Dr. Hammond) to consider how the one
 Heir of the Ottoman Family, who hath such vast possessions, and raigns as a so∣litary Tyrant, feasting on the blood of his own and others Subjects, and conse∣crated in the blood of his own Brethren, keepeth all in peace, nor durst any to raise questions concerning their Prophet, or his Successor, but every one, as if born to fight and dye for him, do at his com∣mand, sowe death throughout the world, 'till at last, they fall themselves a sacri∣fice to his lust. Whereas in the Govern∣ment of Christ, which was setled in a grand pacification, all whose laws tend to that one of loving one another, and to extend our affections to Strangers and Enemies, and to overcome evil with good; there are nothing but Wars and Fightings, and eternal feuds among the Children of peace; they which should be Angels of light, transform themselves to Legions of darkness, and Mahomet is exceeded in nothing but this, that we manage more Wars with greater cruelty, than he;Tragoedias agere in mugis. that all Religion is placed in the belief of those Doctrines which are the least part of Christian Faith, whereas the substantials, on which our eternal state depends, judgment, mercy,
 and faith, are as by consent omitted: and those that rebuke Tyranny and bit∣terness in others, under the charge of Antichristinism; outgo all those patterns, deceivin and enslaving of others, and proclaming God the inspirer and favou∣rer of all those wild confusions. That the God of mercy and Prince of peace would pardon all our iniquities, especially our presumptuous and obstinate sins, and as∣sist us by his eternal Spirit of truth and love, to know and do in this our day, the things that belong to our temporal, spiritual, and eternal peace, shall be the constant prayer, as it is the present en∣deavour of

Exon. Decemb. 1672.
