


WHat is now held out in the forepart of this Piece (which occasioned the second) was first offered by the Author, in the very love and faithfulness of his spirit, in a Lecture at Edinburgh. It was then frowardly entertained by some, roughly by many, and yet ear∣nestly desired to the Press by others. At that time with him, the frame of the former hindered the desire of the latter; yet so as he rested in an expe∣ctation of a season, wherein the former also would be likely to hear such
 words, which to some are never sweet till a day of calamity,Psal. 141. or when their Judges are overthrown. Thus doth the Lord oft times sweeten his truth and sayings, with the bitterness of his doings, and takes out one heat by another. Jonah is peevish and hot, and in his heat cannot receive the expostulation of God himself, (and such hath bin the case here) but afterward the suns heat, and the East-wind (both which are Scripture Hieroglyphicks of af∣fliction) do beat something into Jo∣nahs head,Jonah 4. and (having Gods own comment) do si∣lence the passion of the Prophet.
Possibly Scotlands vision may come as Ezekiels, out of the whirl∣winde and the fire.Ezek. 1. God, afore this testimony was given, had spoken in his wrath to Scotland, at Preston against the grosser, at Dun∣bar against the finer, and at Hamilton
 against the finest oposites of this truth and its interest; and since this testi∣mony given, he hath gone on to speak the same language from Enerkethen to Worcester. It may be, some of you the beloved Saints of Scotland, (for we cannot but think and call some so, howsoever it hath been taken) may suspect or be willing to search the wretchednesse, poverty, blindnesse and nakednes of your national Church state, and having your ear opened to Gods discipline in the rod, will not in love of your own, stop the ear to this faithfull Char∣mer,Psal 58. or soft and sweet wisperer, as the Hebrew signifies. He is wisely charming you from the corruption, not use of Ordinances. If a loose spi∣rit, despising those precious things of Heaven, should seize upon you (which God forbid) we should judge it to have more of the venomous adder in it, and more to be resisted and detested,
 then any thing in your present state. If this good man be not a sweet sa∣vour to you all, yet we believe, he will be so to Christ, whom his soul loves, and in whom also you are the desire of his soul. The first part of his Work may put you upon enquiry, whether you have dealt kindly with Christ, to obtrude as imperious and selfish Guardians or Tutors, such a spouse upon him, as is not according to his choyce, minde or lking. The experience of the true and deserving shepherds here (who are as dear to their other brethren, as shep to the wolves) doth tell them, that almost nine parts of ten in their flock are not sheep, not fit (say they) of civill, much lesse (say we) of Spirituall priveledges; and then they are ra∣ther a herd or drove, then a flock, for few (as the shepherds themselves think now their driving power ceas∣eth) will be willing to be kept by them,
 nay many (as they already know) do turn again, and would gladly rend them. The keeping of such for their flock, may be as unsafe to the good Ministers as it is unprofitable to the people (both good and bad) and dis∣honourable to Christ.
Wherefore, it will not onely be a right done to Christ, but also mercy to themselves and the people, to hearken to the voyce of this testimony in the first part thereof; and that will better dispose to the reception of the second, as a necessary preservative of the first, and give a blessd tendency to a better correspondence with God and men. But while (not the godly, but) the bulk of the Nation is the Church, it must have Officers and subordina∣tions accordingly, and then no less can be expected, then that the generality of the Officers & members, be an abo∣mination to the Lord and his people, in point of Gospel-communion. Nor is it
 any wonder, that those few Saints that are lost and drowned among the rest of the Ministers and people, be an abomination to the greatest part of such a Church. If such Saints will not, but in company of this multitude walk with God, or his people, what Go∣spel-communion can there be expe∣cted? As for the purging of this body, we suspect it to be (as the body) suppo∣sed, and a diversion from a reall duty: For, beside what we apprehend, how impossible it is, that the far lesser number (retaining their present con∣stitution) should regularly cast out the greater part therefrom; we are in∣formed by our experience, that the worser and greater part, is more able and willing to a formall ejection of the better, then on the contrary: And therefore this ten years talk of the lips (about purging) hath tended only to penury,Pro. 14. and the last years have been further from
 that work then the former.
But we may now hope, some more reall truth and course will take place. God hath found Scotland,Act. 12. as Peter in a prison, and asleep, between two armed Keepers, the Kirk, (so called) and the State, and bound with two chaines. May there not a light have now shone in the Prison, and the Angel of the Lord with a wa∣kening stroke have smitten her on the side, and bid her rise quickly? And may not her chains, at that voyce fall off, and she gird her loins, and get her out of her bondage? Scotland's sicknes discovered it self, and for twelve years her issue, or fountain of blood hath been opened,Mark 5. and she hath suffered many things of many Physicians, and spent all that she had, and is nothing bettered, but rather the worse; her touching other garments and garbs, hath not healed her. Oh that now she would try in faith, what a
 touch of Christ will do! It may be, the fountain of bloud would be dryed up, and she might feel in her self, that her plague was healed. For which, and all our mercies to this people, shall, with the endeavours be joyned the requests of

Dalkeith,
April 22. 1652.
