



MOST Hd LADY, VERY Rde MOTHER, & RELIGIOVS SISTERS.
HAD I bin as ready to give the Publicke a te∣stimony of my folly, as I was always willing the World might know how much I esteeme & respect you, I would long since have found some meanes to have gott into Print; but, I thanke God, I ne∣ver found my self transported with that imagination; contrary waise, I am perswaded that had I experienced any kind of tickling cawsed by the conceipt of getting into the Presse, I should have chosen rather to have spett upon the thought, and so have kill'd that itch, then expo∣sed my self to have bin scratcht in publicke. 'Tis upon this account, that as I most willingly Preface this sheet of paper to give a publicke testimony of the most cordiall esteeme and respect I have for you, so am I not unwil∣ling to lett the Reader know, 'tis you will needs trouble him with it. I must confesse I can not well imagin and frame to my self an occasion wch could more powerfully force me to what I doe not much relish, I mean appearing in Print, then this which hath now putt me upon it, the
making this little Memoriall of worthy Mr Carre's deserts become the subject of a dutifull testimony of your Grati∣tude. To me (and I thinke other men are much of that humour) there is nothing so acceptable and pleasing as a Gratefull minde. 'Tis true that the rendring any services, or doing any favours out of a craving hope of being re∣warded or even thanked for them, is indeed Trafike ra∣ther then Freindship, neverthelesse there are few men who take satisfaction to see their kindenesse and freind∣ship wholly lost,tium post ficium est ficii sepul∣m. which yet are never more truly cast away, then when thrown upon an Vngratefull hart. This consi∣deration easily excuseth to me your eagernesse for the pu∣blishing this paper; and I beleive will justify the same in the thoughts of others, who certainly, whatever they shall thinke of my Composition, will allow of your Inten∣tion.
As for this little discourse its being address'd to you, I thinke no body will much finde fault therewith, because it seemes very justly due to you, both upon the account of its Subject, and its Authour. Me thinkes it is a very equitable congruity to Dedicate to you an half-hower's discourse of that life, fourty years whereof had bin dedi∣cated to your assistance and advantage. And for the Au∣thour, there is much the same reason, because, though he pretends not to his Predecessour's excellent qualities and endowments for your help and service, yet doth he (and hopes without offence) to an equality of good will and and best wishes, or, which is the same, to be, as that worthy person was, most entierly Yours in JESVS-CHRIST.

