



Excellent MADAM,
I Have much laboured in this my first birth, not for its production, but suppressiō: I could wish it had not been born, or to have died in the hour it was brought forth, but that more than Egy∣ptian-Midwifery, Importunity, irresistibly prevailed to deliver it to this publique life.
And now a new affliction arrests me, (as poor parents who have strength to bring forth, but not ability to bring up) having no milk in either breast of private worth, or publique reputation; I was at a losse to
 get it nursed to a preservation, untill my memory (which is plentifull with instances of your Ladyships goodness) suggested your frequent and charitable condescentions to support the poore and their issue. This gave me hope it might live by your favour; and being adopted through the ordinance of preaching into the dignity of a Sermon, I presume to a confidence your Ladyship will allow it not onely your eye, but your counte∣nance. In the strength of this assurance I humbly lay it at your Ladyships feet, and there I should think this piece sufficiently secured, but that Envy will thrust into heaven it self, and it may possibly be more than whispered, that it is unhandsome and unseasonable to present a Sceleton, dry bones and a drier skull to a Lady in the eminen∣cy and splendor both of youth and nobleness. I am therefore necessitated to take San∣ctuary
 in the closet of your devotions, and to tell such objectors they are either ignorant of, or injurious to the Religion of your La∣dyships studies & applyments; which are not vain'd away in the modish trifles of an empty visit to the living, but improved in materiall providence, preparative addresses to, & me∣ditationall converses with the dead, watch∣fully observing, that a Ladyes Chamber is not fortified against, nor priviledged from the approches of Mortality more than the Cattage of a Villager. That a Dimple is as lively an Emblem of the Grave, as a Wrinkle, and veyns brimm'd, full, and high, with blood, may as soon be emptyed by an accident, as those that are leakish with age. — In the midst of life we are in death—who pays no reverence by distinction to Person, Time, or Place.
Moreover, as the Sun is so placed in the
 firmament, that he shews us the Flowers be∣low him (which are the Stars of the earth) and the Stars above him (which are the Flowers of heaven;) so a Funerall Sermon directs the eye of your sense to the grave in the earth beneath, but the eye of your faith to a throne in heaven above; a more glorious spectacle cannot be shown or seen. If yet any crooked thoughts shall labour to infer a Danger where I onely intend a Duty, it may be my miserie, not my fault: for this Paper is not designed so much to wait on your Person as on your Piety; and reflects not on any Interest but what is Eternall. It charges not your Ladyship with any expectation of new or great Fa∣vours. It enjoyes its perfect end if it dis∣charge the least of the old. And I hope I may still be a Servant where I am no longer an Attendant; a Votary, though
 not Meniall; and send the duty of my gratitude in the devotion of Prayer, where I cannot carry it in the service of my person.
Ʋpon the indulgence of this favour, I end my Epistle (as I hope I shall my life) in hearty and unwearied prayers for the constancy of Health, the accumulati∣on of Graces, and the eternity of Glo∣ries on your pious Person, your noble Associate, and the precious Pledges of your mutuall love. The performance of this duty will highly delight and perpe∣tually exercise the entire Capacities of
MADAM,

