



My LORD,
THE Nature, and Design of what is here Humbly tender'd to your Lordship's View, must be my Apo∣logy for this Dedication. Which I make not upon my own Personal Inte∣rest, or from any Private Aim; but on the Account of our Common Lord, and for promoting the Common Good, in his Hand, by whom Kings reign, and Princes de∣cree Justice. Christian Magistrates will
surely Accept it, as a Character of highest Honour, and Authority, that they are the Civil Ministers of our Saviour's most Benign, yet not less Awful Government.
'TIS a most Illustrious Jewel in the Crown of our Rightful and Gracious So∣vereign, King William, that in such Singular Regards he reigns by that King of Kings, as England's (and indeed Eu∣rope's) Deliverer, under the Redeemer of the World. The Liberties of his People, and Peace of Christendom have been, thro' the Merit of our Saviour's Inestimable Death, procur'd by the most apparent, and repeated Hazard of a Life so highly valuable. He hath signaliz'd himself as the Strenuous Asserter, and more than Titular Defender of the Reformed Faith; setling it (without Co∣ercion) upon Judgment and Choice, as its proper Basis: Yet, by his Patronage, in∣viting Some to maintain it against contrary Principles: and Others to secure it against repugnant Practices. Briefly, his Govern∣ment is indeed Paternal, and like that of our Redeemer, an Exercise of Mercy, even in the Execution of Justice.
ƲNDER a King, so truly Christian,
your Lordship holds the Sword. Your Ac∣cession to so high an Authority, created a more than Common Joy to all Good Men. Your just, and prudent Management of so great a Trust will not only be the Security, Hap∣piness, and Glory of this Renowned City; but will derive a like kindly Influence upon those lesser Bodies, which, sitting at the Feet of their Great Metropolis, shall from her Example draw both Measures, and Spirit, for the Conduct of themselves in the most Important Affair of Publick Re∣formation.
OF this your Lordship is known to have been already, in a somewhat lower, but more lasting Capacity, an Active and Generous Patron. And it is justly to be presum'd, that in this larger, and higher Sphere, your Zeal for so Noble a Design will be no less Vigorous, but more Extensive. May the following Discourse serve yet farther to Con∣firm, and to Conduct it by the Steadiest Influence of the great Reformer, and for his highest Honour, in Men's Compleat Fe∣licity. That we lose not those Things, which we have wrought, but that we receive a full Reward; not only Riches and Honour from the Left hand of Wis∣dom,
but also from the Right, Durable Riches and Righteousness, with Length of Days, for ever and ever.
THAT thus, in relation to both Worlds, your Lordship may be Bless'd, and Thou∣sands more, by the Means of your Good Government, is the most Sincere and Fervent Prayer of,
My LORD, 
