



May it please your Grace,
THAT I presume to prefix so great a Name to these Pa∣pers, is not that I ima∣gine they bear any proporti∣on to the Honour, but only need the support of your Patronage; a Credit less than your Grace's would not be sufficient to coun∣tenance
 and authorize Morality in a loose and dissolute World.
My Lord, I confess my self Principal in this Presumption up∣on your Goodness, but must, out of a little kind of Revenge, bring in the Learned and Ingeni∣ous Undertakers, as Accessaries for their ready and unanimous con∣currence in the choice of your Grace for their Patron: And in∣deed, who better qualified for the Protection of an incompara∣ble Moralist, than so great a Di∣vine? tho none more unfit to re∣commend him to it than my self. Your Lordship's Character is too high, and you taste too fine and distinguishing to relish an Ad∣dress from so mean a Pen; and I find the confidence of the At∣tempt obliges me to account for the Motives that induc'd me to it. The Relation I have to that
 famous Cathedral, which your Grace is pleas'd so frequently to fill with your excellent Presence, and ani∣mate with your admirable Dis∣courses; as also that I had to your venerable Predecessor; and to that Learned and Worthy Society which enjoys the peculiar Ho∣nour of having my Lord Arch-Bi∣shop of York its Visiter, first encou∣rag'd, and will, I hope, in some measure, qualifie my boldness in the Dedication: Besides, be∣ing conscious no production of my own could ever deserve to appear under your Grace's Name, I thought it more eligible to run the risk of Censure, than be found wanting even to a borrow'd op∣portunity of expressing that great Zeal and Veneration I have for your Lordship's Merits, by Incli∣nation as well as Duty. And yet, for my own part, my Lord, I
 who conceive my self, upon the above-mention'd Reasons, bound to devote my best, though the meanest endeavours imaginable, to your Grace's Honour and Ser∣vice, should scarce have offered a Person in your Lordship's Station the easie products of a few va∣cant hours; did not the number and worth of the Gentlemen concern'd, enhance the value of the Present; had not the Argu∣ment and Affinity with my Profes∣sion; and were there not Precedent both Ancient and Modern on my side. The Learn'd Erasmus has dedicated his Version of one sin∣gle Chapter of our Author's Morals to one of your Grace's Predeces∣sors; and another, the first in this Volume, to the great Monarch, K. Henry the Eight. And would not this bring me off, yet I perswade my self the Candour of your Grace's
 Temper, would prove a sure Re∣fuge at last, and easily pardon what the severity of your Judg∣ment could not approve. The Truth is, my Lord, I was indebt∣ed some publick Testimony of my Gratitude to your Grace's ex∣cellent Predecessor; but had not wherewith to discharge the Debt: This Sum was lent me, but too late; and then who had a better Title to it, and to whom could I with more honesty pay it, than to him who succeeds him in his great Abilities, as well as in his See? And he (for I must endea∣vour to be just to a Memory so precious) came every way up to the Dignity of his Character; had a rare happiness in seconding the Determinations of a clear and dis∣cerning Judgment, with an invin∣cible Resolution in the pursuit of them. He was most religiously
 Pious towards his God, without leaning towards either the Foppe∣ries of Superstition, or the Rants of Enthusiasm; zealous for the Church without Bigottry in his Head, or Interest in his Heart; obstinately Loyal to his Sovereign, out of Conscience, Learned, without Pomp and Noise; of an easy, yet awful kindness to his Depen∣dants, and of a wonderful affa∣bility to all Men: In short, one to be equall'd by few, out-done perhaps by none, but his Succes∣sor.
As to the Author himself, my Lord, your Grace has not only shown your self an accurate Judge of his great Worth in his own Native Language, by the great esteem you have always had for him, but has farther set an additional value upon him, in making many of the noble
 Precepts he delivers, speak Eng∣lish long ago through the whole course of your Life, and in re∣lation to any farther Version of him, I think I need only say, 'tis pity such equally bright and so∣lid Notions should be confin'd to a very few Readers of the Origi∣nal, and perhaps fewer Judges of his Sense: Lie buried either under the rubbish of his own Greek, or the unfashionable and unintel∣ligible English of an antiquated Translator. If it need any far∣ther vindication, I am sensible 'tis either to those, who would ingross all good sense to them∣selves, or who are too lazy or too weak for the performance, whom I am not bound to satisfie. If any thing prove but happy enough to recommend the de∣sign to your Grace, 'twill be suf∣ficient to gain it the approbation
 of all understanding Men; and for others, their dislike will be really a Kindness. Your Lord∣ship's good Opinion will make a Translation authentick: But, my Lord, it is not only the knowing, but the good Man, the tried Royalist, and the excellent Bishop, that render you admirable. Your vast and active Genius qualifi'd you for Government, and your Learning and Piety, striking upon the discerning Goodness of your Royal Patron, determin'd it to the Church: A Prince, who as in all things else, so in this particular∣ly, makes good his Claim to that Illustrious Title of Defender of the Faith; that he fills up the most eminent Stations in the Church with such vigorous and able As∣sertors of it as your Grace. And indeed, who better deserv'd to be intrusted with the Spiritual
 Sword now, than he who once so bravely wielded the Temporal in its Defence? And yet, my Lord, the Arch-bishop seems to be the least part of your Character. Now that you are arriv'd at al∣most the highest Pinacle of the Temple; you grow greater in the good Opinion of all Men, by a generous Contempt of the Vanities of Greatness under your view, and rise by your Condescensions. For you have not unlearn'd the Offices of an Inferiour Order, from your advancement to a Superiour. The great and ancient City of York is not more the Center of your Government, than your Cure the subject of your Pastoral and Ministerial Care. And to fill up all the momentous Duties of your Sacred Function, and ren∣der you truly Primitive, You
 second the unparallel'd Eloquence of your Tongue with that of your Life: whilst the one teaches your Auditors their Duty, the other encourages their Practise; by that you most clearly instruct, by this you most effectually apply; and this, and yet much more than this, is but the first Fruits the earnest of a few Months Enjoyment of your Dignity. Your Lordship must (may I with all humility use the liber∣ty of the Expression) give me leave to promise the World mighty things from a concur∣rence of such great and noble Qualifications. My Lord, I pre∣tend not to Panegyrick in what I say; am not fond of lighting a Taper to the Sun. All persons, who have any merit of their own, must acknowledge your Graces: Your Actions are your true
 Elogies; and he must have your own Tongue or Pen, and have the Honour personally to know you, who would rightly praise you. I cannot flatter, and besides your Grace is above it. Plutarch's Essay upon the Subject is enough to make a Man abominate that sordid and unmanly Artifice, And your Lordship's Sagacity would easily discover me with∣out the help of his Directions. But, my Lord, your minutes are too precious that I should any farther rob your Grace, or your Province, of them; and my deep Sense, and just value of your Grace's merits naturally conclude in wishes for a long and happy continuance of their Influence a∣mongst us. That therefore your Grace may live an aged Patron and Promoter of Learning and Industry; Example of Piety and
 Religion, Support and Orna∣ment to the best of Churches, and the Spirit and Genius of your own Province in particular, is the passionate and dis-interess'd wish of,
My Lord,

