



SIR,
I Preach'd this Sermon by your appointment; but was disap∣pointed in my expectation. For I look't for censure from those that heard it, but found it from those that heard it not. I read in the book of the Reve∣lation of St. John, Chap. 4. V. 8. of Four Beasts, that had Eyes within; but we have need of Eyes without; when the Labours of a poor Minister (such as they are) are scand by hear∣say. Ʋpon this Account I have made it pub∣lique, and have hardned my heart against my understanding and conscience of my own weak∣nesse. And that you may see I do not rely upon the strength of it's constitution, that it can live in spight of the breath of Censurers, I crave the Posse Comitatus for it's protection. That You, Sir, will be pleas'd to defend it and me, wherein neither I nor it have offended.
It was the advise of the Mother of Artexer∣xes
in Plutarch, that they who would addresse themselves to Great Persons must use  fine silken words. Herein, I confesse, I have mist it, for the cloathing is rugged: But if the plainnesse of the dresse be all that makes it despis'd, 'twill prove the more innocent. The Adversaries of it, I mean, those, that have spoken most against it, are persons to whom I wish all peace and happinesse: and I may in the sight of God with a good conscience protest, that in these late times of Rebellion, I was from my heart griev'd to see Men of no Religion make a prey of them, and their Estates for their Religi∣on. Yet God forbid, that Roman Catholiques (as they call themselves) should justle in our streets with Reformed Catholiques; and God forbid again, that we should be reduc'd to the condition of the Church of God in the time of Nehemiah, ch. 4. v. 17. with one hand working, with the other hand holding their weapons. I look upon the Protestant Religion as the Palla∣dium of Great Brittain, and his Sacred Majesty as the Keeper of it. For the preservation of it through Him, and Him in it, I shall truly and constantly pray, and in this I know you will own

