



SIR,
THO I am very well satisfied that the Author of this Discourse never design'd it for the Press, yet his giving it to Mr. Lumley a little before his Death, in my presence, to be dispos'd of at his Pleasure, imply'd a tacite Consent at least to the Publication of it. There are indeed, in my Opinion, Two Reasons why this Discourse might not have been Publish'd, one is because it doth not answer the Character of the Author, the other is because it does not fully come up to the Character of the excellent Lady Lumley; but the Suddenness of its Composure, and the great Indisposition of the Author, at that time, may be a sufficient Answer to both these Reasons.
It is not altogether unknown, to you Sir, how intimate an Acquaintance, and how dear a Friend of mine Mr. Pritchard was, nor am I ignorant of those extraordinary Civilities you was pleased to show him whilst he lived in your Family; I think myself therefore obliged, both in Justice to my Friend, and in Gratitude to you, to take this Opportunity of making a publick Acknowledgment of your great Kindness to him, which he himself, (if please God he had lived,) would have done in a much better manner.
And now, Sir, I am speaking of his Obligations to your Fa∣mily, I should be in the highest Degree ungrateful, did I not most thankfully acknowledg the particular and unusual Respect and Kindness, which that obliging Gentleman Mr. Lumley [your Son] exprest to him upon all occasions: I have often
heard him speak of it with great Pleasure, and bless God for it; and I am perswaded, he esteemed his Conversation and Friendship as the greatest Happiness of his Life.
I shall not here pretend to give the Character of my Friend to you, Sir, who knew him so well, and valued him so much; your Esteem of him, and great Respect to him, is a sufficient Recommendation of him to the World.
I shall only therefore ask leave to acquaint you, that I have often heard him, with great Concern, lament the Loss of your excellent Lady, who was a Person of that exemplary Piety, strict Vertue, and undoubted Charity; she was so disceret and ingenious, so affable and courteous, so free from Pride, [a Vice which renders Greatness contemptible], so kind and use∣ful, even to the meanest Persons; in short, she was so uni∣versally qualified, both as a Christian, and as a Person of Quality, that she exceeded most, and was equalled but by few of her Sex.
But I beg your Pardon, Sir, for presuming thus to Cha∣racterize your Lady, for I have done it so faintly and imper∣fectly, that what the Queen of Sheba said of Solomon's Wis∣dom, may be said here also; The report is true, but the half of it hath not been told us.
That God Almighty would sanctifie this great Loss to you and your Family, and Bless both you and them with Health and Happiness here, and eternal Bliss and Glory hereafter, is the Prayer of,
SIR, 
