



Beloved,
THE Importunity of some Friends, and the Incivility of Strangers, that have rudely exposed me to the Publick Censure, by Printing some Fragments of the follow∣ing Discourse, have Midwiv'd this Infant into the World, and now it is born with much pain and reluctancy, the Law of Nature calls for gentle handling and nursing up with all ten∣derness and forbearance.
Brethren, I have no greater joy, than to see you walking up to the spiritual and saving Truths that have been deliver'd to you. These are times of great Apostasie and Defection, and Temptations are more than ordinary cogent; who would have thought there had been such a force in the Dra∣gon's Tail, to fetch down the third part of the Stars out of Heaven, and to have laid so many for dead in the blood of a slain Profession. Blessed be God you stand, take heed, lest if more piercing Trials should come, there be not an evil heart of unbelief in any of you to depart from the living God. You have parted with your Reverend and dear Pastor, and are yet preserv'd; but if you part from your stedfastness, you will rue it in another World.

 Look to your foundation work, Christ is the foundation. There are foundations so call'd, Ephes. 2.20. The Apostles and Prophets, but Jesus himself is the chief Corner-stone; he is the foundation of all foundations, look to your union with him by faith through the operation of the Spirit. To profess without a Principle, will but leave you under those miseries that those are commonly exposed under, that Trade without a Stock, or enter a Warfare without coin or courage; for men to make a shew in the world, and at last their debts come upon them, and they have nothing to pay their Credi∣tors, what a miserable case is this! Thus it is with every one that makes a shew of Profession, and wants the main; you can't stand before God with a fair profession, 'tis your union with Christ by faith, and your shewing your faith by your works, (or else your faith is dead) that will cause a lifting up of the head in the day of the Lord.
See that you walk circumspectly, accurately, exactly. Christians should be exact in their walkings, there are tem∣ptations in every corner; your Shops, your Warehouses, your Tables, your Beds, your places of lawful diversion are full of snares: That a man may miserably lose himself in the use of lawful things; what miserable work hath things cal∣led indifferent, made in the Churches of Christ? That that you call indifferent, may be sinful, and give offence, and then you must not do what you may do; you must shun all ap∣pearance of Evil, if it appears so to others, and it don't ap∣pear so to you! (It is, All appearance) and must be avoided. Know the Universal Eye inspects all persons, and their acti∣ons, and sees the very thoughts of their hearts, and his com∣mands are exceeding broad, reaching to whatsoever the sons of men concern themselves in.
Be ye courteous, gentle, and affable, full of peace, full of love, condescending to them of low degree, bearing with one another, exhorting, admonishing one another, praying with
and for one another, often meeting together to build up one another in the most holy faith. Take heed of Whisperers, Tale bearers, Busie bodies, those Church incendiaries that do mischief, and divide between very Friends. Make not one anothers faults publick, unless you find them incorrigible un∣der doubled Admonitions. Pity one another under failings, be humble, and say, Such an one is fallen to day, and I may fall to morrow. Avoid too close prying into the infirmities of one another, and easie prejudices that engender strange∣ness, and destroy brotherly love; speedily bind up one ano∣thers strains with gentle ligatures, and be severe against open and scandalous wickedness; and as there should be no schism from the body, take heed there be no schism in the body.
You that are Governors of Families, remember with Joshua, You and your house serve the Lord. Keep the Sabbaths strictly. In the place which the Lord your God shall chuse to cause his Name to dwell there, thither shall you bring all that I command you. And ye shall rejoice before the Lord your God, ye and your sons, and your daughters, your men servants and your maid-servants, Deut. 12.11, 12. And when you have done there, in the Families also where the Lord your God hath placed you, must you carry on those duties, whereby the souls committed to your charge may be instructed and edified.
You that are Children, obey your Parents in the Lord: for this is right, Eph. 6.1. If your Parents be severe, be not you discouraged, but do your duty; if you rebel, you sin against God, and better bare a Parent's blows, than God's frowns. If your Parents be too indulgent, don't abuse their clemen∣cy, and break their hearts with your undutifulness, that so fondly favour you; it's the height of an ill nature and inhu∣manity, to requite them evil for their kindness.
You that are Servants, Be obedient to them that are your Masters according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in
singleness of your hearts as unto God, Eph. 6. not with eye-ser∣vice. Be true and faithful, and diligent, and patient, and as you would have your servants be to you when time serves. Church-membership don't discharge you of your duty of obedience, though there's neither bond nor free, but all one in Christ Jesus; yet you are not all one as to outwards, there are Masters, and there are Servants, and there are differences of Persons in this lower World; it would quickly unhinge the World, if all were Equals; and of all servants, let those that are godly be the most dutiful and faithful, for the credit of the Gospel.
You that are Rich, be full of good Works, and let your Charity abound, your Faith and Hope will signifie little with∣out your Charity: The poor you have always with you, and as you have hitherto abounded in your Charity towards them, do it still.
You that are Poor, labour to be Rich in Grace, and in the hope of Glory; 'tis two Hells, if you suffer here and here∣after. The time will come when you shall have the durable Riches, and the true Treasure; you shall be crowned immor∣tal Kings, and after you have suffer'd awhile, Heaven will be the sweeter, only for what is given you be thankful, be humble, be submissive; to be poor and proud, to be poor and bold, to be poor and medling, hinders Mens Charity, and reflects hard upon your Reputation. No Man that fears God, but is glad to see and relieve a poor body full of grace. And now, Brethren, I commend you to God, and the World of his Grace, that is able to build you up, and to give you an in∣heritance amongst all them that are sanctified. I have now farther to acquaint you, there have been some mistakes of the two last Lines I wrote in the Sermon about the Prayers of the Church Triumphant, for the Church Militant, from Rom. 6.9. Some of you have desir'd it might be blotted out, and will have it so, and I think it is so, but not by my hand.
Some Divines of the most Eminent Note here in London, say, Let it be Printed, and let the Truth shine out, alter not a Word of it, make no Apology for it, no Exposition of it, as such a Truth as no Protestant Writer ever yet denied or questioned. Therefore I only add, to prevent all mistakes, That to pray for Saints departed, or to pray to them, or to make them Co-intercessors with Christ, or to say they have re∣gard to particular Persons, or their Concerns here, is Ʋnscriptu∣ral and Antichristian. But to affirm, That the Church Tri∣umphant holds its Relation of Membership with the Church Militant, is concerned with their sufferings, and do cry in their way, with their glorified longings, together with the cry of their blood (so many of them as have been Martyrs) for the advance of the Kingdom of Christ, and Ruine of Antichrist, is sound and orthodox in the judgment of all Protestant Di∣vines that I have met with. Read Mr. Perkins in his Re∣formed Catholick, and divers more that I can mention. Now, The Lord be with you. This from the very heart of

