



Gentlemen,
IT may seeme unto some unproper, that this Me∣ditation concerning the New Jerusalem, being the highest matter in Christian Divinity, is de∣dicated unto you, against whose Profession some Divines have inveighed. But if what followeth, be duly considered, it may appeare otherwise. Wigelius in that his excellent Treatise of Astrologie Theologized, saith: Astrologie is Philosophy it selfe, or it is the whole light of Nature, from whence ariseth the universall Naturall wisdom, or a solid, sincere, and exquisite knowledge of Na∣turall things: which light of Nature is twofold, externall and internall: Externall in the Macrocosme, internall in the Microcosme. True Astrologie therefore being so noble a Science, the Sincere Professors and Students thereof are worthy of much honour. And whereas it is objected, That it is an Art to be rejected, because vanities are crept thereinto, may not by the same reason the Studie of sa∣cred Theologie bee omitted, seeing that not a few errours
 have entred into Bookes of the same? The holy Prophet David saith: The workes of the Lord are great, sought out of all them, that have pleasure thererin. His worke is honourable and glorious: and his righteousnesse en∣dureth for ever. He hath made His wonderfull workes to be remembred. Psal. 111.3, 4.5. Moreover the God of heaven hath vouchsafed a speciall respect unto the well-minded Students in the Starres, in that Hee made some such the first publishers of the Birth of His Son the Lord Jesus Christ. Of whom S. Basil writing on the Nativity of Christ, among other things delivereth, that they , were addicted to the ob∣serving of Sublime things (matters in the Heaven.) And so Munster testifieth likewise, his Edition S. Matthew Hebrew. where he writeth: Hi ma∣gi nostri fuerunt praecipui siderum contemplatores, quorum Dominus misertus novam condidit stellam, quae ipsos ad Christum perduceret. Now as yee are conversant in consi∣dering the misterie of the Starres, for to understand what the Eternall God (blessed for ever) signifieth and worketh in and by them, that yee may make the right use thereof unto the wellfare of Mankinde; so are you to have in due consideration the chiefe of all Starres, the Spirituall Star, whereof the holy Gospel maketh mention, theuk. 1.78, 79. Day-spring from on high, which hath visited us, to give light unto them that sit in darknesse, and in the shadow of death, and to guide our feete into the way of peace: thePet. 1.19. Day-starre which ariseth within our hearts: thev. 2.26, 28. Morning-starre, which is given to the overcomers, which keepe Christs workes unto the end, the which is the Lord Jesus Christ according to His eternall Divine Nature. Unto the knowledge of whose Tim. 3.16. great mysterie, this present Medi∣tation (how meane soever) may be furthersome unto you.
 The Counsell given in the booke of Iob is considerable hereunto and ever memorable, namely,Job 22.21, 22 See the marg. 2 John 7. signi∣fieth, we should minde Christs Spirituall com∣ming into us. So the Greeke Text intima∣teth. And no∣tice is taken by Occumenius, that whereas  is of the present tense, therefore more is meant than the first comming onely. And that such as understand not Latine, may have some knowledge in the Originall Greeke, we have set forth in English an Intro∣duction much helpfull thereunto. Acquaint now thy selfe with God, and be at peace: thereby good shall come unto thee. Receive, I pray thee, the Law from His mouth, and lay up his words in thine heart. Whereas the study of true Christianity being neglected, ill is ones estate, although he hath much other Learning: as the A∣postle declareth, saying: though I have the gift of Pro∣phecie, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge, and though I have al faith, so that I could remove Moun∣taines, and have not Charity, I am Nothing. 1 Cor. 13.2.
From my Lodging in the Old-Baily.

