


THE Loss of a Christian Friend is a great Loss, much more of a Christian Relation, and yet more, of such a near Relation, most of all of such a Relation as was both a loving Husband, and a spiritual Guide. These twisted Sorrows, like a fourfold Cord, are not easily broken loose from. I cannot but condole with you in your Affliction, and pray for great Sup∣ports for you under so great a Trial; you have need of Patience, and that Patience itself should be more patient. 'Tis a Father's Rod in a Father's hand, and though smarting, yet instructive and medicinal. Let not Time, but Grace overcome your Sorrow; then will you approve your self a Chri∣stian indeed, and do more than others. I need not use Arguments to you, that are so well skill'd in your duty through Grace. The indefatigable pains you have taken, to write from your Husband's mouth such large and fre∣quent Meditations, and divine Truths, which were continually dropping from his lips under his weakness, they cannot but make an extraordinary deep impression of themselves upon your heart. You are much admired (I don't flatter you, but commend you) for your excessive love and tenderness to him under all those infirmities he so quietly submitted himself to, your chearfulness under the hardest services that none but your self could have gone through with so much content to him, and your perseverance in it to the last, speaks a rejoicing to your Conscience, and may be an alleviation of your Grief. And 'tis to be observed, That that God that foresaw what must be provided him, a loving Wife, and a skilful and careful Nurse, is be his Consort and Comfort in his declining Age. And now he is at rest, be you at rest; and let the love you bear him, rejoice in his present discharge from sin and sorrow; we must not dispute Providence, but submit. I have been bold, without your leave, to affix your Name to your Husband's Memo∣rials, accept the service as from one that honours you, and shall upon all ∣casions approve himself

