




SIRS,
FEasts of Love and Charity, are near as old as Christianity it self, for, in the Primitive Age of our most Holy Religion, it was the frequent Pra∣ctice of the Professors of it, to meet together in a Reli∣gious Assembly; not only for the Performance of Publick Worship, but also, as a Testimony of their mutual Love and Charity, to Eat and Drink together at a Common Feast; to the Furnishing of which, every One brought something, according to his Ability: And then they made also their Collections for the Poor.

 To this Practice St. Jude has a Reference in his Epi∣stle, where complaining of some, who, by their abominable Lives, were a Scandal to the Purity of the Christian Pro∣fession; he says ver. 12. These are Spots in your Feasts of Charity. i. e. Blemishes and Scandals to the Christi∣an Feasts, which ought to be constituted of Guests of Pu∣rity and Irreproachable Lives. And St. Paul has a clearer Relation to this Matter, in his Reproof which he gives the Corinthians for their Irreverence, not only at the Lord's Table, but also for their Indecency, and Con∣tumely at this Christian Feast, 1 Epist. Cor. 11 chap. 21, 22, and 33, 34 ver. He there rebukes the Wealthi∣er Christians, for that they had not a due and charitable Regard for the Poor; but even at that Feast (whose End was Charity, and a Testification that they stood on a Level, in respect of their Allegiance to the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Benefits they equally expected from Him, and so were Fellow-Subjects of One great King, the Lord of All, yet there) they regarded Temporal Riches, Worldly Respects and acted accordingly: And so the Rich who brought in Abundance, Eat and Drank accordingly, and the Poor who brought little, went away Dissatisfied; So that One was Hungry, Another was Drunken. This Un∣charitableness and Intemperance, the Apostle Reproves, and Exhorts to a Reformation in the 33, and 34 ver. Wherefore, my Brethren, when ye come together to Eat, tarry One for Another, &c.
I do acknowledge that at these Religious Feasts, they did also receive the Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Sup∣per; but by reason of the Indecencies and Disorders before mentioned, and the following Persecutions which fell upon the Church, this was discontinued: But however the Just
and Christian Practice of these Feasts, neither can, nor ever will be discommended.
This I mention, to justify your Feast, and to shew that a Feast of Love and Charity (and such I hope yours is) is so far from being contrary to our Christian Religion, that its altogether agreeable to it, and concordant with the Practice of the Earliest Professors of our Holy Faith.
But as Those ran into Irregularities in their Feasts, which occasioned their Discontinuance, so may you; and therefore I shall observe, that Publick Feasts cannot have more than some of these Four Ends.
First, (which is the lowest, and most unworthy) The End of satisfying the sensual Appetite in Eating and Drinking, &c. But this is such an Indignity to the Place of our Nativity, as well as to the Holiness of our Chri∣stian Profession, that none of us (I hope) can become guilty of so unworthy a Design.
Secondly, The End of Conversing together and En∣larging our Acquaintance, in order to advance our Temporal Interest. And this (tho' it may, by the Prudence and Sincerity of its Management, be honest enough, yet) if it be not subordinate to Nobler Ends, it's still unworthy of such an Honourable and Christian Concourse. And there∣fore,
Thirdly, A Third End is, The Reviving good Neigh∣bourhood, continuance of Country-Love, and mutu∣al Affection; which we are engag'd to, by our Religion, as we are Christians; and oblig'd to, by our Government, as we are Subjects of the same King; and further as we are Natives of the same Kingdom; but more, as we are Neighbours of the same Country, Born in Bordering Pa∣rishes,
and Breathing the same Sweet and Wholsome Air, and partaking of the same common Benefits of Nature. And this (tho not the highest, yet) is such a just and Na∣tural End, for the Encouragement of your Feast, that every One, that is a Lover of his Religion and Country, and that understands and feels the Obligations of Nature, must needs (agreeable to his Ability) give a suitable Encourage∣ment to its just and regular Observation.
Our Religion obliges all the Professors of it to Love One Another, to be Kind and Just, Charitable and Good-natur'd One to Another: This is an Obligation which the Author of it, our Blessed Redeemer, has laid upon us, and which every One, that will approve himself his Dis∣ciple must Obey Joh. 13, 34. A New Commandement I give unto you, that ye Love one another. so ver. 35. and chap. 15.12. And the same Apostle in his Epistles, inculcates nothing so frequent as the Duty of Love, Lit∣tle Children Love one another. so St. Paul 1 Thes. 4.9.
But as Christianity is a Religious Obligation to the sincere performance of this Duty, so the Regard that we Owe to our Country, and the Government, which protects us is a natural One; And this is so strong that a Man must put off Natural Affection, before he can break it. It's almost as Antient, and altogether as Wide and Uni∣versal as the World; for the Blackest Negro, the Tawni∣est Indian, (yea the Sottish Soldanians) are all possest with a most Warm Passion to their Native Country: To repeat Instances of this Assertion, and it's powerful Effects, would be to Transcribe a great part of all the Histories of the World; and to go about to prove it to be Just and Honest, would be to spend time in Arguing that which no
Body contradicts. But as We who are English Men, Love all English Men, with a Country Affection, as we are Subjects of the same Prince, and live under the Secu∣rity of the same Laws; Yet the Place of our Birth, and the Vicinity of our Neighbouring Towns and Parishes, com∣mands the choicer and warmer part of our National Love; and that this honest Passion may be increas'd and duly cherish'd, no means more proper than a Christian Feast.
Fourthly, But the most Noble End, is To meet toge∣ther to do Good, by Relieving the Necessitous, help∣ing the Indigent, and turning our Eyes on the state of the Poor; To make Collections according to our Ability, for the Support of our Poor Country-men: This is truly to constitute a Feast of Love and Charity, When we deal our Bread to the Hungry, and cover the Naked, and hide not our selves from our own Flesh: This as it's the most excellent End, so it ought to be the Prin∣cipal in Design, of all those that come to those Publick En∣tertainments. We may easily encourage mutual Kindness, between Persons of equal Wealth and Fortunes in the World, since this is not discrepant to an Unregenerate and Sinful State, for Publicans and Sinners do the same, Mat. 5.46. But to give Testimonies of our Christian Love, by Acts of Bounty and Support to the Poor and Needy, as well as by our Regard to the Rich and Honourable, this is to prove our selves Christians indeed, and shews that we are influenc'd by a principle of Love that comes from above. And to do this, and to live with each other according to the Obliga∣tions of our Religion and Country, is that which is Re∣commended in the following Discourse, which you have entreated me to make Publick. And to what is said there, I shall add this Request, That in every Passage
of Life, you'd remember your Country, and never be Guilty of any thing that may cast a Blemish upon it. That if the Manes of our honest Fore-Fathers have any Knowledge of, or concern for, the Deeds of their Posterity, they may be satis∣fied in seeing that we do not degenerate from their Sincerity: But however that you'd so live, that God, (who we are sure knows and takes notice of all our Actions, and will according to 'em judge, us hereafter, that He) may be satisfy'd and pleas'd with us, that so hereafter it may be said to us, Well done good and faithful Servants.
To Conclude, As our Country produces a People of great Inte∣grity, wh are like the numerous Flocks of our Sheep (that feed on our Downs) Harmless and Innocent, and whose Language ought to be as plain as our Garb, as clear as our Air, and harm∣less like to our Sheepherds Lives; I have therefore not endea∣vour'd, in this Discourse, to speak contrary to our honest Wilt∣shire Plainess: And perhaps the little, the very little Notice of a single Day, to fit my self for the Business of appearing be∣fore you, has so far assisted to carry on our Character, that it helps to prove, that even in our Sermons, as well as all things else, we are Men of great Plainess, and I hope of as great Pro∣bity, tho' we want the Smooth Language, as well as the Refi∣ned Arts of the Court.
I am sure what I deliver'd was honestly intended, and that I know will help to make it acceptable to Honest You, tho it be not al∣lowed as an Apology to Others. That God may Bless our Coun∣try, and render it Illustrious by the Productions of excellent Men, and that You may help to make it so, is the Prayer of

