







Right Honourable,
IT hath pleased God lately to make your Fa∣mily an house of mourning, first by the
death of your truly No∣ble and Religious Con∣sort, and since by the death of two of your principal servants. I can say nothing to your Lord∣ship touching that excel∣lent person your Honou∣rable Lady, having not the happiness to know her otherwise, than by the re∣port of others; but sure that testimony your Lord∣ship hath given her in that stately and magnificent Mo∣nument erected to her me∣mory,
as it will represent her a standing pattern to all that desire to have pie∣ty and virtue to be the supporters of their honour (without which the great∣est Titles of Dignities are but empty shells without a kernel;) so will it also proclaim to the world, and as often as you shall think of the Elogie you give her, recall to your own mind the great affli∣ction you suffer in being bereft of her sweet society
and that influence which her excellent spirit had in ordering and guiding the concernments of your Family.
God hath been plea∣sed to call you to another Trial, in the late decease of an Husband and a Wife, that moved as well in a yoke of your Ho∣nours service, as of wed∣lock one with another. Your Lordship best knows your loss, because you had so long experi∣ence
of their service; I believe few persons since the death of that good E∣liezer, Abrahams Stew∣ard, could have received from their Masters such a Testimony as your Lordship gave him upon his death-bed.
But I refer their Lives to the Consciences of those to whom they were best known. My chief business now is to ga∣ther up some of their expressions, when they
were about to surrender up their souls to God. Surely dying peoples be∣haviour is very observa∣ble, especially when they dye in the Lord; For from their expiring breath some quickning force may be conveyed to the stan∣ders by. And therefore the most understanding person that ever was, saith,
Eccles. 7.2, 4. That the heart of the wise is in the house of mourning. That is the end of all men; and the
living will lay it to his heart.
Your whole House rang with the noise of the sweet speeches that soun∣ded from the mouth of our devout Friend decea∣sed. It is pity that what once was so de∣lightful in our ears, should ever slip out of our me∣mories. It may possibly beget an holy emulation in others that knew him, to follow his good exam∣ple, that they may dye
with the like comfort.
And though his wife dyed after another man∣ner, not so strong in the assurance of Gods favor, for the first part of her sicknesse, as he was; yet, I hope, he that putteth his servants tears into his bottle, did not let hers run waste, and now hath wiped them from her face for ever.
The most wise God onely knows what is the best portion for all his
children, both of Humi∣liation for sin, and Assu∣rance of his favour.
If Canaan be our Coun∣trey, it is no great mat∣ter how we get thither, as long as we perish not in the Wildernesse; But with Caleb and Joshua, arrive at last at the Land of Promise, what though we are exercised some∣times with one want, sometimes with another? These trials are not for the ruine of our persons,
but the exercise of our faith.
Let us onely learn to surrender up our selves wholly to the will of God, and so to dis∣pose of our hearts and wayes, that death may not surprise us in our sins. Let not the Devil and our own hearts blind us so far, that we should live in any known sin a∣gainst Conscience; Nei∣ther let us be so unskil∣full in the holy Book of
God, as not to be able nimbly to judge of our own actions, whether they be sins or no. The Devil is a subtil Adver∣sary, and if we want our Complete Armour, and especially the Sword of the Spirit, he will be too hard for us.
Your Lordship is very careful to furnish your self plentifully with that chief Piece of the Divine Harness, both by daily reading of the holy
Word of God, and by diligent perusal of such other Orthodox Writers, as interpret the same. And therefore I hope your Lordships good ex∣ample in this behalf, will provoke all that are rela∣ted to your Honour, to walk in the same steps.
To this purpose I make bold to recommend the dying behaviour of our dear friends to all your Family in your Lordships name; knowing that 
