



My LORD,
HEroick Virtue is of that Universal Attraction, that in the crowd of her Admirers, the Muses in duti∣ous Homage must make a part of her Train. For under the Umbrage of the Valiant and the Brave, they can∣not seek a Nobler Patronage then where they find their Noblest Theme: Noblest indeed, when the Memorials of true hardy Worth tune their Loftiest Ayres, and fill their largest Volumes: And in that Class, possibly, no Merit stands higher than Your Lordships. For War has been your Early Study; nor has the Age known a more Forward Proficient in the School of Arms than Your Lordship. From your First Honourable Wounds before the Walls of Buda, to your Last before those of Limerick; the no less Favourite of the Great Lorrain, than of the Greater Nassau, You have been
 wholly Train'd up under that Sacred Gamaliel, HONOƲR. Nor has Your Cause been less Glorious than Your Courage; The Common Foes of Christendom have been the mark of your Sword; You brought it flusht from against the more declining Turkish, to Engage it against the more prevailing Gallick Tyrant; From combating the Less, to draw it against the Greater Infidel. The Fervor of this Last warm Zeal brought You from the Imperial Leopold's to the Royal William's Standart. And to sum up Your just due in that truest Glory of an Englishman: Not Hannibal was a more Sworn Foe against the Old, than Your Lordship against the New Rome.
But all these Excellent Qualifications, these united Mar∣tial Virtues, are not the only influencing Powers that have set you so fair a Mark to the Ambition of the Addressing Muses. They have seen you wear the Impress of the Great Pallas on your Shield, under her double Character, not only as the Goddess of Arms, but of Wit too: And there∣fore they plead some kind of Justification in presuming to take Shelter, where they have formerly received Honour. 'Tis with these Considerations that This Play, much his Best, and (as Written by so Unfriended an Author) not un∣fortunate, begs your Protection. I confess from a more Favourite Pen it might have made a fairer Figure, and con∣sequently have been a more acceptable Present: For Poetry in this Age holds its value not from the Sterling but the Stamp. A Celebrated Minion Writer shall be able to pass even Irish Coyne Currant, when a Hated Scribler, under Pique and Prejudice, shall hardly bring Bullion and Plate into Play. And in my hard Circumstances, even beyond Expectation, I am bound to thank my kindest Stars that I cou'd come within Fifty per Cent success of my happier Brothers of the Quill.

However I must still own my self indebted on all Hands, not only to the kind Audience, but likewise to the kind Company, who amongst other Favours, were pleased to be at the Charge of dressing my Play to so much Advan∣tage. But above all I must make my publick Acknow∣ledgments to Mr. Betterton for his several extraordinary Hints to the heightning of my best Characters, nor am I a little indebted to Mr. Montfort, for the Last Scene of my Play which he was so kind to write for me. And now if it meet so favourable a Reception in Print, as to move some part of that Compassion in the Reading, as it did in the Acting I have gain'd my point: and for some Recommen∣dation to the Reader, whatever Fiction I have elsewhere interwoven, the Distresses of Hormidas and Cleomira are true History.
But after all this Encouragement, with what shame must I look back on my long Ten Years silence. Alas, I was grown weary of my little Talent in Innocent Drama∣ticks, and forsooth must be rambling into Politicks: And much I have got by't, for, I thank 'em, they have undone me. And truly when impertinent Busy Fools in my little post, in the name of Frenzy must aspire to State-Champi∣ons, though their Pens are drawn even on the Right side, they deserve no better Fate. We read of the Unfortunate Zeal of the Officious Ʋzzah. Let Government like the Ark of Old, be upheld by its proper Supporters in God's Name; and all intermeddling uncommission'd Hands, as a just Judgment upon 'em, meet my Reward.
— — Ne sutor ultra Crepidam▪

And now, after all my repented Follies, if an Unhappy Stray into Forbidden Grounds, (like Trinculo from his Dukedom where he was almost starv'd in't) may be per∣mitted to return to his Native Province, I am resolved to quit all pretensions to State-craft, and honestly sculk into a Corner of the Stage, and there die contented.
Nor is it with any little Pride that I return to that Post, when it gives me the Occasion of writing my self,
My Lord,

