


THE Matter of this Book, Most noble Marquess, sounded on inspir'd Writings, needs no De∣fence, but a Metrical Translation of so Divine and rapturous a Subject, into a language, not so much cultivate and polisht with Learning, Oratory, and Divine poesy as need were; and done by such as at∣tain'd not the tongue without indefatigable industry, doth require Religious, Equitable and Generous persons to own it.
Your Noble self is patron of the place where the Translator officiats as a Presbyter. You are now of the greatest Command among those that make use of this Scotish-Irish Language on either syde of the Grampian Mountains. Your Lordship, hath ever been of undoubted courage, and loyalty for the King; and still alongst inflexible to the persuasions or Threats of frozen Newtralists or Flaming incen diaries in Church or State. Your solid Moderation (a monument and copy for succeeding Ages) in Disputable cases of Church-Government and State policy, with a constant regard to upright justice, and piety, hath by the providence of Heaven, occasion'd your Lordships standing in what Reelings and Re∣volutions have been: which was much furthered by your so Christian and sagacious observance of our Saviours injunction anent the chief seats; In being ever the Higher the Humbler. Were this public ac∣knowledgment then to be accounted of, it could no where be so aptly plac'd, & to none more worth∣ily ascrib'd then to your Noble sel, of such merit in general, Besides my particular Benefactor.
The Language being Vehicl of the more substan∣tial part, I endeavour'd here what was native and proper, but clean and plain for all capacities, shun∣ning
 as much as I could, tedious, tumultuous and disjoynted phrases. And tho I have also sript some words of their superfluous and ultory letters, reserving the possessive, as the several Irish Gram∣mers come to my hands, do allow; Yet no humane work can pretend to be so absolute s to be beyond all Correction. Notwithstanding, My Lord, it may be not unworthy the pains in every Age to contri∣bute a mite or two at least to the Churches Corban, For assisting of our Sagacious Scotsh Irish people in their publick or private Devotions; specilly seing experience tells us that this their maternl Tongue either in Ireland or Scotland, is not easily abolisht by the contiguity and commixture of another lan∣guage: which no doubt is well understood by the present worthy and Laborious Translators of the H. Bible in Irish.
In reference to such pious and laudable interprises your Lordship is lookt upon as ane Ebed-melech, to defend and encourage the Authors, that they be not dismounted, and made to stagger from their post and province, because of the tang of Atheism so much prevailing, the forlorn art of ridiculing with all things, and many mens utter disdaining of what is not shapt in their own mould. For the spider∣web of such polluted vanities, pompous and ultra∣mundane fancy's, in persons either couragiously wicked, politickly profane, or monstruously in∣vidious. is too thin, not to be discover'd by your Lordship, as it is by all who love what is sober, and do not follow the guise of living in a desperate Au∣tonomy, flouting at all that's serious, adoring only the Idol they form to themselv's, and not considering the end. Among others that thus presume on your Lordships patrociny and candid acceptance, is one who implores the Divine Conduct in this World, and Happiness in the next, to your Honurable Self and all the branches of your Noble stem, and is still determin'd.
Most Noble Lord

