


HAuing collected and finished this Treatise ensuing, and deuising very carefully with my selfe to whom I might Dedicate the same: at length I resolued that none were meeter to undertake the Patronage thereof, then some such meete per∣sons, as did alreadie, (in some good measure) pra∣ctise within their seuerall Charges, the seuerall points and duties contained therein, and so would further prosecute those other necessary parts, which they haue yet in some part pretermitted. Whereupon, calling to minde the holy exercises
 daily vsed and exercised in all your houses: I wa moued for two causes to make you all ioyntly Pa∣trones thereof.
First, for that I acknowledge my selfe be∣holden and indebted vnto you all diuersly, since my first acquaintance with you, and therefore (least I should deserue the blame of vnthankeful∣nesse for benefits receiued) I am bold vnder your names, to offer to the whole Church of God, thes my simple collections.
Secondly, for that as you are all ioyned and lin¦ked in kindred by reason of marriage: so also yo are, and haue beene a long time inseparably knit i a zealous and sincere profession of Gods word an religion. And for so much as I may not (fo many respects) accomplish what good I willingl would: yet lest I should be thought to spend the re∣mainder of my yeeres in an idle condition, or to hid my talent in a napkin; I haue beene no lesse care¦full, then willing, to labour otherwaies to doe wha I may to glorifie God, and profit his Church. Ne¦ther will these my labours by vtterly vnprofitable if my purpose therein be rightly conferred with th purpor of my writings. For such Householder as pretend to be great Protestants, and sound pr¦fessors of the Gospel, may long inough talke of dis¦cipline, and still complaine of the want of Church gouernment; but all in vaine, and to no purpose, vn¦lesse they will begin this most necessarie disciplin in reforming their owne houses, according to th
 direction in this Treatise, and so suffer the holy religion of God, to take place amongst their fami∣lies at home, otherwise they shall trauell much, and profit little.
For although there be neuer so good lawes in Cities, neuer so pure order in Churches, yet if masters of families, doe not practise at home catechising, and discipline in their houses, and ioyne their helping hands to Magistrates, and Ministers: they may in truth, (but vniustly, as many haue done) complaine that their children and seruants are disordered, and corruptted a∣broad, when in truth, they were disordered, and are still corrupted, and mard at home. And there∣fore it cannot be, neither is it to be hoped for, that either the father of his children, or the husband of his wife, or the master of his seruants, should looke for that obedience, that reuerence, that faithfulnesse, and that dutifulnesse, which they of right ought to haue, and the other in conscience, and of bounden dutie are bound to performe, vn∣lesse they doe now at length endeuour to see these orders and duties hereafter mentioned, to be practised within their seuerall Households. For if Parents and Householders shall performe no fur∣ther dutie to their children and seruants, then to prouide for them meat, drinke, and apparrell, and to pay them their wages: then Papists, Atheists, yea, Turkes, and Infidels, doe yeeld this dutie as well as they.

 And seeing all men be carefull that their Horses and Bullocks should haue sufficient fodder and prouender, to the end they may haue their la∣bour in leiu and recompence thereof: it doth con∣sequently follow, that therefore a Christian House∣holder ought to haue ouer his Children and Ser∣uants, as much more Christian care, then hee hath ouer his dumbe and insensible beasts, that so hee may make a singular comfort from the daily con∣templation of their encrease in spirituall graces.
Oh what a sweete and comfortable thing shall this be to the soule and conscience of such an house∣holder, when he hath beene so diligent and care∣full in the training and bringing vp of his children and Seruants in the obedience and wayes of the Lord, that he may rightly deserue to haue this wor∣thie report and commendation giuen vnto him, from the mouth and penne of the godly: namely, that he hath a Church in his house: that is, a com∣pany of sound and faithfull Christians, such as feare God indeed; as the like report was giuen by the Apostle, to those godly House-keepers, Aquila, and Priscilla his wife: Rom. 16. 5. 1. Cor. 16. 19. as also to Philemon. Phil. 2.
Therefore all Parents and House-holders are (in the Lord) to be exhorted that they would be carefull to bring vp their children and familie, so as they eyther (by some good tokens) may see them the children of God, and heyres of the couenant, or at the least, they may be comforted in their owne
 consciences, notwithstanding that their children and seruants (for some cause vnknowne to them (do refuse their counsell and instruction; seeing they to the vttermost of their power & abilitie, haue vsed all good meanes to bring them vp well, and haue rightly offered them to the Lord.
Now if parents and masters haue iust cause to bewaile and lament, when (thus trauelling in good education and information) they cannot yet see good effects, and godly fruits in their children and seruants: how much more cause of griefe may they haue, when they haue vsed and bestowed no labour at all (either by themselues or others for them) to bring them vp in the nurture and feare of the Lord? And yet alas, many will be greiued for the one, that will not be any thing mooued for the o∣ther. Wherefore let all Parents and Masters of fa∣milies know and learne, that if they will conuay Gods blessings to their posterities, then they must doe, and performe the duties belonging therevnto: yea, let them (if they be loth to conuay Gods iudge∣ments to their children) carefully auoid the means vnto it.
And surely, as it is a blessed thing in the houre Luke. 2. 29. of death, with Simeon to depart in peace, leauing their wiues, children, and seruants, members of Christ, spouses to Christ, children to God, and ser∣uants to the Lord: so in extreamitie of death, no one thing will be more grieuous vnto Parents and House-holders, then (the Lord hauing giuen them
 the charge of so many soules to be furthered saluation) that their owne tormented conscienc shall presse them, in as much as they haue help their children and seruants forward to their da¦nation, and so, (which is more fearefull they sh haue them spewing and foming on their faces, c¦tinuall curses in hell, then accusing them for euer be the murtherers of their soules, and cut-throa of their saluation.
Is it any maruell, if Householders many tim finde small obedience, and lesse dutifulnesse, a faithfulnesse, at the hands of their children a seruants, seeing they omit and lcaue vndone the pe¦formance of these so christian duties towards the herein expressed, and inioyned of the Lord? For doth God often leaue manifest tokens of his wrat in punishing disobedience, with disobedience.
How can any master of a Household, whosoeu he be, looke to haue his familie trustie and fait¦ful vnto him, & yet he himselfe is faithlesse to God Doth hee maruell, that his children and seruan feare not him, whereas hee himselfe feareth n the Lord? Will hee maintaine his authoritie¦ue those vnder his charge, and hee himselfe do not yeeld obedience vnto the authoritie of Go his Creator?
Moreouer, it is manifest, that the good man the house, by planting Gods religion in his fami∣lie, shall not a little aduance and set forward hi owne priuate profit and commoditie. For wicke
 and vngodly seruants, are for the most part, loyte∣rers, pickers, and deceitfull: whereas on the other side, godly seruants are iust and faithfull, whom in his absence he may trust to doe such businesse and Gen. 30. 30. and 39. 5. &c. worke as he willeth them to doe.
If masters of families be carefull and desirous (as in conscience they ought) that their wiues, children and seruants, should reforme themselues, and endeuour to practise such duties as doe apper∣taine and belong vnto them; then they must like∣wise be diligent and carefull to reforme them∣selues, both inwardly and out wardly in such points and duties, as hitherto they haue left vndone: o∣therwise, they may iustly say vnto them: Phisitian, heale your selfe: or, why doe you will vs to do that, Luk. 4. 23. and 22. 32. Rom. 2. 21. which you doe not practise your selfe? For as one candle cannot light another if it selfe be out: euen so a master of a Household shall not reforme those of his charge, and inflame them with the loue of God and godlinesse, if hee himselfe be voyd of the same.
Let euery master of a Household therefore say and performe with Iosua: I and my familie will serue the Lord: Iosua. 24. 15. And likewise let euery Christian Ladie, Mistresse, and Dame, say with Hester: I and my maides will doe the like: Hest. 4. 16. And so no doubt, God will poure his blessings on them, and theirs, in this life, and euerlasting happines on them in the life to come.
Touching the Booke it selfe, I will not say any
 thing to the commendation thereof, but onely th That I am assured, that if such duties as are m¦tioned therein, were duely and carefully practi of all such as are named in it, then (no doubt) v¦tue and godly religion would greatly flowrish, to aduancement of Gods glory; and also sin and w¦kednesse would then decrease and fall downe, to vtter subuersion and ouerthrow of Sathans ki¦dome.
This Treatise, I confesse is not garnished w eloquence, not full of great cunning, nor beau¦ed with flowers of mans wisedome, neyther yet d it discourse or treat of high or darke things, n¦ther is it stuffed with subtill questions, and ar¦ments; nor indited with Rhetoricall and eloqu stile, as those commonly be, which are propoun and set forth to the world, rather for boasting a vaine-glory sake, then for any desire to edifie, a to doe others good: but it is plaine and without¦ny great gaynesse; yet so full of good, necessary, a The profit of this Booke. wholesome instructions, that whosoeuer reade and marketh it with a right disposed minde, a willing to practise it, without respect to any oth things, then God, the reformation of his life, a the saluation of his owne soule, (which is the o¦ly marke which Christians must leuell at) he m reape singular profit thereby.
And vndoubtedly, it may well be said, th Good Bookes are ladders to climbe vp to heauen. vnto true Christians, good and holy Bookes are ladders to climbe vp vnto heauen: as sparkes
 kindle the heate of the Spirit, when it is quenched, waxed cold in them; and as props to stay vp their th, that it may increase.
Praying therefore your Worships, to accept of  dutifull good will, and to pardon my boldnesse, cease to adde any further things: beseeching God his endlesse mercie for Christs sake, to streng∣en you still in that good and happy course of his rd, and all other good learning: to furnish you  abundantly, with all spirituall and heauenly owledge, to the carefull practising of the same, in e fruits of your most holy and blessed callings, to e aduancement of the glory of our God, and to ur owne euerlasting comfort in Christ Iesus. o be it.


