


OF two things whe∣ther of thē I may do (right reuerend Father) I stand greatly in doubt, whether I maye prosecute my purpose whicb I haue taken in hand: or els ceasse with silence and leue it in obliuion. For such is the curiousnes of this captius age, that the things which are doon and setforth to the vew of men,
 must either with eloquence sur∣passe the common stile of wri∣ting, or els bee some new thing which hath not been heard of be¦fore.
But I which of knowledge am thin, of learning base, of e∣loquence rude, and neuer traue∣led further for the increase of good letters then the shadow of my deer brother Francis Cox (whome I heer name, partely for the dutyes sake I owe vnto him, and partely because I am assured of the fatherly affecti∣on which your Lordship doth beare vnto him) might seem to begin preposterously if I shuld
 take vpon me to satisfie the curi¦ous appetite of the contētlesse tīe. But yet hauīg read & read ouer again this litle book of D. Henry Bullinger whiche hee compiled and published in his owne naturall tung, for the qui∣eting of those stormes that blu∣stred in Heluetia, and behold∣ing the discorde and variance now present in the Churche of Englād, stirred vp by the rest∣lesse heds of such as neuer could be quiet, & cōsidering with my self the effects therof and finall wrapping vp if in time they be not looked vnto: I haue chosen rather with my plain speech &
 simple skil to english this book so eloquently turned into latin by that excellent learnedman, Iosias Simlerus, and so to pro¦fit my contrie, then for want of sufficient furniture to let this worthy woork lye hidden from my contrie, buried as it were in the bosōe of an vnknowē speche to the multitude.
I thinck it the duty of all good christians & faithful Subiects (my singuler good Lord) to do what lyeth in thē to the increace and confirming of concord the true nurse of all florishing com¦mon weales. For what hart so hard bledeth not? what eie so dry
 weepeth not: what man so void of sence trembleth not to consi∣der the calamities and miseries of contention? For what slaugh¦ter of infants, what murder of aged, what spoile of people, what hauock of nations, what ruin of Countries, what rauin of kingdōes, what vtter deuasta¦tion of gouernment and Em∣pires commeth by dissention & discord, the contries adioyning vnto vs are an example, their Princely Lords a Spectacle, their goods and possessions a caueat vnto vs.
This book therfore compi∣led by the author for the looue




 sake he had to the quieting of his Contrey and preseruation of the Church of Christe, whi∣che is that ship where against Sathan bloweth out so many blasts in these our dayes: I haue as I said before translated the same hauīg the like zeale to my contrey that the author had to his, who as hee wrot it in his owne natural language: so haue I made this excellēt and graue father to speake in our tung those things, which of vs if they shalbe wel & diligently obser∣ued and folowed, I dout not but the controuersies which are heer amongst vs wil quite be dissol∣ued
 & ended. But yet knowing that those whelps of Cerbe∣rus that hellish Dog wil euer more snatch something wherat they may braule, and Momus wil be fault finding, yea euen in Apelles woork, I thought it conuenient to chuse out some patron to whome I might com∣mit the defence bothe of this Book and my self. And a∣mongst diuers godly learned bi¦shops (to whome of right the protectiō heerof appertaineth) I, specially choose your Lord∣ship and that for two causes.
First for that you are no lesse worthy to haue the defence heer
 of then the Author him sel bothe for the graue learning and singuler vertues which you Lordship is indewed with all, wherof I will say nothing be¦cause I knowe that whē I hau said al that I can, yet can I no say that your vertues require For who so seeth the fatherl loue you bear to the mīisters & preachers of your diocesse, you vigilant care to remooue, euil disposed persons if you find them incorrigible, your ernes desire to plant about you such as in due time may breke th Lords bread to his household as he shall thīk you worthy of al
 praise: so shall he finde him self whatsoeuer he be, vnable as he ought & as your godly doīgs deserue sufficiētly to doo it. Oh that al were such as you are, thē should there not suche occasion be ministred to the enemyes of the Gospell to blaspheme the same. I speak not this to the dis¦praise of any, and yet I knowe that all mē answere not in their dealings according to their names, neither doo their names agree with their titles. I knowe that Abshalon was author of horrible discention, and yet hee had to name the father of peace. So Iudas hauing his name of




 thanks giuing was moste vn¦thankful as appeered in betray¦ing his maister our Christe.
God graunt therfore we all may consider our callinges an lead our liues according to th same, that it be not veryfied o vs which is pleasantly and true∣ly spoken of the Popes who ha their names giuen per antiphrasim as hee was called Innocentiu that was moste noysome, he Pi∣us that was moste wicked, an he Clemens that was moste cru¦el: yee are called watchmen, God graunt you may all watc dutifully, to defend, feed an keep, not yours but the Lord
 flock.
The second cause that moo∣ueth mee to dedicate this vnto your fatherhood, is for that not onely I take your Lordship for my singuler patron & Mecoe∣nas, but also that I might giue a testimony vnto the world how muche I reuerence your honour and that according to duetye. Wherfore I moste humbly bee∣seech you to accept and take in good parte this my lahoure and to continue as you are, my good Lord, and I shall not ceasse con¦tinually to pray vnto almigh∣tie God to graunt you along and moste happy life that with




 many yeeres you may rule in the Churche of Christe to the glo∣ry of his holy name and comfort of his flock, and in the end re∣ceiue the crown of eternall glo∣ry which is laid vp by the mercy of God in Christe Iesus for e∣uer. Amen.
From Chichester this 22 of Ianuary. 1575.

