



My Lord,

I Have underſtood of your deniall, for the publiſhing of a Libell, lately fram'd againſt me. And though (perhaps) the harme that I ſhould have received thereby, would have been but ſmall, yet my obligation unto you, never ceaſeth to be great; and this argueth a ſpeciall care in you of my tranquillity, not to ſuffer that any, the leaſt noiſe ſhould diſquiet it. I know not (my Lord) if this be not to handle with too much niceneſſe and tendernes, a man that makes profeſſion of Philoſophy; it were enough

that publike Authority ſhould ſhelter me from the tempeſt, without exempting me from the wind and duſt, and that it would guard my Retrait from ſavage beaſts, without frighting away the flies alſo, and ſuch importunate Inſects. But (my Lord) the goodneſſe which you reſerve for me, extends farther then to ordinary juſtice. You take not only care for my repoſe amidſt the hurry and tumult of Europe, but you would have the world alſo ſhew a reſpect unto my retiredneſſe, and that being ſequeſtred from men. J ſhould be alſo placed beyond the levell and reach of Detraction. Yet this Fiend did purſue S. Hierome even unto the Grotts of Bethlehem, and to the foot of our Saviours cradle, there ſhe found him (as he relates himſelfe) although he had

thought to hide himſelfe. If this inſolent Thing had no regard of an admirable ſanctity, and a place guarded with Angels, me thinks a vulgar innocence, retired within an ill fortified village, muſt not expect any favourable treaty. But to paſſe from common conditions to the learned Tribe; If in all ages, there aroſe ſeditious ſpirits, that rebelled againſt the Chieftaines of Arts and diſcipline, and if in the memory of our fathers, it was ſpoken openly at Paris, that Ariſtotle was a ſimple Sophiſter, J think they deale courteouſly with me in this Country, if they be contented to call me a ſimple writer. That great blaſphemer of the name of Aristotle (my Lord) was D. Ramus, who afterward, though he was a Catholique, was taken for a Huguenot, at the maſſacre;

And indeed, ſome did believe that God permitted this to come to paſſe by a juſt judgement; and that the Tutelar Angell of good Letters, took the pretext of Religion, for to revenge the injuries that were done to Reaſon. There is one this day alive in Germany, a petty Tyrant in Grammer, an enimy of common and generall verities, and an accuſer of Cicero; who (not long ſince) hath put forth ſome obſervations, where he preferres a bill againſt his own Judge, and queſtions the precedency ever allowed unto that Prince of Latine Antiquity. So that (my Lord) the univer