





Much honour'd Sir,
and
Right worthy Souldiers,



THe GRECIANS were the firſt that out of variety of action, and long experience of warre, reduced the knowledge of Arms into an Art; giving precepts for the ordering of Arms, and the embattelling of Armies.

The ROMANES, who were their Succeſſours in time, ſo were they alſo of their precepts; breeding and inuring their youth to hardſhip, the uſe of Armes, and the ſtudies of the Art Military. So that by their countenance and practice therein, they not onely became powerfull and terrible to others: but in a word reigned as ſole Monarchs of this Mundane glory.


Plut. in LicurLICVRGVS the Law-giver to SPARTA, ordred that no Epitaph ſhould be made, nor mans name remembred on his Tombe, except of him who had been a Souldier; as eſteeming them onely worthy of memory. The Perſian ARTAXERXES, preferred Plut. in Pelopida.PELOPIDAS, and the Thebane friendſhip before the reſt of GREECE. becauſe they were the beſt Souldiers. PHILIP of MACEDON, King of a poore Countrey, by teaching his people exactly the exerciſe of Arms, and practiſing a new diſcipline, not onely freed himſelf and Countrey from the oppreſſion of his enemies; but alſo laid the foundation of the MACEDONIAN glory.

By this, Right worſhipfull, you may in part diſcern the great eſteeme that Antiquity

made of thoſe ſtudious in this Art. And ſo pleaſe you to compare the Hiſtories of the paſſed times, you may as in an Index behold how that the wel diſciplin'd have alwayes been the very Bulwarks and impalements of their Countreys. Where to the contrary, neglect of diſcipline, and the Art Military have been alwayes the forerunners of deſtruction both to Province and people. I might be infinite in examples of this nature, but then I ſhould make my porch larger then my houſe. Therefore let ROMES remiſſeneſſe be a warning to poſterity; who as it had a ſlow gradation in its ariſe by virtue, ſo had it degrees of falling, by neglecting diſcipline and the Art Military, ſuffering it ſelf to be cruſhed and overtrodden by every Barbarous Nation.

This as it reflects upon us a neceſsity, ſo it demonſtrates of how neceſſary conſequence the practice of Arms is: inducing and inviting all generous ſpirits to endeavour the attainment of this Military skill. To acquire the which, the GRECIANS had their Tactick maſters, the ROMANES their Tribunes, and other inferiour Tutors

which taught them in Campus Martius; and we our Academies and Military Schooles of war, witnes our ARTILLERY GARDEN with the MILITARY and MARTIALL grounds, wherein the choice and beſt affected Citizens (and Gentry) are practiced and taught the Rudiments of our militia. In times of peace ſo fitting them, that they may be able to ſtand in the day of battell, to Gods glory, their own honours, and their Countreys good But leaving theſe to your more retyred and ſerious conſiderations: be pleaſed to take notice that the GRECIANS, ROMANES, PERSIANS, and other Nations, had not onely their trainings abroad, but they had alſo their Triumphs at home in Martiall and warlike wiſe all armed, treading out ſtately meaſures, to their Inſtruments of warre. Such Military exerciſes as theſe have you formerly performed, which induced a
Rich. Nicolls Oxon. his Londons Artillery page 37 printed in Anno 1616.
judicious writer long ſince to ſet forth your praiſes in elegant verſe as followeth.

Behold how Londons armed Infantry,

Through practiſe in true Rules of Souldery


By the Drums martiall Muſick often led
The Pyrrhic dance do now diſtinctly tread:

Which if induſtriouſly they do purſue,
And uſe that timely cuſtome that is due
To warlike practice, in deſpight of hate,
Which evermore upon deſert doth wait;

Times Finger may engrave their Induſtry,

Vpon Fames Pillars to poſterity.


And ſuch as this, right worthy Souldiers, was our laſt exerciſe in Merchant-Taylors Hall, which is the ſubject of this book: the well contriving and exact performance whereof, induced many of the judicious ſpectators to deſire copies: which through ſeverall tranſcriptions became ſo imperfect, that I was requeſted by many to bring it to the Preſſe, ſo to preſerve its Native purity. This I was the more willing to ſuffer, by reaſon no more were to paſſe the print, then barely might ſerve ſuch Gentlemen who are deſirous of them, being members of our own Company. As not being willing that ſo rough and unpoliſht a draught ſhould be expoſed to the publick view. Therefore hoping your wonted favours,

and not doubting of your kinde acceptance; withall deſiring, that as I have freely beſtowed my pains, ſo you will as lovingly paſſe by my errors, whereby you will put a further obligation upon him that is already



