



Gracious SIR;


IF Loyall Duty may be counted presumption?
then doubtlesse the be
•
t
of my meanest worth must begge pardon
for claiming so Royall a Patronage:
Yet to whom should I prostrate my Pen

and Pilgrimage? if not unto your Sacred Majesty:
Nay, none so able to Receive it, none
so powerfull to Protect it; and none so justly
to claime it, as your Soveraigne Selfe. The
subject treateth of my tedious and curious Travailes,
in the best and worst parts of the world;
which being begunne in Your hopefull Infancy,
are now finally accomplished in the fulnesse of
Your thrice blessed Majority.

The generall Discourse it selfe, is most fixed
upon the Lawes, Religion, Manners, Policies, and
Gouernment of Kings, Kingdomes, People, Principalities
and Powers; and therefore so much the
more sit for your Majesty. The defect resting
onely in me, the worthlesse Author, in handling
rare and plentifull Subject, with a homely
and familiar Stile; no wayes fit for Soueraignty
to peruse.
Yet (Royall Sir) vouchsafe to remember how
thankefully Alexander received a small Cup
of water; and what a high Value was set upon
the Widowes Mite. If I have made vse of my
poore Talent, the profit redoundeth unto my
Country; which being shadowed vnder your
auspicuous Fauour, shall leaue a greater stampe
to the worke, and a deeper impression, of future-knowledge,
to the curious Vnderstanders.

And how often wont your ever blessed Father,
graciously to peruse Lines of mine, of far lesser
note then these be: Yea, and (viva voce) the
punctuall Discourse of all my three voyages,
which are now layd open to the Vulgar world;
and therefore I dare humbly expect a greater favour
for a larger and more serious Taske.
So likewise your owne Princely adventures
beyond Seas, in measuring large Kingdoms, &
the glassie face of the great Ocean: have invited
me to lay prostrate my painefull peregrinations
at your Sacred feete. Humbly beseeching your
Regall goodnesse, to remarke the matter and
manner of this Worke; howsoever the Gift, &
the Giver be deficient. And questionlesse as
the Bee, gathereth sweetest Hony out of sowrest
Flowers, your Royall vnderstanding may
finde something, to underprop the Defects of
my nothing; and my soule to exult in the smallest
sparke of your Gracious Clemency. And lastly,
the grievous Sufferings, tortures, and torments I sustayned
in Malaga, being taken as a Spye for your
Late Fathers Fleete, exposed against Algier: and
condemned to death by their bloody Inquisition
for the Gospells sake. These (I prostrate say) doe
commaund me to present the perfect passage
thereof, vnto your Royall & Religious consrderation.

Sufficient Certificates, and infallible approbations
are annexed to the Tragicall discourse it
selfe; and it also humbly bequeathing all, unto
your Princely Piety and Pitty, to commiserate
both my case and cause. Wherefore (and as
duty bindeth) I shall ever beseech God to preserve
your Royall Raigne from wicked Achitophells,
to guard your Sacred person with Heavenly
Angels, and to guid your Monarchicke
State, with faithful and Religious Counsellors.
AMEN.



