



MADAM,


THE cauſes why I make this Dedication apart to Your Ladyſhip, are divers. The firſt is, that ſweete Lord (the lamented Subject of this Booke) in whoſe praiſe, my Muſe ending, will expire like a Phoenix in a Perfume.

Hee was extreamly oblig'd to Your Ladyſhip in particular; and therefore You deſerve particular and infinite thankes from all of his Blood and Name, of which I am one, who have ever had your Vertues in admiration. The ſecond is, that You, Madam, are none of thoſe Romance Ladyes, who make Fiction and Folly their Study and Diſcourſe, and appeare wiſe onely to Fooles, and Fooles to the wiſe. By reading nothing elſe but Vanity, they become nothing elſe themſelves. They make a more diligent enquiry after the deedes of Knights, and Ladies errant, than after the Acts of Chriſt and his Apoſtles. The loſſe of their time is their juſt puniſhment, in

that they ſpend a whole Life in reading much, and yet is that much, nothing. But you, Madam, are capable of the moſt profound grave Miſteries of Religion, and daily peruſe and meditate Bookes of Devotion. You deſpiſe the bold Adventures of thoſe Female Follies, and piouſly ſurveigh the lives of the Female Saints. You have render'd yourſelfe a moſt accompliſh'd Lady on Earth, by imitating our bleſſed Lady which is in Heaven; who as ſhe was here the firſt Saint of the Militant Church, ſo is ſhe there, the firſt of the Church Triumphant; having learn't that ſhe ſpent al her houres in works of Charity, you trace her ſteps, knowing that Shee, and Vertue,

trod but one path. Hence it comes, that you are at no time ſo angry, as with the loſſe of an oportunity to ſuccour the diſtreſſed; and that you are as indefatigable in doing good as heaven in motion. Hence it is, that the impetuous force of a Torrent may bee as well ſtopped, as the conſtant flood of your goodneſſe; which never ſtayes till it have water'd, and relieved all within its Ken, commendable either for Knowledge, or Vertue. My third, and laſt ſcope in placing your Character in the Front of this Treatiſe is, that like a Starre it may ſtrike a luſtre throughout this Booke, and by its light chaſe away the darkneſſe Oblivion would elſe caſt upon it.

Queſtionleſſe it will breede a holy emulation in any of your Sexe, who ſhall here learne that there is a Lady, whoſe vertues are come to the Age of Conſiſtence, and can grow no further; and from whom, not only her poſterity, but her Anceſtors, alſo receive honour; They, in this reſembling the Morne, who though ſhe precedes the Sun, receives her ſplendour from him. Thus ſweet, thus excellent, Madam, I have received you from thoſe who have beene truly happy in being daily witneſſes of all your Words and Actions. I conclude with this proteſtation made in me by Truth her ſelfe, that I am ſo conſtant an honourer (I had almoſt ſaid an Adorer) of

Vertue whereever I finde it, eſpecially when that in eſtimable Diamond is ſet in Honour (as it is in you, Madam) that ſhould I round the World in your Ladiſhips ſervice, I ſhould eſteeme it a Voyage far ſhort of Your Merit, and my Duty; and that I ſhould not thinke the higheſt Title Imagination can reare, a greater addi