




THe Glorious Temple had a beautifull gate.
Hag. 1. 9. Such is a
Gratulatory Epiſtle to a Sermon of Thanksgiving.Acts 3. 10.
Our Eſtates and Liberties bleſſe your Honours. Religion
and Learning do no leſſe: I ſhall therefore here mention
a few of the many good offices done for them.
Whereas the publike worſhip of God was much embaſed,Iſ. 1. 25. you have
been carefull to take away the glittering tin of ſpecious Ceremonies,
together with the ugly droſſe of known Superſtition.Gal. 6. 
•
2. Let popiſh Spirus
bewaile the want of making a fair ſhew in the fleſh, which ſo
many deſire; let them cry out, and ſay, There is not ſo much State
and bravery in the ſervice of God, as heretofore: I dare be bold to
tell the World,Vitulus aureus occidit, Serpen
•
 aeneus ſanat. that much more holineſſe will be found in your braſen
Serpent, then ever was in their golden Calf. It is not long ſince Chriſtians
of the greateſt zeale were iniured by certain Sons of Levi even
as of old the ſons of Eli,
1 Sam. 2. 12, 13, 14. with their fleſh-hock of three teeth, offered
violence to the people, when they came to offer ſacrifice. You have wreſted
from them their fleſh-book, and broken the three teeth thereof,
which were illegall Canons, enſnaring Oaths, and rigorous High
Commiſſion-cenſures. Not long ſince Profeſſors in England, Amnon-like,
were lean from day to day,
2 Sam. 13. 4. by reaſon of the love they bare to
Romiſh fopperies, as he to Tamar, (many affecting the garbe of Rome
in their moſt ſolemne worſhip,Ver. 6. 7. 14. as Amnon pretended to lorg for meat
of Tamars dreſſing: Others proceeding, as he did with her; to a carnall
knowledge of that Whore.) But after your happy aſſembling,
the hand of God wrought an happy change in their hearts,Ver. 15. 17, 18. and made
them generally hate this Tamar, as much and more then ever they
loved her. You have now not onely turned her out, but boulted the
doore by an holy Covenant, to endeavour the extirpation of Popery

and Superſtition. Not long, ſince there were many pens and tongues
fully employed in decrying the Lords day, and diſputing againſt the
morality of the fourth Commandement. An employment to be for ever
abhord;Gen 7. 2, with Chap. 8. 20. becauſe as Noah tooke to himſelfe clean beaſts by ſevens,
ſix for propagation, the ſeventh for ſacrifice, which was accordingly
offered up, at his comming out of the Ark: So the Lord who allows
us ſix da
•
es for civill affaires; would have the ſeventh ſacrificed
to himſelfe as an whole burnt offering. Yet, as Antiochus took away
the daily ſacrifice, theſe men had almoſt taken from us the Sacrifice
of days; but you have reſtored it, by a moſt pious and wholſome
Ordinance,April 1644. according to the good hand of God upon you. And whereas
one of the breaſts of our common Mother▪ hath been dried up of
late, or rather yielded much bloud inſtead of milke; you have already
made ſome, and (we hope) are about to make further proviſion
for the other, leſt the coal which is left us be quenched, as the woman
of Tekoah ſaid to David;
2 Sam. 14. 7. leſt Cambridge become as a cottage
in a vineyard,
Iſ. 1. 8.
as a lodge in a garden of cucumbers.

After ſuch high and holy ſervices, be it far, exceeding far from you
all to diſhonour him who hath 