




TO whom rather should I addresse this present discourse, then to your Honourable selfe, who by your Ann. Dom. 1628. and once since that time
Embassie extraordinary for his Majestie of England into Germany well observed the countrey and the present estate thereof, where many passages here mentioned were acted. And much the rather doe I humbly present it to your Honourable Patronage, because, upon that happie occasion, it pleased our gracious God to put then into your mind

and to nourish therein ever since, a serious consideration of the deplorable distractions of the Christian Church; as he did into good b Nehem. 1. & 2.
Nehemiahs minde, of the lamentable estate of Ierusalem in his time. Your compassionate and tender affection was, and is still much moved to c Segnius irritant animos demissa per aures, quam quae sunt oculis subjecta sidelibus, Hor.
 observe the living stones of the New Ierusalem lying in the dust, or drencht in their own blood, some of her Priests and their slocks clad in Sackcloth, others with their people by sword and fire cast out and banished: and which is worst of all, your Honour well discerned how difficult a task it was to cure this fearfull maladie: because disaffection of parties & dissention of opinions, unlesse God prevented the mischiefe, would not admit the binding up of the wound. Nor did these miserable calamities of Gods people only vex and grieve your pious and religious soule, but also so rouzed and summoned up your Honours most serious thoughts, that with d As the good Samaritan not only pitied, but took care of the woundded man. an heartie and godlie providence, with a sincere and prudent circumspection you presentlie

consulted with other most learned, religious & Christian lovers of Gods Church about the peace thereof, so far as possiblie may be attained, and so far, as it lies in the power of Christian Princes, of most judicious Divines, and of truly zealous people, guided by them both: that as much as may be, we may all be
e Christians shold be peaceable one with another: the devill and the world raise stirs too many to molest tho Church.
of one minde and accord, and think, and speak one and the same thing, as the sacred Scripture often and straightly giveth us in charge. For this end Mr. Iohn Dury a Divine of singular pietie & learning, truly studious of the Churches peace, and incomparably sedulous to advance the same, and first interessed in the work by your Honourable means and incouragement, hath so much prevailed with many illustrious f This by severall instruments signed by them will plainly appear.
Princes & States, and the most eminent learned men in Germany, and the parts adjoyning, that the work is very wel promoted, and an heartie inclination wrought towards a good correspondencie for Ecclesiasticall peace. God grant your Honour life and health, that to your great comfort, and all true Christians

joy, you may shortly see the work come to more maturitie and perfection.
Amidst your Honours grave and vveightie intendments for this and other occasions of much concernement, may you please to reflect on this discourse. I conceive that there be many passages therein very confiderable for these and after times: and that they will make much for the exciting of our thankefulnesse to God: when we behold from what beginnings, in an 100 and few moe yeares, Gods truth hath risen, and Papisticall and Anabaptisticall errour faln. It is remarkable that the points by D. Luther mainly opposed were Indulgences, the Popes boundlesse power, merit of workes, Purgatory, Communion but in one kinde: all When walled Cities and Castles are taken, Villages must yeeld. Isor.
 chiefe points and palpably and and undeniably grosse. And on the other side, that he stood up against the Anabaptists rebaptization of themselves, their not baptizing infants (as not commanded by Christ;) their having all things in common (as had the Primitive Christians, Acts 2. 44.) and against the Antinomians heresies

concerning the law, and other like erroneous fancies. It is also observable that Dr. Luther striking at the Popes unlawfull power, never sought to exalt himselfe to honour or He left his wife and three children in want and distresse too manifest a signe thereof. riches. For though, as he saith, he himselfe with other learned men executed Episcopall Authority in visiting the Churches of Saxony, & reforming things amisse: yet he knowing his talent fittest for the Chaire of Wittenberg, never would rise higher; but wrote a book concerning Christian Episcopacy, and installed Nicolas Amsdorf Bishop of Neoburg, and George Anhaltinus Bishop of Mersburg.

And in regard that Luther studied and read, as Professor, Philosophie of divers kinds, was well versed in the Fathers, and in Aquinas, Scotus, Occam, & other Schoolmen, and attained to the Greek and Hebrew tongues: he was thereby 


〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
. Arist.

 inabled rightly, and soundly, and gravely, and not Some who know nothing dote about questions and strife of words, &c. 1 Tim. 6. 4. ignorantly, rashly, or humorously to judge of these studies, and of their use in Theologie.

It was also very commendable in him, that he disliked railing discourse without

solid and concluding arguments, slighted foolish and groundlesse calumnies, reproved young students forward and rash attempts without authority for the promoting of his cause, blamed the headie and disorderly tumults raised by the Boores and vulgar sort, confessed ingenuously his doubting of some points, his ignorance in others, and craved pardon, if having beene lately a Popish Monk, he should in any point erre from the truth. Seeing this was D. Luthers prudent and religious course, I shall never marvell at his The cause required it. And God sweetly moderated Luthers vehemency with P. Melanct
•…
hons mild and calm temper.
Heroicall Spirit, and impregnable confidence of Gods assistance, and of the successe of his attempts: and on very good ground famous and worthy Princes countenanced and assisted him, as a man, by his then opposites, convicted of no errour, doing much good service in the University, offering his cause to any just triall, appealing from the Pope to the Generall Counsell, and in his whole course manifesting Lutheri vitam apud nos, nemo non probat. Eras Epist. lib. 5. a true correspondence of his life with his doctrine. Much more I might here adde, but will

not longer detaine your Honour from the discourse it selfe. I humbly beseech our gracious God, who inabled D. Luther to be an excellent instrument for the reformation of the Christian Church, for beating downe of errour, and setting up of Gods Truth, that he would implant in us all, quiet, temperate, and Christian affections, 
Luthor endured not to have any one called a Lutheran. And Erasmus saith, Prorsus odi ista dissidiorum nomina: Christi sumus omnes. lib. Ep. 2.
 and love of Christs Name, & still more and more perfect the setling of Truth, and building up of his Church, untill we all become living stones in the Spiritual Temple sitted for our God. The same God of peace crowne your Honourable selfe, and all sincere promoters of Christian peace, with peace externall and internall here, and with eternall blisse hereafter. So prayeth he, who is



