




RIGHT REVEREND.


GRace be to you, and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. At the direction of the Generall Assembly at Edinburgh, Anno 1644. I put my hand to the work of the Psalmes▪ whereof I give to you now this last edition, The work is for the publike service of God in his Church, and it concerns you especially to endeavour by all meanes that this work may be done for the glory of God, and edification of his people, whose soules are committed to your charge. That this may be done worthily, diverse things in my 
•…
udgement are required.
First, That the interpretation approven, and received by our Church be not changed

in the verse, by any particular mans opinion; for the interpreters in some dark places differ in opinions concerning the sense: If the verse follow one interpretation, and the Text another, consider how impertinent that will bee.
Secondly, That all dfficile words be shunned, by reason, that many people and children must sing that are unlearned.
Thirdly, That, so far as is possible, no words of the Text be wanting, for in the Text there be no idle words or superfluities to be retrinched, as in mens discourse.
Fourthly, If any words be added, that they be pertinent to make the sense clear▪ as we see in the Text some words added. which are printed in smaller letters. PSAL. 16. 2. PSAL. 27. 8. PSAL. 54. 17. &c.
Fiftly, A speciall care would be had that the verse be very clear, and easie to be understood by the most ignorant, that unlearned people and children may as Gods word directs, PSAL. 47. 7. Sing with understanding, It is better pertinently to adde some words for explication, as we see done in th
•…
 Text it self, then without them to leave the matter so obscure, that the people & children should sing they know not what: 
•…

Cor. 14


〈◊〉
. I, said the Apostle, will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with understanding, and I will sing with the spirit, I will sing with the understanding also: This above all must be regarded, that the verse be very clear and easie to be understood: It is farre better without all controversie, that diverse words in a pertinent paraphrase be added, that people may understand what they sing, then to want one word of the Text, whereby the song is made obscure; The Apostle preferreth five words with understanding, to ten thousand obscure: 1 Cor. 14. 19. Saint PAUL is a great enemie to obscurity, and all faithfull Pastours must, and will set their face against it in all things that concerne the soules that their Master hath bought with his bloud, and concredited to them: Let therefore all difficle words be shunned that are not in the Bible; as for the words of the Bible, all should understand them.
Sixthly, A speciall care would be had, that so far as may be, the words of the Text be not changed with any other, that those that have their Bibles before them may read the words of the text in the song▪ when other words are in the verse, the Text

seemeth uncouth to him that readeth or singeth: It greatly edifies when the words of the Song are the words of the Text; and this would be very carefully considered, and aimed at by all that meddle with the tryall of our labours, that most diligently they compare the words of the verse with the words of the Text, that none thereof be wanting, nor any others put into their place, so far as is possible to do the same; the Text must be the only touchstone for tryall.
Seventhly, He that medleth with such a work would have good understanding in the Hebrew, which is the Originall and fountaine; The want of this, or the not taking heed, hath made all English verse that I have seen, make a very great fault, in mistaking that which is said of God himself, in the PSAL. 82. 1. where it is said, God standeth in the congregation of the mighty, he judgeth among the gods; All the Psalmes in English verse that I have seen, by the mighty, there understand mighty men, which is a very great mistake; the Originall Hebrew clearly lets us see, that it is God himself that is there called El: those be the words, Elohim nitsav bagnadath El, that is,

is Piseator in his version hath very well▪
Deus stat in coetu Dei, which he interpreteth thus, hoc est Deus stat in coetu suo, id est in coetu a se ordinato: Our English version in this verse would be mended; where as it h
•…
th God standeth in the Assembly of th
•…
 mighty, it were better and more clear to put God standeth in the Assembly of God▪


Now right Reverend, this is my last labour which I have set down with the Text interlined, that the judicious reader may▪ have under his eye both the Text and the verse, and may thē more easily confer them together, and discerne.
I desire that no man esteem that in a mercenary way I am seeking gain by those my labours, though the work hath been both painfull and chargeable, I with a most willing mind offer all in a free-will offering to the Lord; seek gaines who will, I will have none, nor do I stand in need, praised bee the Lord: I hope the judicious Reader shall finde this last edition mended in many things; If any thing hath been observed by any in the former editions, let them consider if it bee mended in this last, which, as I have hitherto done, I submit

in all humlity to the judgement of my Brethren in the Ministry. The spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets: 1 Cor. 14. 32.

From GLASGOW; the day 1648.



