




Sir,


THis Sermon is Yours in right of the
Author, being first Preached, then Published
by Your speciall Command.
Therefore it flyes thither most justly
for Protection, from whence it had a
being. But You have yet a nearer Interest in it
from the Subject, (a great Victory gotten with as
great hazard of Your own Person.) We are not so
Sacrilegious to robbe God of His Glory, Neither
are we so stupid or fanaticall, as to separate the

Sword of the Lord and Gideon. So long as an
English Chronicle shall be extant, this Northerne
Good Fryday will be remembred, to the perpetuall
Honour of Your Noble Family. In managing
Your great trust (conformably to Your Soverai ne)
You have rather expressed His temper, who would
suffer no Man to depart away from him discontented,
then the disposition of Vitellius, who
thought no Smell in the World so Sweet. 
〈◊〉


••
at
of a slain Enemy. God grant that 
〈◊〉
 to the
bad may not prove accidentally cruelty to the good,
Nor Christian pitty to spare effusion of blood, give
the ulcer space to turne to a Gangrene, so to make the
Cure both more costly, and more dangerous to the body
Politiq
•
e. He is blinde that doth not see how
God hath blessed His Majesties Armies beyond
probability, and how all His Forces have almost
ever proved Victorious in the Field; Witnesse for
this County. Seecroft, Tankersley, Yarum, Atherton,
&c. Those losses which we have susteined have
been upon surprises, and especially by the negligence
of Scouts. The cold of the Feet strikes quickly
up to the Head, And the carelessenesse of the meanest
Officer may indanger the Life of the Greatest. But
it is as superfluous as uncomely for me, like another
Phormio, to discourse to Your Excellence of these

things, which are out of mine Element. Accept, I
beseech you, this Mite, as a poore expression of my
obedience and gratitude (two forgotten virtues in
this Age) for Your singular favours to my selfe, And
to the Churches of this Province, which owe to your
Protection their present Liberty to serve God according
to their Duty, and the Laws and rites establ
•
shed,
and to these Northerne Counties, which
by Your endeavours are totall
•
 in a manner freed
from the fury of Sedition, which lies now gasping
within the Walls of Hull. God Almighty prosper
Your Excellencies Arms, for the happy reducement
of the rest of your great charge to Obedience and
Peace, To the glory of God, the Service of His Majesty,
Your own lasting Honour, the tranquility of this
distracted Kingdom, and the unmas king of all Politicall
and Ecclesiasticall juglers; which is the constant
expectation, and shall be the dayly Prayer of

Yarl, Iuly,
18. 1643.



