




WHen first it pleased You to require
our service in Preaching
at Your late Publike Fast, we
resolved to close our eyes against
all Clouds of discouragement arising
from our owne unworthinesse and insufficiency,
and to set our selves wholly to seek what
the Lord would command us to deliver in his
Name, at such a time, to such an Honourable and
awfull Assembly,Psalm. 82. with a totall deniall of our
selves.
And albeit we should have beene glad to have
beene spared this exposing of our selves to the

publike view; yet, You appointing otherwise,
we hold it equall that the joynt entreaty of the
Representative Body of the whole Communalty
of the kingdome should be regarded, and
have chosen rather that others should censure us
of weakenesse, than You should charge us
with Disobedience: Your Request being no
lesse than a command; and Your acceptance
sufficient to give value to things of themselves
both meane and worthlesse.
Wherefore, according to our Duty, so willingly
as the consciousnesse of our slender performances
would permit, we obey Your Order, and
doe now, although somewhat late, humbly offer
these two plaine Sermons (for, who expects other
in a Fast?) at the footstoole of Your Tribunall,
as a lasting Monument of Our Gratitude
for Your encouraging Approbation of, and
solemne Thankes for our weake endeavours in
the preaching of them.
If in some places we have taken that just liberty
which all others have done before us,
we trust it shall not be imputed; so long as in the

most materiall passages we have kept to the very
words which at first wee used, so farre as was
necessary; and have not wittingly swerved an
haires bredth from the sense and substance in the
residue.
Wee have indeed pared off some Repetitions,
which in speaking had their use, the more to inculcate,
and the better to set on the matter, but
would not have been so gratefull in Writing, because
Readers account every thing too long that
hath any thing too much. We have likewise contracted
some expressions, which in discourses of
so much length, could hardly be so concise as wee
desired, Memory being not alwayes at hand to
give birth to every Conception of our minds in
such formes as wee intended. And some few
things we have added, where straites of time, or
defect of memory made some balkes in the first
delivery.
What ever our performances be, we humbly
leave them in Your hands, and under Your
Honourable Protection, which we are bold to expect,
because they are by Your owne Act drawne

from us, and that in a time so queasie and distempered
as can hardly beare that food, or Physik
which is needfull for it. Seldome doth a wise
Reproofe, a necessary Exhortation, or wholsome
Doctrine meet with an obedient Eare.

The God of Heaven steere all Your weighty
consultations by his own Counsell, to his owne
Glory; cover You still under his own Wing, and
make You the most accomplisht, best united, &
most successefull & glorious house of Commons
that ever sate in that High Court; but
chiefly in the effectuall endeavouring of a further
Sanction of, and stronger Guard about our
true Palladium, the true Religion, already
established among us; in the perfecting of the
Reformation of it; in the erecting, maintaining,
protecting, and incouraging of an able,
godly, faithfull, zealous, profitable, Preaching
This was our joynt & earnest suit to You, in Preaching; and we now again beseech You to set your hearts and hands to this work, as Benhail, Obadiah and other Princes in Iudah did.
Ministery, in every Parish Church and Chappell
throughout England and Wales; and in the
interceding to the Kings sacred Majesty for
the setting up of a Faithfull, Iudicious, and
Zealous Magistracy,
2 Chr. 17. 7, 8, 9. where yet the same is

wanting, to bee ever at hand to back such a Ministery:
without either of which, not only the
power of Godlinesse will soone degenerate into
formality, and zeale into Luke warmenesse;
but, Popery, Arminianisme, Socinianisme,
Prophanenesse, Apostacy, and Atheisme
it selfe will more and more croud in upon us, and
prevaile against us, doe You all You can by all
other meanes.
And now, commending You to God and
to the Word of his grace,Acts 20. 32. which is able to
build You up further, and to give You an
inheritance among all them which bee
sanctified; and these our Labours to his further
blessing, whereby all may speedily be brought
under the line of his Covenant,The Summe of both Sermons.
which is
our Safety; that hee may continue with us,
which is our Glory; and wee with him,
which is our happinesse: we rest,




