




THere is no man this day upon the face of the earth whom it more concernes to have this name of God The Lord of Hoſts preſented to him in the due luſtre & glory of it, then your Excellencie, whom the Lord hath not onely honoured to ſtand up even in the fore front to maintain his cauſe, and the cauſe of his people, but he hath even put upon you this his owne name, he hath made you the Lord of his Hoſts. It is that which every Souldier may juſtly glory

in, that God himſelfe ſeems to affect the glory of Arms, when he cauſeth himſelfe to be as it were ſir-named THE LORD OF HOSTS. The beams of this glorious name puts ſome luſtre upon the meaneſt in an Army; What a luſtre then doth it put upon your Excellencie, who ſtand ſo neare it? Happy the time that ever you were borne to be made uſe of by God and his people in ſo noble and honourable a ſervice as this. We reade ZECH. 3. 3. of Joſhua, that great inſtrument of Reformation, in the returne of JUDAH from her Captivity, that he ſtood in filthy garments, but the Angel ſpake to thoſe who ſtood before him, ſaying, Take away the filthy garments from him: and unto him he ſaid, Behold, I have cauſed thine iniquity to paſſe from thee, and I wil cloathe thee with change of rayment. Thoſe who ſtand up moſt eminent and forward in the cauſe of God and his people, ſhal ever have ſome who wil ſeek to ſtain their glory by ſlanders and reproachfull names, to put them into vile garments: what viler garment can there be then the garment of Treaſon and Rebellion? But the Angel ſtands by to take off theſe vile garments, and to clenſe his ſervants even from this nominall iniquity: he will put

change of rayment upon them, he will one day make it appeare that there were none ſo faithfull to God, their King and Countrey, as they: The Lord that hath choſen Jeruſalem, ſaith the Text, ver. 2. wil rebuke them who thus ſtand up againſt his ſervants. The Lord who hath ſet his heart to bring mercie to Jeruſalem, to his Church, will certainly rebuke ſuch as ſtand to reſiſt the great inſtruments thereof. Wherefore that which the Angel of the Lord proteſted to JOSHUA, v. 6. I may in the name of the Lord with a little change proteſt unto your Excellencie, Thus ſaith the Lord of Hoſts, if you will walke in my wayes, and if you will keepe my charge, then you ſhall have an eminencie in my houſe, and I will give you places among theſe that ſtand by. That is, among the bleſſed Angels in the heavens. If a cup of cold water ſhall not go without a reward, ſurely then the venturing eſtate, liberty, limbes, honour, bloud, life for the cauſe of Chriſt, ſhall not goe without its reward.
Wherefore moſt noble Lord of our Hoſts, yea of the Hoſts of God, Goe on with true Heroicke magnanimity, and proſper, in the name of this glorious Lord of hoſts. The prayers of the Churches are for you, the bleſsings of the

Saints are upon you. I beleeve never any Generall upon the earth hath been mentioned more in heaven then your Excellencie hath been, and yet is in this cauſe.
That which is ſtoryed of the Croſſe appearing to CONSTANTINE, with theſe words, HOC VINCES, I may with far more confidence apply to this name of God, The Lord of hoſts. This I preſent unto your Excellence, with this Motto, Hoc vinces: The name is in it ſelfe a box of ſweet ointment, give me leave to open it before your Excellencie, that it may be fragrant indeed, and adde quickning and ſtrength. To that true noble heroick ſpirit fit for great actions, that God hath honoured you withall, I here humbly preſent it opened and poured forth. The bleſsing of it be upon you, and thoſe great things undertaken by you, which is and ſhal be the prayer of



