




NOBLE SIR,


LEarned Casaubon assures me that when the Greek 
Vide Annotat. Casaub. in G. Nys. Epist. ad Amb. & Bas.
Pacem ecclesia, pacem Christi amissā quaerere, & turbatā componere, & repertam tenere curavimus Sed hujus ipsius fieri nos vel participes vel autores, nec tēporis nostri peccata me ruerunt—nec Antichristi ministri sunt passi, qui Pace sua, id est, Impietatis sua unitato se jactant, agentes se non ut Christi Episcopos, sed Antichristi Sacerdotes. Hilarius contra Auxentium.
 Fathers wrote to a wicked man they were wont to salute him with that Apostolicall benediction, Grace be unto you: but when they wrote to a religious man they used the ordinary Hebraisme, Peace be unto you, because Peace doth suppose Grace, and doth comprehend all outward blessings. I am sure your very enemies gave you this testimony at Oxford, that you were a man of Peace, but as it followes in the Psalme, when you spake for peace they were for warre. Psalme 120. 7. All that your Honour desired was, that (as it became gowned men) they would take up their bookes, and lay down their armes; that they would not protect Delinquents any longer, but yeeld them up to a legall tryall. You desired that nothing might be tumultuously attempted, but all things orderly reformed. You engaged your Honour to them that what Plate you found in places fit for Plate, the Treasury or the Buttery should remaine untouched, and most Societies engaged themselves by a solemne promise, that they would never give their consent that their Plate should be put to any other use then what was sutable and according to their oath, and the intention of the

Donours, their successors having in all these respects as great an interest in the Plate as themselves; Nay they generally confessed that they had no more power to aliene their Plate then their Lands. In confidence of their promise you told them you did leave their Plate in their owne custody, which otherwise you would have secured, and in confidence of your Honours promise they brought forth their Plate, and made publique use of it, even whilest the souldiers were in towne▪ Your Lordship found the University (as the Reverend Doctours had left it) groaning under a kinde of Anarchy; for it was thought fit by the Round-house, that the University should be dissolved, and every man left to doe what seemed good in his owne eyes. It was suggested by a Doctor well read in Politiques, that if they did not dissolve the University, the Parliament would dissolve it▪ But your Honour made it appear how much you did abhorre an Anarchy, and honour the Vniversity; you assembled those few Governours of private Colledges which were at home, and the Substitutes of all that were absent, you consulted them how the Vniversity might be put into its right posture: You assured them that it was not the intent of the Parliament to change the Government or infringe the Liberties of the Vniversity, & that though the new Statutes were justly complained of, yet you conceived it fit that the Vniversity should for the present be governed by Lawes that were none of the best, rather then left quite without Rule, or government; they all confessed that you behaved your selfe more like a Chauncellour then a souldier, for the Vniversity was not over-awed by a garrison, or over-ruled by a Councell of warre. You did not impose any Taxes upon the University, you did not go about to perswade them that Guns were Mathematicall Instruments, and therefore they might buy guns with that very money which was bequeathed and set apart for Mathematicall Instruments; you did not importune any Scholars to list themselves in your Regiment, nor did you desire that Doctours would turne Commanders, or that any Commanders should be created Doctours, or boyes created Masters, lest there might be an Anarchy even in Convocation by such a Premeditated Confusion; and yet such counsells and practises have been suggested by some, that are none of the meanest Ranke. When I was commanded by speciall warrant to attend your Honour, (deputed by both houses of Parliament

for the service of King and Parliament to settle Peace and Volumus & nos pacem, sed pacem Christi—pacē in qua non fit bellum involutū; pace