




MADAM!


YOur Honor knows I have ever been afraid of
the Preſs hitherto I have ſtood out againſt all
importunity, and I was peremptorily reſolved
never to have publiſhed any thing in Print:
but now I am inforced, whether I wil or no,
to ſend abroad theſe two ſmal pieces. And
ſince they muſt out, I humbly preſent them to
your Ladyſhip: Not for any worth that is in them: Not for your
Honors protection of them; let them go forth at their own peril:
nor yet for the ſubjects ſake; the matter of them in the general
not ſo directly, and properly complying with your Ladyſhips condition:
they are rather for the inſtruction of Magiſtrates: But
I dedicate them to your Honor: becauſe they are your due.
Whatever I can perform in the ſervice of God, and more by
far then ever I am able to do, low to the gracious Lady Frances. To
ſay truth, your Honor called for them, and here they are: take them
with favorable acceptation. Something your Ladyſhip wil meet
withal in both Sermons appliable and uſeful in regard of your ſelf.
The NAIL (I mean the good Nail) wil give your Honor a freſh
ſight of that Noble Gentleman, worthy Sir JOHN
HOBARTE, your Honors lately deceaſed huſband. He was
a gallant Nail: by the grace of God wel filed from all ruſt and
ruggedneſs: He was a bright Nail, as burniſhed gold, ſhining more
and more every day he lived (that I can teſtifie to the comfort of
my ſoul) by a godly converſation. He was a great and a ſtrong

Nail: His abilities were beyond the common pitch: He had a
good head for wiſdom and underſtanding: He had a good heart;
Faithful and zealous he was for God, for Religion, for his Country,
for our Solemn Covenant: He was a fixed Nail not only in
the Capitol, but alſo in the Sanctuary: his care and painful endeavors
were layd out not only for the Common-wealth, but for
the Church alſo: yea he himſelf was a little ſuncturary to the
faithful Maniſters of Jeſus Chriſt. He was a ſtout Nail, ſteeled
with Chriſtian reſolution and courage; not counting his life dear
if he might have ſacrificed it (as partly he did) for the Kingdoms
peace, his Countries ſafety and the Churches ſettlement. He was
a Nail on which the Welfare and proſperity of our Sion did
much depend. And for our ſins God hath plucked out this
uſeful Nail. We ſee this great Nail turned into a little Wheel:
and he is now rolled into the Houſe appointed for all the living.
I wil not tel the world of your Ladiſhips immoderate ſorrow, and
how you ſit diſconſolate, ſighing, ſobbing, and mourning like a
faithful Turtle bereaved of her mate: I wil rather guide my
ſpeech to your Honor, and direct your eye to the Wheel. Worthy
Sir John Hobarte, he was a ſtately Wheel, he moved bravely in his
time, and did much of Gods work with all alacrity; yea he counted
that life worſe then death, when his motion was any whit ſtopped
by infirmity of body, ſo as he could not be active in the Publick
ſervice as he deſired. This Voluble, and ſwift Wheel, is now broken
at the Ciſtern: and your heart Madam, was almoſt broken
too. Oh! I beſeech your Honor, look up to the throne of glory;
it is the voice of the Lord hath turned the Wheel: He hath ſpok
•
n,
and hath done it. Submit, Submit with humility, patience, cheerfulneſs.
Rejoyce rather: what a world of comforts may your Ladiſhip
have in your loſs? He did worthily in his life, he dyed religiouſly:
I ſaw him draw his laſt breath: but ſo much Majeſty,
and peace in a dying countenance I never ſaw. A ſtranger would
have thought he had been only in ſome ſweet-contenting ſleep, or
taſting the heavenly joys. What an Honorable name hath he left
behind him! Is it not as an oyntment powred forth, even as the
fragrant ſpikenard? The Nail is pulled out of this lower wall, but
it is not loſt: it's only advanced, and ſet up higher. He is faſtned
in the wall of the New Jeruſalem, he ſhines, and ever ſhal ſhine

bright in glory. And we all ere long ſhal roul after him; and
then ſhal your Ladyſhip enjoy a better Communion with your huſband
then ever. Be content to waite, is it not a little while?
I intended a very ſhort Epiſtle, but my pen begins to be free,
and eager of its way. I can hardly hold it in: it would fain be
dropping out ſomething of your honors goodneſs. I wel know how
little your Honor affects the praiſe of men (your praiſe is in the
Goſpel) and your Ladiſhip wel knows how much I abhorr baſe
flattery. And God he knows, my deſign is not to make you proud
by ſpeaking your vertues to your face, but only this; I would
moſt gladly take occaſion to publiſh ſomething to the world of thoſe
eminent Graces, which the Lord hath wrought in your Honor by his
holy ſpirit: that your Ladiſhips example may be propounded as a pattern
to all Chr
•
ſtian women, which they may ever look upon, and follow.
Elect Lady! I could tel them, how I have ever found you
walking in the truth, even in the moſt perilous and ſeducing times:
with what obedience you have always heard the word, reſigning
up your wil to Gods Command: How your deportment was to your
Noble yoke-fellow: the heart of your huſband did ſafely truſt in
you: All that were but lookers on, did ſee t
•
e entireneſs of your
heart, the intention of your love, your loyalty, and faithfulneſs,
joyned with all diligence, and care. You made in your ſtudy and
work, to do him good in regard of his body, in regard of his eſtate;
but eſpecially, and above all in regard of his ſoul. I could take occaſion
by this my dedication to tel the world: That even whileſt
you are on earth, your converſation is in heaven. I can truly teſtify
that your Ladiſhip is a widow indeed, continuing in faſting,
and prayer, and reading, and meditation; and that this is your
work night and day in the temple, in your cloſet, in your family:
That's remarkable; in your family you obſerve Davids houres.
Every morning, every noon, and every night you have prayer,
Scripture read and expounded (and that by an able, and a called
Minister of the Goſpel) beſides repetitions of Sermons, ſinging of
Pſalms, and conſtant Catechiſing (a moſt neceſſary work) the
Noble Olive-plant, your precious daughter anſwering with the
firſt, with all readyneſs, and cheerfulneſs, to her immortal honor.
I confeſs hearing the anſwers of young Mrs. Philip Hobarte, and
the reſt, I could not but think thus with my ſelf: This day is that

Propheſy fulfilled in mine eares. I wil powre out of my ſpirit uppon
all fleſh, and your ſons, and your daughters ſhal Propheſy,
and your young men ſhal ſee Viſions; and on my ſervants, and on
my hand-maids wil I pour out of my ſpirit, and they ſhal Propheſy.
