





SONNE,

The calamity of this time being such, as hath bereaft me of the ordinary meanes of expressing my affection to you; I haue beene casting about, to find some other way of doing that in such sort, as you may receiue most profit by it. Therein I soone pitched vpon this consideration; That Parents owe vnto their children, not onely materiall subsistence for their bodie; but much more, spirituall contributions to their better part, their minde. I am much bound to God, that he hath endewed you with one very capable of the best instructions: and withall, I do therefore esteeme my selfe obliged, to do my vtmost for moulding it to its most aduantage. If my ayme therein do proue successefull, you will with more ease digest those inconueniences and distresses, which already you haue begun to be acquainted with, and that threaten dayly worse vnto you. For how can a man suffer his hart to be deiected att the priuation of any temporall blessinges, whiles he considereth the inanity of them; and that nothing is worthy his serious thought, but what may accompany him to his eternall habitation? What needeth he feare the desolations of warre, and the worst that they can do against him, who haue his estate in their power, when he may be rich with a much nobler treasure, that none but himselfe can robbe him of? Without doubt, he that shall seriously reflect vpon the excellency of his owne nature, and vpon

the admirable perfect and happy state he shall most certainely arriue vnto, if he but weane himselfe from those worldly impediments, that here clogge his soules flight; can not choose but looke with a disdainefull eye, vpon the glattering tryfles, that weake spirits delight themselues withall. If he deeme it not requisite (as of old, the famous wise man did) to throw away those encumbrances, to the end he may the more freely attend vnto diuine contemplations (for worldly goods, duely vsed, may be very aduantagious both to ones selfe, and to others) yet at the least, he will not repine att fortunes recalling of what she formerly had but lent him, and but permitted him the vse of.
To the end then that you may be armed against the worst that may arriue vnto you, in this vnhappy state of affaires, in our distressed country; I send you those considerations of the nature and Immortality of humane soules, which of late, haue beene my chiefe entertainement. The progresse you haue already made in the study of Philosophy, hath (I am persuaded) enabled you to benefitt your selfe, with what I haue written vpon this subiect: on the serious examining of which, if you will employ but halfe the time, that I haue done in spinning out my thoughts, and weauing them into the piece you see, I doubt not but you will thereby receiue so much contentement, as well as profit, that you will not repent you of your paines. Besides that, intellectuall entertainements are the purest, and the noblest, and the most proportionate to mans nature, and proue the most delightfull to him, when they are duely relished. You will presently agree, that the matter j handle, is the most important and the most weighty, within the whole extent of humane nature, for a worthy and a gallant person to employ himselfe about. The aduantage which man hath ouer vnreasonable creatures, is, that what he doth, is by election; and he is himselfe master of all his actions; whereas they are impelled by outward causes, vnto all they doe: it is properly sayd of them, that aguntur magis quam agunt: He onely is free: and in all varietyes of circumstances, hath the power to choose one, and to reiect an other. Now, to haue this election wisely made, and becoming a man, requireth that it be steered by knowledge. To do any thing well, a man must first know throughly all that concerneth the action he is about; and chiefely the end of it. And certainely, of all his actions, the gouernement of himselfe, is the most important, and neereliest

concerning him. The end of that gouernement, and of all a mans aymes, is by all men agreed to be Beatitude: that is, his being completely well, and in a condition of enioying the most happinesse, that his nature is capable of. For arriuall whereunto, it is impossible to pitch vpon the direct and sure meanes, vnlesse it be first determined, whether the Beatitude we speake of, do belong to this life, or be not to be attained, till we come to the next: or rather, whether or no, there be an other life besides this, to be happy in. For if there remaineth an eternity vnto vs, after the short reuolution of time we so swiftly runne ouer here on earth; it is cleare, that all the happinesse which can be imagined in this fleeting state, is not valuable, in respect of the future; nor any thing we do here is considerable, otherwise then as it conduceth to the making our condition then, better or worse. Now the way to be sure of this, is eyther infallible authority, or euident science. They that rely on the first, depend of others: and they onely who know, are absolutely complete of themselues; and haue within themselues, the principles whereby to gouerne their actions, in what is of highest consequence to them. It is true, euery body is not of a straine of witt and iudgement, to be of this ranke: and who are not, must be contented to beleeue others, and be satisfyed with what is taught them. But he that will be of a superior orbe, must make this his study. This is the adequate entertainement of a worthy person.
To conceiue how high and excellent, this science of gouerning a man in order to Beatitude in the next world is, we may consider, how among all arts that concerne this life, the art of a statesman, vnto whome belongeth to see a common wealthwell gouerned, is by much the noblest. All other arts, are but ministeriall to him. He maketh vse of the soldier, of the lawyer, of the orator, of the antiquary, of the physitian, as best conduceth to the end he aymeth att, of making the commonwealth he gouerneth, happy and flourishing. All other meaner trades serue him in a yet lower degree. Yet after all, he must take his measures from the Metaphysitian or Diuine. For since the gouernement of a society of men, aymeth att giuing them the best being they are capable of; and since Mans well being here in this life, is but instrumentally good, as being the meanes for him to be well in the next life; It is euident, that the statesmans art, is but instrumentall to that, which sheweth, how euery particular man must

gouerne his life, to be partaker of a happy eternity. And consequently, if a statesman haue not this science, he must be subiect to a brauer man then himselfe, whose prouince is to direct all his actions vnto this end. We are told, how reuerently great Cesar listened to the discourses of learned Achoreus, how obseruant Alexander was of his Master Aristotle, how secure Nero trode, whiles Seneca guided his steppes, how humble Constantine was to saint Syluesters precepts, how Charlemaine gouerned himselfe in his most important actions, by Alcuines aduise: In a word, all the great men of antiquity, aswell among the Romanes, as among the Gretians, had their Philosophers, and Diuines in their kind, belonging to them; from whome they might deriue rules of liuing and doing as they ought vpon all occasions, if themselues were not Masters in that superior and all directing science. He that seeth not by his owne light, must in this dangerous ocean steere by the lanterne which an other hangeth out to him. If the person he relyeth vpon, eyther withholdeth the light from him, or sheweth him a false one, he is presently in the darke, and can not faile of loosing his way. How great an authority had the Augurs and priests among the rude Romanes, to forbid any publike act, or to breake any assembly vpon pretence of Religious duties, when they liked not the businesse that was in agitation? The like may interessed Diuines among Christians do, if the ministers of state haue not some insight into Diuinity. He leadeth a vexatious life, that in his noblest actions is so gored with scruples, that he dareth not make a steppe, without the authority of an other to warrant him.
Yet I do not conclude, that he whome I designe by the character of a braue man, should be a professed or a complete Metaphytian or Diuine, and consummate in euery curious circumstance that belongeth to this science; it sufficeth him to know it in bulke; and to haue so much Diuinity, as in common occurrents, to be able to gouerne himselfe; and in speciall ones, to vnderstand what, and why his Diuine perswadeth him to any thing; so that euen then, though not without helpe, yet he gouerneth himselfe, and is not blindely gouerned by an other. He that aymeth att being a perfect horseman, is bound to know in generall (besides the art of riding) the nature and temper of horses; and to vnderstand the different qualities of bittes, saddles, and other vtensiles of a horseman; But the vtmost exactnesse in these particulars,

belongeth to farriers, saddlers, smithes, and other tradesmens of all which, the iuditious rider knoweth how to make due vse, when he hath occasion, for his principall end; which is, orderly gouerning his horse. In like manner, he whom we designe by a complete braue man, must know solidely the maine end of what he is in the world for: and withall, must know how to serue himselfe when he pleaseth, and that it is needfull to him, of the Diuines high contemplations, of the Metaphysitians subtile speculations, of the naturall Philosophers minute obseruations, of the Mathematicians nice demonstrations; and of whatsoeuer else of particular professions, may conduce to his end; though without making any of them his professed businesse.
To lay groundes for such knowledge as this, is the scope of my ensuing discourse. My first ayme, was to begett it in my selfe: to which end, the digesting my thoughts into order, and the setting them downe in writing, was necessary: for without such strict examination of them, as the penning them affordeth one meanes to make, they would hardly haue auoyded being disioynted and rouing ones. Now that I haue done that, my next ayme is that you, vnto whom I wish as much good as to my selfe, may reape as much benefit by the studying it, as I haue done by the composing it. My end then being a priuate one (as looking no further then you my sonne, and my selfe) I haue not endeauoured to expresse my conceptions eyther in the phrase, or in the language of the schooles. It will serue our turne, to comprehend the substance, without confining our selues to any scrupulous exactnesse, in what concerneth onely forme. And the same consideration hath made me passe slightly ouer many particulars, in my first Treatise of the Nature of Bodies; vpon which learned and witty men might spinne out large volumes. For in that part, I ayme no further, then to shew what may be effected by corporeall agents. There, possibility serueth my turne, as well as the determinate indiuisible point of truth. I am obliged to that, onely in my maine great theme; which is the soule. In regard of which, the numerous crooked narrow cranies, and the restrayned flexuous riuolets of corporeall thinges, are all contemptible, further then the knowledge of them serueth to the knowledge of the soule. And a gallant man, whose thoughts flye att the highest game, requireth no further insight into them, then to satisfy himselfe by what way they may be performed;

and deemeth it farre too meane for him, to dwell vpon the subtilest of their mysteries for science sake.
Besides this liberty that the scope I ayme att alloweth me of passing very cursorily ouer sundry particulars; I find now att my reading ouer all together, what I haue written to deliuer it to the Printer, that euen in that which I ought to haue done to comply with my owne designe and expectation, I am fallen very short; so that if I had not vnwarily too farre engaged my selfe for the present publishing it, truly I should haue kept it by me, till I had once againe gone ouer it. I find the whole piece very confusedly done; the stile vnequall and vnpolished; many particulars (when they are not absolutely necessary to my maine drift) too slightly touched, and farre from being driuen home: and in a word, all of it seemeth to be rather but a loose modell and roughcast of what I designe to do, then a complete worke throughly finished.
But since by my ouerforward promising of this piece to seuerall frindes, that haue beene very earnest for it, I haue now brought my selfe to that passe, that it would ill become me to delay any longer the publishing of some thing vpon this subiect; and that obligations of an other nature permitt me not att the present to dwell any longer vpon this (besides that, so laysy a braine as mine is, groweth soone weary when it hath so entangled a skeane as this is to vnwind) I now send it you as it is; but with a promise, that att my first leisure, I will take a strict suruey of it; and then in an other edition, will polish, correct and adde what shall appeare needfull to me. If any man shall take the booke out of your hand, inuited by the title and subiect to looke into it; I pray you in my behalfe represent vnto him, how distant my profession is, and how contrary my education hath beene, from writing of bookes. In euery art, the plainest that is, there is an apprentiship necessary, before it can be expected one should worke in it a fashionable piece. The first attemptes are alwayes very imperfect ayminges; and are scarce discernable what they are meaned for, vnlesse the master guide his schollers hand. Much more will the same happen in so difficult and spiny an affaire, as the writing vpon such a nice and copious subiect as this is, to one that is so wholy ignorant of the lawes of methode as I am.
This free and ingenuous acknowledgement on my side, will

I hope preuayle with all ingenuous persons, who shall reade what I haue written, to aduertise me fairely (if they iudge it worth their while) of what they dislike in it: to the end that in an other more accurate edition, I may giue them better satisfaction. For besides what faylinges may be in the matter, I can not doubt but that euen in the expressions of it, there must often be great obscurity and shortenesse; which I, who haue my thoughts filled with the thinges themselues, am not aware of. So that, what per aduenture may seeme very full to me, because euery imperfect touch bringeth into my minde the entire notion and whole chaine of circumstances belonging to that thing I haue so often beaten vpon; may appeare very crude and maymed to a stranger, that can not guesse what I would be att, otherwise then as my direct wordes do leade him.
One thing more I shall wish you to desire of them who happily may peruse these two Treatises; aswell for their owne sakes, as for mine. And that is, that they will not passe their censure vpon any particular piece, or broken parcell of eyther of them, taken by it selfe. Lett them draw the entire thridde through their fingers, and lett them examine the consequentnesse of the whole body of the doctrine I deliuer; and lett them compare it by a like suruey with what is ordinarily taught in the schooles: and if they find in theirs, many brackes and short endes which can not be spunne into an euen piece, and in mine, a faire coherence throughout; I shall promise my selfe a fauourable doome from them, and that they will haue an acquiescence in themselues to what I haue here presented them with: whereas, if they but rauell it ouer loosely, and pitch vpon disputing against particular conclusions, that att the first encounter of them single, may seeme harsh vnto them, (which is the ordinary course of flashy wits, who can not fadome the whole extent of a large discourse) it is impossible but that they should be very much vnsatisfyed of me; and goe away with a persuasion, that some such truthes as vpon the whole matter are most euident (one stone in the arch supporting an other, and the whole) are meere chymeras and wilde paradoxes.

But (Sonne) it is time my booke should speake it selfe, rather then I speake any longer of it here. Reade it carefully ouer, and lett me see by the effects of your gouerning your selfe, that you make such right vse of it, as I may be comforted in hauing chosen you to bequeath it vnto. God in heauen blesse you. Paris the last of August 1644.




