




THis Piece (being ſent me out of
France, as a double rarity, both in
reſpect of the ſubject and the quality
of the Author) I had no ſooner
read, then (taken with its ingenuity) I was
moved to cloathe it in an Engliſh habit, partly
out of envy, that other Nations ſhould glory
to have out-knowne us in any Art, eſpecially
ingenious, as is this of Deviſes, which being
the proper badges of Gentlemen, Commanders,
and perſons of Honour, may juſtly

challenge their countenance and favour,
whereunto tis ſacred.
My Author affirmes himſelfe to be the firſt
hath written of this ſubject in his Mothertongue;
and I might ſay the like here, were it
not that I find a ſmall parcell of it in Camdens
Remaines, under the title of Impreſes,
which are in effect the ſame with Deviſes.
Thence, you may gather, that the Kings of
England, with the Nobility and Gentry, have
for ſome hundreds of yeeres (though Deviſes
are yet of far greater Antiquity) both eſteemed
and made uſe of them: onely in former times
they arrived not (as now) to that height of
perfection; for they ſometimes did (as the
unskilfull ſtill doe) make uſe of Mottoes without
figures, and figures without Mottoes. We
read that Hen. the 3. (as liking well of Remuneration)
commanded to be written (by way
of Deviſe) in his Chamber at Woodſtock,
Qui non dat quod amat, non accipit ille quod optat.
Edw. the 3. bore for his Deviſe the rayes of the
Sunne ſtreaming from a cloud without any
Motto. Edmond of Langley, Duke of York, bore

a Faulcon in a Fetter-lock, implying, that he
was locked up from all hope and poſsibility
of the Kingdome. Hen. the 5. carryed a burning
Creſſet, ſometimes a Beacon, and for Motto
(but not appropriate thereunto) UNE SANS
PLUS, one and no more. Edw the 4. bore the Sun,
after the Battell of Mortimers-Croſſe, where
three Sunnes were ſeene immediately conjoyning
in one. Hen. the 7. in reſpect of the union
of the two Houſes of York and Lancaſter,
by his marriage, uſed the White Roſe united
with the Red, ſometimes placed in the Sunne.
But in the raigne of Hen. the 8. Deviſes grew
more familiar, and ſomewhat more perfect,
by adding Mottoes unto them, in imitation of
the Italians and French (amongſt whom there
is hardly a private Gentleman, but hath his particular
Deviſe) For Hen. the 8. at the interview
betweene him and King Francis the
firſt, whereat Charles the fift was alſo preſent,
uſed for his Deviſe an Engliſh Archer in a
greene Coat drawing his Arrow to the head,
with this Motto, CUI ADHaeREO, PRaeEST;
when as at that time thoſe mighty Princes
banding one againſt another, wrought him for
their owne particular.


To the honour of Queene Iane, (who dyed
willingly to ſave her child King Edward) a
Phenix Was repreſented in his Funerall fire
with this Motto, NASCATUR UT ALTER.
Queene Mary bore winged Time, drawing
Truth out of a pit, with VERITAS TEMPORIS
FILIA. Queene Elizabeth upon ſeverall occaſions
uſed many Heroicall Deviſes, ſometimes
a Sive without a Motto, (as Camden relates) and
at other times theſe words without figure, VIDEO,
TACEO, and SEMPER EADEM. King
Iames uſed a Thiſtle and a Roſe united, and a
Crown over them, with this Motto, HENRICUS
ROSAS, REGNA JACOBUS. Pr. Henry (beſides
that Deviſe which is appropriate to the Princes
of Wales) made uſe of this Motto, without figure,
FAS EST ALIORUM QUaeRERE REGNA.
And His Majeſtie that now is, that other of
CHRISTO AUSPICE REGNO. Our Prince
beares (as all the Princes of Wales have done
ſince the black Prince) for his Deviſe (which
we commonly, though corruptly call the Princes
Armes) a Coronet beautified with three
Oſtrich feathers, and for Motto,A learned Brittan is of opinion that it ſhould be Eich dyn, i.e. your man, in the Brittiſh tongue. ICH DIEN,
i.e. I ſerve, in the Saxon tongue, alluding to

that of the Apoſtle, The heire while he is a childe,
differeth nothing from a ſervant.

The late Earle of Eſſex, when he was caſt
downe with ſorrow, and yet to be employed
in Armes, bore a ſable Shield without any figure,
but inſcribed, PAR NULLA FIGURA
DOLORI. Sir Philip Sidney (to trouble you with
no more) denoting that he perſiſted alwayes
one, depainted out the Caſpian Sea, ſurrounded
with its ſhoares, which neither ebbeth nor
floweth, and for Motto, SINE REFLUXU.
Some may object, that in regard Tiltings,
Tournaments, and Maſques, (where Deviſes
were much in requeſt) are for the preſent laid
aſide, therefore Deviſes are of leſſe uſe.
Whereto I anſwer, that as thoſe Juſting or
jeſting Wars are diſuſed, ſo have vve now an
earneſt, though much to be lamented Warre,
vvhich renders them more uſefull then ever, I
meane for Cornets and Enſignes; And of
theſe, let me alſo give you ſome examples out
of the preſent times. On the Kings party, one
beares for his Cornet-Deviſe Saint Michael killing
the Dragon for the figure, and for Motto,
QUIS UT DEUS? Another is ſo bold as to

beare the picture of a King Crowned and Armed,
vvith his Sword drawne, and this Motto,
MELIUS EST MORI IN BELLO, QUAM VIDERE
MALA GENTIS NOSTRAE. A third bears
onely a Dye, vvith UTCUNQUE QUADRATUS.
A fourth figures the beaſt called anThe Naturaliſts ſay that this beaſt will rather chooſe to dye, then defile her ſu
•
e.
Ermyne,
vvith this Motto, MALLEM MORI QUAM FoeDARI.
A fift repreſents five hands ſnatching at
a Crown, defended by an armed hand and
ſword from a Cloud, with this Motto, REDDITE
CaeSARI. A ſixt figures a Landskip of a
pleaſant Country, vvith houſes, corne, &c.
invaded by beggerly people, and for Motto,
BARBARUS HAS SEGETES? &c.
On the Parliaments party vve find one bearing
in his Cornet, the Sun breaking through a
Cloud, with EXURGAT ET DISSIPABUNTUR.
Another repreſents a Deaths-head, and a Lawrell-Crown,
vvith MORS VEL VICTORIA.
A third figures an armed man, preſenting a
ſword to a Biſhops breaſt, with VISNE EPISCOPARE?
the Biſhop anſwering, NOLO,
NOLO, NOLO. A fourth ſayes onely (without
any figure) TANDEM BONA CAUSA TRIUMPHAT.
A fift repreſents the Sunne, diſsipating a cloudy

ſtorme, with POST NUBILA PHOEBUS.
A ſixt, figures an armed man, hewing off the
corners of an Univerſity Cap with his ſword,
and this Motto, MUTO QUADRATA ROTUNDIS,
&C.
Now though theſe Deviſes for the moſt part
argue wit in the Compoſers, yet many of them
are either imperfect or defective, which may
be attributed to the want of the preſcribed
rules of this Art, which this Treatiſe doth afford
you, together with a Synopſis or ſhort view
of Hieroglyphicks, Emblemes, Reverſes of Medalls,
and all other inventions of vvit, vvhich any
vvayes relate thereunto. I might alſo ſhew you
here how many ſeveral waies Deviſes