




WHen I observe the severall alterations in Nobilitie,
I find foure principall actours on the
theatres of great Families; the Beginner,
Advancer, Continuer, and Ruiner. The
Beginner is he who by his vertues refineth
himself from the drosse of the vulgar, and layeth the foundation
of his house: An excellent workman indeed, as who
not onely bringeth his tools, but maketh his materials. The
Advancer, who improveth the patrimonie of Honour he
receiveth; and what his Father found glasse and made
crystall, he findeth crystall and maketh it pearl. The Continuer,
who keepeth his Nobility alive, and passeth it along
neither marring nor mending it; but sendeth it to his Son
as he received it from his Father. The Ruiner, who basely
degenerateth from his Ancestours; so that in him Nobilitie
hath runne so farre from its first starting, that it is tired:
and whilest he liveth he is no better then his Grandfathers
tombe; without, carved over with honourable titles; within,
full of emptinesse, or what is worse, corruption.
Now to apply. You cannot be Beginners of your Families;
that care was cared for before your nurses were

chosen, or your cradles provided. Your Fathers, though
of late years fixed in a higher Sphear, were bright Starres
long before. None can go on in our English Chronicles,
but they must meet with a Montagn and a Powlet, either
in peace in their gowns, or in warre in their armour.
Yea, when I go backward by the streams of your Paternall
Nobilitie, (not to speak of the tributarie brooks of
their matches) I can never find the first fountain; and hope
none shall ever find the last fall. For as for the ruiners of
houses, I should rend that thought out with my heart, if it
should conceive that of you. Nay, let me tell you; if you be
but bare continuers of your Honour, you deceive both the
desires and hopes of your friends. Good is not good when
proceeding from them from whom farre better is expected.
Your youthfull vertues are so promising, that you cannot
come off in your riper age with credit without performing
what may redound to the advancing of the honour of your
family, and without building your houses one storie higher
in the English Historie.
Now know, next Religion, there is nothing accomplisheth
a man more then Learning. Learning in a Lord is as a
diamond in gold. And if you fear to hurt your tender hands
with thornie School-questions, there is no danger in
meddling with History, which is a velvet-study, & recreation-work.
VVhat a pitie is it to see a proper Gentleman to
have such a crick in his neck that he cannot look backward!
yet no better is he who cannot see behind him the actions
which long since were performed. History maketh a yong
man to be old, without either wrinkles or gray hairs; priviledging
him with the experience of age, without either the

infirmities or inconveniences thereof. Yea, it not onely
maketh things past, present; but inableth one to make a rationall
conjecture of things to come. For this world affordeth
no new accidents, but in the same sense wherein we
call it a new Moon, which is the old one in another shape,
and yet no other then what had been formerly. Old actions
return again, furbished over with some new and different
circumstances.
Now amongst all particular histories (I may say) none
is more generall then this of the Holy warre, which now I
present to your Honours. Some will condemn me for an ill
husband, in lavishing two Noble Patrones in one book,
whereas one of them might have served to have patronized
many volumes. But first, I did it in the weak expression
of my thankfulness unto you, being deeply indebted to
you both; and I thought it dishonestie to pay all to one
creditour and none to another: and therefore conceived it
best, to share my estate joyntly betwixt you, as farre forth
as it would extend. Secondly, considering the weaknesse
of this VVork, now being to walk abroad in the world, I
thought it must be led by both arms, and needed a double
supporter. And now I am sure this Holy warre, which
was unhappie heretofore, when acted; will be happie
hereafter, now written and related, because dedicated to
your Honours. So resteth

Broad-windsor,
March 6. 1639.



