



SIR,


THat I should present You, who have
so honourably deserved of Antiquity,
and of Your Country, and, if
I may add mine own obligations, in
particular of me, with so small a
retribution, as a Romane foot, &
Denarius, may seem more proportionable to mine abilities,
then to the eminency of Your place, and
worth. But You who, to the honour of Your profession,
have joined the wisdome of the Ancients, and
justly have merited this elogy,
—Anglorum gloria gentis
Seldenus,
An elogy long since given You by a man, who is
deservedly esteemed 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
, the learned
Hugo Grotius, You are best able to judge of
what importance these two are, in the discovery of
the weights, and measures, used by the Ancients.
And first, for measures, the 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
, or cubit of
the Sanctuary, in the Scriptures, Josephus, and the
Rabbines: the 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 and 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 in
Herodotus (the former equall to that of Samos:
the later mis-rendred by Pliny, & Solinus, Pes Babylonius):
The 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 in Herodotus,
containing XXX.

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
, in Strabo, sometimes LX.

sometimes XL. and sometimes XXX. (but in Hesychius

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
, and in
Abulfeda three miles: with whom, and with
the Persians to this day it is called the 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

farsach):


〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

 the 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
in Herodotus, Artemidorus,
and Strabo: the 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

in Hero: the pes Ptolemaicus, and Drusianus,
in Hyginus: besides infinite others depending
upon the proportions of some of these: I say,
these cannot after the destruction of those ancient
Monarchies, and Republicks, any other way bee
restored, then from such monuments, as, by divine
providence, have escaped the hands of ruine, and
continued to these later ages. For were it not that
the pes Romanus,
The farsach, with the Ancients, and Modern,
contains three miles. or Mon
•
talis, as Hyginus terms
it, were still extant in Rome, on the monuments of
Cossutius, and of Tit. Statilius Vol. Aper (for those
two columnes, the one with the inscription 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
.
mentioned by Marlianus,
Abulf. Geogr. MS▪
 and Philander: the other
with 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
. seen by the same Philander, are both
lost) we might utterly despair of knowing the measures
of the Hebrews, Babylonians, Persians, Aegyptians,
Grecians, Romanes, and of all others, described
in Classicall Authors: who could not transmit
to posterity the individuall measures themselves,
but onely the proportions they respectively
had to one another: which proportions being pure
habitudes, cannot, as Mathematicians observe, bee
reduced to the measures of these times, unlesse,
either some of the 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 themselves were existent:
or else exact copies taken from the Originals
were derived to us.
In like manner it is for weights, the 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
, the


〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
, the 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
, or 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 of the Hebrews, or 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

of the Chaldeans, which Aruck renders by foure

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

Zuzim, that is, four denarii (from whence,
tho Persian

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 in Xenophon, and Hesychius,
may have received its denomination): the 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
; containing seven thousand Attick
drachmes, the 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 ten thousand, the

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 a thousand five hundred, the 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

six thousand, all mentioned by Julius
Pollux; the Talentum Aegyptium in Varro,
containing eighty pondo, or pounds; the talentū
Euboicum in Festus, four thousand denarii: these,
with infinite others, both mensurae, and pondera,
whither considered as Medica, or Georgica, or
Veterinaria, cannot in our times be restored, but
onely by such weights of the Antients as are still extant;
that is, either by the denarius of the Romanes,
or 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 of the Grecians, or by the congius of Vespasian,
or by the librae, and unciae Romanae, and the
like, that have been preserved by Antiquaries.
Seeing therefore the denarius is of as great moment
for the discovery of weights, as the Romane
foot for the knowledge of measures, I have taken
these two, as two irrefragable principles, from
whence the rest used by the Ancients may be deduced.
And because the denarius may be considered
in a double respect, either as nummus, or as pondus:
the first acception conducing to the valuation
of coins, the second to the certainty of weights: it
was therefore necessary that both the weight, and
valuation of the denarius, should be exactly known.
To which purpose, in Italy I examined with a balance
(the scale of which the eightieth part of a grain
would sensibly turn) many hundred fair denarii,

both Consulares, and Caesarei, as also quinarii, or
victoriati in silver: severall aurei of the former, and
later Emperours: besides the originall standard of
the congius, placed by Vespasian in the Capitol:
and many unciae, and librae, in brasse. From whence
I collected the weight of the denarius Consularis,
and Caesareus: that to be the seventh part of the Romane
ounce, as Celsus, Scribonius Largus, and Pliny
rightly describe: and this to be sometimes the eighth
part, and sometimes the seventh, but most frequently
in a midle proportion betwixt eight, and seven,
till Severus', and Gordianus' times: under whom,
and the succeeding Emperours, it recovered the
weight of the denarius Consularis; but lost much
of its finenesse, by the mixture of allay.
With these denarii, for the greater certainty, I
compared such Grecian coins (especially Athenian)
as I had either seen in choice cabinets, or bought of
mine own; and those were the 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
, or 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

absolutely taken, which, as Julius Pollux, and Hesychius,
out of Polemarchus testifie, weighed two
drachmes: the 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
, or 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
, or 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
,
four drachmes: the 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
, the 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
,
or as Pollux names them, the 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
,
with severall others.
By which comparison I first discovered, that howsoever
the Romanes, as Pliny, and A. Gellius expresly;
Valerius, and Suetonius, by way of consequence,
equall the denarius to the drachma: and
though the Greeks, as Strabo, Cleopatra, Plutarch,
Galen▪ Dio, and many more, equall the drachma
to the denarius, speaking in a popular estimation,
and as they vulgarly passed in way of commerce; yet
if we shall put on the resolution of him in the Comedy,


Oculatae nostrae sunt manus, credunt quod vident:
we may evidently discern in the scale, the drachma
Attica to be heavier then the denarius. And therefore
all such writers of the Ancients, as equall
them, if we speak strictly of weight, and not of estimation,
have been deceived: and consequently, all
modern writers, following their traditions, in discourses
de ponderibus, & de re nummariâ, have
erred.
But because it is not probable, that the Ancients,
both Greeks, and Romanes, should be deceived in
their own coins, and in their own times: it occasioned
me by observing the practise abroad of the 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

in exchanges, with whom the same specificall
coins, in different States, passe with different estimations,
to think of some means how I might reconcile
the traditions of the Greeks, and Romanes, concerning
the weight, and valuation of the drachma Attica,
and denarius; notwithstanding the difference
in the balance, of such as are now found at Athens,
and at Rome.

And this drew from me that discourse, which I
have inserted at the end of this booke, Of some directions
to be observed in comparing the valuations
of coins: which may serve, not onely to
reconcile the Greek, and Romane writers, but
especially, the traditions of Philo, Josephus, Epiphanius,
Saint Hierome, and Hesychius: who make
the Hebrew 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 shekel, equall to the Attick tetradrachme:
whereas in the scale, which is the best
judge of this controversie, I finde them manifestly
unequall: the Hebrew, or Samaritane shekel, being
much lesse then the Attick tetradrachme.


But it may be questioned, why after the labours of
Portius, Budaeus, Alciatus, Agricola, Montanus,
Mariana, Budelius, Alcasar, Villalpandus, Jo:
Scaliger, Capellus, Snellius, and of many other
eminent men, who have writ, either deditâ operâ,
or 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
, de ponderibus, & mensuris, I should
undertake any thing of this nature. My answer is,
that observing in them so great a variety, and contradiction
of opinions, I was willing to use mine
own judgement, how mean soever, in giving my
self private satisfaction. And though I intended
this work, as a 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 to other imployments; yet
having, by the advantage of travailing in forain
parts, 
•
erused in Jtaly, Greece, and Aegypt, more
Antiquities, then I think any of them above named
single, I thought it would not be unacceptable,
if I did, as it is the manner of Travellers, publish
at home, such observations, and discoveries, as I
made abroad. The which I humbly dedicate to You,
as out of a desire to expresse my gratitude for many
noble favours: so out of an assurance, that if they
receive Your approbation, I need not to fear the
censure of others.



