




Right Reverend,


THough many faithfull servants of God did long agoe desire to see those things which we see, and to heare those things which we heare; Yet it hath been one of the speciall mercies reserved for this Generation, and denied to the times of our Ancestors, that Divines of both Kingdomes within this Island, should be gathered and continued together, to consult peaceably and freely concerning a Reformation of Religion

in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government. 'Tis a mercy yet greater, that two Nations formerly at so great a distance in the form of publike Worship and Churchgovernment, should (to their mutuall comfort and happines, and to the further endearing of each to other) through the good hand of God be now agreed upon one Directory of Worship, and with a good progresse advanced, as in one Confession of Faith, so likewise in one forme of Church-government. For all which, as the other Reformed Churches, (in regard of their common interest in the Truth and Ordinances of Christ) so especially your Brethren in the Church of Scotland are your debters: Your name is as precious Oynment among them, and they doe esteeme you very highly in love for your workes sake. A worke, which as it is extraordinary and unparalleld, requiring a double portion of the Spirit of your Master, so You have very many Hearts and Prayers going along with you in it, that the pleasure of the Lord may prosper in your hand.
As for my Reverend Colleagues and my selfe, it hath been a good part of our happinesse

that we have been partakers of, and Assistants in your grave and learned Debates. Yet (as we declared from our first comming amongst you,) we came not hither presuming to prescribe any thing unto You, but willing to receive as well as to offer light, and to debate matters freely and fairely from the Word of God, the common Rule both to you and us. As herein You were pleased to give testimony unto us in one of your Letters to the Generall Assembly of the Church of Scotland, so the great respects which in other things and at other times you have expressed, both towards that Church from which we are entrusted, and particularly towards our selves, doe call for a returne of all possible and publique testimonies of gratitude. For which purpose, I doe for my part take hold of this opportunity. I know that I owe much more unto You, then I have either ability to pay, or Elocution to set forth. Yet although I cannot retaliate your Favours, nor render that which may be worthy of your selves; I beseech you to accept this part of my retribution of respects. I doe offer and entitle unto You this Enucleation of the Erastian

Controversie, which is Dignus vindice nodus. I hope here is a word in season concerning it. Others might have done better, but such furniture as I had, I have brought to the worke of the Tabernacle. I submit what is mine unto your greater learning and better judgement, and shall ever continue

Yours to serve you,

GEO. GILLESPIE.
