





SIR!


IOW you much respect as an ancient
Imanuël-Colledg man, where
(by the good hand of God upon
mee) I had both my first Universitie
beeing, and wel-beeing; and like-wise,
as an old Disciple, a great friend
to the most reverend and learned Mr Perkins; yea, and
as an Instrument of advancing Justice in the Commonwealth,
of encouraging Religion in the Church, and
Learning in the Universitie (according to your
sphere) as also my attentive and candid hearer for som
years formerly in Cambridg: And I know not
how better (for the present) to make any reciprocal
return, then by tendering this Sermon (such as it
is) to your acceptance; and hopeing that by you it

may with the more advantage bee transmitted to
others in Cambridg, who are prepared to receive the
love of the truth,
2 Thes. 2. 1
•
. though delivered by mee; as also
for your Soul-improvement, by raising your thoughts
in your declining years to minde Eternitie.

It was the greatest part of it preached by mee at
Trinitie-Church in Cambridg, Febr. 13. 1647. and I can
truly say, it was both framed at first upon a sick bed,
(when such thoughts are very seasonable) and
preached when I was under sad symptoms of wel-nigh
six months Quartane Ague. So desirous was I to promote
the intended Combination for morning Sermons
there, which depended upon mee for the
begining of it, that with apparent hazzard to my
own health, (being not onely weakened by my
desease, but having, upon an occasion of a Communion,
preached three times within a few dayes before
in Trinitie-Colledg Chappel) I adventured upon the
work out of an honest intention, though I had neither
consent of Friends or Physicians. Admit I were
not able to carrie on or finish my discourse, as I
desired, should I not rather have been pitied then
bespattered, then grosly disparaged by son, and the
present prevailing of my disease most shamefully
mis-interpreted by others, as if this were a Judgment
of God upon mee, for defending the Universitie against

the Town; wherein they shew as little Christianitie
as Wisedom.

As for them, I earnestly desire they would seriously
consider what our Savior saith,Mat. 12. 36.
Every idle
word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof
in the day of Judgment.
Note. And if of every idle word,
then undoubtedly of every uncharitable, censorious,
lying, and blasphemous word. And likewise often remember
that of the Prophet Zacharie,
Zach. 1. 15.
I am very
sore displeased with the Heathen that are at ease: for I
was but a little displeased, and they helped forward the
affliction. When God whippe's his children, it is
most unbecoming brethren to add to their stripes.
Hee is no ingenuous servant that triumph's over his
fellow (unless hee bee guilty of som offence)
when hee is brought low before his Master.

And as for mee, I am not ashamed to bee made
comformable to my head Jesus Christ, who was accounted
Beelzebub, the prince of devils;
Mat. 12. 24. and to bee reproached
as one that was mad, which was the portion
of the most wise and holy Apostle Paul. Neither
shall I deny that this was an humbling Providence,
that such an indisposition should surprize mee
then,Act. 26. 24. (though it might well bee so after a longer
and stronger intention of spirits in prayer then my
condition would bear) to let splenatick fumes

more prevailingly surprize mee in preaching at
that time, then in any other imployment since my
ague began; wherein I desire to sanctifie God's
Name, by abasing my self, and exalting Him without
whom wee can do nothing. I wish all may make
a right interpretation of his actions which are infinitely
wise, and consider that Ministers, being publick
persons, as they have consolations that they may comfort
others,
2 Cor. 1. 3, 4. so have they many times afflictions for
the edification and salvation of others:
2 Tim. 2. 10.
Paul is an instance
of both. And they must make account they
may possibly inherit the same Apostle's portion;
one while possibly to bee adored, and almost sacrificed
unto, Act. 14, 11, 12, 13. and yet soon after to bee
stoned, vers. 19.
I were very stupid, did I not observe the various
aspect of divers in Cambridg-Town towards mee in
som by-past years, wherein I have, and I hope
still shall unchangeably endeavor to approve my self a
true friend to their best good (in defiance to all unkindeness)
and a faithful servant to their souls.
Psal. 24. 6. Yet,
by the good hand of God upon mee, there have been
withal a generation of Seekers which have cleaved
unto, and with som fruitful acceptance, attended upon
my Ministerie. I would not value personal respects,
in comparison of that acceptance which

hath reference unto the glory of Christ in Gospel-success.
I remember, not without thankfulness to my
good God, with what welcom entertainment many
entertained my weak and plain preaching here
in former years,An. Dem. 1628. 1629. when I was your preacher at Andrew's.
I hope I shall never forget how much of
God's goodness I found amongst you both in his
assistance and your acceptance in the great plague;1630.
(hee can make by his presence a Wilderness prove a Paradise)
neither must I pass by with what readiness of
minde you attended upon my occasional ministerie
in 1643, when Providence cast mee for som time
amongst you, the sons of violence having forced mee
from the place I then had in North-Hampton-shire.Tychmersh.

But whence is this Eclipse? whence this black
cloud? (God and som mens conscience know)
which I doubt not but it will soon vanish, as Athanasius
said of Arrius.
Nubecula cit
•
 transitura. Shall I trust God for my
soul, and not for my reputation, for a crown, and not
for a crust?

It was indeed my portion to bee involved in those
unhappy differences between the Universitie and Town
of Cambridg, about their Priviledges, when I had the
honor to serve them as Vice-Chancellor. Is that a sufficient
ground of such an unkinde alteration, that they

calumniate and traduce the Innocent thereupon?
Alas! poor Universitie, how hast thou offended the
Town of Cambridg which live's so much upon thee?
(as by woful complaints appear's when a great
plague scatter's the scholars) that as of old it was
in Tertullian's time, a crime to bee a Christian: so it's
now little less (amongst som for want of Christian
charity) to bee an engaged Universitie-man, and
to stand for that, though hee bee obliged thereunto
by the Rules of Ingenuitie and Conscience.

I do heartily wish, where our priviledges are not
subservient to the publick good, they were regulated and
bounded by those who have power as our competent
Judges; but neither Universitie nor Town must bee
Judges in their own case. Wee cannot give them
away, they must not take them away, till the Parliament
(to whom wee have appealed) do determine
the controversie. In the mean while, till they can have
leisure to minde it, why should it bee offensive for
us to act soberly, according to that which the Universitie
hath been so long invested with, by the donation
of Princes, confirmation of Parliaments, or by a voluntary
composition betwixt both Corporations.

Certainly, this is no sufficient ground for such
passionate unchristian invectives, whereby they fret
themselves to do evil,
Psal. 37. 8. gratifie him who is the Accuser of

the Brethren,
Rev. 12. 10. and the father of lyes. Were it my portion
onely to bee thus injured,John 8. 44. I should suspect my
self; but my reverend Brethren, who deserve much
better then I can, fare as ill from som, when one of
them lately was forced by a violet fit of an ague, being
preaching at the Universitie-Church, to break
off not long after hee began; it would make one
tremble to hear what language was spoken thereupon aaginst
him, for the holy hand of God upon him, which
might have befallen an Apostle; and against others of us
engaged as Masters of Colledges with him.
O that I knew what language to speak, to win
them to terms of amitie with the Universitie:
Surely the Devil get's much advantage by these differences;
they are most unhappy Instruments who
ever do enflame them, whether Universitie or Townsmen.
Is God's Word the worse because delivered by men they now dislike?
Is not this sad, that men, whose ministerie
they have valued, that they can scarce bring off
your spirits to hear them preach. This is the devil's
plot, in fomenting those prejudices to hinder the
good of their souls, and the spreading of the Gospel.
Herein mistake mee not, I do not complain for
want of Auditors. Yet it grieve's mee to see som of
more eminent abilities, whose gifts were formerly
highly valued, now to bee sleighted, because engaged in
Universitie-employment, as Masters of Colledges.



Yet, what ever som think of mee, and how unkindely
soever they have dealt with mee, I will apply
my self to you (whose Christian candor, and
Gospel-ingenuitie, I have had som years experience
of) not without respect to their good, who wish mee
none. I doubt not but you will bear my wonted
plainness I can give you no more real testimonie of
my cordial love unto you, then by suggesting som
few things, which, by God's blessing, may advance
the good of your souls.

 I will begin with your dutie towards God,
Directions. who is
our Alpha, and Omega; our first cause, and last end:
as all the good wee receive is derived from him,Rev. 1. 8. so
all the good wee receive must bee resolved unto
him.Prov. 3. 5, 6.
Trust in the Lord with all your hearts, and lean not
to your understanding: In all your waies acknowledg him,
and hee will direct your paths.


 Acquaint your selvs more and more with worshipping
him purely, according to his will. I doubt Cambridg
hath been too patient (I mean the Saints
there) of sinful mixtures, not mindeing sufficiently
the simplicitie that is in Christ.2 Cor. 11. 3. If you would have
much of the presence of Christ, love purity, hee
walketh in the middest of the golden candlesticks;
Revel. 2. 2. expect
much of the presence of his Spirit, where there are
pure golden Ordinances.



Let the Ministerie of the Gospel bee more precious unto
you,

receive the love of the truth, and attend upon
preaching without respect of persons. Do not yee
blush to remember, that when the truly Noble
Earle of Manchester had picked a choice combination of
most able Ministers out of the Country, that they
should ride a dozen or twentie miles to preach a Sermon
to you, and somtimes so few hearers that
they were discouraged to preach? What ever you
say or think of Scholars, did not they help to fill up
Assemblies, there would bee thin Auditories at week
dayes Lectures. Remember (I pray) our Savior's
words, Hee that heareth you,
Luke 10, 16.
heareth mee, and hee that
despiseth you, despiseth mee, and hee that despiseth mee, despiseth
him that sent mee.


Maintain Christian Communion, whereby you may 
joyn your gifts, experiences and prayers. O the amiable
beauty of the spirits of primitive saints, who
did so sweetly close,Act. 2▪4
•

▪
 as, They continued stedfastly in the
Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and in breaking of bread,
and prayers.

I can remember, when, in the most corrupt and
dangerous times, som of you would adventure even
your all, (so destructive was then the high Commission
Court) to enjoy a praying-day together;

what hath now deaded your spirits, that now these
things are so much neglected?

Is there not as much need as ever? Doth not the
Churches exigents bespeak your wrestling importunities at
the throne of grace.
Chide your selves, and one another out of this dulness,
or disjointing, and labor to remove the obstructions
what ever they are. Often remember their practice,
when one Apostle was in prison (wee have
many in persecution) instant prayer was made for him
by the Church,Act. 12. 5. they prayed earnestly, and sped
succesfully.

 Yet, in your Christian communion, act soberly, and
with a godly prudence. There are that admit young
Scholars into fellowship with them in private duties,
or rather into publick: I dislike it not, that any
Saints joyn to provoke one another to love and good works.
Rom. 12. 3.
But do not encourage them to do any thing beyond
the proportion of their gifts, and without a call
from God. Far bee it from mee to snib the movings
of God's Spirit in the weakest and meanest of his
Saints. I desire to live no longer then I cherish the
least good in any, if indeed it bee good duly circumstantiated.
I know the direction Peter give's,1 Pet. 4. 9, 11.
Use hospitalitie

one to another without grudging. As every man hath
received the gift, even so minister the same one to another,
as good stewards of the manifold grace of God, (which is
a place they alledg for that purpose.) But,
1. It may bee this grace here mentioned, is chiefly
the grace of Bountie.

2. If it bee meant of spiritual gifts and graces, and
their exercise in prophesying, I grant, in Ecclesiâ constituendâ, in a Church to bee constituted, occasionally,
especially when upon triall by competent Judges of
their abilities for the ministerie, (with learned Dr
Ames)
somthing may bee don that way,Cas. Consc. lib. 4. cap 25. de Voc. ad Minister.
sine singulari vocatione,
without a singular call. But that the admiration
of som few ignorant (though honest) women, who
judg much by quick expressions; (which are often
beyond the experience and judgment of the speaker
himself, being borrowed rather from others)
or that one young scholar applauding of another, should
bee the call of Christ, I am not yet satisfied; but
shall welcom any light that shall clear up any truth
of Christ, though never so much against my present
opinion. I do not lay the strength of a Minister's
call upon a Prelate's blessing of him; nor upon
a concurrence of all external circumstances and formalitie;
Note▪

(though I heartily love and desire order in the
Churches) neither must any judg of their call by

their assistance. Many dear Saints call that a spiritual
desertion of God in prayer, which is rather som darkness by
the clouding of Melancholie. Other Novices account that
assistance from God in preaching oftentimes, which is rather
heat of phansie, som warmth by applause, mixed indeed
with som stirring affections.


 Bee whetstones to sharpen one another to raise som
monument of your thanksgiving and thanksdoing, for
God's distinguishing goodness to Cambridg. When
other parts of the Kingdom were steeped in blood, you
were drie; when destroying Angels swept away
many in other places, you were but scratched. O
never let it bee forgotten how God snatched Cambridge
out of the fire, in staying the plague these two
last years; should not you now provoke your Magistrates
more to minde the sanctifying the Lord's day, to
restrain by their power those profane pollutions which
cry for another more sweeping plague? Because they
may not do all, but the Universitie must share in
power, therefore will they do nothing? This, I
doubt will bee no satisfying answer, when the Lord
shall say to a Magistrate, Give an account of thy
stewardship.
Luke 16. 2.

I could likewise wish there were a greater harmonie
of Judgments amongst you; however let not difference
of opinions breed difference of affections.

Love the meanest Saints more for that of God you see in
them, then you neglect them for what they differ from you
that is not sinful. Convers meekly together, (distance
encreaseth difference) you may possibly satisfie
one another. As long as wee nourish prejudices,
and take it for granted, there is no possibilitie of reconciliation,
the devil blow's the coal more, and exasperate's
the flame, till (it may bee) men bite and devour
one anothers names and reputations; at least, do not
suddenly excommunicate all you account carnal;
Gal. 5. 1
•
. for Reprobates,
though you cannot embrace them with
a love of Complacencie, yet must you with a love of Pitie;
there is not onely Brotherly kindness,
2 Pet. 1. 7. but Charitie:
so will you commend Religion to them who
judg more of it by what they see, then by what
they heare.

Finally, as for my self, when they speak evil of mee,
Photii Epist. 10.
I
will satisfie my self with that of the ancient Writer, If
the things thou producest bee true, thou hast not hurt but advantaged
mee, whilest thou by reproving faults, may'st procure
reformation: if they bee fals, thou do'st more advantage
mee; for thou makest mee more watchful to abstain,
not onely from such actions, but even from such thoughts;
onely, the more vigilant others are over mee, pray
the more for mee,Isid. Hispal.
because of my observers. I must say
with the Father, I thank as wel God for the crueltie of my

Adversaries, as the love of Friends. It hath been my portion
to suffer much by tongues amongst you, since
my being Vice-Chancellor, and to receive more
unkinde and unjust censures from som of Cambridg,
then ever in all my life before; (my comfort
is they are but few, and men whose interest was
crossed, and therefore Self will bee angry, and revenge
often, though never so injuriously) yet nothing
shall it discourage mee from serving your and
their souls. Let them mis-interpret the hand of God
upon mee in my sickness, and the effects thereof;
yet when ever God please's to restore my bodily
health, by preaching to promote the health of their
souls: I will beg by prayer the best good from God
for them, who cannot speak a good word of mee before
men. I had enemies enough because I appeared
for Reformation, which I would not decline (if I
know my heart) out of love to my God, though I had
not been (as I am) under the bond of a solemn Covenant
obliging mee thereunto. When the competition
comes between God's will and man's, Peter hath
taught how to resolve, Act. 4. 19. yea, that heroical
Heathen Socrates,


〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

Vide Plat. Apol. Socrat.
 (which may make us blush) being
accused, said, If upon such conditions (they being
dishonorable) you Athenians will absolve mee, I embrance
you, I love you well, yet I will rather obey God then you.



None need (especially not such as I think fear
God) express more passion, because I would not,
contrary to my oath betray (which it may bee they
expected from mee, having been their preacher, with
more acceptance formerly then it is fit for mee to
mention) priviledges with which I was betrusted
as Vice-Chancellor, lifting up my hand to the most
high, that I would maintain the statutes (which include's
them) so far as they were agreeable to the Statutes and Ordinances
of the Kingdom which are or shall bee extant.
If the Parliament had altered them, or when they
shall please to bound them any way, the matter of
my oath being taken away, I am at libertie. In the
mean while, why may not the Vice-Chancellor act
for the Universitie, as well as Mr
Major for the
Town of Cambridg, in pursuance of his Oath? The
Mighty God of Peace, dry up the spring of these most
unhappy and unseasonable differences, when there are so
many dissensions abroad; which shall bee my
prayer and endeavor till the Lord please to accomplish
it.

If I must still suffer under the uncharitableness of any,
I shall desire to kiss the rod of my Heavenly Father,Mic. 6. 9.
who hath appointed it in this place where hee
hath been good unto mee; and earnestly labor, that
overcoming my self,
Rom, 12. 20, 
••

 I may overcom evil with good, and

not suffer my self to bee overcom of evil, that in so doing,
I may heap coals of fire upon their head, not
to destroy them by burning,Igniculi Charitatis. but coals of charitie
to melt them, and so mould them into an unfeigned
love of all the Brethren who love the Lord Jesus
Christ sincerely.

If this prevail not, I will make use of Paul's soveraign
cordial, Rejoycing in the Testimonie of my conscience,
that in simplicitie and godly sinceritie, and not in
fleshly wisedom, but by the grace of God I have had my
conversation in the world, and more abundantly to youwards.

Trin. Col. Camb.

June the 7th 1648.



