




E. Northumberl.

E. Pembrook.

E. Nottingham.

E. Denbigh.

E. Manchester,

L. Visc, Say & Seal,

L. North.

L. Mountague.

L. Roberts.

L. Howard.

S. Gilbert Gerard.

S. Iohn Dreydon.

S. Robert Harley.

S. Wil. Strickland.

S. Hen. Vane, jun.
S. Walt. Earle.

S. Wil. Massam.

S. Robert Pye.

S. Iohn Trevor.

S. Anth. Irby.

M. Sollicitor.

M. Rous.

M. Ashurst.

M. Reynolds.


Denis Bond.


Bolstred Whitlock

M. Guorden.

M. Maynard.

M. Lisle.

M. Salwey.

M. Wheeler.

M. Hoyle



All Fidelitie and happy Successe in your High and Honourable Trusts, and the discharge of your manifold Stewardships.


WHen I read over in my thoughts the pleasing story of Divine Providence, in guiding the Honourable Houses of Parliament, in committing to you the Managing of Westminster Affaires, both in reference to the Abby and Schoole, and observe the happy fruits of your care (by Gods good hand upon you therein) in both which I (though most unworthy) have been employed and entrusted by the favour of those who had power; I thinke it my duty to take the first opportunity publikely to acknowledge the mercy of God to many in your prudent Zeale for the good of those Places, and with all thankfulnesse your most respective

acceptance of my poore endeavours therein. O how many doe blesse God for the sweet change they finde in their Morning Exercises; now they have rather the meanes of a heart and life Religion amongst them. Not Pompous Altars only to humour the Eyes, and taking Musick to please their Eares. All such Let the Bishops take care quod in Divino servitionon tam onerosa prolixitas quam devota & integra brevitas servetur saith Petrus de Alliaco consid. 3. v. Fast. Rerum 206. p.
tedious

Ecclesia non assumit Musica instrumenta, sicut Cytharas & Psalteria, indivinasliudes ne vidiatur I
•
dizar
•
. Aq. secunda secundae. 9 21. Art. 2.
Chauntings with Musick and multiplied repetitions did little Edifie the mind of Hearers; had little saving influence upon their Hearts; which many will tell you to the Praise of God in these Morning Exercises they have found. Neither hath your industrious Love of Westminster Schoole been fruitlesse, which is an high point of Wisdom in seeking the regulating and furnishing Schooles with able Masters (which will never be done without more encouraging Salaries) Good Ministers, good Magistrates, and good Schoole-Masters, are like to make that place happy where they meet. And what Schoole calls for more vigilant superintendency than this of Westminster it being a most famous Nursery, subservient to Innes of Court where many Parliament men, Nobles and Gentry in their tender yeares, may be either seasoned with good, or desperately leavened with evill, and not only supplying other Colledges, but having a speciall subordinate reference to the two great Colledges of both Universities. (if they come there with a Canker at the Root, they are not easiely recovered. There is a sensible alteration
Trinity Coll. in Cambridge. Christs Church in Oxford. which two Col. ordinarily receive more schollers yearly from Westmin. ni fallor, than are sent from Eaton and Winchester. Pueri Ingenui. Pueri Ingeniosi. (blessed bee God) much more civility in the Schooles than formerly: (the care of Mr. Buzby in instructing the Schollers, he being both very able and industrious, deserves encouragement) yet nonnulla desiderantur. I will confidently expresse my thoughts, were the Moralls, and Spiritualls in Westminster-Schoole answerable to the Intellectualls, it would be inferiour (to say no more) to none in England. Any that knows it will acknowledge that there is a kind of hereditary raised genius, entayled upon them: and were the Schollars alwayes as ingenuous, at they are ingenious, wee should much more rejoyce in their transplanting to us.
Your Noble Candor will allow me a wonted

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 and encourage me to speak out, especially the Election being at hand Be pleased to accept of what plaine hints followe from him who desires faithfully Humble Desires tendred to the Honourable Committee for Westmin. school. to serve you in your advancing the Publike.
In your Elections its good to beware of Error in the first Concoction, I mean in your choyce of youths into Kings Schollers places; it is expected then, that in time they should be elected to one of the Colledges (for ordinarily the whole seventh Form, have been by desert or favour

removed; if so, you will send some Droans amongst us, which will hinder the Bees, or if they stay in the Schoole still, they will be there as Slugs and Pull-back examples to others; they being habituated in After 18. yeares of age by Statute they should be turned out of the Schooles.
infectious courses: And if you omit to elect them, they must (being superannuated) bee most disgracefully throwne off, unlesse you will please to raise Meanes to dispose of them in some other good callings; which were honourable indeed.

2. That there may be a Godly able Catechist to instruct them in the Principles of Religion, (such a one the Statutes of the Colledge allowed and appointed an honourable yearly stipend for him) frequently, And withall that they (though but circularly by 3, or 4 in a morning) may have leave to come to the Morning Sermon in the
Note.
Abbey. I know one of the Schollars of singular hopes now in the University, who hath punctually discovered unto me, how God was pleased powerfully to open his eyes, and to turne him from darknesse to light in one of those Morning Sermons.

3. I humbly conceive the Statutes of Westminster Coll. need reveiwing; there is such a forme of Grace (as it is vulgarly called) before and after Meat prescribed therein, as at the first sight you will conclude savoures very much of the darknesse of those Popish times wherein they were first penn'd.

4. If there were now and then an inspection, examination, and tryall of their Schollars progresse in Piety and Learning, with a visible encouragement of such as do well, it would be in stead of many Spurs, to such as are ingenious. Mr. Buzby hath often assured me, that any one comming in there, and putting them to versify, doth incredibly whet up, and raise their Phansies, which would be much more prevailing if Persons of Quality would honour them with their presence.


5. There is I feare some corner in the Schoole full of Leaven which spreals most unhappily: Your inquisition after, purgation of it, likewise Exod. 12. 7 Electors by Statute the Dean of Westminster and his Assistant: M. of Trin. Col. cam. & his Assistant; Dean of Christs church. Oxf. with his Assistant, and the School Master. the removing it utterly, (as the Iewes were wont to do all Leaven out of their honses, with burning and execration of it, would he of singular use. I take the boldnes to tender this to all the other Electers, and would charge it conscientiously upon my selfe. I doubt there is much of this Leaven lurks amongst youths in the seventh Forme, (let the most vigilant Master do what he can.

1. When they are advanced thither, they are all (I thinke) Monitors, wherein divers of them shew most Tyranni
•••


•
ride, making inferiours sell their Books sometimes to serve their Lusts, and humour

their prodigality, (whch they will not forget at the University) else they must expect to be in the Black Bill.


2. The aull slugs staie longest there, and they being radicated in Evill like rotten Apples upon an heape, too often make others putrid, remisse, negligent, learn to Sweare. Lye, &c.

3. There are others, being emproved in their Intellectuals, grow so full of Selfe-confidence, that they shamefully degenerate when they come to the University. Hence (Monacho tepido Abbati calido Episcopo tepido Archiepiscopo pergidis as once the Pope wrote to Baldwin) when at Westminster, Golden Schollers, afterwards when in the Vniversity, Leaden Sophisters, and most drossie Batchelors, unprofitable Burdens in the place suckirg the fatnesse of the soile &c.

4. Their long continuance at Schoole, especially of after elected to Cambridge or Oxford, makes them grow headstreng too often and 

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

 rebellious against the Master, and steele others aswell as themselves, with impudence, which we find after by sad experience.
In the lact place, unlesse there be much circumspection in the choice of their Tutors, especially in these times when they come to the Universityes, all your former care may be lost. It is a lamentable spectacle to see goodly ships miscarry in the Haven for want of an able and vigilant Pilot. Many very hopefull youths miserably undone for want of learned, godly, grave, and prudent Tutors, and such as are hearty friends to a through Reformation, which makes many tender hearted Parents bleed with perpetuall sorrow.
I hope the Lord, who hath already done much by you, will make you yet more renowned Instruments of his service, as in many other things, so in your encouraging and promoting Piety and Learning in Westminster; If he please to honour you to purge Schooles and Vniversities, you may with more encouragement raise Feoffces to buy in Above 9000. Churches and Chappels in England and Wales. J wish half so many Godly, Learned Ministers for the present.
impropriations, you will soon (by Gods blessing) have able men to send abroad as Evangelicall Preachers till you have enough to fixe in all places, and good lustices of Peace, as also solid, able, Parliament men all which my Lords and Gentlemen, is the earnest Prayer of


Westminster,
May, 3. 164
•





