




SIR,


YOu who live in the upper end of the world, as you have the highest Truths, so have you the richest Opportunities of cherishing, and thereby engaging many. Therein indeed you resemble the Celestial bodies, which by beams and motion convey a quickning influence downwards, which naturally occasions a reciprocal reflexion upwards. Unthankfulness to God (whether he communicate himself to us immediately, or mediately by men and means) was an hateful sin, even in the Gentiles; and the more ingenuous of Rom. 1. 21. the Heathen much decryed it. The unthankful man is a Compendium 

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
. Arist. Eth. l. 5. c. 5.
of all evils.


It behoveth the party gratified, to be proportionably serviceable to him that gratified him, and to begin again, saith the Philosopher: And that which is much more, The Apostle Paul charges it upon his Colossians, Let the peace of God rule in

your hearts (scil. peace with one another, which is from God, as warring and fierceness amongst Saints is certainly from the Devil) to which ye are called in one body, and be ye thankful:
Col. 1. 15. But alas, where shall I begin to say or do any thing proportionably? 

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

cum insurgunt in cordibus nostris turbidi affectus irae odii vindictae, &c. haec pax Dci debet instar agonothetae lites dirimere & omnia ad pacem deducere. Daven. in Locum.

Yet, I hope, I shall never be a Sepulchre to bury by unthankful forgetfulness the extraordinary and unexpected Kindenesses (I must speak in the plural number) with which you were pleased to surprize me, when you were Lord Major: Herein you acted like the primus Motor, who does great things where there is no praevious preparation in the subject, I being a meer stranger to you.
And now I have a more deep Obligation to make publike acknowledgement, and to provoke the whole University of Cambridge, together with my self (whose advantage is wrapt up in theirs) to study how to make suitable expressions of our real thanksgiving.
Your most seasonable intention and execution, of enriching us with a Mathematique Lecture (a rich Treasure indeed, to us who had but a Four pound stipend per annum for our Mathematique Lecturer) which is the more noble in you, and welcom to us, because one little intimation by me to you, did but meet, and give a vent to your full inclination, which was ready to overflow. Something to purpose you would do for Cambridge, to advance Learning, onely you waited for a fit occasion, to have it determined to a proper Channel. How greatly indebted is the Universty of Cambridge to the City of London, That two of their Alderman should contribute so liberally to maintain such necessary Lectures? Alderman Adams (to whom the University is much obliged for publike, and I for personal favors) hath bestowed means to support a Reader of the Arabick
Mr. Abr. Wheelock a very industrious man, and able man in many parts of learning.
Tongue, and the other Oriental Languages: The mercy of God raising his heart thereunto, is the sweeter to us, because we hope it may in time, by Gods gracious dispensation, be a means of communicating the Gospel, in stead of the Soul-deceiving Alcaron, and recover many from under Mahomets Impostures, and other poor seduced souls from under the power of darkness, and hardness of heart.



Confusion of Languages was a curse, whereby one could not Gen. 11. 7. understand another how to build their Babel: But such a multiplying of Languages, that the Apostles might communicate Gospel-secrets to various Nations, was a great Blessing, and Act. 2. 3, 4, 8. much advanced the building of Jerusalem, and pulling down of Babylon.

And without doubt there is much of God in it, that now there should be a more then ordinary instinct, both in yong Students to minde such Studies, and Benefactors to encourage them; and especially when both meet with staggerings amongst some of the learned Doctors of the Jews, who begin to publish their doubts and fears, that all this while they have been deluded, and used their wits and learning to cloud those Scriptures, whose light now begins to shine into their mindes, and I trust in Gods time will into their hearts.
2 Cor 4. 4.

I have it related from very good hands, That a Citizen of London being in Aleppo, heard a very learned Jewish Rabbi, being sick, call his people together, who wished them very seriously to consider the divers former Captivities they had undergone for the hardness of their hearts, and now one for above One thousand six hundred years, the cause of which is doubtless our unbelief and hardness of heart. We have long looked for Note. the Messiah, and the Christians have believed in one JESUS of our Nation, who was of the seed of Abraham and David, and born in Bethlehem, and (for ought we know) may be the true Messiah; and that we have suffered this long Captivity, because we have not believed, but rejected him: Therefore my advice is, as my last words, That if the Messiah which we expect, do not come at or about the year 1650. accompting from the birth of their Christ, then you may know and believe, That this Jesus is the Christ, and you shall have no other: And within a little time after this old Doctor dyed.
And now, much honored Sir, that the Lord should ennoble your Spirit to settle a Mathematique Lecture here, is the more welcom to us, because as Alderman Adams his worthy Donation will help to polish our Tongues, enable us to receive and communicate the choycest secrets, Your bounty will help to enlarge our mindes, to consolidate our judgements. Hence

it may be it was the Ancient Philosophers taught their Pupils Mathematiques very soon (as appears by Aristotle and others) they confirming their Propositions by Mathematical Demonstrations, the knowledge whereof must be presupposed. And hence the witty and learned Lord Verulam would have featherheaded yong men study the Mathematiques, there being the most clear and certain Demonstration to compose and settle yong heads.

I hope your new Mathematical Lecturer will read the University such a Lecture, wherein he may like a good Arithmetician, number the many favers comprised in this one of yours, and like a skilful Geometrician and Astronomer, take the Dimensions and Altitude of your Intentions herein, to your perpetual Honor.
And shall likewise expect, That many (by the blessing of the Lord) will inherite the fruit of this Donation. The wise God hath denied you Children, How can you do better, then make so publike a good at least part of your Heir?

I conceive there is much in that of the Lord Verulam, The

Essay 7.
noblest works (saith he) and foundations, have proceeded from Childless men, which have sought to express the Images of their mindes, where those of their bodies have failed: So, the care of Posterity is most in them that have no Posterity.

I know well Children are, in Jacobs language, pledges of Gods grace; yet I will be bold to tell you what hath much satisfied Gen. 33. 5. my Spirit (my condition herein being yet, by the Alldisposing hand of God, the same with yours) in the want of such a mercy.

1. This hath often been the portion of the dearest Servants of God, to want Children.

2. No one childe of God hath reason to expect all mercies; some want Estates, some want Health, and to some he denies Children.

3. Children are but Temporal mercies, and therefore no infallable marks of Gods electing love: Here all things come
Eccles 9. 2.
alike to all.


4. It is a greater mercy to be a childe of God, then to have a childe from God.



5. When God denies such a blessing, he can give contentation of Spirit to be without it, which makes it no affliction.

6. It may be God intends to honor such, in making them the more serviceable, and liberal to some publike uses; whereas for the most part, their minds who have children are more narrow contracted and confined to make provision for their Posterity.

If the Lord vouchsafe thus to use you, and draw so from your Spirit this way, though you want Children; 
〈…〉
 may have such Heirs, as will help to enrich you 
〈…〉
 of Judgement.

You will please (Honored Sir) to accept this, together with a plain Sermon, which you would have had made publike immediately after the preaching of it. I now finding it transcribed by him who took it in Characters, and when as I had often withstood importunate motions to that purpose, yet still being threatned with the publishing of it, by some who might probably prevail with him, I rather chose to overlook his Notes (so much as my Ague would allow me) and to answer your desire and theirs, though it hath nothing to commend it, but the plainness and and peaceableness of it.
And were reconciling Sermons ever more seasonable then now, when there are so many Incendiaries in City and Countrey, yea, such as would blow the coal, and put both the Kingdoms into a new flame? He who is great in counsel, and mighty in work, go on still (as he hath most graciously) to discover and curse such Plots, and blast such Machinations, according to his gracious promise, Isa. 54.

What ever others say or think, I am convinced, we ought to be so far from quarrelling with our Brethren of Scotland, that we should rather provoke one another to bless God for them who first appeared with much zeal in the cause of Reformation, which awakened us who were in a deep sleep of security, and, I doubt, should have swallowed that Service-Book which they so resolutely opposed.
Again, they came in most seasonably to help us, when we were very low upon the loss of Bristol.

Lastly, They who are indeed our Brethren in and of Scotland, do

now throw water upon that fire of Contention which so many would enkindle, otherwise (probably) we might have been in Blood and Confusion before this hour. And shall we suffer our selves, by the policies of selfish men, to be ingaged actively to joyn with such who would destroy both us and them, and hazard the ruine of that Cause, the maintaining whereof hath cost so dear. God forbid that ever we should so much scandalize and weaken the Protestant Churches abroad
There is an old Prophesie in Poly Chronicon, That England shall be overco
••
 three times, by Danes, by Normans, and then by Scots; I hope the Scotish Conquest will not be Military, as from sons of Violence, but onely Moral and Faederal, bringing us under the bond of the same Covenant with them.
You have also an ancient Historian, who saith, London is one Niceph. of the three Cities of the world which shall never be absolutely Conquered. I hertily wish you may have no other Contention amongst you, but that of the Apostle Jude, Contend earnestly
Ver. 3.
for the faith which was once delivered to the Saints; and striving by an holy emulation who should most advance to holy Union of Truth and Love, of Righteousness and Peace, and who shall most magnifie Jesus Christ in their Places and Relations.

This, I doubt not, is the every-days work of you (Honored Sir) and of your good Lady; wherein, that you may abound yet more and more, he prays, who is very much



From my Study in Tr. Coll. in Cambridge, May 29. 1648.


