




Right Honourable,


I Intended the Dedication of this
Treatise to the Parliament before
I had the happinesse to be a
Member of so Honourable a
Society. Who are so fit to Patronize
a worke concerning God, his word and
workes, as the Parliament of England, and such
a Parliaments, who have heard more of God
and his will, and seene more of his wayes in
lesse then a lustre of yeares, then many precedent



Parliaments have in severall Ages▪ Arduous
and important matters concerning
ChurchQuia de advisamento & 
•
ssensu consilij nostri pro quibusdam or dui
•
s & urgentibus negotijs, nos, Statum & d
•
fensionem Regni nostri Angliae & Ecclesiae concernentibus, 
•
uoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Civitatem Westmonasterium tertio die Novemb
•
is proximo teneri ordinavimus. or State have been the daily Theme
of your serious debates. Queen Elizabeth
once in her progresse visiting the County of
Suffolke, all the Justices of Peace in that
County met her Majesty, having every one
his Minister next to his body, which the
Queen tooke speciall notice of, and thereupon
uttered this Speech, that She had often
demanded of her privy Councell, why her
County of Suffolke was better governed than
any other County, and could never understand
the reason thereof, but now She her
selfe perceived the reason; it must needs be so
(said Shee) where the word and the sword
goe together.
You did Honourable worthies) neare the
beginning of the Parliament, cause a Synode
of Reverend and Able Divines to be called to
advise you in Church-affaires. God hath sent
unto you (as Jeremie speaketh) all his servants
the Prophets,
Jer. 7. 25. and 35. 15. choice men out of every County,
(as you your selves were elected out of many)
to be serviceable to you in the great



worke of Reformation. You have had the
benefit of their faithfull advise, of their fervent
Prayers, and diligent labours. When
did any Parliament enter into so solemne a
League and Covenant to reforme themselves
and Kingdome? when were there so many
dayes of Humiliation kept so generally in
England? when was there such a constant
daily LectureThose Gentlemen of the House, and others that live neere Westminster may heare 500 Sermons yearly at least, one every Morning, and foure every Sabbath. of worthy men in Westminster-Abbie
before? In the Parliament held 5.
E.
3. so many excellent lawes were made, as it
was called bonum Parliamentum I hope as you
are now in Prayers and Print stiled the Repairers
of the breach, and restorers of paths to
dwell in, so future Ages will honour you with
the title of Optimum Parliamentum. When in
the Councell of Constance, talke was Ministred
touching the reformation of the Spiritualty,
and some said quòd oporteat incipere à
Minoritis, the reformation must begin at the
Friers, no said the Emperour Sigismond,

Foxe in his Booke of Martyrs.

Non à
minoritis sed a Majoritis incipienda est reformatio,
meaning the reformation ought first to begin
with the Pope and Cardinals and Bishops, and
so discend after to the inferiours. Some Emperours



were called Great for their goodnesse;
religion makes a Nation or person
honourable Rom. 9. 4. compared with 3. 2.
That was a worthy Speech of a Germane divine
writing to Oecolampadius, Veniat verbum
domini, & submittemus, etiamsi nobis essent sexcenta
colla: As Queene Elizabeth passed in Triumphall
State through the Streets of London after
her Coronation, when the Bible was presented
unto her at the little-Conduit in
Cheape-side,
Speeds Chronicle Chap. 24. p. 858. she received the same, with both
her hands, and kissing it laid it to her breast,
saying, that the same had ever beene her chiefest
delight, and should be the rule by which She meant
to frame her Government. You have likewise
covenanted to reforme the Church according
to the word of God, the best Rule both
for a Personall and Ecclesiasticall Reformation.
There is a double generall subject of
reformation. 1. Corrupt persons, 2. Corrupt
things. You have cast out a scandalous
Ministry; labour to settle (I beseech you) in
all the three kingdoms Pious & able Preachers.
Christ (the great Reformer of his Church
Mal. 3. 2 Matth. 3. 12.) specially purgeth



the Sonnes of Levi Mal. 3. 1. because he hath
appointed them the office of purging others.
secondly the ordinances of God must be both
Pure and Perfect in a compleate Reformation.
You have cast out a great deale of rubbish;
O that the House of God might be
built. It was a blemish upon some of those
reformations mentioned in Scripture, that
the high places were not taken away, and
that their reformation needed a further reformation.
God did much honour King Edward
a Childe, and Queene Elizabeth a woman
in making them the beginners of a blessed
reformation. O that the Lord would be
pleased by you to perfect what they begun,
that Christs government, worship, and discipline
might be set up in the three Kingdoms.
In the times of our troubles, peace and truth
have beene joyned together in our Prayers
and Capitulations; O let them never be separated,
I will reveale unto them the abundance
of peace and truth Jer. 33. 6. and the same Prophet
Jer. 9. 3.complaines, that there were none valiant
for truth in the earth. Buy the truth and sell it not
saith Salomon, contend earnestly for the faith



which was once delivered to the Saints.
Jude. 3. v.
Amicus
Socrates, Amicus Plato, sed magis amica veritas.
You have covenanted to extirpate heresies
and whatsoever is contrary to sound doctrine. In
your first Declaration, there is this memorable
passage, It is farre from our purpose or
desire, to let loose the golden reines of Discipline
and government in the Church, to
leave private persons or particular congregations,
to take up what forme of divine service
they please; for we hold it requisite that
there should be through-out the whole
Realme a conformity to that order which
the Lawes enjoyne according to the word of
God. God hath done great things for you
and by you, and therefore he expects great
things from you. It was a noble resolution
in our Josiah, Edward the 6th, when he was
pressed by Bishop Ridly and others to tolerate
his Sister Masse in her owne Chapell, he
would not (though importuned) yeeld thereto,
saying, He should dishonour God in it;
but being much pressed by them he burst into
teares, and they thence concluded, that he
had more divinity in his little finger then



they in all their bodies; O that you would
study to premote Gods glory, and be zealous
for his truth, since you have had such experience
of his mercy, and likewise could not
but perceive the evill of those dangerous errours,
which were too much indulged by
some of those whom you have cast out.
I shall now speake of the threefold Subject
I handle in my Booke. 1. The Scripture,
2. God, 3. The Workes of God. It is reported
of Charles the Great, that he set his Crown
on the Bible,Ego ipse odi meos libros, & sape 
•
pi
