



August Senate, Mightie Sovereigne of Courts,


WHen I call to mind that of Aristides, That the Gods are to be honoured with the consecration of Temples, but eminent men with the dedication of Books; I could not represent to my consideration a fitter Patrone for these my weak labours, then the glorious Assembly and bright Constellation

of the chief and prime lights of the kingdome.
I invoke not your aid to boulster out mischievous doctrine (the main scope of too many late Dedications) but to vindicate the Truth, to maintain that Truth, which contrary to the Proverb hath fled to corners, hath lived in blind recesse, (and like a needy bankrupt) dareth not yet walk confidently abroad without a Parliament Protection.
But you being now (the Lord be praised) upon the great work of Reformation, your wisdomes will (I doubt not) make narrow inquiry not onely into State but Church-Monopolists, those Gnosticks I mean, which seemed to have ingrost all knowledge to themselves, and under that pretence

have in stead of Truth obtruded upon us their own pernicious errours.
Amongst those truths which these Projectours have laboured to suppresse, none have been more furiously persued then those which relate to the Lords Day; and (which maketh the prodigie) none have stickled therein more then they who have with so much clamour cried up Tithes and the Episcopacy (things innocent, yea, commendable enough: onely I wish with the Athenian in Gellius they had been defended by other men.
Lib. 18. c. 3.) Whence we may collect that if this unhappy day could any thing have promoved their greedy or ambitious desires, it had surely escaped the late indignities which these mens

liberall malice hath profusely shed upon it; it had still continued in the esteem of a day Divinely instituted, immutable, and totally to be sanctified; three essentiall properties thereof, which they have much endeavoured to evert, I in this my work as much to uphold.
At the first instant of its manumission, it hath a strong ambition, (great Councel) to live under the influence of your favour; a boldnesse on which it durst never have adventured had it not been assured, the Truth which it professeth will gain it some measure of acceptance with so profest a Patriot of Truth.
The God of Truth prosper you, and in you, us; he direct all your consultations, that their issue may be

his glory, in the peace and safetie both of this Church and State: with all true English Christians so fervently prayeth,

Illustrious Assembly,


