



My deare Mother,


THese following collections came out from you, and they returne unto you: they were made when I lay in your lap, with your other children, you then prosperous, and wee happy in your prosperitie. Woe is mee my mother, that your condition is so farre altered from those times, and that our happinesse is so farre perished in your condition. How hath the Lord clouded the mother of my people in the day of his fierce anger! and how doth shee now sit in midnight, that once was clothed with the very Sunshine of the nooneday! Ah my deare Country, I have much bitternesse for thy sake that the hand of the Lord is so gone out against thee. How is thy plenty turned to pining, and thy flower to witherednesse! How is thy gold become dim, thy candle darknesse, and thy violl the voyce of those that weepe! Deare mother, how are you become not your selfe! And Staffordshire to bee sought in Staffordshire it selfe, and not to bee found! Her children either fled, or destroyed, or become her destroyers; Her townes desolate though full of inhabitants and people, her people perished though alive and healthy, her peace gone, her joy vanisht, her comforts none, her hopes as little: Shee a mother forsaken, a woman forgotten, left of friends, tortured by enemies, helplesse in her selfe, hopelesse in her helpers. Wo is mee my mother, that thou hast borne mee a man of these sorrowes, that I have seene thee a woman of these miseries! It is the Lord, wee have sinned against him, wee have sinned

and hee hath not spared. I need say no more, I can say no more: teares take up, and prayers, and patience must make up the rest: I have spoke thus much that my dearest native countrey may have a testimony, that no distance, no condition can make mee forget her. Forget my country? let my tongue forget her art and my pen her profession, if Staffordshire bee not ever in my chiefest thoughts. Put up these teares into that bottle where are the heartiest drops that are wept for you in those your sorrowes, and lay up this volume amongst those records, that shall speake of the duty, remembrance and observance of your faithfull children to you to future ages; And owne deare mother, amongst that number that most sincerely and intirely love you, honour you, and moane after you, the heart and affections, prayers and groanings, Ah poor Staffordshire, poore Staffordshire,




London,

Decemb. 1▪ 1645.


