




YOur reverend attention during the
length of this service, together with
a deportment suitable to the duty of
the day, and matter in hand, gave
me to conceive that your hearts were
kindly warmed by a better spirit
then yours or mine; and because you
command a farther impression of this
work, I 
••
amfther instructed to conceive; 1. that besides the
hearing ear,
Prov. 20. 12. there is (you know) to be imployed A seeing
eye, both which are the gift of the Lord; 2. that
having bought the truth as tryed gold, the filings are
not to be be lost; 3. that upon your tryall (what ever
some say) you are willing the wise should judge whether you
are taken with sounding brasse, or any thing rather then
Crown gold.

These reasons (besides your command) are pressing arguments
with me to make this Sermon publique to the whole
(as well as to the representative) body of our Commonalty,

and now I leave it to Gods blessing and your patronage,
which I may the rather expect, because I have prayed for
the former, and the latter is implyed in your command, to which
I owe (and will yeeld) this kind of obedience though I
were sure to be made a Sacrifice.

Vpon your summons (Noble Senators) I appeared, knowing
that God and his Vicegerents can make use of mean Instruments
for high imployments, whereof had I not been convinced,
I should have fled (with Jonah to my Country
goord,Amos 7. 14. with the hazzard of a storm; or (with Amos) disavowed
my function, rather then speak (so freely as I did)
in the heard-mans language, and tell this (my) mother
City, that for three great oversights, and for four, (to
say no worse nor more) God hath a few things against her,
which I complained of in this sad message.
As first, though she professes to hate the works of the Malignants,
yet there are those (if not in her bosom, yet) on her
skirts, that say they are true to Church and State, but are indeed
of another Synagogue, and by their blasphemy proclaime
it loud enough, that either they went out from
us, or were never of us; and when the wine hath lightned
their braines, they make light of our Parents nakednesse,
discover it without shame or sorrow in the streets
at noon-day; where the sad spoiles and robberies of our
Nation, are made matter either of sporting Pamphlets, or
merry discourse; to meet with these, I made it my first work
to tell you in sadnesse, that the plundering and spoyling
of a people was a sad and shamefull penalty.

Secondly, (though she own not the doctrine of Baal) yet she
harbours such Doctors as Baalam, that peep, and mutter,
and would amuse the Land with tales from the stars, and
old-wives-fables,
Esay 8. 19. as if the Planets had met in a Counsell of
war, and (by an Arbitrary power of their own) condemned

our present State to a fatall desolation; to meet with these, I
was to give you Information from the Iudge of all the world
(speaking to the case, and concluding) that what was done he
did it, and did us but right in it.
Thirdly, though she have many golden heads, that appear
active in subtle contrivances, she hath more leaden hearts, and
(setting aside the great Councel) hath too few of those that consider
her case aright, and lay it to heart: to meet with these,
the last part of my message was to put home Christs counsell
to that Church of Sardis that had a foot in the grave, yet
a step there was betwixt death and us, if we timely took
her cordiall (viz.) to remember what we have heard and
received. This (if any thing) would quicken us to give the
Lord a meeting, and thereby prevent the wrath to come.
These things (worthy Patriots) you have heard, and that
you might the better reform them, and know how to behave
your selves in Gods method, beginning with his own house,
you have chosen an Assembly of such Counsellors as you and
all may conside in: (To whom I should have thought it honour
enough for me to have been a door-keeper) their peaceable
conflicts and pious debates want nothing but his Majesties
ears to make them hear well throughout the Land,
being indeed a precious reserve, (such as the Lord promises
to leave for hot service in the most conflicting times, Zeph.
3. 12. who doubtlesse will come up in the Rear, and doe worthily
in Ephrata.
Former times have made a great noise about the Church
or place of Gods worship, but these later (with Gods blessing
upon your indeavours) may produce the power and purity
of it. I shall pray that our Dread Soveraign may live to see
and say of Gods house (as that Emperour did of Roome, Invenit
lateritiam & reliquit marmoream) he found it thacht
and over-topt with Lauds, Wrens, Cousens, &c. but will

leave it adorned and paved with Whitakers, Prestons, and
Sibses, cum multis aliis—The work is great indeed, but
there is a great God that hath a great hand in it, and (as you
have been told by a good providence more then once) wil send
Auxiliaries from heaven, proportionable, at least, to the
strongest oppositions. To this purpose the God of the heaven return
an answer to your prayers, for the peaceable returne
of our Soveraign, which is or should be the dayly suit of
those that wish well to our publique wel-fare, and resolve
to live or die in the pursuit of this blessing; Amongst
whom you have to command, the ende avours, and prayers of

Chancery-Lane this 19.
of Decemb. 1643.



