


Madam,


IN ancient offerings to Deity, Turtles, Incense, and Flowers have beene acceptable for the zeale of obedience, though of little worth, or advantage; let my respect to your command make the more excusable the worthlesse following lines, which otherwise in my knowledge of the sleightnesse of their stuffe and making should never have presumed to undergoe the weight of your censure: True Turtles you shall find them, full of simple love, and unfurnisht of all Serpentine climbing art of subtilty and knowledge: Incense and Smoake, they are but of the gentlest nature, not far fetcht Aromatiques, troublesome and intoxicating to the brain, but mild as flowers unmedicinall for morality, meere Poseys or Nosegays, gay to the first sense; which if happily you prove them, favour them so far as to give them their passe without further examination, I promise not my self that they shal please, for they please not my selfe; (especially in a serious humour) I know them full of faults, but thinke them not worth the mending. And if to bee an Author of such toyes bee a fault, it is surely doubled to make them too great a businesse. Idlenesse was their mother, which though I pleased my selfe to avoyd by their destroying her in their birth, yet to good judgements they may well bee as ill pleasing, as ill natur'd: If time were mis-spent in them, yet there was not much cast away; for the idle howers of three moneths brought them forth, except some few, the children of little more then my childhood. As they are

farre from deserving good opinion, so am I farre from the humour of some so well conceited of such their workes (like Peacocks proud of their feathers) that they are never at an end of their labour, but still with child to utter them: my travell ended with their first birth, and so I hope or with the readers may at the first reading; for if they bee not plaine and easie, it is against my will, which as it wants strength to imitate, so cannot approve the ridling humour lately affected by many, who thinke nothing good that is easie, nor any thing becomming passion that is not exprest with an hyperbole above reason. These tormentors of their owne and their Readers braines I leave to bee admired in their high obscure flight, (while my selfe will bee happy, if I can procure but a familiar delight to a superficiall reading) they affect to shew more wit then love, and in truth so much, that whilst they commend beyond reason, they shew that either they want reason to commend, or their subject to bee commended; like ill ranging Spaniells they spring figures, and ravished with their extravagant fancies, pursue them in long excursions, neglecting their true game and pretended affection: Bee the matter, or the discoursers capacitie never so poore and meane, I ever affect a man that maketh right conclusions. And for my selfe, I would rather bee thought to want invention and knowledge, then judgement and good consequence in what I utter. The Poetry of these times abounds in wit, high conceit, figure, and proportions; thinne, light, and emptie in matter and substance; like fine colored ayery bubbles or Quelque-choses, much o
••
entation and little food; conceits, similes, and allegories are good, so the matter bee carried along in them, and not interrupted by them. Venus is here drawne by her Doves, not Serpents; and as I professe my selfe to want art in all things, so in matters or love I thinke it may bee best spared, as being an affection meerely naturall, and where Art is seldome comely, but authorised with a native disposition; besides, Verses of love are commonly made for women, whose chiefest beautie consists in being unsophisticated by Art, and are the more pleasing in conversation by possessing a free puritie of unadulterated wit. And as wee often see that those women that have bestowed on themselves the most Art and costly dressing, nay many times that have the best proportion, are not yet the most winning: So in Verses there is to bee exprest a naturall spirit and moving ayre (or accent) more alluring and charming the affection, then others of a farre more rich, faire and curious composition. The world in all things is full of Critiques, that are sharpe sighted to reprehend, and will approve nothing but according to their owne rule; (many times out of square) But for my part I hold the same opinion of Verses as of Ayres in Musick, or Houses, that let them bee delightfull and pleasant to the first appearance with conveniency to the designe, and for the fantasticated rules of Art, Architecture, and proportion, let them observe them that list: and commonly who most affects them, most failes in the generall delightfulnesse and use. Poetry is in truth a kind of Musick,

the fable of Orpheus expressed as much; Musick hath its Anthems, Pavens, Fantesies, Galliards, Courantoes, Ayres, Sarabands, Toyes, Cromatiques, &c. And Verses have their Hymmes, Tragedies, Satyres, Heroiques, Sonets, Odes, Songs, Epigrams, Distiques, and Strong lines, which are their Cromatiques, and of themselves may bee excellent in their Art; but long dwelt upon grow harsh and distastefull. The commandements and preceptives are none of the poeticall parts of Scripture. Though I am no part of a Scholar, yet thus much by casuall opening of books I know, that Horace in matter of love hates difficulty: and though I beleeve it an imitation of his abrupt and harsh veine in his more serious peeces, that upon the worthinesse of his name and matter, hath debaucht many from the formerly used, more open, familiar and pleasing manner of versifying; yet I finde that even himselfe (howsoever either naturally or affectedly rugged, except his Lyrick veine) when hee uttereth his judgement, or prescribeth to others concerning measured compositions, no man is more frequent in recommendation of a round, current, cleare and gracefull delivery: but what his morall, solid and satyrick matter dispenst with, is in slighter stuffe intolerable: there shall you find the rough hands, but not the voyce and substance; let them rather imitate his best, then his worst. It cannot bee good in limited lines, which are a purposed pause to the voyce, to carry with a counter-time the period of the sense to the body of the next line, much lesse to dismember an innocent word, that every child according to nature, and use, in spelling would put together; and words have a naturall ayre, accent, and quantitie, whence to strayne them is to rack both them and the reader: Who will set himselfe to daunce, or his horse to manage, let him seeke to observe good time, ayre, and fashion: no man is fit for all things; whose Genius was borne for prose, let him write prose, rather then affecting Verse to make such unnaturall stuffe, as shall bee good neither. I pity both in my selfe and others to see the best of our matter in one place so extreamly prest, that it is a labour to discover it, and yet in another part of the same peece slight and superfluous stuffe dilated at large. A Poet should raise light from smoak, not blow that which is light with him to carry but smoak to another.
King Iames.
 I am of his Majesties mind, that the best eloquence is to make our selves clearely understood, and that to him who hath leasure, there need no abbreviations: I had rather pay for a little more paper then to bee put to the cost of my braine.
Sir Philip Sidney.
 The admirable inventions and matter of your unimitable Uncles extant works flourish in applause of all, by a happy and familiar display of their beauties to the meanest, including withall such generositie of truely and profoundly extracted conceit to the most inward life of whatsoever hee expresseth, that the strongest and clearest seeing judgements may rest satisfied, yea transported in contemplation of the most lively and pleasing touches that a soule can apprehend, or a pen distill. Yet somewhat more to authorise my selfe, Lipsius

upon perspicuity holds it the greatest misery in writing, not onely not to be understood, but to be understood with difficulty: and the sharp-witted 
Hunc vol
•
 qui fiat non sine pane s
•

tur.

Martial in contempt of the more formall and severe censurers and Writers, professeth that hee would have his verses need neither an Apollo, nor Grammarian; and howsoever some may deny him to be exact, himself in his entertainments affects rather to please his Guests then Cooks. Verses of love should be verses of pleasure, & to please in love, the smoother fac'd the better.
I may be crabbed and rugged, but will never affect to bee so, especially in verses, whose true nature and use is to worke a kind of a Charme upon the mind, even with slightnesse of matter, by the well wrought and exquisite harmony of their Cadence, and sound: There being to be transfused into verse sometimes such a naturall spirit of magnanimity, sometimes such a soft, wanton, and melting aire of passion, that the one shall never faile to affect a generous and heroick mind, nor the other to work a kind of tender and relenting disposition in a sensible and well-natur'd constitution; neither of which shall easily be seene effected from a harsh and rude (though never so witty) an expression: for as in persons, so in Verses; some, let them meane never so lovingly, shall yet by their naturall verjuyce be ever out of the way of Bacchus and Venus. But in point of obscurity, in some sort to excuse my selfe with others, I feare wee all often unwillingly incurre the errour of it by thinking our meaning as open to others, as to our selves, when indeed the Characters of our expression are fully supplyed by our owne understanding to our selves, whilst to others they are lamely contracted and imperfect. Thus much I have been bold to write, not onely to excuse a poore Mother wit, but somewhat to give a passe upon their strange and uneasie habit, who I doubt not but they will have many a gird at my easie and naturall nakednesse; I meane those lofty dimme shooting Archers, whom I wish to remember, that hee who shootes highest, shootes not ever nearest the marke; and hee that may walke in the light, is to bee suspected for choosing the darke. Now (Madam) I grant that all I can write (especially what these lines containe) is but vanity and a most idle vanity; yet thus farre I will excuse both the writing and the reading, that all the world is little better: wee often condemn vaine pleasures, and remember not that the most things the best of us most seriously doe, have indeed no other end. For God being served and nature sustained, what fruit proceeds from our authority, learning, wealth, policy, and earnest intent to profit, but to satisfie our impulsive affections, which either propound to themselves a felicity whereof they faile in the possession, or seeke to divert by such imployments the dulnesse and otherwise obtruding miseries of their condition? which if you please to consider, you will the more excuse many pursuers of lawful and naturall delights, and value those pleasures at the better rate which are most perdurable and communicable. May the following wanton (but as modest Babes as their Mother Venus could produce) though they cannot profit, yet afford some delight

light to that your Worthy well furnish't mind, to which I wish all happinesse that ever Noble nature possest, or can possesse. I must yet bee so much longer, as to crave pardon for my unintended and I feare unpleasant length, it is the vice of writing to bee endlesse; thus hath my enmity to obscurity brought forth tediousnesse, yet not so much, but that all this may bee sooner read, then some one passage of our Night pieces understood: they had need afford profitable stuffe, who utter it at so hard a rate. I wish your Ladiships authority would so abate the price that our poorer abilities might hold trade without straining. And seeing I am upon the Theame of verses, whither I meane not shortly to returne, I humbly crave your favour after my fashion, disorderly to say thus much more, that howsoever some of the stricter sort approve onely of verses so close, usefull, and substantially woven, that there must bee neither list, loosenesse, nor the least superfluity of words: for my part, I am not of that strict order, nor ever yet saw it observed in any Author. Nature hath mingled stalkes with flowers, and Huskes with Corne, and hath raised ornament from our excrementiciall haires: conceits and matter over-crusht, afford commonly as little grace as pleasure; and to write all in abbreviations, would take indeed les
•
e room, but much more time and trouble. A Geneva print weakens the sight, nor is it good to hold your bow ever bent, or your horse streight rained. Sometimes amongst pithy and tough lines I thinke it not amisse to interpose one of an easie 
•
traine, like resting places in lofty staires, to ease the Reader. Some fluency of weak water helpes the better in nourishment to convey what is more solid. Lamp-oile yeelds no good savour nor in sallet nor verse. Difficilia quae pulchra, is to bee understood of the attaining, and not the exercising of faculties. You know how it is said of Poems, that they should bee such, ut sibi quivis speret, idem sudet frustraque laboret ausus ide
•
. Strong lines may bee drawne on with Cartropes, but the fairest have generally an easie birth. It is rare for anything to be well and hardly performed. The French expression, A Deliure, implyes as well perfectnesse, as facility and dexterity. There may bee imployed such an extraordinary (yet gentle) finenesse of conceit, and Conclusions so designed, wrought, limned and coloured, touches so bold, covert allegories and subtilties so neat, Epithets so materiall, Metaphors and ambiguities so doubly fine, as shall bee more masterlike then more sententious, sublime, abstruse, and strong appearing lines. Worth of matter and conception supposed, nothing more commends a piece then termes well chosen, proper, lively, and significant, with a free comming on, and as free a close and conclusion. Also a faire, cleare and even thorough carriage with well wrought joints and connexions gives credit to the workman. I love as much a great deale of force and depth couched in one word, as I hate little in many. VVe ordinarily write and speake the same things and notions, and to the same purpose, but infinitely differ in the delivery and expression; some proceed in a stuttering confused obliquity, groping as in a mist or darknesse; some goe more directly

and exhibit their Idea's and conceptions with so cleare and distinct a light, illustrations, instances, demonstrations, enforcements, and arguments so pertinent, perspicuous and concluding, that the understanding and assent are captivate beyond evasion or subterfuge. Sophistry and figures may appeare fine and witty, but prevaile little upon the best judgements: Reason must convince the intellectuall soule. May I write clearly and strongly, rather then finely and artificially; hence is the difference of elocution, hence of perswasion, the one is light and aery, the other weighty and solid; most lovely and commanding is the beauty of a faire ingenuous and rich soule fairely mounted, and armed upon well shaped and unanimously received vertue, goodnesse and reason. Verses are then good, when turned to prose they hold a faire and currant sense, and when translated into another language, there is such mastery found in their conception by the advantage of what is genuine unto them, that there will bee either more words or lesse conceit and matter. The priviledge they have over common phrase, consists in the warranted becomming ornament of a lofty well ordered spirit, and wantonnesse, such as shall make toyes passe for Jewels, and give to what of it selfe is precious, an acquisite lustre of workmanship beyond what prose can beare, and that in little room; Their voice is more constrained, and consequently more shrill and piercing. Nor is it in writing the least perfection (howsoever it hath found little observation) so to order and contract our expressions, that one well adopted word may run into, and govern many of diverse and strong sense) for nothing gives more pleasure and satisfaction to a diligent inquisitive and judicious Reader, then much matter and conceit compendiously digested with sufficiency of perspicuity. To conclude, lines of a farre fetcht and labour'd fancy with allusions and curiosity, and in similes of little more fruit or consequence, then to ravish the Reader into the writers fine Chamaeleon colours, and feed him with aire, I approve not so much, as heighth and force of spirit sententiously and weightily exhibited; wit needs not rack it self where matter flowes; embroderies become not a rich stuffe; and art is best exprest where it least appeares.
A strong wing is to be preferred before a painted, and good 
•
ense and matter elegantly delivered before extravagancy of fancy and conceit; such unnaturall impertinency serves rather to shadow then illustrate, to overwhelme then set forth the subject: as well apposite as accurate writing is the Authorsglory.
