




HAVING not long since presented your Honourable Assembly
with A Breviate of the Arch-bishop of Canterburie's
Life, extracted out of his owne Diary and
Writings: I have been since much importuned by divers
Members of both Houses, to set forth a compleat
History of his Crimes and Tryall, with all needfull
Ingredients thereunto. Whereupon, I deemed it very
expedient (by way of Prologue, or necessary Introduction
to that Work) first, to compile and publish this following Peece (which
here I humbly tender to your honourable Patronage) the materials whereof
could not be conveniently inserted into the Passages of his Tryal, though much
conducing to the cleering of your Exemplary Iustice in your equitable Proceedings
and righteous Judgement against him, newly executed on his person.
Your Honours, in these my rude Collections (faithfully extracted out of
many thousand scattered papers, the perusall and digesting whereof into order
hath cost me no little pains) may behold as in a Mirrour, many hidden, or forgotten
Romish Plots of darknes brought to Publike Light and Memory
(from the first Marriage Treaty with Spaine, in the yeere 1617. till this present)
to undermine our Protestant Religion, reduce both us and all our Dominions
back to Rome by insensible degrees; together with the severall Policie,
A
••
ifices, Negotiations, Conspiracies used, and Instruments imployed
between the Pope, his Confederates and Us, to accomplish this long-agitated
Designe; and hereby cleerly discover the true Originals, the Principall
Contrivers of all the late unhappy Commotions, Warres, Massacres,
Desolations within our three distracted Kingdomes, now weltring in
their owne blood; with those mutuall Negotiations we have held with
Rome, not onely of late yeers, but continued till this very instant even for
Cardinals Cap
•

 and such like Pontifician Wares.

His Majesty and your Honourable Assembly are (blessed be God) now at
last (after three yeeres bloody intestine Warres) upon a desirable Treaty
of Peace, which I shall cordially implore theHeb. 13. 20.
God of Peace effectually to
crown with a most happy issue: towards the reall atchievement wherof, I humbly
conceive these seasonable Collections may contribute some assistance; One
of the neerest wayes to procure a settled, lasting Peace on Earth, being first (by
sincere Repentance and Reformation) to make our peace with Heaven, and

then to provide effectuall Remedies against the various Treacheries, Conspiracies,
Policies of the common Enemies of our Peace on Earth, and principall
Contrivers of all our present Combustions; (to wit, the Pope and his
Confederates) which I have here apparently detected, to the end they may
with more facility be prevented by your honourable Vigilancy for the future.
As we must haveSee Bishop Hals, No peace with Rome.

no peace with Rome, so we cannot possibly expect any
peace from her: Yea, the more we endeavour Reconciliation with this Babylonish
S
•
rumpet (the grand Designe of many late past yeers, and now)
the remoter shall we be from any reall Peace and Unity among our selves, as
we have seen by dear-bought experience: and it must necessarily be so, since
2 Cor. 6. 14 15, 16.
Light and Darknesse, Truth and Errour, Christ and Antichrist, the
Sonnes of God and Children of Belial, can never be cordially reconciled
by all the Policies or Contrivements of men;
Gen. 3. 15. Gal. 4. 29. Prov. 29. 27. God himselfe having put an
everlasting irreconcileable Enmity, Antipathy between them.
If therefore your Honours ever hope to enjoy a sincere, solid, durable Peace
in our Churches or Realmes, you must now use all extraordinary Care and
Vigilancy to provide sufficient remedies against all the Popes and his
Confsederates
Devices, stratagems, Engines, Instruments, who else will perpetually
embroile us with fresh Conspiracies, Treasons, Rebellions, Powderplors,
Warres, till they have wrought their owne or our utter ruine, as many
late Experiments (under which our whole three Kingdomes now bleed and
languish) abundantly demonstrate. It therefore much concernes your Honours
and our Realms in your intended Treaty, as much as in You lyes, to provide
the surest and most effectuall Remedies against this viperous Generation
of Romish Incendiaries, without which we can neither expect any substantiall
Peace for the present, nor en
•
oy any lasting Tranquility for the future;
and, blessed be God, who hath long since put it into your zealous, pious
hearts, to endeavour to effect it.
It may be some Court-Sycophants,
Object may deem these Discoveries very unseasonable,
yea perchance dishonourable (in some particulars) to his Majesty
in his fore-past Proceedings, and suggest so much to his Highnesse, or your Honours.

To which I answer;Answer that the Discovery of all Plots, Dangers is then
most seasonable, most advantagious, when we are by speciall Lawes or Treaties
to establish future Remedies against them. It is over b
•
st searching
festred wounds to the very bottome, and letting out all their corruption, when
we are ready to incarne or glutinate them; else, if we citatrize before we sound
them to the bottome, they will soone fester or break out againe with greater
paine and danger then before: As for the pretended wounding of his Majesties
honour, or his former proceedings by this Discovery, as it was most remote
from my loyall heart and intentions in its Collection and Publication,
so I hope his gracious Majesty and all faithfull Councellours about him (who
bear any reall affection to his Highnesse, Religion, our bleeding Kingdoms, or
really intend to close up their wounds by the approaching Treaty) will be so far
from resenting these Detections to be any reall eclipse of his Majesties honour
(purposely compiled to discover bona fide to his Highnesse and others, by
what Romish Stratagems, Pollicies, Councels, Instruments they have been
for sundry by-past yeers seduced, circumvented, abused, miscounselled, to the

Kingdomes, Churches, Religions almost utter desolation, and ingul
•
ed in those
bloody Civill Wars, Massacres, which have turned most of our pleasant Fields into
Acheldama's and Golgotha's) that they will interpret these timely Discoveries
of them (of which, perchance they have bin hitherto ignorant or unobservant) the
See here p. 91. highest expression both of my Duty, Loyalty to his Majesty, and my dearest
Country, or at least a faithfull impartiall discharge of that solemn Covenant & Protestation We all have taken by your Honours Injunctions, which oblige me in
poynt of Conscience, of Fidelity to bring them unto publike knowledge; yea, I
should in truth have violated both my Alleagiance and Covenant, had I concealed
them at such a time as this, when Gods admirable Providence had unexpectedly
brought them to my hands: Since therefore the wisest King that ever
reigned, yea, the King of Kings himselfe hath assured me,Pro. 16. 13.
That righteous
lips are the delight of Kings, and they love him that speaketh right; I doubt
not but his Majesty and all true-hearted Protestants about him, together with
your Honours, will deem this Publication a speciall Act of my Loyallest, Sincerest
Service to his Majesty and all his Realmes, which through Gods effectuall
bssileng on them, may much conduce to their future Tranquility, Felicity, the
things here principally aimed at.
I shall therefore become an humble Suitor to your Honours, to accept of these
Collections (which I have with no small labour extracted, digested into method,
whiles others have been taking their naturall rests) as a pledge of my reallest Affection
to my Country, his Majesty, Religion, Parliaments: yea, as a seasonable
Preparative (not to be slightly read over as matter of meere Newes, but seriously
perused, as a Discovery of highest consequence) to your intended much efflagitated
Treaty of Peace: and as a necessary Introduction to the History of your
Patient, upright, unparalelled Tryall of, and righteous Judgement against
that Arch-Incendiary and Enemy of our Peace, Religion, Lawes, Parliaments
(some of whose Seditious Popish practises are here lightly glanced at, others more
fully detected, the rest reserved for their proper Place) who hath received with
much Mercy and Moderation the due reward of his treasonable, violent, bloody,
Romish Councels and Actions. I shall daily supplicate the God of Recompence
that the effusion of his most Nocent blood by the AXE of Justice may put
a speedy period to the spilling of any more Protestant blood by that sword of
civill War, which his Councels, Innovations, Oppressions first unsheathed, and
his seconds, the Romanists, have since kept drawne and brandished among us, almost
to the depopulation of our whole three Kingdomes.


Heb. 13 20, 21. Now the God of Peace that brought againe from the dead our Lord
Jesus, that great Shepheard of the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting
Covenant, make you perfect in every good work, to doe his will, working
in you that which is wel-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, and
Luk. 1. 79. guide all your feet aright in the way of Peace, you are now entring into;
that the end of it may be Peace indeed, and
Isa. 32. 17, 18.
the effect of it, quietnesse and
assurance for ever, that so we may henceforth dwell in sure dwellings, and
rest in quiet and peaceable Habitations; which is, and shall be the Prayer,




