



YOUR HONOURS earneſt deſires expreſſed in the premiſed Order, inevitably engaging me to compile and publiſh to the World, A compleat Hiſtory of the famous Tryall, of the late decapitated Archbiſhop of Canterbury; I have, without other motives, in Obedience thereunto (with as much Expedition as my many other distracting Occaſions, and the Vastneſſe of the Work would permit) finiſhed the First Part thereof; (which I here humbly tender to Your Honourable Patronage and Acceptance) compriſing, The ſeverall Orders, Articles, and Parliamentary Proceedings againſt him, from his Originall Impeachment till his Triall; together with, the Commons Various Evidence; his ſeverall Anſwers to it; and their Replies upon them, in maintenance of the Firſt Generall Branch of their Charge of High Treaſon againſt him: to wit; His Trayterous Endeavours to alter, & ſubvert Gods true Religion by Law eſtabliſhed among us; to introduce Popiſh Superſtition and Idolatry in liew thereof; and to reconcile the Church of England to the Church of Rome, by ſundry Jeſuiticall Stratagems: The guilt of which black Execrable Charge (wherein he moſt of all proteſted, and endeavoured to clear his pretended Innocency, both during his Triall at the Bar, and at his Death on the Scaffold, as that which did moſt nearly concern him in his function as an Arch-Prelate, and in his Religion as a Proteſtant,) was ſo abundantly evidenced, ſo firmly fixed upon his White Rochet by a various multiplicity of unavoydable proofs, impregnable Demonſtrations, (which all his Sophistry, Oratory, Subtilty, Protestations, could no wayes enervate or evade,) that it will ſtick faſt upon him for Eternity, maugre all his own verball Apologies, during his life, or the Malignant Panegyricks, the ſcandalous Relations of any Anti-parliamentall, or Prelaticall Sycophants ſince his death: Who in open affront of Your moſt memorable Exemplary Juſtice, upon this Arch-Traytor, (the very Sourſe and Compendium of all our late miſeries) have proclaimed him to Poſterity, in their late lying Legends of his death, A most Glorious Martyr, (as the Papists did his moſt Trayterous Predeceſsor,

Joannis de Aton. Conſtit. fol 149. 150. Antiquicates Eccleſiae Brit. and Godwin in his life, M. Fox Act, & Monuments, p 2. 205.
Becket) and already canonized him for A SAINT: perchance, becauſe beheaded on Jan. 10. Les plus Grands du Berray rapporterent au Roy, qu'il troubloit le repoſe du publie, & qu'il S'emparoit contre toute la Juſtice de ſon domaine, &c. Il depublia la Bulledecernee par le Pape pour faire la guerre aux Albegiois auec tant de zele & de fruict, que pluſieurs a ſa parole S'y cro
•
ſerent courageuſement. La gu
•
rre eut une iſſue houreuſe, car les Heretiques furent tellement deconfits qu'ils ne purrent depuis ſeremetter on campagne, &c. Ribadeniera Flures des Vies des Saincts p. 124.
Saint Williams day, the Popiſh Archbiſhop of Bourges in France; as great a diſturber in his time, of that Kingdomes publike peace, and courſe of Justice; yea, as grand an Incendiary of the bloody Wars againſt the Albigenſes & French Proteſtants, as this Archbiſhop was of our Kingdoms tranquility, its publike Juſtice; and ſtirrer up of

the War againſt the Scots; yet for all this enrolled in the Red Calender of Romiſh Saints.

There have lately come unto my hands two Oxford Pamphlets; the one intituled: A true Relation of the Death of the moſt Reverend Father in God, William Lord Archbiſhop of Canterbury, upon Tower hill, January, 10. 1644. (Firſt Printed at Oxford, and ſince at Bristol, Anno 1644.) Which begins thus:

On Fryday, Jan. 10. THE REBELS MARTYRED the moſt Reverend Father in God, William Lord Archbiſhop of Canterbury upon Tower hill, after they had kept him priſoner above four years: And then relating his ſpeech and Prayer on the Scaffold, it concludes in theſe words: Thus dyed the KINGS, and the CHURCHES Note. MARTYR; a man of ſuch Integrity, Learning, Devotion, and Courage, as had he lived in the Primitive times, they would have given him another name: whom though the cheated multitude were taught to miſconceive, (for theſe honoured him) yet impartiall posterity will know how to value him, when they hear the Rebels ſentenced him the very ſame houre that they voted down the Liturgy of the Church of England; whoſe innocency cryes to heaven for Vengeance, upon the heads of theſe deſtroyers, who pile MURTHER upon Murther to fortifie their Covenant, that upon this generation may come all the RIGHTEOUS BLOOD, from him whoſe blood was first ſhed, to the pulling down this great Pillar of our Church; which if you conſider, is THE MOST GROUNDLES, MALITIOUS, SOLEMNE STUDIED MURTHER THAT EVER WAS COMMITTED IN THIS WRETCHED Note. ISLAND.
The later Pamphlet Imprinted at Oxford, of the ſame Subject, dated as the former, (inſcribed; A briefe Relation of the Death, and Sufferings of the most Reverend and Renouned Prelate, the Lord Archbiſhop of Canterbury, with a more perfect Coppy of his Speech and other paſſages 
•
n the Scaffold, than hath been hitherto Imprinted;) thus blazons this Archtraytors Innocency, merits, ſufferings. 
Page 14. 15. 25.
He that had ſo long lived a Confeſſer (a Popiſh Confeſſor if he pleaſe to the Duke of Buckingham and others) could not but think it releaſe of miſery to be made a MARTYR. He aſcended the Scaffold with ſo brave a courage, ſuch a cheerfull countenance, as if he had mounted rather to behold a Triumph than to be made a Sacrifice, and came not there to dye, but to be tranſlated; and to ſay truth, it was no Scaffold but a Throne; a Throne whereon he was ſhortly to receive a Crown, even the most glorious Crown of MARTYRDOME: After which he ſtiles him, A glorious Martyr; his blood, Innocent blood; yea, thou extols his Innocency, and Canonizeth him for a Saint in a Poeticall Elegie, eſpecially in theſe enſuing lines.


—Through the hand


Of baſe detraction practiſe to defame


Thy ſpotleſſe Virtues, yet impartiall fame


Shall do thee all just honour, and ſet forth


To all ſucceeding times thy matchleſſe worth;



No Annalls ſhall be writ, but what relate


Thy happy influence, both on Church and State;


Thy zeal to publike Order, thy great parts


For all affairs of weight; thy love to Arts;


And to our ſhame and his great glory tell,


For whoſe dear ſake, by whoſe vile hands he fell.


A death ſo full of Merits, of ſuch price,


To God and man ſo ſweet a ſacrifice,


As by good Church-Law may his name prefer,


To a fixt Rubrick in the Calender.

And let this ſilence the pure Sects complaint,
Note.


If they make Martyrs, we may make a SAINT, &c.

And not onely theſe Anonymous Pamphleters, but King Charles himſelf, who not long before had given him an ample Pardon, as a Traytor, under his great Seal of England, forgetting what he had done herein, doth in his own
See the Kings Cabinet opened.
Letter to the Queen, dated Jan. 14. 1644. cry up this headleſſe Arch-biſhop for a Martyr; yea, deems his blood ſo meritorious, ſo Innocent; that being totally the Parliaments, he beleeves it no preſumption, hereafter to hope that Gods hand of Justice, (for the Parliaments juſt effuſion of his blood) must be (thence-forth) heavier upon them and lighter upon him and his Anti-parliamentary Partie, looking now upon their cauſe having paſſed by their faults. If his blood ſo lately ſhed by the axe of Juſtice be already become ſo meritorious, as to ballance the ſcales of Gods Juſtice in this manner; we may juſtly fear it will in few years more grow into as great eſteem at Court, as Thomas of Beckets his Trayterly predeceſſors blood, did in former times among the Prelatical Popiſh party; who attributed more efficacy to it then to Chriſts, and therfore preſumed moſt blaſphemouſly to pray to Chriſt himſelfe to ſave them, by his own, but this Arch-Traytors blood, in this diſtick.



Officium Beatae Mariae ſecundum Vſum Sarum, Pariſtis 1919. p. 12. Biſhop Jewels Defence of the Apology, part 2. c. 18. Diviſ. 1. p. 295. 296.
Tu per Thomae Sanguinem quem prote impendit


Fac nos Chriſte ſcandere quo Thomas aſcendit.


But as the manifold glorious Victories, miraculous Succeſſes of the Parliaments Forces ſince his Execution, have experimentally fruſtrated this his Majeſties groundleſſe Hope and Preſumption, that Gods hand of Iuſtice would be heavier upon the Parliaments Party, but lighter upon him and his, by reaſon of his crying blood, it being never lifted up ſo extraordinarily, ſo viſibly for the Parliament before, nor falling ſo heavily upon the King and his Partizans; as ſince his beheading, and the Kings overconfident relying on the Merits of the Blood of ſuch a Traytot for ſucceſſe in his warrs againſt the Parliament; So, I preſume, the ſetting forth of this Hiſtory of his Tryall, will ſoon Un-Martyr, Un-Saint, Uncrown this Arch-Impoſter, by preſenting him in his Proper Colours, ſtript of all Diſguiſes, and render him ſo deſperately criminall, ſo tranſcendently Trayterous in all reſpects, eſpecially in point of undermining the Proteſtant Religion, wherein himſelf and his Paraſites have endeavoured moſt of all to vindicate his Innocency, that all Generations will unaminouſly pronounce

him, the Archeſt Enemy to, the moſt active univerſall Underminer of the Protestant Religion eſtabliſhed among us, that ever breathed in Engliſh ayre; and readily acknowledge, that no Eccleſiaſticall Annalls ever recorded his Paralell, for multiplicity of deſperate cunning Jeſuiticall Stratagems ſecretly to ſubvert that Orthodox Reformed Religion which himſelfe pretended to profeſſe; nay, propagate and patronize.
It is far below the Magnanimity of my Spirit in the leaſt meaſure maliciouſly to blaſt the Fame, or revengefully to triumph over, to trample upon the Aſhes of a Vanquiſhed Enemy, whom I never dreaded, or ſlandered all his life, forgave and pittied both before and at his death; the Memory of whoſe Capital crimes ſhould have expired with his breath, and been eternally buried in oblivion with his Corps, by me, had not Your Honors ſuperiour Commânds neceſſitated me to revive, record them to Poſterity ſince his death (as well as to give them in evidence at his Tryall,) for Vindication of Your untainted Justice, and the Common Good, to deter all others in future Ages from the like Trayterous Practiſes. If any therefore deem my Expreſsions, concerning him or his actions, over-laviſh, malicious, or revengefull, let them impartially compare them with his Criminall Offences here recorded, (which they hardly equalize, or fall far ſhort of) and then if they warrant not the harſheſt Epithites, the blackeſt Characters here beſtowed on him, let me eternally bear the blame and ſhame: but if they be ſcarce proportionate to his Treaſons, his grand Miſdemeanors, (which muſt be blazoned and ſet forth in language ſuitable to their tranſcendent Hainouſneſse, not minced, not extenuated by over-diminutive expreſſions) I hope none will or can be ſo injurious, as to charge me with Calumny, much leſſe Scurrility or Revenge, who never yet particularly demanded, received the leaſt farthing Recompence from him or any of his, for all the barbarous Cruelties, Oppreſsions, Impriſonments great Loſſes, Dammages I ſuſtained, eight years ſpace together, onely for diſcovering, oppoſing, countermining (to the utmoſt of my skill and power) all Popiſh Plots, Innovations, Proceedings of this Arch-Prelate and his confederates to undermine our Religion, re-eſtabliſh Popery among us by degrees, and ſet up an arbitrary Papall power, the better to effect the ſame: the onely reall cauſe of all my former ſufferings.
Yet three things there are, I foreſee may poſſibly be objected againſt me by his complices, which need ſome Anſwer to prevent their cauſeleſſe Calumnies.
The firſt is, That in this Hiſtory of his Tryall, I have at large inſerted ſome particular papers, paſſages, (eſpecially in the Catalogue of the Arminian,

Object. 1.
Popiſh Errours, vented in, and of the clauſes againſt them purged out of late new Printed Books) which were not actually, or at leaſt fully read at the Lords Bar; Therefore I am guilty of partiality and unfaithfulneſſe in relating the Evidence given in againſt him at the Bar, by theſe additions to it.
To which I anſwer. Firſt, that all the Evidence, Paſſages here at large recited (with many more) were prepared and ready by me at the Bar; yea 
Anſw. 1. the effect of every Paper, paſſage here recorded, was in generall terms opened, preſſed at the tryall, though not all fully read and particularly urged

for want of time: which I have here more largely inſerted for clearing the truth, and ſatisfying the Reader, the moſt materiall paſſages being onely read at large, the reſt of like nature but briefly referred to in generall to avoyd prolixity, and husband time.
Secondly, that I have largely recorded none of theſe Paſſages here by way of New Additionall Evidence, requiring anſwer, but onely for illuſtration or corroboration of the old, fully given in and read.
Thirdly, the Catalogue of new licenſed Popiſh Doctrines, and of the Purgations of Paſſages againſt Popery, Arminianiſme, arbytrary government, Prophaneſſe, &c. wherein moſt of the new Additions, not fully read, are inſerted, make but one intire charge, not divers; and had but one generall Anſwer, defence given to them by the Arch-biſhop; to wit, that they were not licenſed nor purged out by himſelf, but only by his and the Biſhop of Londons Chaplains, who muſt anſwer for them, and that they concerned not him: therefore theſe Additions making no new charge, and receiving all the ſelfe ſame Anſwer & defence, no indifferent perſons can juſtly taxe me with partiality or injuſtice for inſerting them into this Hiſtory, for the fuller diſcovery of his Popiſh intentions in this kinde, (which want of time prevented us to diſplay ſo fully at the Bar, as was deſired, where we had each particular ready in writing proved upon oath) it being not onely excuſable, but juſtifiable, yea neceſſary in a Hiſtory of this nature, which ſo much concernes Religion and the publick.
The ſecond thing, which perchance will be alleadged againſt me, is; 
Object. 2. That I have not ſo fully, ſo punctually related the Arch-biſhops ſeverall Anſwers and Replyes to all the particulars of his charge as he uttered them viva voce at the Bar in his particular and generall Defences (who ſpake as much for himſelfe as the wit of man could invent, in ſo bad a cauſe) and that I have made ſome few Additions to the Commons ſodain Replications to his Anſwers.
To this I anſwer: Firſt, that I uſed all poſſible diligence, both by friendly 
Anſw. 1. intreaty and the power of Authory, to procure the Archbiſhops own Notes of his Anſwers and Defences to the Commons charge, or authentick Coppies of them, from Mr. Dell his Secretary and others; that ſo I might Print them verbatim to avoyd all calumnies; but I could obtain neither from them; M Dell proteſting, that neither he, nor any other to his knowledge, had the originalls nor any coppyes of them; and that he beleeved, his Lord did burn all the Notes of his anſwers and defence before his death, of purpoſe to prevent their publication after it. So that if I have caſually omitted or miſtaken any part of his Anſwers or Defence, himſelf or his own creatures muſt beare the blame, not I; who have as faithfully, as exactly as I could ſupplyed this defect of his own Papers, out of the Notes of others and mind own fragill memory, relating all his Anſwers, Defences, as neer as poſſible in his own termes, and preſſing them fully for his beſt advantage, without the leaſt wilfull omiſſion or diminution of any one particular of moment.
Secondly, For the Commons ſubitane Replyes to his Anſwers, I have rehearſed them as neer as I could in their own termes; and made no Additions thereunto, but onely of ſome Authors teſtimonies concerning the

unlawfulneſs of Images, Crucifixes, Altars, the placing and rayling in Altars and Lords Ta
•
l
•
s altarwiſe againſt the Eaſtwall, & the conſecration of Churches and Chapples; wherein the Archbiſhop much abuſed his Auditory with empty flaſhes and confident pretences of antiquity, which Mr Serjeant Wilde at large refuted by the Teſtimony of Fathers & other orthodox Writers, and Mr Nicholus too, as far as the ſhortneſſe of time permitted; to the ſubſtance of whoſe replies in theſe particulars I have added very little, but only for learning ſake and the fuller clearing of the truth.
If any ſhall further object, that J have related his Charge intirely together in one continued Diſcourſe, but his Anſwers & the Commons Replies 
Object. 3. thereto in fractions; not in one continued Diſcourſe, as they were delivered each day ſeverally at the Bar, and ſummed up at laſt in the Lords and Commons Houſe.
I anſwer, it is truth: and I did it for theſe Reaſons. Firſt, to avoyde Prolixity, & tedious Repetitions of the ſelf-ſamethings: For had I recited Anſw. his ſeverall Anſwers, Defences & the Cōmons Replies to them as they were made at the Bar each day by themſelves; and then repeated his generall Anſwers, Defences in the Lords and Commons Houſe, and Mr Brownes Reply thereto diſtinctly by themſelves, I ſhould have repeated the ſelfe-ſamethings, with very little variation, three or four times over to no purpoſe; whereas now I have contracted the ſumme of all his Anſwers, Defences to each particular Charg & Proof with the Comons Replies thereto into one, to eſchew Prolixity and Tautologies: 2ly, I did it to prevent confuſion; and for clearer Diſcovery of the truth, the pertinency of the evidence given in againſt him in each Particular: For had I contracted all his Anſwers, Defences into one, and repreſented them in one intire continued Diſcourſe by themſelves; and then have ſubjoyned the Commons Replies unto them intirely together, the Reader could never have clearly diſcovered the frivilouſnes, falſenes, or im