




Right Honourable;


YOu two are ſo joyned, as
it were in one, that it may be
ſaid of you, which was ſaid
of Jonathan and David,
1 Sam. 18. 1. 3. & 20. 42. (two
mighty warriours) that their hearts were
ſo knit, that they loved each other as their own
ſoules; they had ſuch ſweet experience of
each others faithfulneſſe, that it was not
in the power of Saul (though a King) to
break it,Prov. 12. 26. or cut it aſunder; and although
many have attempted to doe the like to
you, yet their labour hath been fruitleſſe;
it hath bin a joy to many to ſee the effects
of love ſo freely flow forth from each to
other interchangeably, which is amiable,
ſweet, and lovely. Moreover, God hath
raiſed you up, and ſet you in high places,

where opportunities flow of doing good;
and which is more, God hath given you
hearts to improve theſe opportunities to
his glory, and the good of his people.
You have alſo had many and great experiences
of his protection, preſence, & bleſſing,
even to admiration; it is the Lord
alone, who hath wrought all your works
for you: ſurely you may well ſtand aſtoniſhed
at his dealings with you; all you
can doe, is too little for him who hath
done ſo much for you; you know the ſorrows,
ſufferings, and ſighings of the people
of God in this Kingdome, have been
many and great, by reaſon of the Prelates
Lording it over them in matters of Religion;
and their ſorrows and ſufferings are
like to be greater, if the plots and ſnares
laid againſt them take place, therefore
now is the time for the righteous in authoritie
to ſhew themſelves for the people
of God; and ſuch as ſleepe and ſlumber
had need quickly to be awaked, that
they might rowſe up themſelves, & ſhake
off that feare and faintneſſe which poſſeſſeth
their hearts, & arme themſelves with
reſolution & courage, to hazard all, even

life it ſelfe, upon a poſſibility of doing the
leaſt good,Prov. 29. 2. (for to do good we live) we rejoyce
that God hath choſen you, (with
many others) whom God hath kept waking
for ſuch a time as this. Next under God
our eies are upon the houſe of Commons of
England, to deliver us from temporall ſlavery,
to free us from the oppreſſion of men
in matters of Religion; we truſt they will
effect this work fully,2 Epiſ. Joh. 8. Job 29 (and God ſhall give
them a full reward) as good Job, who was a
father to the poore, and the cauſe he knew not
he ſearched out, and brake the jawes of the
wicked, and plucked the ſpoile out of his teeth.

It is a great honour unto you,1 Sam. 16. 18. that you
have done valiantly, & ſo have been ſpeciall
inſtruments to ſave this Kingdome
from deſtruction, & that God hath made
you and your Armies ſo victorious; but it
is a greater honour unto you, that you are
of the number of thoſe that love the truth
and people of God, and endeavour to reſcue
them from the hands of cruell and
unreaſonable men: the people of God are
in the love of God,Joh 2 and (which is more)
they are one with God, therefore God
takes the good done to them as done to

himſelfe,Prov. 10. 30. abide by them, and you ſhall be
in ſafety; hold together, for they that ſeek
their lives, ſeek yo
•••
 alſo: And as you
have pleaded their cauſe, (with many other
Worthies with you) ſo ſtill goe on
& proſper,Judg. 6. 12. the Lord is with you, you valiant
men, the Saints love you, they pray
& praiſe God for you; England fareth the
better for you, childrē unborn ſhall praiſe
you, & bleſſe God for you, & the memorial
of your names ſhal be for ever precious.
Moſt noble Worthies,Luk. 1. 3. I may ſeeme to
paſſe the bounds of modeſty, ſo to preſſe
into your preſence, but ſuch is your humility
and love, that you can paſſe by any
defect in that kinde, and accept of that
wch is preſented in love. And ſeeing God
doth not deſpiſe the day of ſmall things,Zach. 4. 10.
I truſt you will not; the great reſpect you
have ſhewed to the truth, and people of
God, hath imboldened me to preſent you
with the beſt I have, in love, out of a deep
reſpect unto you; the peruſall and acceptance
of which, I ſubmit to your wiſdomes,
and humbly take my leave, and
remaine



