



Noble Senatours,


NOt like Araunah in the Holy Story, as a King in
Spirituall Things: but like the Widow in the Gospell, Poore in the Riches of
Christ, and too much a Widow by the absence of her Heavenly Spouse, my Soule
hath offered from her Penury to your Treasury.
Yet, as a Steward, have I endeavoured to be Faithfull, bringing
forth the Best of my Spirit, for Service, and Food to your Spirits: as the
Priests of old gave the Fat of the Sacrifices to the Flame on the Altar.
As the Royall Preacher sought out Choice  Words: so
have I sought for the most Pleasant, most Profitable, most Powerfull
Discoveries of God, in my Scanty Store, in the midst of that Thick Ignorance,
which covers my Poore Heart.
Now I have laid them at your Feet, where they lye, as Scattered,
and Dry Bones; except the Spirit of our Lord Iesus breath upon them, bring them
together, infuse a Warmth, Power, and Beauty into them, to make them Living
Company for you.
Not able to bring Stately, and Costly Beasts to the Sanctuary; I
have made it my Desire, and Designe to present for an Offering before God, and
You, a Payre of Turtle Doves; Simplicity, and Sweetnesse; or, an Innocent
Integrity with an Humble Meekenesse.
I hope both are, if not without blemish, because they have
alighted on my Heart: yet of the right-breed of that Dove, which 
descended from Heaven, and alighted on the Head of our Lord Iesus.
And now, what is my Expectation? For my owne Soule, for my
Brethren in the Flesh, all the Children of Seth, for the rest of my
Fellow Creatures, which groane continually in my Eares? Is not my desire and
Sighing before thee, O my God? Even This; The Descent of the Dove upon them;
the Manifestation of the Spirit in them, the True Iubile, the Divine Liberty of
the whole Creation.
All within me testifies of this Spirit to me; All without me
proclaimes this Spirit before Me; as the Spring of my Ioyes; the End of my
Faith; the Glorification of my Person; and not of mine onely, but of all
those, who are rooted in this Principle of Life, what ever the Soile of
Education, Profession, or Custome be, in which they are Planted; whatever the
Barke of Opinion or Affection  be, in which for the present they
are Inclosed.
The most Known Men for Wisedome in all Languages, Learnings,
Religions, Ages, Regions have worship't, have waited for This Eternall Spirit;
The Vnderstanding of the World, riding forth in a Chariot of Light, upon the
Face of all Formes of Things; The Good Converting All Things into it selfe; The
Vnity, or some-thing above an Vnity, To 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
, The Supreame
Band of Vnity, and Multiplicity.
This Spirit brought forth from it selfe the Creation, and still
sits upon it, hatching it, till it breake the Shell of This Darke Flesh, and
spring forth into its owne Life and Image.
The Lord Iesus is this Spirit; who is, before Abraham
was, by whom the Worlds were Made; who is a Spirit, Comprehending, Cherishing,
Enclosing, Comming forth  into all the Fleshly Births of Time.
This Iesus came Himselfe in the Last of Times, into Flesh; was by
His Crosse drawn up out of it into Spirit; and now by the same way is drawing
up all Things after Him into the same Spirit.
That your selves, and these Kingdomes may Feele, Obey, Enjoy the
Drawings of this Iesus, the Descents of his Spirit, is the Affectionate Prayer
of him, who is



