




SIR, not having of mine owne, wherewith I might tell the world of your great and continuall favours unto me, by such a pub
•
ke testimony, I thought good to doe it by publishing this worke of another, whose Person and Doctrine

you well knew and respected. Which I doe the more willingly, because it is sutable to the Contentment here treated of. I am well contented with that mediocrity of gifts and abilities, which God hath bestowed on me. I hold it better in this life, to be faithfull in a little, then ruler over much. No doubt but some are Masters of great parts, and estates, and faithfull too: rich in this world, and rich in good workes too: high in place and respect among men, and high in the favour of God too. But, both such have their hazzards and temptations, against which they need to be watchfull; and the brother of low degree hath cause (in God and his love) to rejoyce and be contented. And oh how happy were it with godly Christians, if they had taken forth this lesson of Contentment! How comfortlesse

would their lives then be! How blessedly free from those torturing passions of emulation, envie, murmuring, impatience, and the like, wherewith the spirit is too often, and too much disquieted! Godlinesse with Contentment is great gaine, saith the Apostle: as if the purchase were small, where Contentment is wanting: And indeed much of the benefit and advantage is taken away, where this lesson of Contentation is not taken forth perfectly. And how unbeseeming is it to an heire of the promises, to be Malecontent for worldly wants, or afflictions! How thwarting to the wisedome of God, as if he knew not best to make allowance to his children! How terrible to lie disconsolate in death, or any deadly trouble, moaning as that great Emperour when he lay dying at Yorke;

In my life time I have been all 

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
. Sev. things, and now nothing doth me good! I w
•
sh to your Worship all the comforts and mercies of God in Christ, both in life and death; and therunto at this time I commend to your reading this little Treatise of Contentment: resting ever,



