




SIR,

IT is Bernards
Bern. Ep. 91. saying, Nemo esse
bonus plusquàm oporter potest;
There is not a man alive can
be better then he should be; and it is
without doubt he is not good, who would not be better:
Ubi incipis nolle fieri melior, ibi etiam
desinis esse bonus; adding they be professedly
the children of the luke-warm, who say, We
will be no better then our Fathers: Nolumus esse
meliores quàm patres nostri; whereas men
are in Religion not to be stinted by any Antiquity,
but what is divine from God the Ancient of dayes.
The children of light be proficients, they reach
forward, their spark comes to be a coale, their coale
a most vehement flame; God hath kindled in your

breast an ardent love to the house of God, your
zeale provokes many, your zeale makes many a
glad heart, your zeale honours God, who hath put
honour upon you: For them that honour him, he will
honour. Your present employment in the honourable
House of Commons in Parliament, cals for zeale:
It is a fire, 1. Active, to set all on work, the hand,
the tongue, the head, the heart. 2. Quick, speedy;
it is an utter enemy of delayes in its work. 3. Vehement;
it bestoweth the top of affection, and strength
of intentions on what it loves. 4. Aspiring; it is the
highest element, mounts up nearer heaven, nearer
the Lord. Anciently, they who published Books
were wont to honor Personages with the patronage of
that, which they found them to be lovers or professors
of; To whom then may this present word of zeale
(which once you heard with patience) be
Dedicated more properly, then unto you? Whose
abilities in conjunction with zeale, graced with
magnanimity, and modesty, render you amiable to
all that know you, and honourable in mindes that
heare of you. I humbly pray your acceptance of this
my memorizing your zeale for Zion; You reade not
here swelling words of vanity, my study was to be not
plausible but profitable; Nos autem qui rerum
magis quàm verborum amatores, utilia

potius quàm plausibilia sectamur:
Salvian. praef. in lib. de Gubern. This I
present you withall, to deliver my selfe from suspition
and imputation of an unthankfull minde towards
you, who countenanced me with ain your first speech in Parliament, when I was pursued by a Pu
•
sevant from the Archbishop of Cant. for not reading the prayer against Scots, &c. mention too honourable
for me, when I was in contempt; who
testifie my respect to you much honoured of good
men for well-doing: Others zeale would have
consumed me, but that your zeale
Ps. 119. 139. consumed you;
for I have seen God in you, yet I have a greater bond
of deeper acknowledgement of your zeale, then your
many favours to me-ward amount unto, which is the
faithful discharge of that place the Country hath most
worthily put upon you, and intrusted you withall;
wherein your forwardnesse for the good of the
Church (the welfare whereof is above my chiefe joy)
hath been to my comfort, hath warmed many a heart,
and hath occasioned thanksgiving by many unto
God. The fruit of true wisdome is credit and confidence,
Eccl. 8. 1. A mans wisdome makes his face to
shine, and the boldnesse of his face shall be changed,
as faultlesse and fearlesse. Adorn your personall sufficiencies
with the true fear of God, a wise mans treasure,
a zealous forwardnesse for Gods glory, goodnes,
and good causes, whereby your publique imployment
may be blessed: Keep good conscience, the dearest
jewell your heart can have in it; Hold a constant

countermotion to the course of the world; minde the
life of grace as that which farre excels all ornaments
of nature, art, or policy, that it animates
and ennobles them. What you doe for God, doe it by
his Word, all Laws are to be rectified by Gods Law,
men must set their Watch by the Dyall, and the
Dyall by the Sun. This way the more you labour, the
more rest will you finde. Thus with my unfained
prayers to the God of all grace,1. Thess. 3. 13.
That he may establish
your heart unblamable in holinesse,
and guiding you by his counsell, may after
receive you to glory.

Otham, in Kent.
Your Worships
Petitioner to the
Throne of Grace,


