




LOw and humble (Most High, and Mightie
Prince) doeth Your Montrose addresse
himself to Your Highnes presence:
not He himself, in his full aequipage,
no, nor a moitie of him, and in truth
Scarse a mean scantling of that matchles worth.
Who, though unpolished and rude, and, in this his
Roman dresse, ill deck
•
, rough, and uncomely; yet
shal be not feare the publike view, if You daigne
him that favorable aspect, and grace, which You are
wont to vouchsafe even forraigners, and strangers
that court You. And he thinks, he may, upon
better grounds then they, presume to entreat this, he
being no alien, but a lawful native of your Royal Fathers

haereditarie Kingdome: and no otherwise, then
by the fatall calamitie of those times, exposed, bred,
and fed in a strange land. Nor doth he want lively
characters, and marks imprinted in him, to evidence
from what land, and father he is descended: That,
Your own Scotland, wherein one hundred and nine
of Your Progenitors have raigned; all whose Royall
blood runs in Your veins, and divine souls breaths
in Your breast: Him a free, born, and bred native,
of that most ancient Kingdome; a loyal servant of
Your dearest father, his most Gracious Lord, and
faithful follower of his, in despight of all the casualties
of fortune.
Which arguments, if they be not sufficient to conciliat
the sweet gale of Your Grace, to inspire health,
and life, in this tender birth, otherwise readie to expire:
yet let me beseech Your singular clemencie, to
lend it so much of Your countenance, as to observe in
it (though drawne with a rude pencill) some lineaments,
and shaddows of it's first patterne; and even
for those resemblances sake, vouchsafe it so much of
Your countenance, as may give it some life and being,
if not immortalitie. For, who would despise that only
Pourtra
•
cture that were of Scipio, Caesar, Alexander,
or of Your Royall Grandfathers, exstant, Iames

the Peaceful, or Henry the Great, because the work of
some obscure, and perhaps, unskilfull craftsman? I can
wel divine, Montrose will not long want an Apelles,
or Leucippus to paint him out, and limbe him to
the life; nor an Homer perhaps to sing his praises: only
(most Gracious Sir) be pleased to use a while these
my poore endeavours, till those more worthie show
themselves to the world. And looke not on the harshnes
of my stile, but bend Your high and generous
thoughts upon the actions, truly Roman, that's to say,
Noble, High, Heroik, Great, and farre transcending
meane and vulgar spirits. And, if You wil impute (as
is fit and just) the blemishes and errours, which herein
may occurre, to the weaknes of my wit and judgement,
and no wayes, to my Patterns Genius, I dare
boldly undertake, that your Montrose shall prove
neither unpleasant, nor unprofitable.
For, what can be more pleasant to a Prince, second
to none on earth, but his Father, borne in that eminent
dignitie, bred in that condition, and from his
infancie trained up in those wayes, which resent nothing
but Heroicall deeds; then to have alwayes before
his eyes, that worthie, whom (be it said without
envy) no man in his time goeth beyond, to embrace,
caresse and cherish him, and coppie out his actions,
and observe,


How he behaves himself, how brave and goodlie,
In Martiall feats, manhood and Chevalrie?

Who taking up arms to serve the commands of the best
of Kings, your most Gracious Father, and leading the
dance, as it were, to usher in Your Valour, which now
waxeth to ripnes and strength apace; hath performed
such exploits, as strikes the present times with admiration;
and gratefull posteritie shal ever preserve in
memorie. For, though envy presse hard upon true
glorie, and tread upon her heels; yet that short lived,
and self destroying furie, shall never overtake, nor
ecclipse her solid and immortall lustre.
In the meane time (most Gracious Sir) we present
You here with no smoothe fables, or Romanses.

Antiphates, and Scillaes gulf are not my theme,
Swallowing Charybdis, devouring Polypheme.

No gyants, or glorious wonders; yet enemies, as
like gyants, and Victories obtained over them, as
like wonders, as may be. For, what did ever lying
Greece faine of the proud attempts of their old gyants,
which these conspiratours, the sons of the earth,
have not dared to doe against God, religion,
faith, loyaltie, and right, in all their dealings, with
Your Royall Parents, Your self, and all Yours? who
heaping up mo intains, upon mountains of lyes, calumnies,

and slanders; reared up those bulworkes, from
whence, with horrid violence, they have fought against
the Gods. And what did they imagine done
by Apollo, by Pallas, or Mars, to overthrow those
monsters; which our Montrose did not with like courage
undertake, and successe performe? And now that
having vanquished, he did not finally, and totally
triumph over them; we must impute it to the force of
Your Fate, which would not permit the Genius of
Your countrey, to owe so glorious a deliverance, to
any others valour, but Your own. Nor indeed, seemed
it convenient, that any other should thunder
downe Enceladus, with those other Titans, to Hell; but
the sonne of him, whose father those gyants kept in
chains.
And then (Great Sir) when You intend those
courses, to which the lawes of God, and man oblidge
You; the vindication of Your Father, and countrey,
from that most savage bondage; what can be more
profitable, then to have Your eyes stil on him, as the
guide, and leader of Your way, who first of all discovered
the counsells, plots, and treacheries of these
traitors, and, as I may say, alone did show the way,
how to lay their intollerable pride, and breake their
power, though growen verie great, before it was perceived.

For You shall find him a body, without a
soul; for being no more valiant in arms then wise
in counsell and managing affairs, he advised 
