



To his little flock, the Inhabitants
of the Parish of S. Iohn the
Evangelist in Watlingstreet in London,
Georg
•
 Walker their weake, but wellwishing

•
astor, commendeth this small token of
his unfeined lvoe, and hearty desire of their
eternall happinesse in the fruition of God; by
their fellowship and communion with him in
the Lord Iesus Christ.


BEloved in the Lord
Christ, seeing now I
have spent one halfe of
my dayes in Preaching
to you and your predecessors
the Gospell of Christ, in expounding
the sacred Scriptures, & in
watching and labouring for the good
of your soules, to wit, for the space of
29 yeares, untill there is not one left alive
of all those inhabitants, who were
masters of families at my first coming
to this place, and did all with one consent

and voyce make choyce of me to
be their Pastor: I hold it high time
for me, to thinke of my departure from
hence by putting off this earthly tabernacle,
and of leaving you as your
predecessors who were my first flocke,
have left me their Pastor behind them
to feed you a succeeding generation.
And least my labour and paines,
which I spent among them for the
good of their soules should seeme to die
with them, and to bee buried in their
graves: I have thought good to renew
the memory of them; and to leave
to the World some Monuments of
that Doctrin I have Preached to them
heretofore, as also to you of latter
times, by Gods gracious assistance,
though in great weaknesse of body, yet
with a willing mind, and with a courage
never daunted with any menacings
and threatenings of potent adversaries,
and malicious persecutors.
The principall heads and true platforme
of which doctrine I have briefly

comprised, and compendiously set
forth in this short Dialogue, which
containes in it the principles and
foundations of Christian Religion
and which I do here commend to you,
as a testimony of that unfeigned love
which I beare to you, and of my fervent
desire of the salvation of your
soules. I have already published, and
have ready for the Presse divers larger
Treatises, wherein are conteined
many particular doctrines which may
be reduced to these principall heads;
and are there largely handled, plainly
opened, and fully proved by Scriptures;
and the true use of them shewed
in such manner as they have beene
by my mouth publikly preached among
you. But this golden Key, which is
the quintessence of them all, will open
Heaven unto you, if you can learn
to use it aright. It is made of divine
metall, even the Word of God revealed
from Heaven, which is more pure
than the most refined gold. It will

teach you by a short and compendious
way to know God, not only in the unity
of Essence in his essentiall attributes;
In the Trinity of persons, and
in his Works of Creation, and actuall
Providence overruling mans fall, and
disposing it and all the evils which
entered in by it, to his own glory, and
the good of his Elect: but also in
Iesus Christ, in whom to know him
the only true God is eternall life, as
our Saviour testifieth, Iohn 12. 3.
Here Gods eternall Counsell and Decree
of Predestination is discovered:
Here you may learn the saving works
of God, in and by Christ, God and
man humbled in our nature. What
love God hath shewed in giving his
Son for us; and what Christ hath
done and suffered for our Redemption.
Here you may see what saving
works God works by his Spirit, shed
on his Elect through Christ, as Regeneration,
Renovation, effectuall
calling, Vnion with Christ, Adoption,

Communion of his ransome
for Redemption, of his Righteousnesse
for Iustification, of his satisfaction
for Remission of sins, and Reconciliation.
And what Gods Spirit
works in us and by us, as Mortification,
Sanctification, Faith, Repentance
and all holy graces; and how
and by what meanes he enables us to
apply Christ and his benefits unto us,
and to enioy him and them for Salvation;
and also doth beget and increase
grace in his Elect, to wit, by
the Word preached and heard, the Sacraments
rightly administred and received,
faithfull and fervent Prayer,
and the like. And how these worke
in the Elect to eternall life and blessednesse,
and are abused by wicked
reprobates, to their owne everlasting
damnation and destruction. These
things have I written to you Fathers
and Masters, that you may read them
your selves, and commend them to
your children and families; I commend

them to you Young men, that
you may grow strong, and may overcome
the wicked one. And I commend
them to you litle children; that you
may learne to know his name, and that
your sins may be forgiven you for his
names sake. If after so much preaching
& teaching you be found ignorant
& unprofitable, it is because the God of
this World hath blinded your minds,
least the light of the glorious Gospell
of Christ, who is the image of God,
should shine unto you. This word
will be to you the savour of death unto
death, and this booke shall witnesse
for me against you, that you are wilfully
ignorant and a lost people. But
if, as I hope, and pray fervently and
wish from my heart; You do chearefully
receive the love of this Truth:
then shall my Doctrine bee to you the
savour of life unto life, and wee shall
both together, I of my worke and labour
in preaching, and you of your
reverence in hearing, and faithfulnesse

in obeying the Word Preached,
receive the reward of righteousnesse,
which Christ hath purchased for
them that beleeve and obey the Gospell,
even the Crown of glorie, which
never fadeth. This briefe summe of
Christian Religion, with other more
large Treatises I have written in my
bonds, for the common benefit of you
and others, to testifie unto you, that
the many waters of troubles and persecutions,
which I suffer for the
Truth sake, which I have preached
unto you, cannot quench my love to
you, nor my desire of your salvation,
nor hinder mee from labouring for
your good. In all which I seeke not
yours, but you. And as I have preached
the Gospell freelie to you, never
seeking any of your temporall
goods, for my ministring of spirituall
things plentifullie unto you; but
spending besides my spirits, much
substance over and above the revenues
of my smal Benefice, which from

you I have received; so I commend
to you freely this and all other works
and labours of my love, which if you
do lovinglie accept and use, and imploy
to your own advantage, I shall
thinke my work in some good measure
rewarded, and shall ever remaine a
faithfull labourer for the good of your
soules, according to the utmost of my
power, and



