




WORTHY PATRIOT,

THe life we live we live in God, happy is the improvement of that life that is lift up to him, and to his wayes. It is a glory (above the crowne) of the worthy Kings of Judah, that they prepared their hearts to seek the Lord. What's the life of man without comfort? And what greater comfort doth man enjoy in life, but his communion with God? The life of the best is but a pilgrimage; and a life of service lyes upon every man; though the race be short, imployment attends it; if a servant neglect his Lords affairs, he had the honour to be call'd a servant, but lost his glory for casting by his industry; how sweet is their peace that know their Lords command, and chearfully take up his charge? Every man is at work, but many mistake their Masters business, they doe their own, and put his name upon it. Servants that love to walk in the dark, are unfit to attend npon the Lord of light; light and darkness have nocommunion. This present age affords us full testimony: how doe the deeds of darkness vanish, that past without controule



not long agoe, which in this time of tryall will not indure the touchstone? Mens confidence of their actions is no ground of their justice, the Judge will search him out that seemeth just in his own cause, nor must the Judges, or those that assist them in advancing Justice, be discouraged, though the impeached challenge them of unjust proceeding. Who shall be innocent, if the condemneds test may be sufficient to fix a crime?

Sir, I reckon it a part of your honour, that God hath conferr'd upon you, to be an instrument to bring so great an offender to justice, rather then to be ensnared by him. You served our Lord Christ in helping to subdue a mountain of ambition; you have suffer'd for your love and endeavour, to establish a throne for Christ, and a throne for the King in righteousnesse: your labour of love will not be forgotten; your work is with your God, and your reward in the Lords hand. Goe on and prosper, and God that hath made the evill bow before the good, and the wicked at the gates of the righteous, make you every day more succesfull.
If this ensuing Subject may yeeld any refreshing to your spirit, or provoke the church of Christ to exalt their Lords glory, and sanctifie his glorious Name that hath delivered us from so great a burden; my spirit hath rest; rejoycing in the God of our salvation; waiting for further manifestation of greater consolation. The God of peace fill you with comfort in beleeving, and preserve you to his heavenly Kingdome.



