





I
 Purpose not (Honourable LORDS) to insinuate my selfe, or my endevours into your Favour, by fine words, and feined commendations of your Vertues. For I doe not thinke it wil be acceptable unto wise mē, who both suspect that Art, and account it base; Though of my selfe I am not apt to flatter, yet the very name of Conscience that is set before this Treatise, chargeth me to avoid it. Many indifferent good Bookes are in the very beginning disgraced by it. I will onely shew the true cause, by which I was perswaded (though my name perhaps be more obscure, then to be knowne unto you) to set downe your Name in the forefront of this Treatise.
It is reported over all places neere hand, that the Doctrine according to Godlinesse, is both more Practically Preached by the Pastors, and more put in practise by the Hearers in your Churches, then yet hath beene marked in many others, though they hold the same Doctrine.
That worthy Servant of the Lord, Master WILLIAM TEELING, who was by this meanes in great admiration, and famous throughout all the Low-Countrey Churches, (to say nothing of others, that both haue, and doe take the same course) tooke such painfull paines this way,

both publikely and privately, by word and writing, that it may be truely said, The zeale of Gods house hath eaten him up: whereby also (Envy the follower of such a Vertue, being now overcome) he hath obtained that Crowne, which God hath prepared for those that haue instructed many unto righteousnesse.

Because I hope this Treatise will more excite to this kind of study, it being also desired by many, who were not to be neglected. Its fittest it should be sent, where it may finde those running this race, who will be easily put on, and where others also may take example of that course that is taught heere.
This being the true cause of the Dedication, giues me cause to hope, that this intention and service will not bee unacceptable unto you. This onely remaineth (Noble Lords) The good and great God in Christ, vouchsafe to blesse you more and more, and your Churches, with a true faith, a good Conscience, and perfect Happinesse.



