




BEing unjuſtly forced from that Cure,
whereunto God had called me, as the
moſt of my▪
Profeſsion are, that will not
turne Mountebancks and poyſon the People)
and not ſuffered▪ upon His Majeſties
gracious Exchange, (after ſeaventeene months impriſonment
in London, without any cauſe ſhewen in all
that time) either to returne to that Care or to practiſe any
where elſe with ſafety (though licenſed for all parts of
this Kingdome) I was neceſſitated to repair to this City
made happy in the midſt of miſeries by your Vigilancy
& Gods bleſſing thereupon. I had not beene long here,
but I ſaw and partooke (prayſed be the Lord for it) of
one of the greateſt mercies (let others value it as they
pleaſe) that ever this City was bleſſed with: A vaſt, and
in their owne opinion, an invincible Army ſurrounded

us,2 King 18. and 19. as ſometimes the Aſſyrians did Jeruſalem: Their
Tartaris, their Rabſariſes and their Rabſakehs opened
their mouths wide both againſt our religious Hezekiah,
and againſt all his loyall Subjects then attending his ſacred
Perſon, thinking (as their own bloudy Pamphlets
did intimate) inſtantly to have devoured them all.
And without doubt, If the Lord himſelfe had not been on
our ſide.
Pſal. 124.
If the Lord himſelfe had not beene on our ſide, when
thoſe men thus roſe up againſt us, they had ſwallowed us up
quick when they were ſo wrathfully diſpleaſed at us: But bleſſed
be the Lord, he did not give us up as a prey unto their teeth;
but put his hooke in their noſe,
2 Kings 19▪ 28.
and his bridle in their lips,
and turned them back by the way, not by which they came,
but by which they became the object of their Soveraign's
tender mercy and compaſſionate pitty, whom
they then purſued with their Rebellious malice and
mercileſſe cruelty. This unſpeakable mercy of God to
this City, or rather to this whole Nation, was attended
upon (whether for our unthankfullneſſe, or for our other
ſinnes, or for both! with that formidable judgement
of Plague. Upon the increaſing and ſpreading
whereof, obſerving, that your Honours, in your extraordinary
care of this place, had commanded certaine
Phyſicall directions in time of Plague to be publiſhed, I
was encouraged to beleeve, that Hyper-phyſicall directions
for ſuch a time could not want your patronage,
And therefore finding none other of my calling,
though farre more able, to have prevented me, I preſumed
to preſent you with theſe: Knowing withall,
that without your helpe and aſſiſtance, both Phyſicall
and Hyper-phyſicall preſcripts, how excellent ſoever, will
be but of little benefit or profit to the moſt of men; all

men being naturally prone to reject, at leaſt to neglect
that adviſe which would do them moſt good: and unleſſe
the Magiſtrates make them know that they beare not
the ſword in vaine, but will proceed to ſevere correction
where wholſome inſtructions are deſpiſed, the Divine
and Phyſitian both may preſcribe till they are weary,
and all to no purpoſe.Numb. 16▪ 46. We reade of an Aaron needing
a calling upon from Moſes to do what belonged to
him in the time of a Plague.
Numb, 25. 8. But as the Plague may be
(and, for ought any man knowes to the contrary, this
Plague may be ſuch) the Magiſtrates actuall exerciſing
their power in the execution of juſtice upon ſome provoking
Offenders may be ſo neceſſarily required, that
the raging contagion will not ceaſe without it. This
I am confident of, and not without good grounds:
That would your Honours be pleaſed but to revive the
execution of ſome of your owne Lawes againſt that
one horrid crying ſinne of ſwearing and blaſpheming
Gods name, which ſo raignes in our ſtreets and houſes,
the Plague