




IT cannot be unknown to any, except ſuch
as are ignorant of Satans devices, and
altogether ſtrangers to the Hiſtories
of former times, that when▪ the Church
commeth out of Idolatry, and out of bitter
ſervitude and grievous preſſures of conſcience, all her
ſtorms are not over her head, but ſhe begins to be aſſaulted
and afflicted more then before with hereſies,
ſchiſmes, and home-bred diſturbances. Which through
the manifold wiſdome and over-ruling diſpenſation of
God, who worketh all things according to the counſel of
his will, is Englands lot this day, that this may be to
thoſe in whom the Lord hath no pleaſure, a ſtone of
ſtumbling, and a rock of offence, that they may
goe and fall backward, and be broken; & ſnared,
and taken: that others, who are approved,
may be made manifeſt; yea, that many may be
purified, and tried, and made white; and that in
the iſſue God may have the greater glory in making a
ſoveraign remedy out of poyſonfull Ingredients, and his

people may ſay, bleſſed be the Lord God of Iſrael
who only doth wondrous things.

But now will the Sectaries be contented (as Chriſts
witneſſes in former times were) to be examined and
judged according to the word of God, and if they be
found to be what they are accuſed to be, then to ſuffer
accordingly? Nay, if ſo, they fear they ſhall run too
great a hazard. Therefore they cry out for toleration
and liberty of conſcience, hereby going about not only
themſelves to fiſh in troubled waters, but to improve at
once the manifold advantages of ſympathiſing with the
principles of the moſt part of men amongſt us; for as it
is a common plea and bond of union among all hereticks
and ſectaries, how many ſoever their diviſions and ſubdiviſions
be among themſelves;
See the Review of the Covenant. yea, they give (in this)
the right hand of fellowſhip to the Prelaticall▪ and malignant
party, for they alſo put in for liberty of conſcience:
and as carnall and prophane men deſire nothing
more then that they may not be compelled to any religious
duty, but permitted to doe what ſeem good in their
own eies. So liberty of conſcience is a ſweet and taking
word among the leſſe diſcerning ſort of godly people,
newly come out of the houſe of bondage, out of the popiſh
and Prelaticall tyranny; I ſay the leſſe diſcerning ſort,
becauſe thoſe of the godly who have their ſenſes exerciſed
to diſcern good and evill, know that liberty of hereſie

and ſchiſme is no part of the liberty of conſcience
which Chriſt hath purchaſed to us at ſo dear a rate.
But is there no golden hook and taking bait for the
Magiſtrate? yes ſure; for his part he is told that he may
puniſh any breach of peace or civill juſtice, or a treſpaſſe
againſt the State and againſt civill authority, but
yet not put forth his power againſt any man for hereſie
or ſchiſme, being matters of religion and of conſcience.
As if both Polititians and Divines had been in a great
error when they ſaid that the end and uſe of Magiſtracy
is to make bonum hominem, as well as bonum
civem, a good man as well as a good commonwealths
man. Shall I adde further, that all who wiſh well to
the publike from principles either of religion or policy,
want not here their own tentations, perſwading to a toleration
of ſectaries, in regard of the neceſſity of an union
againſt the common adverſary, and the great hazard,
if not certain ruine, of the cauſe, by our own ruptures?
Vnder theſe fair colours and handſome pretexts doe
ſectaries infuſe their poyſon, I mean their pernicious,
God-provoking, Truth-defacing, Church ruinating, &
State-ſhaking toleration. The plain engliſh of the queſtion
is this: whether the Chriſtian Magiſtrate be keeper
of both Tables: whether he ought to ſuppreſſe his
own enemies, but not Gods enemies, and preſerve his

own ordinances, but not Chriſts Ordinances frō violation.
Whether the troublers of Iſrael may be troubled. Whether
the wilde boars and beaſts of the foreſt muſt have
leave to break down the hedges of the Lords vineyard;
and whether ravening wolves in ſheeps clothing muſt be
permitted to converſe freely in the flock of Chriſt.
Whether after the black Devil of Idolatry and tyranny
is trod under our feet, a white Devill of hereſie and
ſchiſme, under the name of tender conſciences, muſt be
admitted to walk up and down among us. Whether not
only pious and peaceable men, (whom I ſhall never conſent
to perſecute) but thoſe alſo who are as a peſtilence▪ or
a Gangrene in the body of Chriſt, men of corrupt minds
and turbulent ſpirits, who draw factions after them,
make a breach and rent in Iſrael, reſiſt the truth and
reformation of religion, ſpread abroad all the ways they
can their pernicious errors, and by no other means can
be reduced; whether thoſe alſo ought to be ſpared and
let alone. I have endeavoured in this following diſcourſe
to vindicate the lawfull, yea neceſſary uſe of the coercive
power of the Chriſtian Magiſtrate in ſuppreſsing
and puniſhing hereticks and ſectaries, according as the
degree of their offence and of the Churches danger ſhal
require: Which when I had done, there came to my
hands a book called The ſtorming of Antichriſt.
Indeed, The recruting of Antichriſt, and the

ſtorming of Zion, (if ſo be that I may anabaptize
an Anabaptiſts book) Take one paſſage for inſtance,
pa. 25. And for Papiſts, ſaith he, though they are
leaſt to be borne of all others, becauſe of the
uncertainty of their keeping faith with Hereticks,
as they call us, and becauſe they may be
abſolved of ſecurements that can ariſe from
the juſt ſolemn oaths, and becauſe of their cruelty
againſt the Proteſtants in divers Countries
where they get the upper hand, and becauſe
they are profeſt Idolaters, yet may they be born
with (as I ſuppoſe with ſubmiſsion to better
judgments) in Proteſtant government, in point
of religion, becauſe we have no command to
root out any for conſcience, &c. Why then? is
this to ſtorm Antichriſt? or is it not rather a ſtorming of
this party, in the prevailing whereof God will have
far more glory then in the prevailing of the
Popiſh and Prelaticall party, as himſelf ſpeaketh,
pa. 34. And if he will ſtorm, ſure ſome of his Ladders
are too ſhort. If any one rail againſt Chriſt (ſaith
he, p. 23.) or deny the Scriptures to be his word,
or affirm the Epiſtles to be only letters written
to particular Churches, and no rule for us, and
ſo unſettle our faith, this I take may be puniſhed
by the Magiſtrate, becauſe all or moſt Nations

in the world doe it. That all the Nations▪ in
the world doe puniſh for theſe things, I am yet to learn:
and thoſe that doe, doe they not alſo puniſh men for other
ways of unſetling the grounds of faith beſides theſe?
The declining of ſome of the Epiſtles as being letters
written upon particular occaſions, and no rule for us,
is an error which hath been pretended to be no leſſe conſcientious
then thoſe errors which now he will have indulged.
Laſtly, if he would needs ſtorm, why would
be not make ſome new breach? I find no materiall arguments
in him for liberty of conſcience, but what I
found before in the bloudy Tenent, the compaſſionate
Samaritane, and M. S. to A. S. ſo that my
enſuing anſwers to them ſhall ſerve his turn. And
now Reader buy the truth, and ſell it not. Search
for knowledge as for hid treaſures. If thou readeſt
with a unprejudiced mind, I dare promiſe thee through
Gods bleſsing a ſatisfied mind.
