




MAny there are (Courteous Reader,) which have and doe daily observe, to their due commendation, in the voyages they undertake, things worthy the eternall register of fame: and some have not beene wanting in all ages which in the words of that learned man (Gaspar Waserus) non tantum transcurrendo, corpora hominum aspiciunt, sed etiam animos, atquererum

momenta, non margines, aut super fines introspiciunt: But few or none, which have prescribed the exact and profitable limits, which ought to direct this laudable purpose. And therefore I have observed it to be a custome (perhaps, where it is well sorted, not unprofitable) among those which send forth their sons, pupils, or kinsemen to travell, to elect some discreet, and well experienc't Companion, which may more safely waft them to their owne homes backe againe, through many tempests, that continually use to assault those which Iourny from their homes. But these doe not alwayes fulfill the intentions of the Directors, or rather imployers; because frequently

most men belye or overweene their own sufficiencie: and (which is worse) usually overshadow, by their cunning demeanour, at or before their election, their ownē vices.
I have therefore thought it, in my opinion, alwaies a profitable worke; if any (which bath ability for directions of this quality) studious, and sober man, would, collect, to necessary and pertinent heades, such monitions cautions, and observations, which might be easily found out: whereby the hot spirits of some novices may be wholesomely restrained and faithfully instructed. For these dumbe counsellors, are commonly most trusty, and carry with them in their prudent directions, collected from both reading

and experience more solid profit: then those which eyther readily spend their Iudgements without meditation, or at leastwise have no other but transitory and superficiall knowledge. Finding therefore none that hath in our vulgar language (to my remembrance) undertaken this profitable essay; I have adventured to make publique a small treatise of direction how to travell profitably, and safely into forraigne Countries; which in another idiome I had some 4 yeares since addressed, to a neere and deere travellor of my acquaintance. The originall shall hereafter appeare, (although not so fully furnished) if this impolished translation, with the not altogether unnecessary additions may passe

without the censure of the criticall, and with the allowance of the Courteous reader. I well know the presses groane with the weight of pamphlets and (since this most happy invention) innumerable bookes of all sortes lye moulding in most private studies, and libraries, fearing the wormes, and desiring their readers. Nay many iudicious volumes of former, and moderne times doe now cum blattis et tincis rixari; whilst many more idle vanities or raging follyes doe busymens minds upon worse imploiments. Sed (in the phrase of Baudius) quae est ista profusio temporis in hac vitae brevitate, tanta



que
 copia rerum scitu dignissimarum, tempus tanquam rem vacuam

aut noxiam super vacuis impendere? nec supervacuis tantum sed noxiis, vtquae dulcedine quadam sui, praeclarissima quae




que
 ingenia alliciant ad se, & avocent a melioribus? expertus loquor, nec quisquam tibi mihi ve verba dederit, ut in plurimorum nugis, magnum aliquod aut secretum bonum inesse suspicemur. I have therefore provided a remedy in this little treatise to mitigate this disease, for my selfe and others (if they will as many doe,) have any confidence of an unknown physitian. Heere also the patient may trust without danger; and knowing once the quality of the potion, take as little as it pleaseth him selfe. For the needlesse

(which some perhaps, male volent esteemers of other mens endeavours, may object) subject of this booke; I will answer with a learned Philologer: Stultum est, certe serum nimis jam demum incipere misereri chartarum, quae tam diù, tam miserè, sine omni gratia perierunt, & pereunt quotidie. Besides, Scribimus indocti docti



que

 And there is not (if we beleeve Pliny) any booke out of which the laborious, and candid reader, may not collect some profit. How ever I have made it publique for to serve my owne turne; who have now one, I may not repent to leave this unto, as a legacy, or direction. But I would be willing to benefit more, and amongst

the rest my courteous, and benevolent reader otherwise.

Optarem ut placeam, sin minus ut taceam

From my house. At Warneford.



3. Feb. 1642.


