




THe Records of Holy Scripture, whether they concerne
the Actions of GOD or Men, are not onely
Stories of things done in that Age, but Propheſies
alſo of future events in ſucceeding Generations.
This GOD hath been pleaſed to exemplifie
particularly in that Word, which divers weekes agoe on a
Solemne Day appointed for extraordinary Humiliation He
ſent to be preached in your Eares. While ſome bodily Indiſpoſitions
hindred me from a ſpeedy obeying the Call of tendring
it alſo to your hands and eyes: It ſeemed good to Him, (who
doth all things wiſely and faithfully,) to give Inſtances of
His fulfilling both parts of it; affording ſome anſwers of
Grace, and expreſſions of Pardon and favour in Wales and
the parts thereabouts; and yet withall taking ſome Vengeance
upon our untowardneſſes, by the ſad blow given us in
the Weſt. I hope that as we ſhall all learne by it, even more and
more, that1 Sam. 3. 19.
GOD lets none of His Words fall to the
ground, but whatſoever He ſpeakes to us hath its effect upon

us, andZech. 1. 6.
takes hold of us, even whether we take hold of it or
no: So we will beleeve alſo, that the effect of it will never be
ſpent as long as we live, or any of mankind, in as much as all
the Word of GOD lives and abides for ever, as both theIſai. 40 8. Prophet and1 Pet. 1. 23. 25. Apoſtle tell us. And this Beliefe will both make
all the Word profitable to us, and make us Happy by the Word:
The Promiſes and Expreſſions of Grace in the Word never
doing us good, never being fulfilled to us compleatly,
but by our beleeving them: And the Threatnings or Expreſſions
of Severity never endangering us, never being fulfilled
at all upon us, but when we beleeve them not. We
have all need to Pray,Luke 17. 5.
LORD Encreaſe our Faith! even in
relation to Terrifying Truths, as well as to Comforting. And
though Faith most commonly comes by Hearing, yet unqueſtionable
Experience telling us, that it is partly encreaſed by Reading
alſo, (ſpecially of what was once attentively heard) I cannot
doubt, but this Paper-remembrance of matters of ſo grand
Importance, will be bleſſed by GOD, as to ſome others into whoſe
hands it ſhall come, ſo ſpecially to your ſelves, according to Your
Leaſure for making uſe of it, unto your Furtherance and Joy
of Faith. Which that it may be continually augmented in You,
who have ſo great buſineſſes to goe through, and ſo great Adverſaries
to encounter, and all Calling for Faith in the ſtrength and
Glorie of it, through Ieſus Chriſt the Author and Finiſher of
our Faith, is and ſhall be the earnest Deſire and Prayer of Him,
who is for IESVS ſake



