




GIve me leave to joyne You together in an
Epiſtle, and may it be a pledge of Union in
all things that tend to an happie and ſpeedie
eſtabliſhment of Truth and Peace. The Kingdome
is very ſenſible how conſiderable You are in the
welfare of it, eſpecially as it now ſtands. And according
to the influence you have upon the publick good
or evill are the endeavours of the Enemies of our reformed
Settling to diſtract and divide you, for they ſee
no other means to deſtroy you, and thoſe with you,
whoſe welfare is bound up in yours. And in this you
are a reſemblance of the Kingdom of whom a great Politician
ſaith, that it is Magnum Animal ne



que
 interit
niſi a ſeipſo: and according to this Axiom have the
Enemies of our Religion and State framed their deſignes.
The zeal of Spaine and Rome carried them on indeed
at firſt to furious attempts, as in 88. and Powder
Treaſon; but when they ſaw they were not able to prevail
that way, they put on the Foxes skin, and have moſt
ſtudiouſly raiſed and fomented jealouſies and differences
betwixt the King and Parliament, betwixt the Parliament

and Kingdom: not to mention thoſe ſubdiviſions
lately ſtirred, which I would not be ſo far guiltie
of keeping alive as to name them. So hath it fated with
your renowned City, you have been to the Reformation
and Liberty of this Kingdom, what this Kingdom
hath been to the Proteſtant Religion in other parts, a
great ſupport. The oppoſing party as impatient of ſuch
an adverſary (you know) directed the firſt fruits of
their ſtrength aud malice againſt you they were indeed
interrupted in their way by the battell at Edge-hill, but
as ſoon as they were recruted and recovered, how eagerly
they purſued their former purpoſe, Brainford can
witneſſe: but the next day when the City appeared ſo
unanimouſly, and heartily, for their own and the Parliaments
defence, they ſaw it was neceſſary to take another
courſe, and try if they could become your maſters
by deſigne and fraud, and bring you to a cheaper ruine
by making you deſtroy one another. To this purpoſe
ſeverall courſes have been taken, and not altogether
without effect. But ſo long as there was a Common
Enemy appeared, there was a diverſion of the humors,
which ſince our late ſemblance of Peace have broken
out into violent and ſtrange diſeaſes, which have alreadie
diſtempered the health, and go on to endanger the
life of that famous City. The beſt expedient to remedie
this great evill, were doubtleſſe a reconciliation of
thoſe perſons and parties who are now diſtant, but were
in the beſt eſtate of the City affectionate and unanimous.
This is not onely policy but piety, as by a ſerious
peruſall of Jam. 3. from the 13. ver. to the end may
appear. Experience witneſſes the hard task and fate of
reconcilers, who lye betwixt the extremes as corn betwixt
the Milſtones: But yet I muſt profeſſe my ſelf
one of them, and I had rather they grinde me then one
another.


To the accompliſhing this great work, a ſpeciall portion
of the wiſdom that is from above, which is mentioned,
Jam. 3. ult. is very neceſſary, which let us beg
on the behalf of all Chriſtians, eſpecially thoſe whoſe
influence into publick affairs requires a greater meaſure.
A probable expedient hereunto may be this, that ex