




I Read in the Book of Nehemiah, that when
the wall of Jeruſalem was in building, the
builders met with ſo much oppoſition, that
they were forced to build with their weapons
in one hand, and with their working
tools in the other. They had enemies from without, and
they had ſecret enemies amongſt themſelves. They met
with many diſcouragements; but God carried them
through all, and at laſt they finiſhed the wall to the
confuſion of their enemies, and the rejoycing of their
friends. Nehemiah's condition is our condition. The
Diſcipline and Government of the Church, is to the Church
as a wall is to a City. A City without wals is expoſed to
every enemy: ſo is the Church without a Government.
This wall is now in building: the Parliament (bleſſed
be God) hath contributed very much to this building;
but yet we meet with mountains of oppoſition, and with
many diſcouragements. Our enemies ſay, What doe
theſe feeble Presbyterians meane? will they fortifie themſelves?
will they make an end in a day? will they revive

the ſtones out of the heaps of the rubbiſh which are burnt?
Even that which they build, if a Fox goe up, he ſhall even
break down their ſtone-wall. Our enemies alſo raiſe falſe
reports to weaken the hands of the builders, and to
make us afraid, as they did, Neh. 6. 6. 10. They ſay, that
the Presbyterian Government (which is the Government
that comes neereſt the Word, and the Government of the
beſt Reformed Churches) will prove Tyrannicall, and
Epiſcopall. And that it is better to be under one Biſhop
then under a hundred. But we anſwer, as Nehemiah did,
Neh. 4. 4. Hear ô our God, for we are deſpiſed; and turn
their reproach upon their own head. And as Neh. 6. 9. Now
therefore, ô our God, ſtrengthen our hands. But that which
is worſer then this, is; that our ſeeming friends ſeek
to undermine us, and to terrifie us, and ſay, as Neh. 4.
11. They ſhall not know, neither ſee, till we come in the
midſt among them, and ſlay them, and cauſe the work to
ceaſe. And others are ready to diſcourage us, and ſay as
it is, Neh. 4. 10. And Judah ſaid, The ſtrength of the bearers
of burdens is decayed, and there is much rubbiſh, ſo
that wee are not able to build the wall. It is impoſſible
(ſay ſome) to purge our Churches according to the rule,
they are ſo full of rubbiſh, and therefore it is better and
ſafer to ſtudy Separation from, rather then Reformation
of our Churches. But yet notwithſtanding all theſe oppoſitions,
and diſcouragements, I doubt not but God
Almighty will in his due time finiſh this wall of his,
and ſo perfect his own work, that all the enemies thereof
ſhall caſt down their eies, and perceive that this work
was wrought of our God, Neh. 6. 16.
For the effecting of this bleſſed work, God hath
raiſed us up a happy Parliament. And alſo God hath raiſed
you up (Right Honourable, Right Worſhipfull, and the reſt

of the Common Councell) and hath raiſed up your ſpirits
to ſtrengthen our hands to this work, and to build the
wall together with us, (each of us in our places) that
ſo the Church may no longer lye waſte, and open
to all Errors and Hereſies, and that we may be no longer
a reproach to all other reformed Churches. This
work by your help will quickly bee finiſhed, as it is
written, Neh. 4. 6. So we built the wall, and all the wall
was joyned together unto the half thereof, for the people had
a minde to the work.

The times wherein you live are indeed very troubleſome:
but be not diſcouraged; for it is foretold, Dan.
9. 25. That the wall of Jeruſalem ſhall be re-built, even in
troublous times. And let me ſay to you as Mordecai to
Eſther, Eſther 4. 14. Who knoweth whether God hath not
raiſed you up to be Mayor, to be Sheriffs, Aldermen, and
Common Councell men for ſuch a time as this is? Go on
courageouſly, and God will trouble thoſe that trouble
you, and bring good to you, and to the Church out of
theſe troubles. We reade of the Pool of Betheſda, that
when the water was troubled, then it became a healing
water. The untroubled water, was an unhealing water.
So will God doe with you; he will make the troubled
waters of the Sanctuary to become healing waters: Inſomuch
as we all ſhall ſay, Periiſsemus niſi periiſſemus; We
ſhould have been undone had we not been undone. Onely
be ſtrong and of a good courage: I ſay it again, be
ſtrong and of a good courage. I ſay it the third time (for
ſo did God to Joſhua in 4 verſes, Joſhuah 1. 6, 7, 8, 9.
Be ſtrong of a good courage. The Lord hath made you
inſtruments to doe much good for Church and State; the
ſame God make you every day more and more inſtrumentall.


And be not terrified and diſmayed becauſe of the many
Hereſies and Errors that are in the City. For as when the
wall of Jeruſalem was once built, all their enemies did
immediately vaniſh into nothing, Neh. 6. 16. So when
the wall of the Church ſhall be once erected, I doubt not
but theſe prodigious errours will all vaniſh.
And as when the Sun ariſeth, all wilde beaſts goe to
their dens; ſo when the bright Sun of Chriſts kingly government
ſhall appear in our Horizon, I truſt all theſe
beaſtly errours will betake themſelves to their dens of obſcurity
and oblivion. It was ſaid of Auguſtus, that when
he was firſt Emperour he found Rome in a poor condition,
but he left it in a glorious condition; Invenit lateritiam,
ſed reliquit marmoream. My prayer ſhall be (and oh that
God would hear me!) that you may be able to ſay, When
I was firſt Mayor, or firſt Sheriffe, or firſt Common-councell
man, I found the City a City full of diviſion, full of profaneneſſe,
full of errors and hereſies; but now I ſhall leave
it full of truth, full of holineſſe, and a City at unity within
it ſelfe. Inveni lateritiam, reliqui marmoream.

For the better bringing of this to paſſe, you did lately
renue your ſolemne League and Covenant; at which time
this enſuing Sermon was preached. Since which time,
not only the Sermon, but the Preacher of it, hath undergone
many harſh and bitter cenſures. It is the wickedneſſe
of theſe dayes to build their own deſignes upon the ruine
of other mens good name. But ſurely God will never proſper
ſuch bloody practiſes. It is ſaid of Antiochus, a vilde
perſon, Dan. 11. 28. That his heart ſhall be againſt the holy
Covenant. We have many amongſt us, that in this are
like unto Antiochus, whoſe hearts, tongues, and hands, are
not only againſt our ſolemne League and Covenant; but
againſt all that preach for it, or write in the defence of it.

There is indeed a Covenant that ſome do much contend
for, and make the very form of a particular Church, without
which a Church cannot be a true Church, which is
called a Church-covenant. For my part, I conceive that
whoſoever ſhall ſay, that a Church-covenant (I meane an
oath expreſſed by formal words) is an Ordinance of Chriſt,
and neceſſary to the very being of a viſible Church; doth
not only un-church moſt of the Churches of Jeſus Chriſt,
but doth alſo ſet up his own invention for an Ordinance
of Chriſt. In the New Teſtament we reade of no ſuch
Church-oath at the admiſſion of Members. And there is
no place in the Old Teſtament (for ought I could ever
reade) that ſpeaks of a Church-oath to be taken at our admiſſion
into Church-fellowſhip. Indeed we have mention
made of a Nationall Covenant, and of the Covenant of
grace, and of ſubſcribing with our hands unto the Lord. But
what are theſe to a Church-oath; without which, no
man is to be accounted a Church-member, or to have right
to the ſeales of the covenant of grace? To urge this as an
Ordinance of Chriſt, is to ſet our poſts by Gods poſts, and our
threſhold by Gods threſhold, Ezek. 43. 8. But if I ſhould
expatiate any further in this point, I ſhould exceed the
limits of an Epiſtle, and therefore I forbear.
My hearty deſire is, That this Covenant which you
have now taken the ſecond time, may be carried about
you in continuall remembrance. And that it may ſerve
in ſtead of a thouſand Arguments to make you zealouſly
ſerviceable, to God, to Church, and State. It is reported
of Theſeus, that he was ſo taken with the wonderfull
works of Hercules, that he could not ſleep for thinking
of the wonders of Hercules; and when he ſlept, he dreamt
of Hercules wonders; and was never ſatisfied till he had
imitated him in working wonderfull things alſo. And

it is alſo related of Themiſtocles, that he had alwayes in
his thoughts by night and by day, the victories of Miltiades,
and this made him inſatiable till he had imitated
him. Oh that you would thus deale with the Covenant!
That you would think of it in your bed, in your cloſets,
in your walks; and think of what particulars you have
ſworn unto, and never leave thinking untill you have
fully performed your Oath and Covenant. And if you
keep Covenant with God, the great God will keep Covenant
with you, and all the bleſsings of the Covenant which
are mentioned in the book of God, which is the book of the
Covenant, ſhall be your portion for ever and ever. Which
is the prayer of



