




WHen I received Your Order, I was not in
caſe to obey it, being ſcarſe able to write
or read; We ſhould learn by every fit of ſickneſſe
the greatneſſe of Gods Majeſty and our
frailtie. We live in ſickly times, and You are
collecting many wholſome and Medicinable ingredients,
onely take heed that you do not miſtake
one Herbe for another, it is eaſily done, and
whileſt You are but making Eſſayes it may be eaſily
rectified: Be pleaſed to conſider that the Antidote
muſt be made according to the Diſpenſatory the preſcription
of the great Phyſician of Souls in his ſaving
Goſpel, that the bleſſing of Chriſt may be upon it,
and it may prove a ſoveraign Antidote for the preventing
as well as removing of Church-offences. Jeſus
Chriſt hath not entruſted any State to make new Inſtitutions,
or create new offices in his Church. There are
ſeveral forms of Civill government in ſeverall Chriſtian
States, but there ſhould be the ſame Church-offices,
and for ſubſtance the ſame Church-government
in every Chriſtian State, though that government
cannot be ſo peaceably exerciſed in ſome places
as in other; There is ſo much equity and prudence

in Evangelical rules and Inſtitutions, that they ought
to be obſerved in all Chriſtian States and Common-weals
thoroughout the world: Thoſe orders which
Chriſt hath ſent us by his Apoſtles muſt be obeyed, there
can be no exception againſt them, there muſt be no
Prohibition of them;Rom. 16. v. 17, 18. This is a Rule of Chriſt, that
they who walk inordinately, and cauſe diviſions contrary
to the doctrine of the Goſpel,
2 Theſ. 3. 14, 15.
muſt not be admitted into ſociety
with the Saints.
1 Cor. 5. 11. I need not inſiſt upon other
rules.1 Tim. 3. 4, 5. Our Saviour did injoyn his Apoſtles to teach
Chriſtians to obſerve all things he commanded, Matth.
28. 20. Now St. Paul did not onely teach Timot
•
y
to ordain Elders in every City, Tit. 1. 5. but Paul and
Barnabas ordained Elders in every Church. Act. 14.
23. And when St. Paul ſpoke of his departing out of
the world, and ſeeing their faces no more to whom he
had preached, he recommended the overſight or government
of the Church to Elders, aſſuring them
that the holy Ghoſt had made them overſeers over the
Church. Act. 20. 1
•
, 25, 28, 29. and therefore it is
eaſie to conclude, that the Elders were, Jure Divino,
by the will and appointment of Jeſus Chriſt, to ſucceed
the Apoſtles in the ordinary government of the
Church, and Chriſt promiſed to be with the Apoſtles,
and their ſucceſſours, not for two or three hundred yeers
onely, till ſome Magiſtrates did turn Chriſtians, but
even to the end of the world: and the holy Ghoſt ſeals
up the promiſe with Amen, Matth. 28. 20. If then
there be ten thouſand Churches in England, there ſhould
be ten thouſand Elderſhips; but the government by
theſe Elders is not Arbitrary, all the Cenſures which
they paſſe muſt be in ſome ſort Evangelicall, becauſe
agreeable to the Word of Chriſt; for the Elders are

not to govern in their own name, or in the name of the
Magiſtrate, no nor in the name of the people, but in the
name of Jeſus Chriſt, from whom they do immediately
receive their power and authority, and therefore are to
receive their orders and directions from the Goſpel of
Chriſt. The Chriſtian Magiſtrate ought to protect the
Elders, that they may peaceably exerciſe that Church-power
which is committed to them by Jeſus Chriſt, for
the Chriſtian Magiſtrate doth owe a ſpirituall ſubjection to
all the ordinances of Jeſus Chriſt. Eraſtus himſelf confeſſes,
that the Magiſtrate in ordering of ſacred things muſt not
depart one hairs breadth from the Word of God. p. 161. &
162. li. 3. Confirm. Theſ. It will be very dangerous for a
Magiſtrate to do any thing of his own head about Church
affairs, and it will be as dangerous for Miniſters to complement
in this weighty point; all the power that a Magiſtrate
hath ſetled upon him in Rom. 13. is ſetled on him
as he is a Miniſter of God, and therefore they who teach
Magiſtrates to deſpiſe the Authority of Miniſters, becauſe
they are but Miniſters of God, teach the Magiſtrates
to deſpiſe their own authority. Officers of Chriſts inſtituting,
and powers of Gods ordaining, muſt agree together,
and uphold one another, or elſe both will be vilified:
Miniſters muſt not uſurp a civil power, nor Magiſtrates
lay claim to any Spiritual power properly ſo called: if a
man go about to thruſt two ſwords into one ſcabberd, let
him take heed he doth not ſplit the ſcabberd, and cut his
fingers. Mr. Robinſon and thoſe of his mind ſay, that if the
Magiſtrate be a Church-officer, he muſt be called to his
office, and may be depoſed from it by the Church, and
and if the Magiſtrate be a ruling Elder, he is inferior to
teaching Elders, and deſerves leſſe honour, according to
that order, 1 Tim. 5. 17. In his Iuſtificat. of Separat. p. 216.

if the Magiſtrate (ſay others) chalenge a Church-power,
and deny himſelf to be a Church-officer, then we have a
good Argument for Popular government, becauſe there is
a Church
•
power in ſome that are not Church officers;
and none can be entitled to Church-power, but by a
Church office, or by Church-memberſhip; and if by the
latter, then ſay they, Every member hath as much power as
the Magiſtrate; who knows not what the Anabaptiſts ſay
upon this point; The Church of Scotland hath declared
their judgement; and they who plead for a Congregationall
government have expreſſed themſelves after this
manner: The Governors of the Church have not their
power from the members of the Church, but from
Chriſt, they are inveſted with the power of Ieſus Chriſt, they
exerciſe his power, and do act in his name, and not in the
name of the Church, ſaith Mr. Burroughs in his 

•
ren. p.
50. And for my part, I ſhall readily grant that theſe Officers
ought to tranſact all things which concern the conſciences
of the people in ſuch a convincing way as may
beſt tend to Common edification and ſatisfaction. Church
ordinances are to be diſpenſed by the Church, that is, by the
Elders with conſent of the people, ſaith Mr. Rutherford, in
his late book p. 398. We ſhould quickly think of ſome
expedients for an happy agreement, if You would be
pleaſed to free us from the much feared Commiſſioners.

Church power muſt needs be acknowledged to
have the proper notion and character of Authority in
the Elders, to which the multitude ought by a command
from Chriſt to be ſubject and obedient, as to an ordinance
to guide them in their conſent, and therfore in the
ſentence of the Elders the ultimate for mall miniſteriall
act of binding or looſing ſhould conſiſt. Chriſt hath
placed a Rule and Authority in theſe officers over the 
•
eſt

of the congregation, not directing only, but binding. (See
the Epiſtle to Mr. 

•
ottons book of the Keyes) When
theſe officers gathered in Chriſts name do paſſe a right
judgement upon hereticall congregations, or perſons
declaring them to be ſuch as have no communion with
any of the Churches of Chriſt, thoſe hereticall perſons or
Churches are put out of the kingdom of Chriſt, and conſequently
put under the power of Satan: Heart diviſions, p. 44.
The Rule urged by many is this, Nemini fit injuria cui
praeponitur Chriſtus, we prefer the Authority of Chriſt
above all authoritie of men, or ſocieties of men: King,
Parliament, & people muſt ſubject themſelves to Ieſus Chriſt.
None muſt plead priviledge to live ſcandalouſly, though
Peers of the Realm. The Tigurine Divines are accounted
moſt favourable or rather remiſſe in this point; but
Guather in his Epiſtle to Ionvill, ſaith, Excommunicatio
legibus noſtris praecipitur quâ a tribuum Societate, & publicorum
paſcuorum uſu fructu excluduntur qui contemptis admonitionibus
tam publicis quam privatis aliter vivunt quam
homines deceat Chriſtianos: and Bullinger in his Epiſtle to
Mr. Dathen ſpeaks for them all, and ſaith, That if Noble
men amongſt them were taken in the act of uncleanneſſe, they
were publickly degraded. Solemus maechos,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
, deprehenſos
honore & trabeâ exutos publicè ded
•
corare; And
Eraſtus ſaith, that they who do pertinaciouſly violate
Gods commands, may be put to death. Confirmat Theſ.
p. 337. You ſee that Eraſtus did not encourage pertinacious
offenders. They that deſire ſuch a monſtrous kind of liberty,
as to live as they liſt, and be accountable to none whatſoever
they hold or do, are not onely unworthy of Chriſtian, but
Humane ſociety, ſaith Mr. Burroughes, Heart-diviſions, p.
166. & 177. You ſee what a generall ſeverity is expreſſed
by all, that deſire any true Reformation, though they

be men of different perſwaſions. In the judgement of the
Aſſembly, None are fit to be admitted to the Sacrament, who
do uſually neglect to pray in and with their families, or to inſtruct
them in thoſe principles of Religion, the ignorance of
which, is ſufficient cauſe to debar any one from the Sacrament.
Be pleaſed then to take theſe things into your moſt retired
thoughts, and doubt not but the godly Miniſters
and people of this Kingdom will ſtick cloſe to you for
promoting of a thorough-reformation; onely let me intreat
you, that when bloody Delinquents come to compound
3. things may be excepted. 1. That their compoſition
may not authoriſe them to communicate at the
Lords Table with thoſe friends of yours, whoſe fathers,
brothers, &c they have ſlain with wicked hands, & have
not as yet given any publick teſtimony of their repentance.
2. That they may not deprive any Pariſh of a
powerfull Miniſtry, by denying ſufficient maintenance to
the Miniſter, that they may raiſe their Fine, or a good
part of it out of the Impropriations, which come into
their hand upon their compoſition. 3. That they may
not make themſelves whole, by oppreſsing and racking
thoſe poore Tenants of theirs, or their widows, or orphans
who have been faithfull to You, and ſpent their
eſtates, or loſt their lives in your Service, Help the honeſt
Tenants to an eaſie compoſition with their Malignant
Landlords. If I did not Honour You, I would not be thus
plain with You, I leave it to your wiſdom to draw concluſions
from all, for the putting of your own Order in
execution, for ſuſpending all that are ſcandalous ſinners from
the Sacrament, though the ſins which they be guilty of be not
yet enumerated; let all be fairly interpreted, as it is humbly
preſented, by him who deſires Your perfection.




