



SIRS,


YOur deceaſed friend is not yet ſpeechleſſe, he calls
upon you to beware and repent; ſome preach more,
at leaſt more practically, when they are dead, then
ever they did whilſt they were alive. You that
were his Patrons and Encouragers, as hee acknowledged
ever,Dr. Bayly, Dr. Prideaux, Dr. Fell. when he was in the heigth of his Rebellion, doe
you beware leſt a worſe thing come unto you. You that were
the Licenſers of his ſubtile Atheiſme, Repent, Repent; for he

was ſo hardened by your flattery, that (for ought the moſt
charitable man can judge) hee periſhed by your Approbation:
he ever appealed to his works even to his very dying day, and
what was it, which made him dote upon them, but your Licence
and Approbation? Heark what hee ſaith, The third and laſt
part of my Accuſation was, That I anſwer out of principles,
which Proteſtants themſelves will profeſſe to deteſt: which
indeed were to the purpoſe, if it could be juſtified. But beſides
that, it is confuted by my whole Book, and made ridiculous
by the Approbation premiſed unto it, &c. read Mr Chillingworth
his Preface to the Author of Charity &c. Sect. 30.
Sure I am, that the Accuſation may bee juſtified, and therefore
is to the purpoſe; but the Approbation cannot bee juſtified, and
is therefore juſtly Reprobated: The Accuſation is ſo ſerious,
that the Approbation cannot make it (but may well make the
Approvers and their Church) ridiculous. O what a ridiculous
Church doe the Licenſers make the Church of England to be,
by ſaying that there is nothing in Mr Chillingworth his Book
contrary to the doctrine of the Church of England; ſure they
meant the Church of Canterbury. But Dr Fell, and Dr
Bayly are not aſhamed to ſay, that there is nothing in that Book
contrary to good manners, which Dr Prideaux would not ſay; but
enough of that.
Sirs, the following Hiſtory will teſtifie my compaſſion towards
your deceaſed friend, whom I ever oppoſed in a charitable and
friendly way.


〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
. I doe not account it any glory to trample upon
the carkaſſe of Hector, or to pluck a dead Lion by the beard;
ſhould I miſquote his Book, and make that errour mine owne
by a falſe citation, which I pretend to be his in an Accuſation,
you that were the unhappy Licencers of his Book would ſoone take
me tripping. If you conceive that he deſerved a more Honourable
buriall, bee pleaſed to anſwer my Reaſons, and patronize
his errours with all the learning Bodleyes Library can afford:
or elſe ſtudy his Catechiſme, pardon my boldneſſe, ſome Courtiers
never learnt, and ſome Doctours have forgot their Catechiſme,
or elſe this man we speak of had never beene ſo
much admired, his Book extolled, or theſe Antichriſtian warres

fomented by ſuch great Clerks and buſie wits.
I looked upon Mr Chillingworth as one who had his head as
full of Scruples as it was of Engines, and therefore dealt as tenderly
with him as I uſe to doe with men of the moſt nice and
tender conſciences: for I conſidered, that though Beefe muſt bee
preſerved with ſalt; yet Plums muſt be preſerved with ſugar.
I can aſſure you I ſtooped as low to him as I could without falling,
and you know he is not a wiſe man in the judgement of
the Philoſopher, who ſtoops ſo low to another mans weakneſſe,
that he himſelfe falls into weakneſſe: and it is a Rule with us
at Weſtminſter, that he falls into weakneſſe who falls into
ſinne.

Doe not conceive that I ſnacht up my pen in an angry mood,
that I might vent my dangerous wit, and eaſe my overburthened
ſpleene. No, no, I have almoſt forgot the Viſitation at Merton
Colledge, the Deniall of my Grace, the plundering of
my houſe and little Library: I know when and where and of
whom to demand ſatisfaction for all theſe injuries and indignities.
I have learnt Centum plagas Spartanâ Nobilitate concoquere.
I have not yet learnt how to plunder others of goods
or living, and make my ſelfe amends by force of armes. I will
not take a living which belonged to any civill, ſtudious, learned
Delinquent, unleſſe it be the much neglected Commendam of
ſome Lordly Prelate condemned by the knowne Lawes of the
Land, and the higheſt Court of the Kingdome for ſome offence
of the first magnitude: I can, without ſtraining my conſcience,
ſwallow ſuch a gnat, a camel I ſhould ſay, for every one of their
Commendams hath a bunch upon its back, and may well make
a bunch upon their conſcience. I ſhall not trouble you with any
long diſcourſe about State matters, only you will give me leave
to ſay what the Lacedemonian ſlave ſaid, when he stood to be
ſold in the market;

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
. and one asked him what he was? I am
(ſaith he) a Free man, and ſo am I, for though I have not
taken Antidotum contra Caeſarem, yet I have taken Antidotum
contra Tyrannidem. I could never yet ſtoop ſo low to
the moſt tyrannicall Prelate as to cry Your humble Slave.

Sirs, we heare you have made a New Almanack at Oxford;

and ſome conceive that you hold correspondence with all the ſwore
Planets, and that you have enticed the truſty Sunne from his
Ecliptick line, and taught him to goe Retrograde. We wonder,
I muſt tell you, that the Sunne never came into Libra, that Opinions,
Proteſtations, Actions were ſeldome or never weighed in
the ballance of the Sanctuary: and we wondered more, that
Venus (I had almost forgot my Aſtronomy, and ſaid Iuno) was
ſhufled into Virgo's place, and the ſigne was in the Dogs head,
when we did expect it in a more propitious place, the Lions heart.
I remember that of Tertullian, Habet & Eccleſia dies Caniculares,
the Church of Chriſt hath cauſe to complaine of Dog
dayes; for the Dog doth not only ſhew his teeth; we heare him
bark and feele him bite; we may in every month write the Dog
dayes in capitall letters, nay you write them for us (ſo capitall
are your crimes) in letters of blood. What is England