




Right Honourable,



GOd hath given us four Books to ſtudy: The Book of Scriptures; The Book of Conſcience: In which, there are ſo many Errata's, that all Books were Written to mend that one Book of Conſcience. The Book of Creation, and therein the Treatiſe of Beaſts, deſerves our ſad conſideration: We may read ſuch excellent things in Beaſts, and ſee ſuch abhominable things in men: That I may ſafely ſay, All they who quarrell at the Language of the Holy Ghoſt, in my Text, think too highly of themſelves, and too cheaply of the Beaſts. Wiſe men may go to School to Ants, Bees, Elephants, Serpents, &c. And moſt men to the Ox, and Aſſe, Iſai. 1. 3, 4. What ſtrange things have Beaſts done by phantaſie, and memory helped with experience? Beleeve it, The providence, wit, do
•
ilitie, ſagacitie, meekneſſe, temperance, chaſtitie, diligence of Beaſts, ſet forth to the life by Baſil, Ambroſe, Chryſoſtome, Auguſtine, Ariſtotle, Pliny, Atheneus, Elian, Geſner, and the reſt, may put too many Nobles to the bluſh. The laſt Book, is the Book of Providence, and we are compelled to ſtudy this Book ſo often in theſe ſad times, that ſome 
〈◊〉
 feared our Divines will turn Stateſmen: But you know, my Lords, That he 
•
ho is to Preach a ſolemn Sermon, doth not Preach conſcionably, unleſſe he Preach ſeaſonably: We muſt ſtudy how to apply ſpirituall Remedies to our ſick State; and it is our duty to ſtir up you, to apply ſome civill Remedies: But for my part, I had rather be Preaching of Faith and Love, Chriſt and Heaven, for I am not cut out for Court-work; yet ſ
•
re I ſhould have more Courtſhip then Conſcience, if I ſhould crave your pardon, or make any ſneaking Apologie, for preſſing Scripture-notions, and phra
•…
 or any neceſſary trueths, home upon your conſcience. You did command me to Preach before you, and I was bold for to Preach to you: Some paſſages of my Sermon were ſharp, and others bitter; but if Pills be well acuted, they will purge the better: My roughneſſe is like that of a file, to ſmooth and poliſh my Auditours; and if by that means, you become more bright, and pure, I ſhall not repent that I was no ſmoother. Miniſters, eſpecially in times of war, are inſtead of Drums and Trumpets, we muſt not let you ſleep in quiet; but ſome expreſſions of

mine, may ſeem too blunt, why, a Whotſtone's blunt, yet ſerves to ſharpen what was dull before, though made of excellent mettall. We are enjoyned by the Directory, to give every one his own portion, without neglecting the meaneſt, or ſparing the greateſt in their ſins. 

〈◊〉
 moved your Honour's almoſt in down right terms, to paſſe that Self-denying Ordinance, which bindes not onely Lords, but Commons alſo, to deny all private intereſts, that you and they, may unanimouſly promote the Publike Service: Your Honour doth not depend on Wax and Parchment; and it is clear, that rebus ſic ſtantibus. You will gain more Honour by laying down your Commiſſions, then by keeping them. Your Lordſhips are pleaſed to approve, what was delivered, by a double Order; the firſt of Thanks, the ſecond for Printing.

My Lords, I underſtand and obey, onely give me leave, to preſent ſome humble requeſts to you, which being granted, will encreaſe your Honour.


Be pleaſed to conſult how to relieve diſtreſſed Ireland, and beſieged Taunton: How to purge the Committtee's (in the Counties neer London) in Eſſex, Suſſex, Surrey, Hampſhire: It is proper to give them Phyſick now at Spring; you will thereby do your ſelves, thoſe Counties, and the Citie right. Conſider, how you may unſtop the mouth of the other Fountain: We fight for Learning, as well as Pietie; How to prefer able Divines that have ſpent their ſpirits, and loſt their voice, and are by that means disabled for any Preaching Service, but admirably qualified for Writing, if they had leaſure and encouragement to put Pen to Paper: How to rebuke preſumptuous Incendiaries, who occaſion the bloodſhed of many hundreds, plunder thouſands, and yet hope when they have done all the miſchief they can, to make their peace for 500 l. and get a Warrant from ſome Juſtice of Peace, to receive the Sacrament: Finally, How to relieve the Orphans and Widows, of them who have loſt their lives; and maintain ſuch as have loſt their limbs, in this preſent Service.


Keep a preciſe watch, my Lords, over your own ſouls; They who have the greateſt temptations, muſt allow themſelves the leaſt libertie. Prepare, and wait for the coming of our Saviour, Chriſt will wait upon▪ them, that wait for him: Theſe are Honourable Services, and you cannot deſire a more Honourable reward, then to be Honoured, nay, ſerved, by the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Luk. 12. 37. That you may never be weary of doing him ſervice, who will never be weary of doing you good; is the Prayer of your Honours, moſt humble Servant




