




TIs not unknowne to You, Right Noble and Worthy Senators, that the Great and Preſent Controverſie of theſe Times is about the Church, and Church Government. In the dayes of Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, Bucer, and the reſt of thoſe Worthies, the controverſie of that age, was concerning

the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, being generally ſtiled Bellum Sacramentarium, and the Sacramentary Controverſie, the contention about it (even amongſt the Servants of God) being ſo ſharpe, that it produced moſt ſad and woſull effects. The e was not any one thing more hindred Melch. Adam. vita Oecolamp. pag. 53. Melch. Adam vit Bucer p. 213. Melch. Ad. vit Toſan. pag. 702. Melc. Ad vita Brent. pag 441. the cauſe of God, or the free paſſage of the Word, or the progreſſe of the worke of God begun in the Church then this. This weakened and wounded the Proteſtant party, their weapons being turned each againſt other, this made them a gratefull ſpectacle to their enemies, this ſtrengthened the Popiſh ſide, they placing more confidence in their cauſe by theſe differences than in all other wayes beſides. This Sacramentarie controverſie kindled ſuch a fire in many Reformed Churches, that it even burnt them up, and turned them much a ſide from that true edification which is in Chriſt, and in the practiſe of godlineſſe: And hath proved ſuch a laſting fire, that it is not quenched till this day (although thoſe Churches have had ſword, famine, and Peſtilence, to put it out.) Now in our dayes in this Kingdome, the chiefe queſtion is about the Church and the diſcipline of the Church, and our Controverſie may fitly be tearmed the Diſciplinary Controverſie, which however it differs from the Sacramentary Quid? nonne vident diſſidia noſtra eſſe amicorum diſpendia, hoſtium compendia, & publica irae divinae incendia. in the ſubject matter, yet it is too like it in the manner, & way of it, being likely to bring forth as ſad births and fruites as did that? What? Is it not ſo, that we do ſee already (that I may ſpeake with Hierome) that our differences about the Church

and Diſcipline are the loſſe of friends, the gaine Junius Bi
•
enu. Epiſt. land Haſ. of enemies, and the publicke flames of Divine wrath? The great differences in this Kingdome about the Church and Diſcipline, are one of the ſaddeſt and greateſt ſymptomes of Gods diſpleaſure againſt us. Theſe contentions and opinions make us forget the proper cauſes of God, and that maine building up of one another, which is in faith and love, ſo craſtily doth that old Serpent Adeo vetera
••
ie hic antiqu
•
s d
•
aco imprudentiae noſtrae ne vit illudere. know how to delude our ignorance; (as Iurius ſpeakes upon a like caſe.) Oh there is ſuch a fire kindled in this Kingdome about theſe points, that unleſſe the Lord looke downe from Heaven, and graciouſly be pleaſed to quench it timely, it may hazzard the burning and conſuming all. Now it is the duty of all the Sonnes of Sion to endeavour in their places, the putting out this fire, before it goe too farre, as by povring out buckets of teares and prayers before the Lord, ſo by all other good wayes, but eſpecially of the Miniſters of the Goſpell by all meane, both by themſelves and by ſtirring up of others to doe it. The ſerious conſideration of which hath ſtirred up in me ſtrong reſolutions, to lay out my ſelfe (according to that meaſure of the giſt of Chriſt beſtowed upon me) for the healing of this ſchiſme, and quenching this fire. Now the firſt borne of this kind (though not the firſt conceived) is this preſent Treatiſe againſt Independant Government, and the Toleration of it, which I here humbly preſent to this Honourable Houſe, ſubmitting it to your grave Judgements, and ſerious Conſiderations,

humbly deſiring your Acceptance of it: Now the Reaſons moving me to take this boldneſſe, to Dedicate this Booke to your Honours, are theſe. Firſt, that great and generall liberty you grant of free acceſſe to your Honourable Houſe, unto all rankes of perſons, in this Kingdome, both by Petitions and Bookes. Secondly, that hereby I might take an occaſion to teſtifie my humble duty and thankefullneſſe unto, together with my high thoughts and eſtimation of this Honourable Houſe for all the Indefatigable paines and care beſtowed on the Publicke; Seeing that by You (under God, and the Kings moſt Excellent Majeſty) I, and hundreds of my Brethren, enjoy ſo great quietneſſe and freedome in our Miniſteries, Eſtates, Perſons, (after ſo great a ſtorme) and that very worthy deeds are done, both to us, and to this Nation by your Providence, we accept it alwayes, and in all places, moſt Noble Patriots, with all thankfullneſſe, and here I offer to you the firſt fruites of my labours, as a laſting Monument of Gratitude. Thirdly, that by preſenting it to You, both my ſelfe and Booke might here take Sanctuary, and have your Protection againſt the many Calumnies and Reproaches which will be caſt upon us from that ſpirit of Separation. Neither flye I to this Honourable Houſe, as if I were conſcious to my ſelfe of any crimes or juſt grounds of ſuch revilings (for had I not Innocency and Integrity in my actions, and intentions, I durſt not preſent this Booke to this Juſt and Honourable Houſe, as knowing well

you are a refuge onely for Innocent and oppreſſed perſons, and perſons who ſeeke the Publicke good) Or, as if I were not fore-armed to beare them; I know whom I ſerve in this worke, and Quiſquis volens detrabir fama meae, iſte nob
••
 addit mercedi meae. Auguſtirus Regium eſt male audire cum bene feceris. that therefore, whoever doth willingly detract from my name, doth but adde to my reward; I know alſo tis a Royall priviledge for a man to beare ill when he hath done well, and I have long agoe given my backe to the ſmiters, and by the grace of Chriſt hope to beare all calumnies with much quietneſſe of ſpirit, having in part learned that leſſon to goe through bad report (even amongſt good men) as well as amongſt evill men, and to be counted an enemy (as Paul was) for telling the Truth; but I therefore preſent it to your Honours, and put it under your ſhadow, that ſo your Countenance and Acceptance of it (according as you finde it) may counter-ballance and weigh downe with all ſorts of men, the calumnies and cenſures caſt upon it, to hinder that good intended by it, and may the more commend the Worke to make it take with many for their ſatisfaction. Fourthly, I take this boldneſſe, that ſo I might have an opportunity, to move and ſtirre you up, moſt Noble Worthies, to put to your hands for the earely and timely compounding of this great Controverſie about the Church, and Church Government: When fires are begun in great Cities and Townes, or Tumults raiſed, the Fathers of Families, and the Citizens run to the Magiſtrates and Governours to acquaint them with the caſe, and to deſire their helpe, who having

power to command both Men, Armes, Waters, Engines, buckets from every quarter, the fire is quickely out, and the peace ſetled. Now be pleaſed to ſuffer me to mind you of that which few or none doe, namely of our danger from errors on the right hand, the growing and ſpreading evill of this preſent time. Every one minds you by Petitions, Sermous, Bookes, concerning the Reformation of this Church, in Government, Miniſtery, Ceremonies, and worſhip; and God forbid that a word ſhould ever fall from my mouth, or my pen draw a line, to call you off from it. Goe on ſtrongly and fully in the worke of Reformation to purge this Church thorowly, and purely to take away all our droſſe and tinne; caſt out of the way all ſtumbling blocks, & gather out all things that offend, let nothing be left to hurt or to deſtroy in Gods holy mountaine; Break downe all Images and Crucifixes, throw downe all Altars, remove the High Places, breake to peeces the brazen Serpents, which have beene ſo abuſed to Idolatry and ſuperſtition, put out the unpreaching and ſcandalous Miniſters, take a courſe for ſetting up good Paſtors and Miniſters in every Congregation, and in your great Wiſdomes, and zeale be pleaſed to conſider of wayes to provide oyle for al the Lampes of the Sanctuary; Goe on Comfortably (for God is with you, and the Miniſters with ſounding Trumpets of Miniſtery of Word and Prayer; and the people of God with you, covering you all over with earneſt prayers, and and teares, as alſo with praiſes to God

for you) and be pleaſed to remember not to doe the worke of God by halves, or negligently. Perfect and thorow Reformation, will be your praiſe both with God and all good men, at home and abroad; and your zeale may provoke other Kingdomes, and States, and many will ariſe up and call you bleſſed, for the good Paſtors, and pure Ordinances that they ſhall enjoy. Tis the blemiſh of ſome of the good Kings that were reformers, as Aſa and Iehoſaphat; But nevertheleſſe 2 King. c. ult. v. 43. 2 Chron. 15. v. 17. 2 King 18. v. 4. the high places were not taken away. It was the praiſe of other Kings, that they were taken away, as of King Hezekiah. Perfect Reformation takes away all poſſibility and hopes from men, of bringing things backe againe; but an imperfect leaves both a ground-worke, and faire poſſibility upon any advantage or opportunity to returne: Theodoret in his Eccle. historie relates that Theodoſius that moſt faithfull Emperor, being fully ſet Theod. hiſt. Eccle. l. 5. cap. 20. to overthrow the errors of the Gentiles, he made Lawes, by which he commanded that the Temples of the Images ſhould be puld downe. Conſtantine the great, with ſome other Emperours, who ſucceeded Conſtantine, forbad all Sacrifices and worſhips to the heathen gods, and their Images, and forbad any to come to their temples, but they did not demoliſh the temples & places wherin they were worſhipped; ſo that Iulian and Valens, Emperours who came after, did renew the impiety of the Gentiles, ſo that fire was kindled againe upon the Altars, and Sacrifices were offered to the Images: All which things when Theodoſius

underſtood for certaine, hee did not onely ſhut up the Idols houſes, forbidding all to come to the Temples, but he did extirpate them by the rootes, and tooke care to have them buried in eternall oblivion. It was the ſaying of Ziſca the famous leader of the Thaborites, That the very neſts of the Storkes are to be puld downe, leſt Diruendi ſunt etiam ipſi ciconiarum nidi ne redeant. Lavat. in Deurer. they returne againe. And may it pleaſe this Honorable Houſe to purge us thoroughly, and the rather for this, becauſe the more perfect our Reformation is, according to the will of God, you ſhall by this lay the better and ſurer ground-worke, for healing and compoſing the great ſchiſme, and diviſions riſen about the Church, and Church Government. But amidſt all your care and paines in this kinde, I beſeech you caſt an eye upon the errors and evills of the other hand, as Anabaptiſme, Browniſme, &c. and be pleaſed to take into your ſerious conſiderations the meanes and wayes how to hinder their growth, and ſo much the rather, in regard there is not now in this Kingdome (things ſtanding as they doe) ſo much danger of errors on the left hand. Popery, ſuperſtition, prophaneneſſe, have beene ſo diſcountenanced of late, ſo diſcovered, and their nakedneſſe laid ſo open, as that Altars, Images, preſſing of Ceremonies, and prophane Miniſters are falling of themſelves. Satan for this time hath even done with errors on the left hand, and their time is going out, growing like an Almanacke out of date. Any man who hath but halfe an Eye in his head,

and obſerves the courſe of things may ſee that errors on the right hand are now comming on the ſtage to take their turne alſo and to act their part; the Devill ſeeing he cannot effect his ends in the former wayes he went, he will now try others, as Theodoret ſpeaks in the caſe of Neſtorius, that Satan Theod. Heret. Fab. lib. 4. de Neſt. gave over moving againſt the Church by outward & manifeſt enemies, but came under the ſhow of the Orthodox, and in the habit of great ſtrictneſſe bewitching many & drawing the injudicious common people to a deſire after him. Satan is now transforming himſelfe from an Angell of darkneſſe into an Angell of light, and though hee muſt uſe other kind of inſtruments, and goe other waies, yet tis to bring about the ſame things, the upholding of his kingdome and the hindring of Gods, ſo that he will now labour to doe that by correcting and building up, which hee did before by perſecuting and pulling downe (as Luther ſpeakes.) In a word plainly to expreſſe my meaning, one extremitie (as many examples both antient and moderne teſtifie) 
Neſtorius ſpeaking againſt the perſonall union of the divine and humane nature of Chriſt: Extiches fell into an error contrary, confounding the natures, that he would have the humane nature ſo ſwal