



SIR,


IF my boldneſſe may reach ſo far upon your patience, I
ſhall briefly touch what Iohn in the fift chap. of his
Goſpell writeth of a poole which was in Ieruſalem
called Betheſda: About this poole were wont to lye a
great multitude of impotent folke, blind, lame, and
withered, waiting for the moving of the water, which was done by
an Angel, who went down at a certain time into the poole and troubled
the water, and then whoſoever ſtepped in, was cured of whatſoever
diſeaſe he had. But one lying there 38 years, who in all this
time could never be cured, becauſe being of himſelfe impotent (as he
anſwered to our Saviour) he had no man, when the water was troubled,
to help him or to put him into the poole. I will not ſtand to moraliſe
this holy ſtory unto you at large, least you might justly ſay that
I abuſe to much your patience, by confounding the ſtile of an Epistle,
which ought to be brief, with the diviſion, parts and order of a Sermon.
Only I beg your patience ſo far as to peruſe this my enſuing

Sermon, and in it you ſhall find an impotent man, not only blind, but
deafe and dumbe, and truelly beaten by Satan, and by him expulſed
out of the Church of Christ, and as I may truly ſay) lying in this
miſery neare 3
•
 years. The diſcourſe of my enſuing Sermon will informe
You that I my ſelfe have been this impotent man. Many times
my Conſcience hath been moved and troubled from above with good
and heavenly inſpirations (which God hath been pleaſed to ſend into
my ſoule) by my conſidered aberration from the true Church, for
which the waters of my teares and inward ſobs from my heart have
been alſo moved with the troubles of my ſoule. So that I would many
times full faine have ſtepped and entred into the true Church of
England, where all diſeaſes of the ſoule are most ſurely healed. But
alas! mine own impotency and weakneſſe joyned with my long blindneſſe,
hindred the execution of my good reſolutions; temporall reſpects
and feares kept back my ſteps. Many times I feared I ſhould
want a man and a friend (as the cripple at Betheſda did) to helpe
me, to encourage me, and to further my good deſires. I feared the
high Aſſembly of Parliament would rather mistrust him, that ſo
many years hath been an enemy to the State of this Kingdome, than
now in theſe times approve his penitency and contrition, which
might rather have ſeemed unto them a fained hypocriſie. All theſe
feares kept back for a time the forwardneſſe of my will and heart.
Untill at laſt I reſolved to diſcloſe and diſcover unto Your Worſhip,
theſe troubles of my heart, theſe diſeaſes of my ſoule, even the want
of a man to help me. God whom I ſought too pleaſed, with my
request; I found that aſsistance from you, that I ſo earneſtly deſired,
for, I found a man, I found a friend, I found a comforter, I found an
Advocate to plead for my pardon before that high Court now aſſembled.
For by Your meanes I have been quietly brought into the
Church; by Your meanes alſo, I hope, I ſhall be henceforth protected
againſt all ſlanderers, who will whet their tongues against me
and ſeeke to trouble me, and grudge at my good, as the Jews excepted
against the Cripple and impotent man, who was cured by our
Saviour. I ſhall always be ready to render due thankes to God, and

next to You, for Your bleſſed help towards my Converſion, and firſt
fruits of my Vocation, which in this humble. Work of mine, I have
endeavoured to make knowne to the World, remitting my further
expreſsions to better occaſions. And in the meane time praying to
God, that he will be pleaſed with his powerfull hand to ſupply to You,
and Yours what my heart can wiſh, but never will be able to perform
according to the full meaſure of ſo glorious a Worke, which truely
next to God the beginner and Author of all goodneſſe, by Your
meanes hath been accompliſhed.



