



MOſt Noble Senators, having had a
neceſſary occaſion to publiſh a Treatiſe
againſt Superſtitious Ieſu-Worſhip,
I dedicated the ſame to a worthy
Member of your Houſe. Now finding
it encountred in two volumes
by Maſter Barton, who after dedication
of his firſt Booke to the Kings
Majeſtie, ſeemes next to dedicate the ſame to you, I
have therefore taken boldneſſe to dedicate this my Reply
to you alſo, (being indeed an encounter with both
his Bookes) which otherwiſe I ſhould not have done nor
preſumed to ſoare ſo high. This man is very confident
in his cauſe, hee tels you hee hath hit the Marke▪ at
which hee aymed, but I am confident it will appeare
for all his boaſting, that he hath tooke his levell
with a falſe deceitfull eye. Hee firſt flatters you
and tels you, that your Honour advanceth truth, and
nothing more, and preſently after complaines, that the

•
loſe followers of truth and peace are purſued, (hee

meanes himſelfe, and his faction) and ſo the two ſacred
Siſters are forced by humoriſts. Upon whom this will
reflect, I leave to your wiſedomes to conſider. Hee is
not ignorant that you have broken the necke of this ſuperſtition,
and favour not the followers of it. Againſt
me he complaines to the Kings Majeſtie that I have crucified
Chriſt in his name, and have ſhamefully handled
the Church: heavy charges if I cannot avoid them;
For the firſt, I appeale to what I have written; for the
ſecond, I am not guilty, unleſſe affirming it to be unlawfull
to give a Church authority over Gods word, doe
make me to be ſo. For this opinion I know it to be one
of the maine props, and pillars of Antichriſt, and it lives
and dies with him, and bleſſed bee God both are haſtning
to their end, but if I ſhould hold my peace at this
time I ſhould betray truth, which I abhorre to do. There
be many Malignant Spirits fit for a Malignant opinion
that doe yet plead for it. And ſome I know doe greatly
cry up this Mans booke; I have laboured to ſtrippe this
ſuperſtition ſtarke naked, that the ugly deformitie of it
may appeare, and what I have done herein I humbly
ſubmit my ſelfe to your Honours grave cenſure, and
humbly crave of you pardon for my boldneſſe. The
Lord watch over you for good, be a wall of fire round
about you, and the glory in the midſt of you, keepe you
ſafe under his wings from the deſperate plots of wicked
and unreaſonable men, (as, his Name be eternally praiſed,
hitherto he hath done) till Babylon be laid in the duſt,
and the King of glory appeare on Mount Sion in perfect
beautie; Thus prayeth



