





THe richeſt rareſt mercies, daily ſent
(Right Chriſtian brethren) to us of this land,
From Gods ore-flowing grace, al-filling hand
May be compar'd to th'Sun in firmament.


Whoſe glorious rayes all creatures hearts revive,
Whoſe light enlightens all the world throughout,
Whoſe heat doth cheriſh plants that ſpring and sprout,
Whoſe ſhine to want doth us of ioy deprive.


Yet ſince, ſo daily, man doth it enjoy,
Who is't (almost) that valews it aright?
Who yeelds due praiſe to heaven for heavens ſweet light?

O few or none. Abundance does us cloy.



From whence, we (therefore) iuſtly may conclude,
That Gods rich mercies, which we oft poſſeſſe,
Wherwith he daily, hourly doth us bleſſe,
We all receive with great ingratitude.


I need not stand t'exemplifie the ſame,
It is a fault too frequent, too rank grown,
And yet to God, more odious, ther's not one,
And which to Chriſtians brings more ſmart and ſhame.


Of spirituall-bleſſings, our thrice bleſt Salvation
Wrought by our Saviour, bought with's precious-blood,
Was moſt divine, gave man his chiefeſt good,
Was more admir'd than was the worlds Creation.


But, of all temp'rall-bleſſings we enioy'd
Since God did form the Earth and heavenly frame
To our deliverance, never greater came,
When Rome by pouder, would have us deſtroy'd.


How thankfull for the firſt, to God we are
I'll tax nones conſcience, but examine mine:
But for the ſecond, how we doe decline
From giving thanks to God, I may not spare,


To tell you all (my Chriſtian brethren deare)
That, which if I ſhould ſilence, ſenceleſſe ſtones,
(Tis to be fe
•
r'd) would ſound with mournfull groans;
Englands ingratitude is too-too cleare.


For why? not only Popiſh Jebuſites,
Already do begin (as plain appeares)
To buze, with brazen browes, into the ears
And mindes of their ſeduced proſelytes.



Yea and perſwade too-many Proteſtants
That there was never any pouder-plot,

But, that (we falſly) ſtain them with that ſpot
The Cath'likes to diſgrace with c
•
uſleſſe taunts.


For this cauſe, therfore▪ I have ta'ne in hand,
Again to ſing (to Gods due praiſe and glory
In this revived and moſt faithfull Story)
How powerfully God to our Church did ſtand.


Which, now, at laſt (though, with much ſtrugling) I,
(By Gods aid, in our pious Parliament)
Have brought to publike view, thus to prevent
Our times dough-Hoſ. 7. 4, 6, 7. D. Baker a late moſt impudent Apoſtate, who would not licenſe this my Hiſtorie, becauſe, as he ſaid, we were not ſo angrie with the Papiſts now a dayes (though wee never had greater cauſe than in theſe our daies) as they were 20. or 30. yeers agoe, and one Mr. Croſfield a Senior fellow of Queenes Colledge in Oxford, could not (as he endeavoured) get it licenſed for the Preſſe there. Nor could Mr. Daniell▪ Cambridge Printer (who would have printed it there) get it licenſed at Cambridge, Dr. Brumrick being then Vicechan. O tempora! O mores!

Bakers baſe malignity:


Who, heated had their Oven, extremely▪ hot,
To burn-up in Oblivions ſmoakey-flame,
The memory (to our eternall ſhame)
Of this nefarious Popiſh Pouder-Plot.


And 'gainſt which, though ſome temporizing-minde
May ſcoffe and ſcorn, in this my good intention,
Though from Romes favorites, nought but reprehenſion
And taunting termes I ſhall (uniuſtly) finde,


Though Rome doth curſe me with bell, book and candle
And like a gal'd-backt-iade doth kick and winch;
Yet I their ſores have laboured ſo to pinch,
As in their nature, iuſtly, them to handle.


But, if to you (my brethren deare) I may
For my poore labour kindly be reſpected,
And from calumniators fangs protected
I ſhall acknowledge this a rich repay.



If I (hereby) may move and ſtimulate,
Your Chriſtian hearts to zealous deteſtation
Of Romes moſt impious foule abhomination,
And heavens rich mercies oft to ruminate,


Chiefly, the great miraculous defence
From this nefarious pouder-plot of Rome,
Wherin our King and Kingdomes they did doome
To dire deſtruction, fatall violence.


Then, happy I (maugre Romes worst deſpight)
That God, hereby, may have due thanks and praiſe,
That this occaſion may mens hearts incite
This fact, with fame to memorize alwayes;
Read then (kinde Reader) what's amiſſe amend,
And kindly take the good-will of thy friend,




