






THE Accompt that I make of my ſelfe and ſervice is this: For my ſelfe, the reaſon of my ſlowneſſe in this work grew not from any undervaluing of your ſo honourable invitation, but from mine owne diſtemper of body, which at the ſame time forced me to deprecate a greater ſervice to a greater Aſſembly, and to lay aſide this till it was too late to put it off. 2. For the works ſelfe, 1. in my choyce, I had reſpect to custome and entreaty, and in the purſuance of that choyce I lookt upon
the ſeaſon and Auditory:Jubet qui rogat, &c. Obligant qui impetrant, &c. You have now by your motion (that is) command, made it publique, and it being your owne, it is in your power to make it good: That is a good Sermon which doth good, as that's good ſoyle which mends the ground: that good food or Phyſick that helps the body: Some worth you have put upon it in your calling for it, and ſending it ready written to my hand; if now you pleaſe to tranſlate it into practice, the work is done. And ſurely there lyes before you the faireſt of opportunities; never was there a fitter ſeeds-time for Prayer and Almes; in the one the pooreſt may concurre, in the other they cannot; that's your happineſſe that you can give, and will be more yours if you doe the thing. It was ſome comfort to me to heare (ſo ſoone after my ſervice) of a deſigne for the poor, that newes was to me what Jonahs Gourd was to him; and my prayer is, that this may be more lasting then that: The poore are exceeding many, and their wants exceeding great, and it is not the leaſt of our griefes, that many of us in the Miniſtery can doe no more; we meet them hourly, and part but ſadly; they ſighing becauſe they cannot receive, and we becauſe we cannot give; and give we cannot,
til we receive better anſwers then we do from more then enow: We know you not, we cannot, we will not, we may not ſupport ſuch a —I am not (I confeſſe) well read in your Charter, I know not your bounds; this I know, that this famous City hath been heretofore much honoured and bleſſed both by and for their Miniſters; this I know, that magistrates by calling are Heirs of reſtraint,
Judg. 18.7. Neh. 13.17. Rev. 1.20.41. Prov. 29.18. Jun. ad locum, & Shindler. Pentag. 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
(ſc. 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
, & quae ſequuntu
•
 apud Soph.
 and that ſinne uncontrold and unpuniſhed by them, will be ſet upon their heads, and beaten upon their backs; Yea, and this I have read, that where viſion (preaching) failes, the people are naked, or (ſay ſome) idle and uſeleſſe; that where men grow high in ſin and ſcorne, the City is enſnared or fired, Pro. 29.8. that where any City is divided, it cannot ſtand, Mat. 12.25. This I am ſure of, and therefore my humble ſuit unto you is, that as you tender your ſelves, your ſafety, your City, your Poſterity, your Religion, your Chriſt, your All, doe your utmoſt to reſtraine all deſtructive ways of ſinne, errour, faction, &c. and to establiſh a ſetled Government, and ſincere Religion among you: Oh! let it not be free for any men at pleaſure to proclaime their Jubilees, to aſſert, to
preach, to print, what ſeems good to themſelves, & under colour of Christian liberty & free grace, or I know not what new light, to cry downe Magistracy, Ministery, Repentance, Obedience, ſay I? nay Scripture it ſelfe, Chriſt himſelfe in his Nature and Offices. My Lord, and worthy Senators, I'le trouble you no longer, the reſt you ſhall read in ſilence; I commend your Perſons, your Imployments, your honourable City, and all your publique Concernments to the grace of our Lord Jeſus, beſeeching him to raiſe up ſtill amongſt you Magistrates of Jethro's marke,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 Importes all men of might for wiſdome, wealth, courage, men of truth (whether for Theorie or Practice) but no men for ſelfe either ends or turnes: So prayes





