




LUke-warme Laodicea by ſome hath beene made Englands Embleme, and ſutably enough, not ſo much to the cold climate, and this coole evening of the world we live in, as to the tepid ſpring of our reformation at firſt, eſpecially to the decaying Autumne, which of late yeares wee were come to. But as cold oft breeds an inflammation, ſo this hath inkindled Gods wrath, and it theſe ſad combuſtions, which we are already well-nigh conſumed with: what remaines now therefore but that fire ſhould take out fire, the kindly warmth of holy zeale, the wofull heate of this devouring fire, that it may not come to everlaſting burnings? Great is the honour that God in this kind hath conferred upon you, and great the bleſsings which hee hath to this whole land conveyed by you: Your Engines not more admirable to quench fire in your Citie, then your care, coſt, and blood freely uſefull to the extinguiſhing of the generall ſcare-fire of this whole kingdome: your zeale herein hath ſaved many, provoked more, hath under God beene as a wall of fire about us, and will bee for ever a more ſparkling Diamond in your Crowne, then thoſe ſtones Ezek 24. 14: of fire in the King of Tyres Diadem. The Miniſters Lungs ſome make the Prophets Bellowes to blow up a dying fire, I deſired Jer 6. 29. that mine in preaching this Sermon might helpe to blow up yours to a yet brighter flame; and if this further publiſhing of it (at your requeſt) may any whit ſerve to keep ſtill alive this holy fire on the Altar of your hearts, whilſt Incendiaries ſet on fire from hell, are every where ſhooting fiery bullets to ſet all into a further combuſtion, I am but ſubſervient to my great Maſter in his preſent

work, who is now purging the blood of our Jeruſalem out of the midſt of it, by the ſpirit of judgement and burning; Fervet opus, and then I know you will not coole. Iſa 4 4.

Its reformation, worke, and the examples of Phinehas, Elias, John Baptiſt, Luther, Knox, and thoſe other great reformers tell us it requires zeale. Baruch was a great repairer of Jeruſalems walls, but it is ſaid of him, that flagrante animo inſtauravit,
Nehem 3 20. 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

 hee repaired faſt, but it was when hee was hot upon it.
It is Gods worke, and they muſt be fervent in ſpirit that would ſerve the Lord, who had rather wee ſhould let his worke alone, Rom. 12. 11. then ſee us freeze at it, it is his zeale that muſt now doe all for us, and therefore hee expects that our zeale ſhould doe what Hab. 97. 37. 32 wee can for him.
It is Chriſts worke and cauſe, who is willing to redeeme us, but that wee might bee a people zealous of good workes; hee Tit. 2. 14. did not ſweat that wee ſhould freeze, nor ſhed his blood out of his owne veines, that it might congeale in ours.
It is finally a great worke, and the oppoſitions againſt it are greater, but as they ſaid to Joſhua, Onely be couragious, ſo I to Joſh. 1. 7. you, Onely bee zealous, and then bee not diſcouraged; Hannibal by fire made his way over the Alpes, and you by zeale may make yours over greateſt mountaines of oppoſition, which without running up with full ſtrength and ſpeed will not bee gotten up to; Palmes are the Embleme of victory, but they love to grow in a hot ſoyle; be warme, and promiſe your ſelves the Palme; nay God promiſeth it, and that not onely to Smyrna (whoſe name ſmells ſweet of warme incenſe) that if ſhee will be faithfull to the death, Revel. 2. 10. he will give her a Crowne of life; but even to our cooler Laodicea, that her, whom hee was ready to ſpew out of his mouth whilſt ſhe was lukewarme, hee will be ready to come into and ſup with, Revel. 3. 16. with 19. 20. when ſhe ſhall once be zealous and repent: which is the humble and hearty prayer of your



