




Right Honorable,


THis Sermon publiſhed by your Order, holds out an inſtance of what St. Paul preached 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28. God hath choſen the fooliſh things of the world to confound the wiſe; the weake things of the world to confound the things which are mighty; and baſe things of the world, and things which are deſpiſed hath God choſen; yea, and things which are not, to bring to nought things that are.
1 Cor. 1. 27, 28. What Creature ſo ſimple, weake, or baſe as a Worme, a creature which no man values, loves, or feares? yet here's a worme beats great Mountaines to duſt, and makes the hills as chaffe. What ſo ſhiftleſſe and unable to defend it ſelfe, or offend an Enemy, as a Babe or Suckling? yet behold here are Babes and Sucklings quelling and deſtroying the ſtrongeſt enemies, even the Enemy and Avenger. Your eares have not onely heard theſe things preached, but your eyes do ſee them fulfilled in this our day: O that theſe things might perſwade your hearts of theſe Two things; 1 That

it is better, more excellent and honourable to be one of Chriſts Babes, one of his weake, ſimple, and deſpiſed ones, then to bee one of the Zanzummims, the Nimrods, or men of renowne of the world. 2 That the greateſt ſupport and ſtrength to Families, Cities, or Kingdomes, proceeds out of the mouth of theſe Babes, that their hearts and tongues can doe more then an hoſt of Men. The firſt would make you with Theodoſius, rejoyce more in being the meaneſt Chriſtian, then in being the greateſt earthly Potentate. The latter would provoke you both to plant the Kingdome with faithful Miniſters, who are Fathers to beget theſe Babes unto Chriſt; and to encourage and cheriſh the godly party of this Kingdom, who with Mordecai will ſeek the wealth of the Kingdom, and as ſo many ſhields under God, defend this Nation againſt all its enemies, Theſe Innocents will deliver the Iland, and it ſhal be delivered by the pureneſs of their hands;
Job 22. 30. Yea it would provoke you to get ſuch about you, and with David,
Pſal. 101. 6. make your eyes ſet upon the faithfull of the Land, that they may dwel with you, and ſerve you, and conclude that you and your Family ſhall be bleſſed in them. My Lords, I beſeech you let this bee your choice, it is the earnest prayer of



