




SIR,


ALmighty God having made you the inſtrument, of that deliverance and peace, which in the County of Eſſex, we do injoy, next to his own Goodneſſe, the Remembrance thereof is due unto your name. Thoſe who Honour him, he will honour, and thoſe who deſpiſe him ſhall be lighty eſteemed. 1 Sam. 2. 30. Part of theſe enſuing Sermons, being preached before your Excellency, and now by providence called forth to publick view, I am imboldned to dedicate them unto your Name, as a ſmall mite of that Abundant thankfulneſſe, wherein all peace-loving men of this County ſtand obliged unto you.
It was the cuſtome of former days, in the provinces of the Lubens meri toque.
Roman Empire, to erect Statuas and Monuments of gratefull Remembrance, to thoſe preſidents and Governours, who in the Adminiſtration of their Authority, behaved themſelves, with wiſdome courage and fidelity. Yea inſtruments of great Deliverances and bleſſings, through corrupted natures folly, became the Pagans Deities.



There is ſcarce a County in this Kingdome wherein and not one from which, your Excellency hath not deſerved a more laſting Monument, then ever was erected of Corinthian Braſſe: But if the Lord be pleaſed, that your worth ſhall dwell only in the prayſes of his people, it will be your greater glory, that being the place, which himſelfe hath choſen to inhabit. Now for a Teſtification of this, is This only intended; beyond This, towards men, God pleading for you, you need nothing but our ſilence. The iſſue of the laſt ingagements, whereunto you were called, and enforced, Anſwering, yea outgoing your former undertakings, giving Ample Teſtimony of the continuance of Gods Preſence, with you, in your Army, having ſtopped the mouths of many Gain-ſayers, and called to the reſidue in the language of the dumbe ſpeaking Aegyptian Hieroglyphick,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
, men of all ſorts know, that God hateth impudence.


•
ut. de Iſide Oſir.

It was ſaid of the Romans in the rayſing of their Empire, that they were, ſaepe praelio victi, bello nunquam; So naked hath the Bow of God bin made for your Aſſiſtance, that you have failed neither in Battell nor War.

