




THe many ample teſtimonies
of zealous reverence to the
providence of God, as well,
as affectionate care, for the
priviledges of men, which
have beene given, by this
Honourable Aſſembly of Parliament, incourage
the adorers of the one, no leſſe then
the Lovers of the other, to vindicate that
alſo, from the incroachments of men. And
as it was not doubtleſſe without divine
diſpoſition, that thoſe ſhould be the chiefeſt

Agents, in robbing men of their priviledges,
who had nefariouſly attēpted to ſpoile God
of his providence: ſo we hope, the ſame All-ruling
hand, hath diſpoſed of them, to be
glorious inſtruments, of re-advancing his
right, and ſupreme dominion over the hearts of
men, whoſe hearts, he hath prepared with
courage and conſtancy, to eſtabliſh men, in
their inviolated rights: by reducing a ſweet
Harmony, between awfull Sovereigntie, and
a well moderated libertie. Now the firſt of
theſe, being demandated to your particular
care, I come unto you, with a Bill of
Complaint, againſt no ſmall number in this
Kingdome; who have wickedly violated,
our intereſt in the providence of God,
and have attempted to bring in, the forreigne
power of an old Idol, to the great
prejudice, of all the true ſubjects, and ſervants
of the moſt High. My accuſation I
make good, by the evidence of the fact,
joyned with their owne confeſsions. And
becauſe to wave the imputation of violent
intruſion, into the dominion of another,
they lay ſome claime, and pretend ſome
title unto it. I ſhall briefely ſhew how it
is contrary to the expreſſe termes of the

Great Charter of heaven, to have any ſuch
power, introduced amongſt men: Your
knowne Love to truth, and the Goſpel
of Chriſt, makes it altogether needleſſe
for me, to ſtirre you up by any motives, to
hearken to this juſt Complaint, and provide
a timely remedy for this growing
evill: eſpecially ſince experience, hath ſo
cleerely taught us here in England, that not
onely eternall, but temporall happineſſe alſo,
dependeth on the flouriſhing of the
Truth of Chriſts Goſpel.

Iuſtice and Religion, were alwaies conceived,
as the maine Columnes and upholders
of any State, or Common-wealth;
like two pillars in a building, whereof the
one cannot ſtand, without the other; nor
the whole fabricke without them both.
As the Philoſopher ſpake of Logick and
Rhetoricke, they are Artes

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
, mutually
ayding each other, and both ayming at
the ſame end, though in different manners:
ſo they, without repugnancie concurre,
and ſweetely fall in, one with another,
for the reiglement and direction, of
every perſon in a Common-wealth, to
make the whole happy and bleſſed: and

where they are both thus united, there, and
onely there, is the bleſsing, in aſſurance
whereof, Hezekiah rejoyced: Truth and
Peace. An agreement without Truth, is
no Peace, but a covenant with Death, a
league with Hell, a conſpiracie againſt the
Kingdome of Chriſt, a ſtout rebellion againſt
the God of Heaven; and without
Iuſtice, great Common-wealths, are but
great troopes of Robbers: Now the reſult
of the one of theſe, is civill Peace, of
the other Eccleſiaſticall, betwixt which
two, there is a great ſympathie, a ſtrict
connexion: having on each other a mutuall
dependence: Is there any diſturbance
of the State? it is uſually attended with
Schiſmes, and factions in the Church, and
the diviſions of the Church, are too often,
even the ſubverſions of the Common-wealth.
Thus it hath beene ever ſince that unhappy
difference, betweene Cain and Abel: which
was not, concerning the bounds and limits
of their inheritance, nor which of them
ſhould be heire to the whole world: but
about the Dictates of Religion, the offering
of their ſacrifices. This fire alſo of diſſention,
hath beene more ſtirred up, ſince the

Prince of Peace, hath by his Goſpel, ſent the
Sword amongſt us: for the preaching thereof,
meeting with the ſtrong holds of Satan, and the
depraved corruption of humane nature, muſt
needs occaſion a great ſhaking of the earth. But
moſt eſpecially, diſtracted Chriſtendome, hath
found fearefull iſſues of this diſcord, ſince the
proud Romiſh Prelates, have ſought to eſtabliſh
their hell-broached errors, by inventing, and
maintaining, uncharitable deſtructive cenſures
againſt all that oppoſe them: which firſt cauſing
Schiſmes, and diſtractions in the Church, & then
being helped forwards, by the blindneſſe and
cruelty, of ambitious Potentates, have raiſed war
of nation againſt nation, witneſſe the Spaniſh
Invaſion of 88. of a people within themſelves,
as in the late Civill wars of France, where after
divers horrible Maſſacres, many choſe rather to
die Souldiers, then Martyrs.

And Oh, that this truth, might not at this day,
be written with the blood of almoſt expiring
Ireland. Yea, it hath laſtly deſcended to diſſention,
betwixt private parties, witneſſe the horrible
murder of Diazius,
Sleid. Com. whoſe brains were chopt
out with an axe, by his own brother Alphonſus, for
forſaking the Romiſh Religion: what rents in
State, what grudgings, hatreds and exaſperations

of mind, among private men, have happened
by reaſon of ſome inferiour differences, we
all at this day grieve to behold; tantum Religio
potuit ſuadere malorum: moſt concerning then is
it for us to endevour obedience, to our Saviours
precept, of ſeeking firſt the kingdome of God,
that we may be partakers, of the good things,
compriſed in the promiſe annexed: were there
but this one Argument, for to ſeek the peace of
the Church, becauſe thereon depends the peace of
the Common wealth, it were ſufficient to quicken
our utmoſt induſtry, for the attaining of it. Now
what peace in the Church, without Truth? all
conformitie to any thing elſe, is but the agreement
of Herod and Pilate, to deſtroy Chriſt
and his Kingdome, neither is it this, or that, particular
truth, but the whole Counſell of God, revealed
unto us, without adding, or detracting,
whoſe embracement is required, to make our
Peace firme and ſtable. No halting betwixt
Iehovah and Baal; Chriſt and Antichriſt, as
good be all Philiſtine, and worſhippers of
Dagon, as to ſpeake part the language of Aſhdod,
and part the language of the Iewes: hence, hence
hath been the riſe of all our miſeries, of all our
diſſentions, whileſt factious men, laboured every
day, to commend themſelves to them, who

ſate aloft in the Temple of God, by introducing
new Popiſh Arminian errors, whoſe Patronage
they had wickedly undertaken: who would
have thought, that our Church, would ever have
given entertainment, to theſe Belgicke Semipelagians,
who have caſt dirt upon the faces, and
raked up the aſhes, of all thoſe great and pious
ſoules, whom God magnified, in uſing as his inſtruments
to reforme his Church; to the leaſt of
which, the whole troope of Arminians, ſhall never
make themſelves equall, though they ſwell
till they breake? what benefit did ever come to
this Church, by attempting to prove, that the
chiefe part, in the ſeverall degrees of our ſalvation,
is to be aſcribed unto our ſelves, rather then God?
which is the head and ſumme, of all the Controverſies,
between them and us: and muſt not the
introducing and fomenting of a doctrine, ſo
oppoſite to that truth our Church hath quietly enjoyed,
ever ſince the firſt reformation neceſſarily
bring along with it Schiſmes and diſſentions,
ſo long as any remaine who love the truth, or
eſteeme the Goſpel above preferment: Neither
let any deceive your Wiſdomes, by affirming, that
they are differences of an inferiour nature, that
are at this day agitated, between the Arminians
and the Orthodox Divines of the reformed Church,

be pleaſed but to caſt an eye on the following
inſtances, and you will finde them hewing, at
the very root of Chriſtianity. Conſider ſeriouſly
their denying of that fundamentall Article of Originall
ſin: Is this but a ſmall eſcape in Theologie?
why, what need of the Goſpel? what need
of Chriſt himſelfe, if our nature be not guilty, depraved,
corrupted? neither are many of the reſt
of leſſe importance; ſurely theſe are not things,
in quibus poſsimus diſſentire ſalva pace ac charitate,
as Auſtin ſpeaks, about which we may differ,
without loſſe of peace or charitie, one Church
cannot wrap in her communion, Auſtin and
Pelagius; Calvine, and Arminius. I have here
onely given you a taſte, whereby you may judge
of the reſt of their fruit: mors in olla, mors in olla;
their doctrine of the finall apoſtaſie of the elect, of
true beleevers, of a wavering haeſitancy, concerning
our preſent grace, and future glory, with divers
others, I have wholly omitted: thoſe I have
produced, are enough to make their abettors
uncapable of our Church communion: the Sacred
bond of peace, compaſſeth onely the unitie of
that Spirit which leadeth into all truth. We
muſt not offer the right hand of fellowſhip,
but rather proclaime 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
,Greg. Naz. an holy warre,
to ſuch enemies, of Gods providence, Chriſts merit,

and the powerfull operation of the holy Spirit▪

neither let any object that all the Arminians do
not openly profeſſe, all theſe errours, I have recounted;
let ours then ſhew wherein they differ
from their Maſters,Profitentur Remonſt. haſce ad promotionem cauſae ſuae artes adhibere, ut apud vulgus non ulterius progrediantur quam de articulis vulgo notis, ut pro ingeniorum diverſitate quoſdam lacte diualant, aliis ſolidiore cibo &c. Feſtus Hom. praeſtat ad ſpecimen Con. Bel. we ſee their owne confeſsions,
we know their arts, 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
,
the depths and crafts of Satan, we know the
ſeveral wayes they have to introduce, and inſinuate
their Heterodoxies into the mindes of men:
with ſome they appeare onely to diſlike our doctrine
of reprobation: with others to claime an
allowable libertie of the will: but yet for the
moſt part, like the Serpent, where ever ſhe gets
in her head, ſhe will wriggle in her whole body
ſting and all: give but the leaſt admiſsion,
and the whole poyſon muſt be ſwallowed.
What was the intention of the maintainers of
theſe ſtrange aſſertions amongſt us, I know
not: whether the efficacie of errour prevailed
really with them, or no? or whether it were the
better to comply with Popery, and thereby to
draw us back againe unto Egypt, but this I have
heard, that it was affirmed on knowledge in a
former Parliament, that the introduction of
Arminianiſme amongſt us, was the iſſue of a Spaniſh
conſultation:
Hieron. Zanch. ad Holderum: Reſ. Miſcel. it is a ſtrange ſtory that learned
Zanchius tels us, how upon the death of the Cardinall

of Lorraigne there was found in his Study
a note, of the names of divers Germane Doctors and
Miniſters, being Lutherans, to whom was paid an
annuall penſion, by the aſsignment of the Cardinall,
that they might take pains to oppoſe the Calviniſts,
and ſo by cheriſhing diſſention, reduce the people againe
to Popery. If there be any ſuch amongſt
us, who upon ſuch poore inconſiderable motives,
would be wonne to betray the Goſpel of
Chriſt, God grant them repentance▪ before it be
too late; however, vpon what grounds, with
what intentions, for what ends ſoever, theſe
Tares have been ſowed amongſt us by envious
men, the hope of all the piouſly learned in the
Kingdome is, that by your effectuall care and
diligence, ſome meanes may be found to root
them out. Now God Almightie increaſe and
fill, your whole Honourable Societie, with
wiſedome, zeale, knowledge, and all other
Chriſtian graces, neceſſary for your great calling
and employments, which is the daily
prayer of



