




MOſt Religious and Judicious SENATORS, I here
preſent to your ſaddest thoughts and ſerious deliberations,
an abſtract of ſundry moſt ſcurrilous, ſcandalous,
ſeditious railing Libels, lately publiſhed to the world
in Print, by ſome Anabaptisticall Independent Sectaries,
and New-lighted FIRE-BRANDS; wherein
the undoubted Priviledges, Ordinances, juſt Proceedings of Parliament;
the Reverend Aſſembly of Divines; our Brethren of Scotland;
the Church of England, with her Government, Miniſters, Worſhip;
the Nationall Covenant, Directory, Presbytery; profeſſed Defenders of the
Parliaments Priviledges, Ordinances againſt their Licentious Schiſmaticall
Practiſes, (according to their Solemn Vow and Covenant) are ſo
audaciouſly affronted, oppugned, ſlandered, railed againſt; and the
Common people ſo earneſtly excited to mutiny againſt the Parliament
Aſſembly, Presbytery, Government and Miniſters of our Church of
England, that I am confident no former Age did ever produce ſuch
Monſtrous Inſolencies, ſuch deteſtable virulent Libels, which neither
the Honour, Justice, nor Wiſdome of that Soveraigne Court of Justice
wherein you are Aſſeſſors, nor the Peace and Safety of our Religion,
Church, State, nor your own perſonall ſecurity, nor the Nationall Vow
and Covenant, (engaging both your Honours and all others who have taken
it againſt theſe pernitious Mutiniers) can any longer ſuffer you patiently
to tollerate (as hitherto you have done) without exemplary proceedings
againſt, and puniſhments upon the Authors, Printers, Publiſhers,
Diſperſers of theſe moſt ſcurrilous and mutinous Pamphlets.
Wherein they moſt injuriouſly and falſly revile, traduce all
ſuch for Perſecutors, Fighters againſt Chriſt and his Kingdome, Enemies to
the wayes of Christ, pulling his royall Crown from off his head, his
kingly Scepter out of his hand, Oppugners of the moſt religious, conſcientious,

Godly, beſt-affected Party (as they Phariſaically and falſly
terme themſelves) dividers betweene the Parliament and their beſt,
their faithfulleſt Freinds; Prophane Apoſtates, Popiſh Jeſuiticall Incendiaries,
haters of Gods people, and the like; who out of conſcience, ſolid
Judgment and cordiall affection to the ſafety, tranquility of Religion,
Parliament, Church, Kingdome, dare openly by word or writing,
maintain the undoubted Juriſdiction of Parliaments, Synods, Magiſtrates
in Eccleſiaſticall affaires, or oppoſe their factions, ſchiſmaticall
Independent wayes and Innovations, deſtructive both to Magiſtracy,
Miniſtery, Vnity, Parliaments, and that bleſſed Reformation
ſo much deſired.
For my owne particular, I have with much Patience and Contempt
endured, without any Reply at all, their falſe unchriſtian Invectives againſt
my ſelf, only for Writing in Vindication of the undoubted Eccleſiaſticall
juriſdiction, directive and coercive power of Chriſtian
Emperours, Kings, Magiſtrates, Parliaments, in matters of Religion
and Church-government, in my, Truth triumphing over Falſehood, Antiquity
over Novelty, publiſhed with Your ſpeciall approbation; and
my Independency Examined, (which have much incenſed this waſpiſh
Generation, unable to give any ſatisfactory anſwers to them) and I
ſhould have continued ſilence ſtill, had my own private intereſt only
been concerned. But when I diſcerned them to be ſo audaciouſly licentious,
preſumptuous, as To
Pſal. 73. 9.
ſet their mouth against the Heavens,
to
Exod, 22. 28. Acts 23. 5.
revile the very Gods themſelves, and curſe the Rulers of the people;
2 Pet. 2. 10.
to deſpiſe Government and ſpeak evill of Dignities, to bring railing
accuſations against, and
2 Theſ. 2. 4.
reſist the Higher Powers, publiſhing Libell
after Libell, againſt the Proceedings, Ordinances, and Juriſdiction
of the preſent Parliament and Aſſembly, yea with Antichriſtian
pride, to
2 Pet. 2. 11. Rom. 13.
oppoſe and exalt themſelves above all that is called God, or
that is werſhipped (as they have lately done, in the Pamphlets hereafter
mentioned, and in the Nativity of Sir Iohn Presbyter, &c. freſhly
publiſhed ſince the reſt; every of theſe latter Libels being more ſeditious
and pernitious then the former) andMar. 15. 7.
Barrabas like, to ſtirre up
ſedition and inſurrection among the people, againſt the Ordinances,
Votes of Parliament, and that Eccleſiaſticall reformation and
Pre-byteriall government You have reſolved to eſtabliſh;Jer. 4. 19.
My bowels;
my bowels were pained within me at my very heart, ſo that I could not hold my
peace, nor keepe ſilence any longer, becauſe thou haſt heard, O my ſoul, the
ſound of theſe ſeditious Trumpets, and the alarme of this Schiſmaticall

Anti-Parliamentary war: Yea ſhould I now refraine from writing,
the very ſtones themſelves would immediately cry out againſt their
moſt infamous Libels and mutino
•
s preſumptuous Practiſes, oppoſite
to all publike Order, Government, Authority.

And the rather am I neceſſitated to this ungratefull worke, becauſe
their very Libels, actions, ſpeeches proclaime a plotted avowed Confederacy
among ſome furious Ringleaders of theſe Independent Sectaries
(though I preſume the more moderate are not guilty of it) againſt
the Parliament, Aſſembly, and all their Reſolves in matters of Religion
or Church-Government, yea, againſt our very Church, Miniſters,
and Tithes the meanes of their ſupport; as their Libellous Paſſages
againſt the Eccleſiaſticall Power, proceedings of the Parliament and
Aſſembly; their publike oppoſitions againſt the Nationall Covenant,
Directory, the Ordinances prohibiting diſorderly & unlicenſed Printing
of Libellous Sciſmaticall Pamphlets; againſt Lay-mens preaching in
the Army or elſe-where; for due Payment of Tythes, &c. recited in the
enſuing Sections, will at large declare.
And that which further confirmes me in this opinion, is: Firſt, the
New Seditious Covenants which the Members of ſome Independent
Congregations enter into; To adhere, defend, maintain, to the utmoſt of
their powers, and contend for, even unto blood, the eſtabliſhment of that Independent
form of Church Government which themſelves have ſet up and ſubmitted
to, and oppoſe the Presbyterian, in contempt of the Parliaments
Authority: in truth meere Anti-covenants of the Nationall League
and Covenant, which they utterly refuſe to take, and rayle againſt.
2. Their menacing predictions to the Aſſembly and Presbytery in their two laſt
Martins Eccho. p. 5. 6. The Nativity of Sir Iohn Presbyter, p. 5. 9. 10. 1
•
. Libels; wherin they print, That the time haſtens the people
will call them to an Account, and repell and confound them by the
ſword; That the life of Sir Iohn Presbyter is like to be neither long nor
good; That he wilbe brought to a ſudden untimely end, Perhaps
HANGING. That Presbytry ſhall live but a ſhort time to do miſcheife,
and then, THE COMMON PEOPLE will beg in to ſing, Her
Toſſe, The Devil's dead; Presbytery will quickly dye, the Synod be diſſolved,
the divell chained up: and therefore follow the adviſe of old
Cat
•
; Spem retine. Rejoyce O heavens, ſing aloud O earth, clap thy hands
for Joy, O England-poſt nubula ſoles; thou ſhalt have a time of Quietneſſe, of
pence, of content, for Presbytery will have never a Child to vexe thee, to
Impriſon thy free Denizens, to ſucke up thy fatte, devoure thy good

things and eat up thy bread out of thy Childrens mouthes, and himſelfe
is not long lived, as I ſhewed before; and then farewell perſecution for
conſcience, farewell Ordinance for Tithes, farewell Eccleſiaſticall
Supremacy, farewell Pontifical Revenue, farewel Aſſembly of Divines
diſſembled at Weſtminſter, you ſhall conſult together no more, farewell
Sr. Simon Synod, and his ſon Presbyter Iacke.


Gens antiquaruit, multos dominata perannos, &c.
Which paſſages, preſage and intimate nought elſe, but a plain conſpiracy,
confederacy, againſt the Aſſembly, Presbytery and presbyterian
party.
3. Some late ſeditious ſpeeches of two preaching Captaines of this
Schiſmaticall Confederacy; who being apprehended and queſtioned
by Sr. Samuell Lukes Officers for preaching in Newport-Pannell, and other
places neare adjoyning, in contempt of an Ordinance of Parliament
made the 26. of April 1645. which ordaines, That no perſon be
permitted to preach who is not ordained a Miniſter▪
 threatning condigne
puniſhment to the offenders againſt it for their contempts; enjoyning
Sr. Thomas Fairfax, the Lord Major, the Committee of Militia for London;
the Governours, Commanders, and Magiſtrates of all Garriſons, Caſtles,
Places of ſtrength, Citties, Townes, Forts, Ports, and the reſpective Committees
of each County, To ſee the ſame duly obſerved in the Army and
places aforeſaid, and make ſpeedy repreſentation to both Houſes, of ſuch as
ſhall offend therein. Theſe Captaine preachers; (far wiſer then that
devout Centurian Cornelius, who feared God with all his houſe, and prayed
to God alwaies; yet never turned Preacher to his owne Band, for
ought we read, but by Gods own direction from heaven, ſent for the Apoſtle
Peter to inſtruct him and his family, Acts 10.) among other ſpeeches averred;
That they were illegally uſed by Sr Samuel in being apprehended
(for their contempt againſt this Ordinance;) moſt faſly and ſeditiouſly
affirming, That the Generall & all the Colonels in the Army were deeply
engaged. IN THEIR DESIGNE: That they would acquaint their
FRIENDS IN THE HOVSE OF COMMONS of their bad uſage,
that they had done nothing but taught the Word of God;
(among other things, that wee had no true Church not Miniſtry, and
that the children of Beleevers had no more right to Baptiſme then thoſe
of Infidels, &c.) which they would juſtifie, and thoſe friends likewiſe:
That they had Commiſſion from the Parliament for what they did, &c.
Whereupon one Capt. Oxford anſwering them; That he was confident

there were few or none in the Houſe would uphold them (againſt an
expreſſe Ordinance of both houſes) and that the Generall and Collonels
would not ſide with them in this caſe: The ſaid Pedicant Captains
replyed; That ſhould be tryed ſpeedily: For they were reſolved
to make this buſineſſe THE LEADING CASE OF THE KINGDOME
FOR ALL THE GODLY PARTY:
Note. adding; That if the
godly and wel-affected party were thus perſecuted, they ſhould be forced
TO MAKE A WORSE BREACH THEN WHAT WAS YET,
WHEN THEY HAD DONE WITH THE KINGS PARTY:
and telling Enſign Ratford and his Souldiers, that they were worſe
then Cavaliers; and that when they had made an end of the war with
the Cavaliers, THEY SHOVLD BE FORCT TO RAISE A NEW
ARMY TO FIGHT WITH THEM.


Certainly theſe ſeditious privy Covenants, Libels, Speeches, compared
with the enſuing Sections, Letters, diſcover and portend no leſſe
then a ſtrong conſpiracy among ſome Anabaptisticall Sectaries to oppoſe
the Power, Ordinances and Proceedings of Parliament, to extirpate
all other Governments but their own, and to ſet it up by the ſword,
or popular commotions in deſpight of your Authority. And is it
not then high time for your Honours, with all other well-affected Perſons
to look about you? to Vindicate your own Power, Honour, Juſtice,
againſt theſe moſt ſeditious, audatious, contemptuous libellers
againſt your Soveraign Authority, your moſt Religious Ordinances,
proceedings in the deſired waies of Reformation; and to make ſome of
them Exemplary Monuments of your Impartiall ſeverity, to deter others
from the like unparalleld Inſolencies, not read nor heard of in any
preceding Age, nor practiſed by any Generation of men, but theſe
New furious Sectaries: who to engage all ſorts of people in their Quarrell,
proclaim a free Toleration and Liberty of Conſcience, to all Sects, all
Religions whatſoever, be it Judaiſ
•
e, Paganiſme, Turciſme, Arianiſme,
Popery; (as all their Pamphlets manifeſt) And to intereſt the female
Sex, and draw them to their party, they (contrary to the
1 Cor. 14. 34. 35. 1 Tim. 2. 11, 12.
Apoſtles
precept) allow them not only deciſive Votes, but Liberty of Preaching
Propheſying, ſpeaking in their Congregations; yea, power to meet in
theirWhich they uſed in New port Pa
••
ell, (contrary to the Governours Command.
Nocturnall Conventicles, without their Husbands, Parents, Ministers
Privitie, the better to propagate Chriſts Kingdome, and multiply
the Godly party: Which, what confuſion and Ataxy it will ſoon▪
produce in Church and State, if not prevented by your Honours extraordinary

ſpeedy Diligence, Wiſdome, Power, I humbly ſubmit to your
deepeſt Judgements.
I am certain your Honours have read the
Sl
•
idan, Com. l. 5. 10. Gaſtius, de Anabaptiſt: Erroribus. Bullinger adverſ. Anabaptiſt. Guil. de Bres C
•
ntr. Les Anabap

••
ſtes. D. Featlies Dippers Dipt, p. 199. 200, &c The Hiſtory of the Anabaptiſts. Hiſtories of the Tragicall
Wars and Commotions of the Anabaptiſts in Germany; whoſe
Opinions where-ever they predominate, are fatall to the Government,
Magiſtracy, Miniſtery of all States, Churches, and bring in popular
Tyranny, and licentiouſneſſe, the worſt of evils. O then let not your
Honours Patience or Indulgence to ſuch Anabaptiſticall Libellers involve
both you, us, our Realm, in like German popular Sedicions, Devastations,
and bloody Maſſacres, which they threaten: but if theſe
New ſeditious Lights and Fire-brands, will needs ſet up New Churches,
Hereſies, Church-governments, and vent their new errors or opinions
againſt your Power and Authority, let them doe it onely in
NEW-ENGLAND, or other NEW-FOVNDLANDS, ſince OLD
ENGLAND needes them not, unleſſe it be to ſet her all on fire.
As for thoſe furious Champions and Emiſſaries of theirs who have
moſt preſumptuouſly oppoſed your religious Ordinances, by word,
deed, and preſuming on the ſtrength of their Freinds within your Wals,
(the opinion wherof, with your former Lenity towards them hath much
increaſed their ſpreading Leproſy] intend now at laſt to try this iſſue with
your Honours; whether your juſt Ordinances, or their willfull Contempts
againſt them ſhall take place; It is preſumed you will ſo proceed
gainſt them, and the Authors, Printers, Publiſhers of the execrable Libells
h
•
re preſented to your veiw, that they and all the world ſhal know,
You a
•
e a Soveraigne Court of Parliament; whoſe priviledges, Honour,
you have all joyntly Covenanted to mantain with your Lives, Power,
Fortunes; and to proceed againſt all ſuch ſecret Underminers or open
Impugners of them, as Capital Delinquents: and theſe Mutineers experimentally
know, that no one Member of your Honorable Aſſembly, will
ſo far diſhonour himſelf, or violate his publike truſt & Covenant, as to
countenance ſuch audacious willfull offenders in the leaſt degree; nor
yet for Fear or Favour of any Faction, any Perſon how great ſoever, decline
one hairs-bredth from that ſtraite path of Truth and publike Juſtice,
[the greateſt Security and ſupport of Parliaments, Kingdoms]
eſpecially in theſe Leading-caſes, wherein you are moſt concerned, and
as much obleiged to maintain your own Priviledges, Power, Reputations,
Ordinances, againſt Seditious Sectaries, as againſt Rebellious C
•
valeers:
or elſe diſſolve, give over your intended almoſt-accompliſhed

Reformation; and ſo render your ſelves, with your Proceedings contemptible
to all the world: which God forbid.
If any ſhould Object;Object. that the Puniſhment of theſe groſſe Libellers
& Ring-leaders of ſedition would diſcontent and diſengage the Independents,
with all other Sectaries of their opinion, who are a conſiderable
party now; which might prove dangerous to the ſtate in this juncture
of our publike Affaires.
I anſwer:Anſw. 1. That I doubt not all moderate and juditious perſons of
that party wil willingly diſclaime, if not excomunicate, baniſh them
their Congregations, and yeeld them up to publike Juſtice, as perſons
worthy the ſevereſt Cenſures; elſe all the world will cry ſhame upon
them. Secondly, Admit your executing Juſtice on them ſhould diſcontent
their party; yet thankes be to God (for all their vapouring]
they are not ſo potent, ſo conſiderable as to over-aw a Parliament from
doing Juſtice on ſuch of their party, who Libel againſt, or affront their
power & proceedings; in which caſe, our whole three Kingdomes are ſolemnly
engaged by publike Covenant to aſſiſt you to the utmoſt, with
their very lives and fortunes. Thirdly, The greatnes of the Kings Power,
party, hath not retarded you from executing Juſtice upon Strafford, Canterbury,
Tompkins, & ſundry other delinquents: Shall then the leſſe conſiderable
Faction of Anahaptiſts and other Sectaries hinder you from
proceeding againſt a few ſeditious Libellers and Delinquents of their
party? Fourthly, Either you muſt permit them to go on to libel and affront
your Authority, Orders, proceedings ſtill, without exemplary puniſhments,
to your great diſhonour, infamy: or elſe proceed againſt
them now, whiles your Ordinances, and their contempts againſt them
are freſh, their party ſmall: elſe they will plead preſcription, and
you will be leſſe engaged, leſſe able to puniſh them hereafter, in caſe
they ſhould grow ſtronger and more numerous. Principiis obſtandum;
is ever the beſt policy. Fiftly, Let their party be as conſiderable,
as potent as is falſely ſurmiſed by themſelves, yet I humbly conceive,
it ſtands neither with the Majeſty, Honour, Power, nor Wiſdome
of a Parliament, to be afraid of doing Juſtice (eſpecially in maintenance
of their own Ordinances, Priviledges whoever they diſcontent:
In ſuch a caſe, Fiat Juſtitia, ruet Caelum; is the ſafeſt Reſolution.

Majestrates and inferiour Judges (much more then ſupreameſt
Courts of Judicature) muſt not
Pſal. 56. 4. Iſa. 7. 4. Jer. 
•
. 
•
. 17▪

fear the faces nor Frowns of any
Mortalls in diſcharging their duties, but execute Juſtice and Judgement,

what ever comes of it, and truſt God with the Event.
Sixtly, The not doing Exemplary Juſtice in ſuch leading caſes of
publike Concernment, will render your Parliamentary Authority, Ordinances,
Proceedings more contemptible to your own party, then ever they
were unto the Kings: yea, animate the Country Club-men and every inconſiderable
Sectary, not only to Jeat, contemn, diſobey your Ordinances
and Commands, but at laſt to preſcribe Laws unto you, [asSee 31. H. 6. c. 1.
Iack Cade and
his Confederates did to the Parliament in the 29. of Hen. 6.] Which
will by conſequence bring Parliaments into contempt, and ſo ſpeedy
deſolation upon all our Dominions, after ſo many ſucceſſefull proceedings.
Up therefore and be doing Juſtice upon ſome few chiefe
offenders of this kinde for the preſent, to prevent execution upon many
others, if not ruin on us all, for the future, and God himſelfe will
no doubt be with you;Pſal. 56. 4.
You neede not fear what fleſh can do unto you,
or Sectaries ſpeake or write againſt you: whoſe enſuing ſcurrilous Libellous
Seditious paſſages will ſo publikely diſcover their uncharitable,
unchriſtian, Libellous, ſlandering, tumultuous diſpoſitions, and
hypocriticall, falſe, froward, licentious tempers, to all the world, as
will render them odious to all ſober minded, peaceable, conſciencious,
modeſt Chriſtians, if not to themſelves, and all ingenious perſons of
their own Sects; and ſo, through Gods bleſſing, reduce many of them to
the boſome of our Church, from which they have formerly revolted.
It is not my intention by any the premiſſes to ſoure or exaſperate
your Honours in the leaſt degree againſt any peaceable, Conſciencious,
Orthodox, or truly Religious Chriſtians, ſeduced by the Independent
party; or to ſtir up any kind of perſecution againſt ſuch; whoſe conſciences
will (I doubt not) in due time be fully ſatisfied, perſwaded to ſubmit
to that Presbyteriall Church-Goverment and Diſcipline, which you
have now reſolved to eſtabliſh in our Churches▪
 there being nought there
in repugnant to Gods word, or which any well-informed Conſcience,
can have cauſe to ſcruple at. Towards ſuch as theſe, it is moſt juſt and
reaſonable, all Chriſtian Charity, meekneſſe, long-ſuffering, brotherly
love, and fitting liberty ſhould be Indulged for the preſent, till
God ſhall further open their eyes and turn their hearts unto us. For
whoſe better ſati
•
faction in the irregularities of their new concealed
Independent way, I have here-unto ſubjoyned ſome Letters and other
Papers lately ſent me from the Summer Iſlands; whereby they may diſcover,
the faction; arrogance, pride and Cruelty of the Independent

Miniſters there, and that the Liberty of conſcience they plead for, & pretend
they grant to Presbyterians, others; and the peaceableneſſe of their
way, is but a meere fiction, contradicted by their practiſe; and likewiſe
diſcern, how they lead their followers by a meere implicite faith;
impoſe upon them a Popiſh blind Obedience; exerciſe a meere Papall
Authority and unlymited dangerous Arbytrary power over them and others;
pretending an Vtopian Government after the mind of Chriſt, which
is no where written in his word; nor in any claſsicall Authors, Ancient or
Modern, but founded only in their own Fancies, not yet fully diſcover'd,
nor ſet down in writing, nor agreed on among themſelves, nor publiſhed
to others for their better ſatisfaction. The ſerious Conſideration
whereof may happily reclaime our Independents here from the error
of their ſeperating deſtructive ways, and eaſe the oppreſſed Planters of
thoſe Iſlands from that Independent yoake of Bondage under which they ſo
much groane, as to cry out to You for releife of their ſore oppreſſions
in their Letters: which I ſhall beſeech your Honors in their behalfe
(ſince they have made their addreſſes to your Tribunall by my mediation)
ſeriouſly to lay to heart, and ſeaſonably to redreſſe.
Thus humbly craving Pardon from your Honorable Aſſembly for
my true-hearted Zeale to do you faithfull ſervice, by this unburthening
of my conſcience, and preſenting You with this Freſh diſcovery of thoſe
New Wandring-ſtarres and Firebrands who revile, oppugne your Eccleſiaſticall
Juriſdiction, Proceedings, Ordinances; diſturb the muchdeſired
peace of Church, State, (which we ſhould all earneſtly endeavour
in theſe diſtracted Times;) I humbly recommend all your faithfull
undertakings for the ſecurity, tranquility of both, to Gods
owne bleſſing with my devouteſt Oriſons to the throne of Grace, and
ever remaine,



