



Chriſtian Reader,


I Who have beene alwayes hitherto a Cordiall Deſirer,
endeavourer of Peace, am here neceſſitated to preſent
Thee with a Diſcourſe of Warre; to juſtifie The Lawfulneſſe
of the Parliaments preſent taking up of neceſſary
Defenſive Armes. Which neither their Endeavours,
nor my, with many others Prayers could
(with any ſafety to our Priviledges, Perſons, Religion,
Liberty, Realmes, now forcibly invaded by his
Majeſties Popiſh and Malignant Cavallieres) hitherto prevent, or conjure
downe.
To plead the Juſtneſſe of a Warre, of an unnaturall Civill warre, (the
worſt of any) of a Warre betweene the Head and Members, may ſeeme
not onely a Paradox, but a Prodigie, in a Land heretofore bleſſed with
an aged, uninterrupted Peace: AndCivilis Belli, l. 1. p. 1.
Lucans
Bella per AEmathios pluſquam civilia Campos, &c.
(now moſt unhappily revived among us) being but Hiſtoricall, and Poeticall;
may paſſe the world with leſſe admiration and cenſure, than this harſh
Peece, which is both Legally & Theologically (like the Subject matter) Polemicall.
But as the
Apud veros Dei cultores etiam ipſa bella pacata ſunt; quae non cupiditate aut crudelitate, ſed pacis ſtudio geruntur Aug. de diuerſ. Eccl. obſerv. 7. Gratian Cauſ. 23. qu. 2. cap. Apud. Albericus Gentilis de Iure belli. l. 1. c. 5.
ayme, the end of all juſt War, is and ought to be onely future
ſetled Peace; ſo is the whole drift of this Military Diſſertation: not to foment
or protract, but end our bloody Warres; which nothing hath more excited,
animated, lengthened in the Adverſe party, than a ſtrong conceite,
(if not ſerious beliefe,) that The Parliaments Forces, neither would,
nor lawfully might in point of Law or Conſcience forcibly reſiſt or repulſe their
invaſive Armes, without danger of High Treaſon and Rebellion, (which Bugbeare
I have here refuted, removed) and the In-activity, the much admired
ſlowneſſe of many of our Forces, in reſiſting, in preventing their
vigorous Proceedings, which a little timely vigilance and diligence had
eaſily controlled.
It is a more thanPatriae deeſſe quoad vita ſupperat nefas eſt Livius, Rō. Hiſt. l 5.
Barbarous Inhumanity for any perſon, not to put to
his uttermoſt ſtrength, ſpeedily to cloſe up the mortall wounds of his bleeding,

dying Native Country; but to protract its cure, to enlarge, encreaſe
its deadly Ulcers, Stabs, Sores, and make a laſting trade of Warre, out of a ſordid,
Militare non eſt delictum ſed propter praedam militare peccatum eſt. Auguſt. de Verbis Dom. Tract. 19. & Gratian. cauſ. 23. qu 1.
ſinfull deſire of Gaine, of Plunder, to raiſe a private fortune by the
Republicks ruines, (a ſinne, of which ſome perchance are guilty) is an
unparalleld, moſt unnaturall prodigious Impiety.

It was thought a great diſhonour heretofore, for men of Honour and Eſtates,
not to ſerve and defend their Country gratis, as our ownSee Littleton in his Chapter of Gran-ſerjanty, Knight-ſervice, Eſcuage, & Cook ibi.

Lawbooks &
Hiſtories plentifully manifeſt: and ſhall ſuch Perſons now turne ſordid
Mercenaries; ſtirre neither hand nor foot without their Pay; and be more
diligent to get their wages, than diſcharge their Service? God forbid.

It is
Numb. 32 Joſh. 1. 12, to 18.
Recorded of the Children of Gad and Reuben, after they had
recovered their inheritance on this ſide Jordan, that they went all up armed before
the Lord over Jordan, at their owne free coſt, untill they had driven out all
the enemies in it before them, ſubdued the Land, and ſetled their brethren of the
other Tribes peaceably in it. And ſhall not Engliſhmen of Eſtates doe the
like for their Brethren now, in theſe times of need, when money (the
ſinewes of Warre) is almoſt quite ſhrunke up, by reaſon of former Diſburſements
and want of Trade? We read,
Judg 5. 19. That the very Heathen Kings
of Canaan when they came and fought in Taanach by the waters of Megiddo,
againſt the Iſraelites, THEY TOOKE NO GAINE OF MONEY,
for their paines: Such was their Noble-generoſity, which Deborah
regiſters in her Song for their eternall Glory. And we heare of divers
Lords and Gentlemen in the Kings Army, which ſerve againſt their
Country gratis; yea furniſh out ſundry Horſe and Foote, of their proper
coſt; of few or none ſuch there who receive any Pay. And ſhall theſe be
more free, generous, active in ſerving, fighting againſt God, Religion, Lawes,
Liberties, Parliament and their Country; than thoſe of like Ranke and quality
on the Parliaments party are in warring for them? O2 Sam. 1. 20. let not ſuch
anignoble, unchriſtian Report be ever once juſtly told in Gath, or publiſhed
in the ſtreets of Askelon, leſt the daughters of the Philiſtines rejoyce, leſt the
ſonnes and daughters of the uncircumciſed triumph.

I know there are ſome Heroicke Worthies in the Parliaments Armies, of
whom I may truely ſing with Deborah,Judg. 5. 9. 18. My heart is toward the Governours
of Iſrael, that offered themſelves willingly among the people; and who like Zebulon
and Nepthali, have freely jeoparded their lives unto the death, in the high
places of the field. Bleſſed be their Endeavours, and their Names for ever
Honourable: I ſhall now onely wiſh that others would imitate their laudable
examples, that ſo our long-lingring warres, may be ſpeedily and
happily determined in a bleſſed, pure, pious, ſecure, honourable, laſting Peace.

They are Tormentors, not Chirurgions, Executioners, not true Souldiers, who
deſire, endeavour not ſpeedily to cloſe up and heale their deareſt Countries
bleeding, feſtring wounds; for which I have prepared this Treatiſe, as a
Soveraigne Balme, to incarne and cicatrize them, not ulcerate, or inflame
them.

It was the Prophets Patheticke expoſtulation,Jer. 8. 20. 22.
The harveſt is paſt,
the Summer is ended, and we are not healed: Is there no balme in Gilead? Is
there no Phyſitian there? why then is not the health of the Daughter of my people
recovered? It may be Englands and Irelands expoſtulation now: The
Lord put it into the hearts of our great Phyſitians (the King, Parliament,
and Grandees of both Armies) that they may now at laſt with bleeding,
melting hearts and ſpirits, ſpeedily poure forth ſuch effectuall healing
Balmes into theſe two dying Kingdomes deadly wounds, as may effectually
cure and reſtore them to more perfect health and vigor than they ever formerly
enjoyed, that ſo they may loſe nothing but their putrid blood, their
proud dead fleſh, their filthy ſanies and corrupt humours, by their unnaturall
ſtabs already received: Towards the advancement of which much
deſired cure, if theſe my undigeſted rude Collections (interrupted with ſundry
inevitable interloping Diſtractions, which may juſtly excuſe their many
defects) may adde any contribution, or ſatisfie any ſeduced, or ſcrupulous
Conſciences touching this preſent Warre; I ſhall deeme my labours highly
recompenſed; And ſo recommending them to Gods bleſsing, and thy charitable
acceptation, I ſhall detaine thee with no further Prologue.

Farewell
