




Right Honourable,


HAving had the Honour, through Gods aſſiſtance, to be
a meane, though cordiall Inſtrument, of Vindicating The
Soveraigne Power of Parliaments and Kingdomes, in all
Civill or Military affaires which concerne the State,
in Foure ſeverall Volumes, againſt all Oppoſites whatſoeever;
which they have (for the moſt part) ſatisfied, or put to ſilence:
I expected a Quietus eſt from all other Controverſies, concerning the
Iuriſdiction of Parliaments, eſpecially in Eccleſiaſticall matters; which
moſt imagined had been put to eternall ſilence when our Lordly Prelates
loſt their Votes and Seſsion in Parliament, by a publike Law: But (alas)
I know not by what evill Genius, and Pythagorean Metempſychoſis, the
Anti-Parliamentary Soules, formerly dwelling in our defunct Prelates
earthly Tabernacles, are tranſmigrated into, and revived in a New-Generation
of men (ſtarted up of late among us) commonly known by
the Name of INDEPENDENTS; who, though for the moſt part
really cordiall in their Affections, Actions to the Parliament and
Church of England, (for which, and for their piety they are to bee
highly honoured▪) yet ſome of them are of late become extremely derogatory,
and deſtructive unto both, in their Anarchicall and Anti-Parliamentary
Poſitions: For which, and for their late gathering of Independent
Churches, contrary to Your Parliamentary Injunctions, they are to be
juſtly blamed, as great diſturbers of our publike Peace and Vnity.

It is the obſervation of learnedSelect. Diſputat. de Quaeſt. in quibus ſit Poteſtas Eccleſiaſtica. Theſ. 1. 4, & 5.
Voetius andDe Epiſcopatu Conſtantini Magni. p. 3. 4, 5, 6.
Vedelius, That
the Arminians in the Netherlands, for the advancing of their owne
Faction, and more facill accompliſhment of their private ill Deſignes,
did before the Synod of Dort, and in the beginning thereof,
exceedingly cry up the Power of the Civill Magiſtrate, and States

of Holland, in Eccleſiaſticall matters, both by Writing and Preaching;
aſcribing to them the higheſt Juriſdiction and Power of giving
ultimate Judgement in all Controverſies of Faith, and Eccleſiaſticall
matters ariſing in the Church, as a Prerogative belonging immediately
under Chriſt to them alone: And thereupon they appealed
to the States, from the Eccleſiaſticall Claſſes, as the proper
Iudges of the Controverſies they had raiſed in the Belgick Churches.
But at laſt, after the Synod of Dort had determined againſt their
Arminian Errors, and the
See Acta Synodi Dod
•
. p. 3
•
5, 326, 327
States eſtabliſhed their Determinations,
prohibiting the Preaching or Printing of any Arminian Tenets, with
the private Independent Congregations and Conventicles of the Arminian
Party, they preſently altered both their opinions and practice;
crying downe the Authority of the States and Civill Magiſtrate, as
faſt as they had cryed it up, both in theirApologiae. c. 25. See Epiſcopius Diſput. 32. Theſ. 4. Mr. Rutherfords, Due Right of Presbyteries. p. 343, 344, 345 357, 358, 359.
Apologies and Sermons;
contracting, yea denying them that very power which before they
had ſo liberally meaſured 
•
ut unto them; affirming, that the States
had no power at all over their private Congregations: that it was not
any right or part of their Office to obliege men, by their authorities,
to the Decrees of Synods, however agreeable to the word of God;
and that they ought not to uſe any coactive Power or Authority in
ſuch caſes, to obliege them to conformity.

This Practice of the Arminians was, by
Anti-apol
•
gia. p. 157, 158.
Mr
 Thomas Edwards, by way
of prediction, applied to the Independents, in theſe very tearmes: And
it may be feared, however theſe Apologiſts NOW to ingratiate themſelves,
and being let alone in their Church-way, ſay, they give more to the Magiſtrates
than the Presbyteriall, and that they profeſſe to ſubmit, and to be moſt willing
to have recourſe to the Magiſtrates Iudgement, and Cognizance, and Examination
of Eccleſiaſticall Cauſes; yet when they ſhall come once to be
croſſed, and the Parliament, by the advice of the Aſſembly, to ſettle the
Government of the Church, and by their Authority to bind them to things agreeable
to the word, wee ſhall ſee then what they will ſay of the Magiſtrates
Power. There are too many ſpeeches already, ſince the Aſſembly, (out of
their feare how they may goe) which have fallen from many Independents,
THAT PROGNOSTICATE, THEY WILL DOE BY THE PARLIAMENT,
AS THE REMONSTRANTS DID AFTER THE
SYNOD OF DORT BY THE STATES. Which Prognoſtication
hath fallen out accordingly. For ſince that time our Independents having
felt the Pulſes of the Aſſembly and Parliament bearing, but very
gently, by way of debate, againſt their Anarchicall and Anomolous New-Way,
(derived from their good friends, the

See Lac
••
 Oſiander his 
〈◊〉
 Controverſiarum cum Anabaptiſtis. German Anabaptiſts and

See Mr Rob
••
ſons Apology Separatiſts, and ſupported only with their Arguments, as I am fully able
to demonſtrate;) they have not only in Preſſe and Pulpit cryed up their
Way, as the Onely Way, Kingdome, and Scepter of Chriſt; and denyed all
oppoſition in word, deed, or thought againſt it; as a direct
See Mr. Iohn Goodwins Theomachia, and Innocencies Triumph. FIGHTING
AGAINST GOD; and promoted it publikely and privately with
all their Induſtry, Policy, Power; ſetting up New Independent Congregations
in every corner; but even with open mouth, pen, hand, (contrary
to their former Solemne Vowes, Covenants, Proteſtations, which I feare
they have over-much forgotten) cryed downe, and fought againſt the
very Eccleſiaſticall Power, and Legiſlative Authority of the High Court of
Parliament it ſelf, and Supreme Temporall Magiſtrates: proclaiming not
onely in their
Mr. Iohn Goodwins Sermon, Febr. 25. 1643. Pulpits, but likewiſe in ſundry late
Reply to A. S. Mr. Iohn Goodwins Theomachia: and Inocencies Triumph. An Anſwer to Mr. William Prins Twelve Queſtions. My Brother Burtons Vindication. p. 5. 6. &c.
 Pamphlets, wherewith
they have filled the World, That every particular Congregation of viſible
Saints, and Independent Church, is under the Government of Chriſt alone, as the
ONELY Head, King, Governour, Law-giver of it; and ſubject TO NO OTHER
IVRISDICTION, then that of Chriſt, his word and Spirit. That
NO POWER ON EARTH, NOR EARTHLY LAW-GIVERS MAY,
CAN, OR OVGHT TO GIVE LAWES, FOR THE GOVERNMENT
OF THIS REPVBLIKE, nor claime, nor exerciſe an Headſhip, or undertake
the Government of this Body. That neither KINGS, NOR PARLIAMENTS,
NOR SYNODS, have any Authority to preſcribe Lawes or Rules
for the Churches Government, to order the affaires of Chriſts Kingdome, or
inſtitute the Government of his Churches; or to make coactive Lawes, in any
Eccleſiasticall matters, to bind the conſcience of any Church or Chriſtian to out