




Noble Lord,


MAny whoſe eyes are upon your Lordſhip, do acknowledge the good hand of the Lord towards you, not in conferring eminency of honour

upon you in your minoritie, (as it were, before your time) but in giving you a ſerious diſcerning ſpirit, farre above your yeers, whereby they conceive great hope, and powre out many prayers to the Lord, that he may in due time bring you forth in publique, as a choice Inſtrument in the hand of your God, to do worthily
Ruth 4. 11
in Ephratah, and to be famous in Bethlehem.

Among others the publiſhers of this ſmall Treatiſe, (part whereof being the Meditatiōs, of a pious yong man, now with God, and the reſidue the labour of a reverend Divine) to declare their great affection to your Lordſhip, have importuned mee to recommend

this Tractate to your Honour, conceiving, that under your Lordſhips Name theſe Meditations not only may appeare to the world with ſome acceſs of luſtre, but that the influence they may have upon ſome hereby may prove more available.
The ſubject herein handled, is about the choice of that which ſcarce yet ever entered into your ſerious thoughts, yet it is wiſdome to ſtore up good rules before you need to uſe them: Mariners learne their skill before they launch into the deeps: All Artiſts ſtudy the Theory before the Practice; Wiſe men are long in contemplation,

before they adventure upon action: It's a known rule, Deliberation muſt be long, where Determination can be but once; and where there is no admiſſion of ſecond thoughts to reverſe a former errour, the firſt thoughts muſt be carefull, that errour be prevented.
In the interim, before the Lord incline your heart to think of any choice that way on earth, be intreated to make your choice in heaven; that the Lord Jeſus may be the guide of your youth, & ſo the God of your age, that God may ſay of you: I remember the kindneſs
Jere. 2. 2.
of thy youth, and the love of thy eſpouſals.


Surely it can be no diſparagement, for the greateſt of men to betroth themſelves to the great God, to contract ſpirituall alliance with innumerable companies of
Heb. 12. 22, 23.
Angels and Souls made perfect, and to match with himEph. 3. 15.
of whom the whole familie of Heaven and Earth is called.

Satan hath done his utmoſt to brand the ſervants of God with ignominy, and to deterre men of quality from owning the way called holy. It is not long ſince ſome of our Nobility, eminentE. M. for pietie, paralleled our age with the ſad times ofCogunt
••


•
ſſ
•
 ma
•••


