



Right Honble,



I
 Have principally endeavoured in this Sermon to
ſearch, What that is, to Which we may Truſt our
Soules; and What Foundation we are to Lay in our
Religion.
If we were once Eſtabliſhed in this maine Point
concerning the Next World, we ſhould Enjoy our ſelves with
much more Setledneſs, and Security in This World. For how
quietly ſhould we repoſe our Selves for this Outward, Short Life
in the Body on that Power, to Which we commit the Care of our
more Excellent, and Immortall Part?
What Difficulty would there be in Truſting to Him for our
Preſervation from Death, to whom we truſt our Selves in Death,
for Eternity?
Our Lord Jeſus ſeems to this End to be Shaking Heaven, and
Earth, Church, and State, all Outward Powers, and Inward
Principles in Both; that the True Foundation of Heaven, and
Earth may be Diſcovered.

Saint Paul ſaith, Other Foundation can no Man lay, than
that which is laid, Jeſus Chriſt, 1 Cor. 3. 11.
God Hath laid no other Foundation; neither May we, neither
Can we.
On This alone hath God built the World, His Church, His Glory.
He hath made All Things by Jeſus Chriſt, Coloſſ. 1. 16.
On this alone muſt we build our Belief, and Obedience in Divine
Things; our Wiſdome, and Power in the Things of Man.
For All Power is given to Him in Heaven, and Earth, Mat.
28. 18.
Whoever raiſeth any Outward, or Inward Frame of Things

upon any other Ground-worke, he makes a Lie, he works the
Works of the Devill, whoſe End is to be Diſſolved; to Vaniſh into
Ayre, or Periſh in the Fire.

S. Paul Divides Man into Three Parts; Spirit, Soule, and
Body, 1 Theſſ. 5. 23.

The Body is an Outward Image made of Duſt, Gen. 2. 7. God
formed Man of the Duſt of the Ground.

The Soule is a Breath of Life Incloſed in This Image, Clothed
with It, and Giving Life to It: He breathed into his
Noſthrils the Breath of Life, and Man became a Living Soul.
The Spirit is the Fountain of Life, which flowes forth from
God, to Feed, and Maintain the Breath of Life in the Body.
When the time of Death Comes, This Spirit draws back to Their
Head again Thoſe ſtreams of Life, by Which It went forth into
the Body. Then the Outward Image falls to the Ground, and
moulders away. Thus doth the Duſt return to the Earth, as it
was; and the Spirit returns to God that gave it, Eccleſ. 12. 7.
Now of Theſe Three the Higher lives In the Lower, and Above
It. The Lower lives by the Higher. And the Higheſt of
all Three, the Spirit of Man hath a Higher than That, by which
It Self lives, even the Spirit of the Lord Jeſus, who is the King,
and Father of Spirits.

Our Saviour reaſons after this manner, Is not the Life More
than Meat, and the Body than Rayment? Mat. 6. 25.
My Lords! We are all well aſſured of This: that, Nothing
can Give More, than It Hath. Theſe Bodies of ours, which
have a more Noble Image, and Life, than any other part of this
Outward World, in which they are; cannot receive Either, or
continue in Either by any Inferiour, and Outward Thing; but
by a Soule, which dwells in the Body, as a Silk-worm in her
Work; which lives in the Body, as a Fire in the Flame. Food,
and Rayment may be the Fuell, by which the Soule maintains the
Flaming Appearance of this Bodily Image. But the Vertue goes
forth from the Soule.

Our Saviour again teacheth us; that, Nothing, which comes
from Without, can make the Soule Miſerable, or Happy; Clean,
or Unclean.
This is done by that which comes from a more Inward, and
Higher Principle; from the Spirit of Man.
In like manner this Spirit it ſelf derives Its Life from the
Right, or the Left Hand of Jeſus Chriſt; His Love, or His
Wrath. From Hence our Spirits convey Life into our Soules,
and thorow them into our Bodies.
Thus our Bodies live not by Bread alone, but by that Vertue,
which comes forth from our Soules. Our Soules live not by their
Counſels, and Courages alone; but by every Stream of Life,
that deſcends from our Spirits upon them. Our Spirits live
not by their own Eminencies; but by Every Word, that comes
forth from the Mouth of Jeſus Chriſt.

S. Paul ſaid, The Head of the Woman is the Man; The
Head of the Man is Chriſt; The Head of Chriſt is God,
1 Cor. 11. 3.
So the Head of the Body is the Soule; the Head of the Soule is
the Spirit; the Head of the Spirit is Jeſus Chriſt, as He comes
forth to us in the Miniſtery of Angels.
Therefore let us have a Covering over our Heads, a Power over
our Soules, and Spirits, holding them in Subjection; for
theſe Angels ſakes, Amongst Which, and By Which Jeſus Chriſt
the Head of our Soules, and Spirits doth now raigne over us.
Our Lord Jeſus calls Himſelf the Sun of Righteouſneſſe. O
that men did once Know; that there can be no Right Judgment
made, no true Diſtinction, or Diſcovery of Things; but by the
Shining out of Jeſus Chriſt in their Hearts!
Are there not Inviſible Things, as well as Viſible? Have not
They alſo Their Sun?
The Sun, the Brighteſt Body, is the Foundation, and Fountain
of all Light, Vertue, Forme, and Being in this Globe of Bodily

Subſtances. If the Sun be quite hid, all Shapes are loſt in an
Utter Darkneſs.
The Lord Jeſus among Spirits, and Spirituall Things is the
onely Foundation of Truth, Life, and Power. All Truth, and
True Life is loſt in Doubt, Uncertainty, and a Spirituall Death,
to thoſe Spirits, in which He withdraweth Himſelf.
Why is the Heaven of our Religion darkened with Clouds of
Diſpute, with ſo much Diverſity, ſuch Uncertainty of Opinions;
that he begins to ſeem the Wiſeſt among us, who is moſt of all a
Sceptique, that is, a Scorner, or an Atheiſt?
How comes our Reaſon to ſuch a Loſſe, that She cannot Find,
or Know Her ſelf; She can give no Cleer, or Conſtant Account
of Her ſelf, in any One Man, or in any One Particular Thing?
Doe not Theſe things manifeſtly declare not only a Negation,
but a Privation of ſome Great Light, which ſhould by It's Immediate
Preſence rule the Day of our Religion; and by Its Beams
falling upon our Reaſon, as the Leſſe Light, rule the Night of
of Nature, and Civill Affairs?
The Watch-men watch for the Morning, ſo doth my Soule
wait for the Riſing of the Lord Jeſus upon Her, and upon the
whole Earth. He is the Image of the Invincible God; the Light,
that is Sowne even in This our Darkneſs. But He ſhall breake
theſe Chains of Darkneſs. For it is not Poſsible, that He ſhould
be Holden by them.
I have onely One Thing more to ſay, which is this; that, There
are Some things, which I could not ſpeake before your Lops,
though I had prepared them. Theſe things I have now taken the
Boldneſs to preſent to your Lops Eyes, together with thoſe,
which I had formerly offered to your Lops Ears.
That Jeſus Chriſt may diſcover Himſelf a Living Cornerſtone
in your Hearts, out of which may grow up a Building of
Eternall Peace to your own Perſons, and Preſent Peace to This
Kingdome, is, My Lords, the Prayer of



