




AFter other meanes duly but without ſucceſſe
tried, for the publique good, to wit the vindicating
of truth, and conſequently for the
preventing of the eſtabliſhment of an errour
and corruption of the moſt ſolemn ſacred
rite of the Chriſtian profeſſion, and the oppreſſion
of them that oppoſe it, I conſented to
the publiſhing of two treatiſes in December
laſt about Infant-baptiſme. It ſeemed good to ſundry perſons of note
preſently to cry downe my aſſertions, and to load me with unjuſt accuſations,
which I take to be rather a baffeling of the Author, then an
anſwering of his writing. Yet the truth hath gotten ſo much ground
(however ſome eminent men pretend otherwiſe) that the Doctrine
of the Directory is diſavowed by two of the moſt eminent of my Antagoniſts,
as is ſhewed § 9. pag. 40. 41. 42. 43. 44. of this Apology,
the chiefe argument of my prime Antagoniſt, is proved to be either
nugatory or fallacious, §. 10. pag. 44. 45 46. 47. 48. of this Apology,
ſundry confeſſions are drawne from my Antagoniſts, which in my
judgement, and I thinke in the judgement of any that knowes what
belongs to diſputes, do yeeld the cauſe, as thoſe that I mention §. 18.
pag 97. 98. 100. 101. 102. & §. 5. page 28. of this Apology. And
as for the accuſations againſt my ſelfe, I ſhould ſleight them, were
it not they had a great influence upon the cauſe, and therefore have
been neceſſitated to vindicate my ſelfe; and therewith the truth in

ſome meaſure by this Apology. The great prejudice againſt me in
Point of antiquity, I have alſo in this Apology endeavoured to diſpell,
ſpecially that from the teſtimony of Auguſtin, Serm. 10. de verbis
Apoſtoli, tom. 10. which upon examination I find not to be an
hiſtoricall narration from good records, but a meer hyperbolicall
ſpeech, Rhetorically aſſerting a thing by conjecture from preſent uſe
in a Sermon to the people, §. 15. pag. 81. 82. 83. 84. of this Apology.
And for the teſtimony of Tertullian concerning federall holineſſe,
it is ſhewed to be impertinent, §. 15. pag. 84. 85. That the
preſent Synod or reformed Churches are againſt me ſhould be no
more prejudice againſt me, then it is againſt the Synod, and reformed
Churches that they oppoſe the Doctrine of Infant-baptiſme, as
it was taught by Cyprian, and his councill of 66. Biſhops, Auguſtin,
and many Synods, and Churches all along till the fifteenth century,
and the Auguſtan confeſſion art 9.
The danger of troubles upon a reformation of this corruption
ſhould make men wary how they introduce them; I thinke they
that are bound by Covenant to reforme, yet are not bound to do it
with procipitation, and without prudence. But however men muſt
take heed how they eſtabliſh an errour and corruption by a Law, and
oppreſſe men for holding a truth, leſt they kicke againſt the Pricke.

As for my owne particular, the hard dealing I have fo
•
nd doth
not alienate me from my brethren, nor I hope ſhall make a ſchiſm between
us; if it muſt happen, my indeavour is, that it may be neceſſary,
not voluntary on my part. What hath happened I looke upon it,
however meant by men, yet as ordered by God for good, to wit the
clearing of the truth, the trying and humbling of my ſelfe. That I
ſuffer in the repute of men, or my outward peace moves me not. It's
not to be expected children ſhould be born without travail, nor truth
without ſuffering; yet to leave ſo intelligent an Auditory, with ſo
much advantage of the fruite of my labours, is no ſmall grievance.
However I have choſen you for depoſitaries, in whoſe hands I may
leave this Apology; that you may not be ſtrangers to this buſineſſe,
nor forget him who is


From my ſtudy at the Temple
in London,

Auguſt 20. 1646.


