



CHriſtian reader, I will take it as a great favour from thee, if in reading
this my Anſwer thou wilt judge me to be, as indeed, and in truth I
am, an adverſary of the cauſe, and not of the perſon. He who is commonly
reported to be the Author of the foure queſtions in hand, is one
whoſe perſon I have, from my firſt knowledge of him, dearly loved, honoured,
and admired, for his excellent parts, profitable paines for the
publike good, and his unwearied labours, and patient ſufferings in the cauſe of Chriſt.
If he hath but once in all his life ſtumbled upon a bad cauſe, and pleaded for it, (which
is a common, and in ſome ſort a neceſſary evil, hardly to be avoided by men of his vocation:)
let not this blemiſh his great learning, nor his judgement, ſound in all other
points, and leaſt of all his approved piety and zeale for true religion. His name, which
was happily concealed, and not annexed to theſe foure queſtions, ſhall ever be precious
with me, and I hope with all Gods people alſo, who truly feare the Lord, long for the
peace of Zion, and unfeignedly ſeek the reformation of Christs Church, in all theſe three
Kingdomes. It is no ſmall griefe to me, that I am compelled to move my pen in writing
againſt any paper, publiſhed by an hand ſo deare to me: But in the cauſe of Chriſt,
and in a point ſo prejudiciall to the peace and pure reformation of the Church, Who can
be ſilent? The neareſt relations of love which one Chriſtian can have to another in this
world, muſt not hinder us, nor ſtay our hands, tongues or pens from performance of any
duty, in which we all ſtand obliged to the Lord Chriſt our Redeemer, and to his Church
our deare mother. And wherein can we be more neceſſitated to ſhew our duty to both,
then in reſisting with all our power whatſoever tends to the common and continuall prophanation
of the holy Sacrament of Chriſts body and blood? which cannot poſſibly be avoided,
if the power of the keys, which Chriſt hath given to his Apoſtles and their ſucceſſors,
with a promiſe to be with them to the end of the world, be taken, under any pretence, out
of the hands of the Pastors and Presbyters of the Church, and no power left unto them
to put by any ſinners, openly ſcandalous and impenitent, from the holy Communion nor
to exclude ſuch ſpirituall lepers, moſt loathſome and infections, from the ſacred meeting
at the Lords holy Table. Who doth not ſee that the maine cauſe of the Schiſmes and
ſeparations of divers godly and zealous Chriſtians from our Communion, is the mixture
of the prophane among the pious and godly, and the admiſſion of perſons openly ſcandalous
to the holy Sacrament? This is that which hath moved many out of their blinde
zeale to proclaime our Church, a whore a ſtrumpet, a Synagogue of Antichriſt; and our
faithfull Miniſters, Baals Prieſts, and limmes of the beaſt. All true Chriſtians, and
moſt of all the Miniſters of the Word, are bound to put to their hands and ſhoulders
for the removing of this ſtumbling-block and rock of offence out of the way: And I eſpecially
more then others, by reaſon of that ſingular love I bear to this deare brother erring
in this point, and leaſt I ſhould offend against that commandement, Lev. 19. 17.
Thou ſhalt not have thy brother in thine heart: thou ſhalt in any wiſe rebuke thy neighbour,
and not ſuffer ſin upon him, or bear ſin for him. His paper is gone forth in publike,
private rebuke will not hinder the hurt which it may doe: It hath given ſuch publike
wounds, as cannot be cured but by a publike remedy. The Lord, the great healer of
ſoules, give a ſpeedy cure to the maladies of his Church, and all our ſoule-ſickneſſes: to
him be praiſe for ever and ever.
