To The Towne-Reader . TO tell thee true , I am both sorry and ashamed , to have spent so many idle hours with thee ; and therefore to avoid the expense of more , have retired me from the Town . This then to thee , is in part of acknowledgement of it , as of purpose to amend ; and as this shall find acceptance , so expect at convenient leisure to hear from me again . For my disposition ( if thou knowest it not ) thou mayest , from this Ode of mine . ( 1 ) Free as I was born I'll live , So should every wise man do : Only fools they are , that give Their freedoms to I know not who . ( 2 ) If my weakness cannot save it , But 'tmust go ; what ever it cost : Some more strong than I shall have it , Can make good what I have lost . ( 3 ) Still some excellency should be More i'th' Master , than the Slave , Which in others till I see , None my liberty shall have . ( 4 ) Nor is't excellency enough , Time nor Chance can mar or make ; But 'tmust be more lasting stuff , Shall from me my freedom take . ( 5 ) Wherefore beauty never shall On my liberty intrude : And proud greatness least of all , Cause it's proud , once to conclude . ( 6 ) Those to whom I'll give away , That which none too deer can buy , Shall be made of better clay , And have better souls than I . For the Treatise it self , by reason there are but too many of that depraved palate , to whom all seems insipid and disgustful , that is , seasoned with any taste of piety , to occur to such infirm appetites , I have served up their meat in little pieces , thus cut up unto their hands , which in greater perhaps they would not like so well . To make it a more spreading work , if I would , I could have beatrice it thinner , ( the matter was pliable enough unto the hammer ) but I like not works of that rarity , defined by the Philosopher , Sub magna quantitate substantia parva . And hold in books as in coin , those of most valve in least quantity the best . That I am so frequent in Latin citation , those I am sure who are versed in the language , will easily pardon it ; the rest , I hope , will not be difficile , when they shall find in the reading , the sense complete without it . If any demand , why then I inserted it , I answer , works of this fabric , consolidate and built upon authority of holy Writ , without frequent Texts of it , for foundation and cement , are worthily esteemed , but weak and loose-written things . Now that I chosen the Latin to any other vulgar ; I presumed , as a builder , they would give me leave to provide my materials , when I supposed them at best hand to be god . But I detain thee too long in the porch , unless with Malchus thou thinkest much to have and ear in the passion : Enter the work , and if thou receivest but as much profit in reading , as I intended thee in writing , we shall both be happy in it . Farewell : R. F.