To the Honourable EDWARD MONTAGU , Sir JOHN POWLET , Sons and Heirs to the Right Honourable EDWARD Lord MONTAGU of Boughton . JOHN Lord POWLET of Hinton-St-George . WHen I observe the several alterations in Nobility , I find foure principal actors on the theatres of great Families ; the Beginner , Advancer , Continuer , and Ruiner . The Beginner is he who by his virtues refineth himself from the dross of the vulgar , and layeth the foundation of his house : And excellent workman indeed , as who not only brings his tools , but makes his materials . The Advancer , who improveth the patrimony of Honour he receives ; and what his Father found glass and made crystal , he finds crystal and makes it pearl . The Continuer , who keepeth his Nobility alive , and passes it along neither marring nor mending it ; but sends it to his Son as he received it from his Father . The Ruiner , who basely degenerateth from his Ancestors ; so that in him Nobility hath run so far from its first starting , that it is tired : and whilst he lives he is no better then his Grandfathers tomb ; without , carved over with honourable titles ; within , full of emptiness , or what is worse , corruption . Now to apply . You cannot be Beginners of your Families ; that care was cared for before your nurse's were chosen , or your cradles provided . Your Father's , though of late years fixed in a higher Sphere , were bright Stars long before . None can go on in our English Chronicles , but they must meet with a Montagu and a Powlet , either in peace in their gowns , or in war in their armour . Yea , when I go backward by the streams of your Paternal Nobility , ( not to speak of the tributary brooks of their matches ) I can never find the first fountain ; and hope none shall ever find the last fallen . For as for the ruiners of houses , I should rend that thought out with my heart , if it should conceive that of you . Nay , let me tell you ; if you be but bore continuers of your Honour , you deceive both the desires and hope's of your friends . Good is not good when proceeding from them from whom far better is expected . Your youthful virtues are so promising , that you cannot come off in your riper age with credit without performing what may redound to the advancing of the honour of your family , and without building your houses one story higher in the English History . Now know , next Religion , there is nothing accomplisheth a man more then Learning . Learning in a Lord , is as a diamond in gold . And if you fear to hurt your tender hands with thorny School-questions , there is no danger in meddling with History , which is a velvet-study , & recreation-work . What a pity is it to see a proper Gentleman to have such a crick in his neck that he cannot look backward ! yet no better is he who cannot see behind him the actions which long since were performed . History makes a young man to be old , without either wrinkles or grey hairs ; privileging him with the experience of age , without either the infirmities or inconveniences thereof . Yea , it not only makes things past , present ; but enableth one to make a rational conjecture of things to come . For this world affords no new accidents , but in the same sense wherein we call it a new Moon , which is the old one in another shape , and yet no other then what hath been formerly . Old actions return again , furbished over with some new and different circumstances . Now among all particular histories ( I may say ) none is more general then this of the Holy war , which now I present to your Honours . Some will condemn me for and ill husband , in lavishing two Noble Patroness on one book , whereas one of them might have served to have patronized many volumes . But first , I did it in the weak expression of my thankfulness unto you , being deeply indebted to you both ; and I thought it dishonesty to pay all to one creditor and none to another ; and therefore conceived it best , to share my estate jointly betwixt you , as far forth as it would extend . Secondly , considering the weakness of this Work , now being to walk abroad in the world , I thought it must be led by both arms , and needed a double supporter . And now I am sure this Holy war , which was unhappy heretofore , when acted ; will be happy hereafter , now written and related , because dedicated to your Honours . So rests Your Honours in all service THOUGH . FULLER . Broadwindsor , March 6. 1638.