TO THE RIGHT VERTVOVS and Religious Gentlewoman , Mrs. JOANE PARKER , the Relict of Master Iohn Parker lately deceased . HAving been , with much importunity and renewed reqests , Qotidian • • onviti • es flag • tatu •• Fa • ju • Instit. pr • f . incessantly solicited , by diverse , who either had themselves herd , or from others herd of , what was delivered at the enterrement of your late wor • hy Consort , and either had known him in his life time , or taken notice of his course of life then related , to make that more public , that was then uttered , in the audience but of a few to speak of , and by reason of the lowness and feebleness of my voice , of the fewer ; I was at length overwrought ( though having formerly not such purpose ) to condescend thereunto : the rather hoping that his exemplary course of life and carriage , with the good effect and comfortable issue of it , might be a means , through Gods blessing working together therewith , to invite , incite , allure and win others to the like . Experience teaching , that Vivi • ur exemplis . Nec tam imperio nobis opus est qam exemplo . Plin. Paneg . • lus succendunt exempla . qàm praedicamenta . Gregor . Dialogue . l. 1. prae • . & qi praeceptis non accenduntur , exemplis saltem excitantur . Id. moral . l. 9. c . 43. Plerum que ad exercenda bona opera , aliena nos utiliter exempla persuadent . Ib. l. 22. c . 7. & grex , qi pastoris v • c • m mor • s que seqitur , per exempla melius qam perverba graditur . Id. the Past . l. 2. c . 3. Facilius suadent exempla qam verb • . Ambr. in 1 Cor. 14 men nature is of it self more prove to walk by example then by rule ; and to follow precedents rather then precepts . Those also having this advantage of these , that 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . Arist. Probl. lib . 18. q . 3. Longum e • st iter per praecepta ; breve & essi ax , per exempla . Senec. Epist. 6. Insuevit • a • er optimus hoc . me , u • fugerem , exemplis • i •• orum q • que notando , Formabat dictis puerum sic , sive j • bebat ut f • ce • em qid , sive vetab •• . Flac. Satyr . 4. they show not only what things are enjoined , and how things enjoined may be done ; but they Admonetur audi •• aetas omnis , fi • ri posse qod factum est • Cypr. ad Donat. Melius homin • s exemplis docentur ; qae in primis hoc in se boni habent , qod approb •• tO • ieri posse qae praecipiunt . Plin. in Paneg . Sermo qidam vivu • & efficax exemplum open • is est , • acilè pers • adens q • worser intendimus , dum factibile probat esse qod suademus . Bern. de Resur . 2. Adjuvari se ex • m • lis exoptat humana in • irmitas , qo facilius ipsa etiam nunc faciat , qae alios secisse ante cognosca •• Salvian . contr . Avar lib . 3. Ex aliorum enim factis fieri posse credunt , qod fo • te dum putant fieri non posse , pigrescunt . August . Epist. 134. take away also that common counterplea of impossibility , which against all exhortation and admonition is by the multitude usually objected ; by showing , that such things as are required of them , are not other then have been done by 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . Acts 14.15 . Ia • es 5.17 . men like themselves ; and may therefore be done by others also , and among others 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . M. And • on • n . l. 6. Sect. 19. Tes • es suos contra nos Dominus inns • a • r • tO , eum bora qae f • cere ipsi negligimus . ad correptionem nostram , ab a • iis facta demonstrot : ut in recti tudini • appe • i • u nil sibi mens nostra di • si isle aes • imet , qod ante peragi ab aliis videt . Gr. Mor. l. 9. c . 43. Nescio qo modo amplius ad c • oh • it • tē excitamur , per fidem , qâ cred . mus vixisse sic aliqē ; & spe • qa nos • oh que ita posse v • vere , qi homines sumus , ex counterfeit qod aliqiho • ines ita vixerunt , mi • i . • è desp • ramus . A • g . de Trinit . l. 8. c . 9. by themselves , if they will but as those before them have done , endeavour and enforce themselves thereunto . I remember a good saying of a Reverend Divine now with the Lord , that Mr. William Bradshaw in his Meditations on Christ . Tempt . MS. a good great man is a great Moat in the Devils Eye : for that the examples of those that are in eminent places , as they are Matth. 5.14 . Tu to totius medio telluris in o •• e Vivere cognoscas : cunc • is tua g • ntibus esse Fac • a palam : nec posse dari regalibus unqam secretum viti • . Nam lux all • issima fati occultum nihil esse s • nit , latebras que per omnes Intrat , & abst • usos explo • at fan are •• ssus . Cla • dian de Honour . Coss. 4. 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . Herodim . l. 4. Perluc • tO omne regi • e vitium domus . Sen Agam . 2.1 . Tibi nullum secret • m liberum est : in mult • l • ce fortuna • e posuit . Idem ad Po • yb . c . 25. Nost • os motus • auci sen • i • nt : • ibi non magis qam so • ila • ere conti • gi • : multa circa te lux est : omnium in istam conv • rsi oculi sunt . Id • m de Clem. l. 1. c . 8. 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . Greg. Naz. in Patr. Qi m • gro imp • rio praed •• i in excelso aetatem agunt , corum facta cuncti mortales novere . Sal • st . ad Caesar Ad • e oculos aures que tra • is : • ua facta notamus . Pedo and Liv . more eyed of others , so 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . Basil. apud Anton. •• l ss . l 2 c . 1. 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . Nicet . in All • x . Comn . l. 2. c . 4. Vua principis censura est , ae que perpetua . ad hanc dirigimur , ad hanc convertimur . Flexibiles qamcun que in partem worser • cimur a princ • p • : at que ut ita worser •• am , se • ac • s s • mus : huic enim cari , huic prob • ti • ss • cupimus : q • worser worser • ssimiles • rust • asperant . Plin. paneg . Rex veli • honesta , ne • oh n • n • adem v • l • tO . Se • . Thyest 1.1 . Nā totus componitur orbis Regis ad exemplū ; nec sic inflect • re sensus Humanos edicta valent , qam vi • a regentu . Claud. ut sup . R • ctè facere princeps s • os sacie • do docet . V • lleius Hist l. 2. & contra , Vitia principes non selū ipsi concipi •• , e • iam in civi • a • es infundun • ; plus que exemplo qam pecc • to n • cent . Cic. de leg . l. 3. they draw the more after them , either to good or to evil . And I may well add , that a r • ligious rich man is likewise ( witness blessed Iob 1.10 . Job ) a great Moat in the Devils Eye : not only because such and one , having his heart enlarged answerably to his hand , may Iob 29.13 , 15 , 16. & 31.16 , 20. by his bounty and beneficence do a great deal the more good , and that Gal. 6.10 . where the Devil least liketh : but because also in such it is made to appear , that by honest courses and Prov. 10.22 . Gods blessing upon them , men may attain unto wealth , as well as by fraud , deceit , extortion , oppression , and such indirect ways , as Hab. 2.9 , 12. most strive to raise and advance their estates by , and Varo , regustatum digito terebrare saelin •• Contentus per • ges , si vivere cum Iove tends . Pers. sat . 5. hoc est , qod Flac. l 2. Sat. 4. S • mp • r p • uper eri • . without which they think wealth cannot possibly be compassed . Yea , let me add in the third place , that a religious industrious man ( and yet I see not well , Ephes. 4.28 . 1 Tim. 5.8 . how they can be severed ) is a great Moat in the Devils Eye . For that by his • aven and wise practice such and one makes it manifest , that a man may well serve God in a constant course , and yet follow also the duties of his special calling ; and that there is therefore no such necessity , as many , on either side faulty , pretend , of neglect of the one , if the other be diligently attended ; but that 1 Cor. 7.20 , 24. Vbi vo • atio duplex , in qâ , ad qam both of them may have their due time and place , without interfering or justling out either of other , as the 1 Thes. 4.11 . 2 Thes. 3 • 7 , 12. rules both of reason and Religion require . The common , yea , almost general abuse of the times , might well require me to add , that a sober and temperate , as well as a religious ( and yet Ephes 5.18 . Rom. 13.13 , 14 • what Religion can be , where excess reigneth ? ) but yet , that a sober and temperate Merchant or Tradesman , may well be reckoned among those Moats , that disturb the common adversaries eye : since that by such it appears , that men may have ordinarily , in orderly manner , mutual commerce , trade , and traffic either with other , without 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , ut Athen. dipnos . l. 11. Persa • um ritu , qibus 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . vid . Plut. Sympos . l. 7. c . 9.10 . beating every bargain they make over a Wine-pot , and concluding it with brains equally distempered on either side . In these therefore and diverse other respects , I supposed the example of this our worthy friend and faithful servant of Christ might be useful to many : and was in that regard the rather induced to satisfy the desire of those , that so instantly pressed me in it . Which having once concluded on , I knew none fitter to address it to , then to your self ; who had chief interest under God in him , G • n . 2.24 . 1 Cor. 7.4 . by Gods own ordinance , while he lived ; and may with fairest title and plea lay best claim to the memory of him now deceased . To you therefore , beloved in our common Saviour , I tender it to remain by you ; for my self , as a monument of mine entire a • fection to him , who is now with the Lord , and to his surviving for him ; for your self , as a memorial of what a precious Jewel it pleased God sometime to possess you of , and to grace you with : yet not thereby to renew your grief for your temporary loss of him , ( if it may be so termed , when he is but , as Philem. 15. Deside and • us • s • tibi , q • si absens , n • n q • si 〈 ◊ 〉 : u • illum expectare , n • n amisisse videam • is . H • er . de N • p. he says of Onesimus , gone from you for a time , that you may after a while again receive him and enjoy him for ever ) joined with his eternal and incomparable gain ; but 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . Basil orat . 5. Ne doleas , qod talem amiseri • ; s • worser gaudeas q • worser tO • lem habueris . Him • ron . in Nepot . Non • oeremus , qod ta • ē amisimus ; sed gratias agimus , qod habuimus , imò habemus . Idem in Paul . Non contri • lor , qod accepisti ; s • worser ago g • a • tias , qod dedisti . Idem ad Iulian . E • si dolemus ablatum , non oblivis • imur tomen , qod datu • suit : gratias agimus , qod habere illum meruimus , qo career in tantum non volumus , in qantum non expedit . Bern. in Ca • tO . 26. & de Humberto Ser. 110. Tulisti , q • niam tuus erat . Nec pro nobis , qibus ille sublatus est , murmurandum ; magis gratias agendum , qod tam di • concessus est • obis . to mind you of his goodness who bestowed him upon you , and of thankfulness to him for the continuance of such a favour so long unto you . So beseeching God abundantly to bless you , and all yours and his , with all spiritual blessings and sweet comforts in Christ , I take leave , and rest Yours ever in all Christian office , THOUGH . GATAKER .