TO MY LORD the Chancellor . My Lord , I Have underſtood of your denial , for the publiſhing of a Libel , lately framed againſt me . And though ( perhaps ) the harm that I ſhould have received thereby , would have been but ſmall , yet my obligation unto you , never ceases to be great ; and this argue a special care in you of my tranquillity , not to ſuffer that any , the leaſt noiſe ſhould diſquiet it . I know not ( my Lord ) if this be not to handle with too much niceness and tenderness , a man that makes profeſſion of Philoſophy ; it were enough that public Authority ſhould ſhelter me from the tempeſt , without exempting me from the wind and duſt , and that it would guard my Retreat from ſavage beaſts , without frighting away the flies alſo , and ſuch importunate Inſects . But ( my Lord ) the goodness which you reſerve for me , extends farther then to ordinary juſtice . You take not only care for my repoſe amid the hurry and tumult of Europe , but you would have the world alſo show a reſpect unto my retiredness , and that being sequestered from men . J ſhould be alſo placed beyond the level and reach of Detraction . Yet this Fiend did purſue S. Hierome even unto the Grotts of Bethlehem , and to the foot of our Saviours cradle , there ſhe found him ( as he relates himself ) although he had thought to hide himself . If this inſolent Thing had no regard of and admirable ſanctity , and a place guarded with Angels , me thinks a vulgar innocence , retired within and ill fortified village , muſt not expect any favourable treaty . But to pass from common conditions to the learned Tribe ; If in all ages , there aroſe ſeditious ſpirits , that rebelled againſt the Chieftains of Arts and diſcipline , and if in the memory of our father's , it was ſpoken openly at Paris , that Ariſtotle was a ſimple Sophiſter , J think they deal courteouſly with me in this Country , if they be contented to call me a ſimple writer . That great blaſphemer of the name of Aristotle ( my Lord ) was D. Ramus , who afterwards , though he was a Catholic , was taken for a Huguenot , at the maſſacre ; And indeed , ſome did believe that God permitted this to come to pass by a juſt judgement ; and that the Tutelar Angel of good Letters , took the pretext of Religion , for to revenge the injuries that were done to Reaſon . There is one this day alive in Germany , a petty Tyrant in Grammar , and enemy of common and general verities , and and accuſer of Cicero ; who ( not long ſince ) hath put forth ſome obſervations , where he prefers a bill againſt his own Judge , and queſtions the precedency ever allowed unto that Prince of Latin Antiquity . So that ( my Lord ) the universal conſent of all the world , strengthened by a preſcription of 18. centuries of years , is not a ſufficient title for to warrant the reputation of that Roman , againſt the prevaricating quirks of this Barbarian . Indeed , this is a business of no good example , but yet ſince it is ſo , and that it does little avail Virtue , to be conſecrated by time , and to be crowned by the people , for to make it inviolable againſt the practiſes of ſome private Humours . There is no reaſon that I ſhould complain before ſo many Worthies , that have been ſo ill entreated themſelves , and that I ſhould be had in any conſideration , where Ariſtotle and Cicero are not in ſafety ; and ordinary man ſhould not make moan , for ſuffering the ſame deſtiny , which extraordinary Perſonages have undergone ; and I cannot with modeſty , deſire or expect from you , that you ſhould reform the world for the love of me ; nay , J know ( my Lord ) that this little diſorder , is of ſome good uſe in a commonwealth ; and it were to be wiſhed , that malice would buſy it self thus , about things of ſmall importance , that it might not think of buſineſſes of higher conſequence . Thoſe that have hitherto beſtowed their pains , in depraving the sense of my words , and in falſifying my works , had ( perhaps ) ere this time , forged men's Teſtaments , and minted falſe coins ; And he that now deſires from you a privilege , would have ſtood in need of a Pardon , it may be , if it had not been for me . It is better by far , that injuſtice ſhould exerciſe it self upon my books , than that it ſhould vex and implead againſt all that is good and ſacred in a civil ſociety ; that unjuſt men ſhould rather toss and tranſpoſe words , invert and pervert periods of ſpeeches , than remove the bounds of lands , or demoliſh their Neighbours houſes ; To ſay the truth , this is the moſt innocent way that vice can employ it self in , and I believe I have not a little deserved from the commonwealth , for keeping at work theſe ten years , ſuch and infinite number of idle companions , who ( certainly ) would have been dangerous Commonwealths-men , if they had not choſen rather to have been ridiculous Cenſors . It is well , that the heat of their brains , is exhaled out this way , and that their intemperance takes this courſe ; and that to prevent their fury , men give ſome ſcope and liberty to their folly . Permit them therefore this exerciſe ( my Lord ) they cannot chooſe but make uſe of their time , which they will employ far worſe , if you do not permit them to employ it thus . Permit giddy Youth to ſpend their heat and fury upon a senseless ſubject , and a dead letter , which is not capable either of joy or ſorrow . As long as theſe Pen-fencers only beg the Seal of your Authority , be no niggard of the Prince his grace and favour , and abate ſomething of your wonted ſeverity and rigour . If it were anew & unusual thing , it may be , I ſhould be contented to have the firſt Libel , which branded me with injuries be ſuppreſſed , but ſince there is now a pretty Library of them , I am in a manner well pleaſed it ſhould ſwell and increaſe , and I take a delight to built me a monument with thoſe ſtones , which Envy hath hurled at me , without doing me harm . I account it no diſgrace to be censured by ſome men , becauſe I account it no credit to be favoured by them : I intend not to canvas for voices , nor labour a myſterious ſecret , whereby I may gain the general applauſe of the world . I have obtained what I deſired , ( my Lord ) if I have obtained your approbation , as being derived from and unerring principle , and from and Jntelligence moſt perfectly illuminated . God hath beſtowed on you , a sovereign judgement , before the King had committed to your hands , his sovereign Juſtice . And you were moſt powerful in Reaſon , before you were ſo in Authority . J need not have recourſe to this , knowing that the other is no way againſt me , and I eſtime it more glory to me , to have pleaſed you , than I would think it ſatisfaction to have my enemies proſcribed by you . Your ſpeeches of me upon every occaſion ſo full of reſpect , your own portraiture that you beſtowed upon me a year ago , for a pledge of your Affection , your imparting to me the riches of your writings , I mean thoſe writings , that were animated with the ſpirit of the State , and were full of the greatness of your Maſter , which ſeemed to me ſo far to tranſcend the ſtrength and vigor of this age , and ſo nearly reſembling the Roman Majeſty . In a word ( my Lord ) each moment of that happy afternoon , which I had the honour to pass away within your cloſet , are privileges , which I do valve above that which you denied a Phantasm , or the Succeſſor of Philarchus . I dare not rehearſe my other obligations , by which I ſtand bound unto you . You have herein enjoined me ſilence , and believe , that your favours would lose ſomething of their purity , if my thanks ſhould ſtill attend them . Nevertheless you muſt not ſtifle in me the intentions of and honeſt man , or ſmother the conceptions of grateful thoughts ; you have debarred me from divulging my acknowledgements , but you ſhall not debar me from acquitting that ſecret part of duty , and from being , ( at leaſt in my soul ) and that while I live My Lord Your moſt humble , moſt obliged and most thankful ſervant BALZAC . From Balzac the 1 of Iuly 1637.