TO The Right Worshipful the Master , Wardens , Assistants and Communality of the Mystery of the Mercers in London , my right worthy friends and Patrons , etc. Right Worshipful , etc. MOst lamentable it is to see men's eager pursuit of earthly vanities , and their woeful neglect , and contempt of true saving grace , which is durable riches . To which two , may be fitly applied that which was said of Saul and David ( the two first Kings of Israel ) sc . that the one hath slain thousands , and the other tenne thousands : both which arise chiefly ( as I conceive ) from men's ignorance , or the want of the knowledge , of the worth and excellency of piety and true fear of God , or saving grace . For ( as our Saviour said to the woman of Samaria , Ioh. 4. 10. ) If thou knewest the gift of God , etc. So if they knew these gifts of God , in the true resplendent nature of them ; if men were but acquainted with the worth , and excellency of this precious , and golden commodity of true saving grace , they would not labour so immoderately for the meat that perishes , but for the meat that endureth to everlasting life ( as our Saviour himself speaks , Ioh. 6. 29. ) yea , they would not be so cumbered ( with Martha ) about many things , whilst , in the mean time , the one thing needful is neglected ; but rather ( with Marry ) choose the better part , which should never be taken from them , Luk. 10. 42. To this end , I at first fastened my meditation upon this portion of Scripture , and took into my serious consideration this clause of holy Writ , yea , and have still fixed my saddest thoughts upon this golden Counsel of our blessed Saviour , wherein the great Counsellor of heaven and earth does give his blessed advice to the sons of men , whom he generally finds like the Church of Laodicea , sc . wretched , and miserable and poor , and blind , and naked ; now unto all such , whom he finds in this woeful and wretched condition , He propoundeth this sweet and heavenly counsel and direction ( which is the ground of this ensuing discourse ) contained in the words of this Text , Rev. 3. 18. I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire , that thou mayest be rich . Wherein our Saviour directeth us unto the true riches indeed , and commends unto us , the worth and excellency of Himself , his merits , and graces of his Spirit , that they are all of a right precious nature , and of great worth and valve , even gold tried in the fire , and such as will truly enrich us unto life eternal . In prosecuting of which Text , I have run this course , and endeavoured to show the great worth , and transcendent excellency of true saving grace , that it is most fitly resembled to Gold tried in the fire , yea , indeed to be far preferred before it , and that in sundry respects ; yea , not only the worth and excellency of grace it self , but also the admirable worth of such as do enjoy this precious Jewel , that all such are most excellent , and golden persons indeed , as coming of golden parentage , having a golden portion and inheritance , and also golden attendants , having the holy Angels of God daily to pitch their Tents round about them , for their safety . Farther , by way of application , I have earnestly pressed , and persuaded unto the duty of examination , that we should all try , what metal our graces are made of ; whither they be of a right golden nature , yea , or no . And because herein we are all of us naturally backward , I have therefore endeavoured to enforce the duty by sundry Motives , drawn from the consideration of the difficulty of the duty , the danger of being mistaken , as also , the possibility of performance , and comfort that will hereby redound unto us , when the work is once thoroughly performed . And that we may not be deceived about it , nor guled with Sathans devices , in a business of such importance , I have therefore also endeavoured to manifest and discover the true marks and characters of this golden metal ; together with the comfortable , and happy estate and condition of all such , as do enjoy this precious commodity . 2. I have endeavoured to prove , that all such as have true grace , are absolutely , and incomparably the richest persons in the world ; and that piety is the best , and surest way to make us truly and spiritually rich . So that , if there be any that are ready to say ; Who will show us any good ? Let such come , and see the shortest , and yet the surest way to get wealth , yea , durable riches , and righteousness . Lastly , if any be so far wrought upon , as to cry out with those in the Gospel , Lord , evermore give us this bred , this wealth , this precious treasure ; I have therefore , in the last place , endeavoured to discover the direct means to obtain it , and that is , Buying . And the rather to encourage us , to the making of this happy bargain for our souls ; I have here described the excellency of the Chapman , that is ready to fell us this rare commodity of saving grace . Here you shall also find a description of all the particulars , requisite to the making up of this bargain with Christ . Here you shall find the price of true grace , and the great variety of such customers , as are ready ( in appearance ) to bargain with this spiritual and heavenly Chapman : Here have you the sum and substance of this TREATISE . Whereunto I have adjoined another of like argument ; showing the worth and excellency of the time that is spent in Gods service , or in the use of the means to get grace ; which seems fitly annexed to the former Treatise : for if true saving grace be a jewel of such worth ; then time spent in the use of the best means to get grace , must needs be the best spent time : For how can any ( that earnestly thirst after saving grace ) spend their time better , then in diligent attendance upon the Word of Gods grace , which is able to built us up farther and farther , and to give us and inheritance among all them that are sanctified , as the Apostle speaks , Act. 20. 32 ? O how justly may a man take up a lamentation , in regard of the general defect among men , in the woeful misspending of their precious time ! Men do even take care , how to pass away that precious time , which is never to be recalled , but of it self passes away as the most swift Ships . Now the desire of my soul , is not only to bewail this dangerous sin of wasting and misspending of precious time ; but also to do my best endeavour , to reform this general and monstrous abuse this way . To this end , I have endeavoured to stop the stream , and to turn the water into the right channel , by giving direction for the right spending of our precious time ; and have earnestly laboured to evince thus much , sc . That time spent in Gods service , is absolutely and incomparably the best spent time ; and therefore have earnestly persuaded , that we should not only begin to serve God betimes , even in our youth , etc. but also that we should be constant and abundant in the duties of Gods worship and service , after we have once begun . Concerning all which , I have given sundry motives and directions . Loe here the sum and substance of the whole book , and of both these Treatises ; which as they seem fitly united together ; so being ( upon occasion ) to look abroad in public , they seem to be most fitly Dedicated to you , the Worshipful Company , or body of the Company of the mystery of Mercers . To you therefore ( Right Worshipful , the Master , and Head of this beautiful and comely body , consisting of great variety of Worshipful and worthy members , ) do I offer and present this my poor and unworthy present : which ( notwithstanding ) if the manner of handling , was correspondent to the matter it self , I durst then presume to say , was right worthy of you ; though in respect of the manner of illustration of them , I have justly and fitly called unworthy . To you therefore are these fruits of my poor labours dedicated , by whose encouragement , the Author himself hath been supported , and better enabled to proceed in the work of his Ministry . Accept therefore , I pray you , of this poor paper , as a public testimony to the world , of my thankful acknowledgement of your noble favours towards me , and kind and special respect unto me . By perusal whereof , you may happily be encouraged to proceed in the good work , which you have begun , so mainly importing , not only my good in particular , but also the good of sundry others , who will have cause ( I hope ) to bless God for you , that he hath been pleased to make you the worthy instruments of upholding the means of grace among them ; yea , and to establish for their good , the spiritual Market of their souls , that they may now come and buy freely , bred , milk , and wine , without money , and without price , as the Prophet speaks , Isa. 55. 1 , 2. Yea , the desire of my soul is , that these first fruits of my labours may taste and relish so sweetly in the palate of your souls , that you may hereby see cause , never to repent you of the pains which you have take , and the cost which you have this way expended ; but may still be persuaded to continue your loving respects towards me , and your zeal to the cause of God , which is hereby greatly advanced and furthered by you , and so discharge the trust committed to you by that late famous , and admirably charitable and worthy Gentleman , Mr. Richard Fishburne , who committed money to your trust , to be both religiously and charitably employed . Which trust , how faithfully you have discharged , ( as it is best known to God , and to your own consciences , which are as so many thousand witnesses ) so I my self am not ignorant of your noble & worthy proceedings ; but out of my experience , to my comfort , and your credit , am able both to speak , and to write of your fidelity and liberality , which you are wont to use in these cases : beside also , that I am well acquainted with your dealings with others beside my self , on this behalf . Most gladly therefore do I take hold on this opportunity , to manifest unto the world , my thankful acknowledgment of your special respect to me , in this case , and of this your noble courtesy . As the benefits therefore which I have received from you are public , and manifest unto so many : so likewise do I desire , that my acknowledgement hereof should not only be real and hearty , but public also . For I have not yet forgotten ( though so many years ago ) how freely and kindly I was chosen by you , to participate in the fruits and pledges of your love , after ( with all diligence ) you had sufficient trial , both of my sufficiency , and also of the unblameableness of my life and conversation ; as touching both which , I trust you have ever since been fully satisfied . In most grateful manner also I do acknowledge , with what peace and quietness , for sundry years together , I freely did partake in • he fruits of your love towards me ; neither was I ever at any time since disturbed , or molested by you ; but rather most kindly supported by you , against the molestation of others ; yea , and for the present , amid the dangers and difficulties , wherewith I am not only pressed , but oppressed also , my chief hope and expectation of relief in this case , ( next under God ) is wholly from you ; neither do I well know what to do , but mine eyes are upon you ; and not only mine , but also the eyes of sundry others , both in City , and Country , are steadily fixed on you , expecting what the issue and event will be . Go on therefore nobly still , and with your wisdom and undaunted courage , vindicate the cause in hand , and clear those difficulties and great encumbrances , which are lately fallen upon the Rectory ( which I do enjoy ) and consequently , upon my self : whereunto let these poor labours of mine encourage you , together with the goodness and amiable beauty of the cause it self . For if true saving grace , be of such rare worth and valve ; then surely the cost and pains that is bestowed to uphold the means of grace , must likewise needs be well employed . These Treatises were several Sermons , preached in the Country among the people committed to my Charge : and good reason me thinketh it is , that I should give some special account of my labours to you , from whose hands , I have received the greatest part of my maintenance , and that constantly , for more then seven years together . Which endeavours of mine , if plain and homely , are notwithstanding thus far justly to be excused , namely , that they were preached to a plain Country people , which though of good affection and inclination towards piety , ( I hope ) are yet but of mean and small capacity , and understanding in the things of God . Beside , my care hath ever been , rather to speak to the hid man of the heart , in a plain way , then tickle the ear with a neat discourse , perhaps not understood , and therefore without all benefit and profit . Beside , no marvel if these Sermons want ornaments , when the Anthour himself was scarce supplied with necessaries ; the greatest part of my means , at that time , being wholly taken from me ; so that some small pittance only of outward means was left me ; though God in his goodness hath graciously ( by your hands principally ) provided for me . This I propound , not only by way of just excuse , for these my impolished labours , but also to preserve alive , and keep awake your pity and compassion towards me , and to stir up your zealous care and diligence in the cause of God , which seems some way endangered : yea , hereby you shall deeply engage a number of poor souls to pray for you , when they perceive the constancy of your love , towards both them , and me , in supporting of me , by way of maintenance , that I may still impart the Word of life among them , and go on still to fulfil the Ministry , which I have received of the Lord IESUS . Thus leaving these things to your grave and loving consideration ; I commend the book unto your reading , and your Worships to the protection of the Almighty , and both your selves , and it , unto his blessing . I humbly take leave , and rest Canwicke this 1. of Iuly . 1638. Your Worships , ever to be commanded in the Lord , WILLIAM HARRISON .