To the Right Honourable Henry Garway , Lord Mayor of this Famous Metropolis ; London . Right Honourable , TO whom for your long Travel , variety of Language , and known Wisdom , I cannot but give a precedence due to your Person , as a priority belonging to your place ; since laboured lines only comply with judicious ears . I must ingeniously confess your worth so far to transcend my weakness , that I am almost silent in the Proem ere I enter on the Epitasis : yet presuming on your generous disposition , which ever waits on solid Judgement , I thus proceed . Your breeding ( Right Honourable ) next to a Scholar hath been chiefly in Mercature , and of your sufficiency therein , you have not only given to this City ample satisfaction ; but to the several parts of this Christian World : your personal Travel in your youth acquainting you with the passages and proceedings in other foreign regions , have bettered your conceptions ( now growing towards Age ) in the management of State Magistracy in your native Realm : of which since the time that you were first chosen Alderman , you have given rare President ; none having decided more differences , ended more doubtful Causes ; or been a greater Peacemaker than your honoured self . And for the multiplicity of your Commerce , it is most manifest , that you have long Traded ( to begin with the nearest first ) in the Low Countries , France , Spaine , Italy , Venice , East India ; and moreover in Greenland , Muscovy , and Turkey , of which three noble societies last nam you are at this present Governor . History tells us that diverse Praetors and Tribunes during the time of their Authority , have been so indulgent over the people committed to their charge ; that they have not only ratified the good Edicts of others , but devised wholesome Ordinances of themselves : when Solon swayed the Senate no Creditor had power over the Debtors bodies , but their goods only . In Platoes Commonweal all excess was prohibited , which among the Roman was called Lex sumptuaria . Acilius glabrio made and Edict De pecuniis repitundis , Commanding all money taken by bribery , extortion , or other indirect means to be restored , called Lex Acilia : Another compelled the Plebe to a liberal contribution towards all public Shows , and Triumphs ; which was Titled Lex fannia . But not to endanger the just reproof of a presumptions arrogance , in prompting your Lordship's in the studied Duties of your succeeding charge , I conclude with that Spanish Refran : Embia all sabio a la embaxada , Y no le degat nada ; still remembering that of Cato , Imperium gero non miht sed Civitatiet socus . Your Honours most obsequious Tho. Heywood .