TO THE Worshipful , and his ever honoured friends , the whole posterity of his worthy Patron , Sir Timothy Hutton deceased , both to his Sons with their wives and Children , and to his Daughters with their husbands and children : namely , Mathew Hutton of Marsk . Esquire , Justice of peace ; Iames Maulleverer of Arncliffe Esquire ; Iohn Dodsworth of Thorntonwatlass , Esquire , Justice of peace : Edmund Cleburne of Cleburne , Esquire ; Mr Timothy Hutton ; Mr Philip Hutton deceased his relict and issue ; Mr Iohn Hutton ; and Mr Thomas Hutton , Peace etc. THis little following book had been in the Printers hands diverse days ere ever I purposed any nuncupation , or dedication of it at all . At last , it came into my mind to address it this way , and that for these causes . first , out of honour to your chief , Arch-Bishop Hutton , of whom for his learning , and gravity , this great Encomium was publicly given , that he was worthy to fit President in a general Council . Secondly , because I was well ascertained , my book could receive not smut from you , being people of whole fame for native gentleness , innocency of manners , fair deportment , and for the constant and uniform profession of Religion . Thirdly , for that the most of you are spread into a goodly posterity and have fair sons and daughters , unto whom these things may be truly useful to ground them soundly in Religion , so as neither Abundance can choke , nor Indigence ever starve in them those due respects they owe to divine powers . Would God parents would at last be wise , and think it were conducible to the hopeful settling of a child , to aim at more of instruction and institution , though less of provision . Fourthly , in acknowledgement of that great love , sweet familiarity , and continual intercourses of Christian acquaintance which you were ever pleased to hold with me , both affecting my person , and leaning to my ministry far beyond the proportion of desert . Lastly , and especially for the pious memory of that worthy Knight Sir Timothy Hutton , your deer Father , and my most incorrupt Patron . Into the mention of whom being fallen , I cannot contain my pen , but to his great praise I must relate one or two things of him in this very regard : first that coming to settle his family at Marske , and finding the Rector there to be no more but a bore reader , he rested not till he had compounded forth the present incumbent , and filled the Church with a preaching Ministry . And when it was empty again by the death of that incumbent , he most freely presented my self with out the least request made in my behalf to him , either by my self , or any other ; yea he besought me earnestly to take it , and when he signed the presentation he drew with his pen the form of his heart between his name and surname . and I can well take and account of my memory , that the Bpp of the diocese , when he gave institution , asserted vehemently that I had the best and most upright Patron living . This I say not only for his honour , but also for the just defamation both of such Patrons ( sons of the earth whosoever they be ) as think heaven and earth would fail them for maintenance and support , if they should present a Father and Priest without some sprinkling either of direct or indirect simony : and also of such Clerks as profess they believe the resurrection of their bodies after they are calcined to dust , and yet dare not trust God for food and raiment , without these indirect and simoniacal contracts . But I contain . These things therefore ( my much honoured , and most dearly respected friends ) I present unto you , and together with them whatsoever is worth acceptance either in the person or function of Your most affectionate friend , and Servant in the things of Iesus Christ . IOHN IACKSON .