TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Alderman , THOMAS SOAME , One of the Colonels of the City , and Preſident of the Artillery Garden , London . As alſo , To Captain JOHN VEN , Vice Preſident , Mr. WILLIAM MANBY Treaſurer . And All other the worthy Captains of the City , and Gentlemen of the Court of Aſsiſtants . Much honoured Sir , and Right worthy Soldiers , THe GRECIANS were the firſt that out of variety of actium , and long experience of war , reduced the knowledge of Arms into and Art ; giving precepts for the ordering of Arms , and the embattling of Armies . The ROMANS , who were their Successors in time , ſo were they alſo of their precepts ; breeding and inuring their youth to hardſhip , the uſe of Arms , and the ſtudies of the Art Military . So that by their countenance and practice therein , they not only became powerful and terrible to others : but in a word reigned as ſole Monarchs of this Mundane glory . Plut. in LicurLICVRGVS the Lawgiver to SPARTA , ordered that no Epitaph ſhould be made , nor men name remembered on his Tomb , except of him who had been a Soldier ; as eſteeming them only worthy of memory . The Perſian ARTAXERXES , preferred Plut. in Pelopida . PELOPIDAS , and the Theban friendſhip before the reſt of GREECE . becauſe they were the beſt Soldiers . PHILIP of MACEDON , King of a poor Country , by teaching his people exactly the exerciſe of Arms , and practiſing a new diſcipline , not only freed himſelf and Country from the oppreſſion of his enemies ; but alſo laid the foundation of the MACEDONIAN glory . By this , Right worshipful , you may in part diſcern the great esteem that Antiquity made of thoſe ſtudious in this Art. And ſo pleaſe you to compare the Hiſtories of the paſſed times , you may as in and Index behold how that the well disciplined have always been the very Bulwarks and impalements of their Countries' . Where to the contrary , neglect of diſcipline , and the Art Military have been always the forerunners of deſtruction both to Province and people . I might be infinite in examples of this nature , but then I ſhould make my porch larger then my houſe . Therefore let ROMES remissness be a warning to poſterity ; who as it had a ſlow gradation in its ariſe by virtue , ſo had it degrees of falling , by neglecting diſcipline and the Art Military , ſuffering it ſelf to be cruſhed and overtrodden by every Barbarous Nation . This as it reflects upon us a neceſsity , ſo it demonſtrates of how neceſſary conſequence the practice of Arms is : inducing and inviting all generous ſpirits to endeavour the attainment of this Military skill . To acquire the which , the GRECIANS had their Tactic master's , the ROMANS their Tribunes , and other inferior Tutors which taught them in Campus Martius ; and we our Academies and Military Schools of war , witness our ARTILLERY GARDEN with the MILITARY and MARTIAL grounds , wherein the choice and beſt affected Citizens ( and Gentry ) are practiced and taught the Rudiments of our militia . In times of peace ſo fitting them , that they may be able to ſtand in the day of battle , to Gods glory , their own honours , and their Countries' good But leaving theſe to your more retired and ſerious conſiderations : be pleaſed to take notice that the GRECIANS , ROMANS , PERSIANS , and other Nations , had not only their trainings abroad , but they had alſo their Triumphs at home in Martial and warlike wiſe all armed , treading out ſtately meaſures , to their Inſtruments of war . Such Military exerciſes as theſe have you formerly performed , which induced a Rich. Nicolls Oxon. his Londons Artillery page 37 printed in Anno 1616. judicious writer long ſince to ſet forth your praiſes in elegant verſe as follows . Behold how Londons armed Infantry , Through practice in true Rules of Soldiery By the Drums martial Music often led The Pyrrhic dance do now diſtinctly tread : Which if induſtriouſly they do purſue , And uſe that timely custom that is due To warlike practice , in despite of hate , Which evermore upon deſert does wait ; Times Finger may engrave their Induſtry , Upon Fame's Pillars to poſterity . And ſuch as this , right worthy Soldiers , was our laſt exerciſe in Merchant-Taylors Hall , which is the ſubject of this book : the well contriving and exact performance whereof , induced many of the judicious ſpectators to deſire copies : which through several tranſcriptions became ſo imperfect , that I was requeſted by many to bring it to the Press , ſo to preſerve its Native purity . This I was the more willing to ſuffer , by reaſon no more were to pass the print , then barely might ſerve ſuch Gentlemen who are deſirous of them , being members of our own Company . As not being willing that ſo rough and unpolished a draught ſhould be expoſed to the public view . Therefore hoping your wonted favours , and not doubting of your kind acceptance ; withal deſiring , that as I have freely beſtowed my pains , ſo you will as lovingly pass by my errors , whereby you will put a further obligation upon him that is already Yours , WILL . BARRIFF .