TO HIS MOST Sacred Majesty , CHARLES , BY THE GRACE OF God , King of Great Britaine , France and Ireland , Defender of the Faith etc. DREAD SOVERAIGNE : THIS Tract will need Patronage , as great as may be had , that's Yours . Yet , when I first printed part of it , I presumed not to ask any , but thrust it out at the end of another's Labours , that it might seem , at least , to have the same Patron , your Royal Father of Blessed Memory , as the other Work , on which this attended , had . But now I humbly beg for it Your Majesties Patronage ; And leave withal , that I may declare to Your most Excellent Majesty the Cause why this Tract was then written : Why it stayed so long before it looked upon the light : Why it was not then thought fit to go alone , but rather be led abroad by the former VVorke : Why it comes now forth both with Alteration , and Addition : And why this Addition made not more haste to the Press , then it hath done . The Cause why this Discourse was written , was this : I was , at the time of these Conferences with Master Fisher , Bishop of S. Davids ; And not only directed , but Commanded by my Blessed Master King Iames , to this Conference with him . He , May 24. 1622 when we met , began with a great Protestation of seeking the Truth only , and that for it self . And certainly , Truth , especially in Religion , is so to be sought , or not to be found . He that seeks it with a Roman One of these 〈 ◊ 〉 is and 〈 ◊ 〉 from all • … changed Truth as fits not our Ends. And • … rsus à 〈 … 〉 etc. Bias , or any Aug. l. 2. contentedly . 〈 ◊ 〉 〈 ◊ 〉 & Prophet . And it's and 〈 ◊ 〉 Transition , for a man that 〈 ◊ 〉 Avers • … from , 〈 ◊ 〉 become Ad. 〈 … 〉 to the • … ruth . Other , will run Counter , when he comes near it , and not find it , though he come within kenning of it . And therefore I did most heartily wish , I could have found the Iesuite upon that fair way he protested to go . After the Conference ended , I went , whither my duty called me , to my Diocese ; not suspecting any thing should be made Public , that was both Commanded , and acted in private . For VV. I. the Publisher of the Relation of the first Conference with D. White ( the late Reverend and learned Bishop of Ely ) In his Epistle 〈 ◊ 〉 the Reader . confesses plainly , That Master Fisher was straightly charged upon his Allegiance , from his Majesty that then was , not to set out , or Publish what passed in some of these Conferences , till He gave Licence , and until M. Fisher and they might meet , and agree , and Confirm under their hands , what was said on both sides . He says farther , that Ibid. M. Fisher went to D. White's house , to know what he would say about the Relation , which he had set out . So then , belike M. Fisher had set out the Relation of that Conference , before he went to D. White , to speak about it ; And this notwithstanding the Kings restraint upon him , upon his Allegiance . Yet , to D. White it's said he went , but to what other End , then to put a Scorn upon him , I cannot see . For he went to his house to know , what he would say about that Relation of the Conference , which he had set out before . In my absence from London , M. Fisher used me as well . For with the same Care of his Allegiance , and no more , These words were in my former Epistle , And A. C. cheeks at them , in defence of the Jesuite , and says : That the Jesuite did not at all so much as in Speech , and much less in Papers publish that • … , or either of the other two Conferences with Dr. White , till he was forced unto it by false reports given out to his private disgrace , and the prejudice of the Catholic Cause . Nor then did he spread Papers abroad , but only delivered a very few Copies to special friends , and this not with and intent to Calumniate the Bishop . etc. A. C. in his Preface before his Relation of this Conference . Truly , I knew of no Reports then given out to the prejudice of the Jesuite's either Person , or Cause ; I was in a Corner of the Kingdom , where I herd little : But howsoever , here's a most plain Confession by A. C. of that which he struggles to deny . He says he did not spread Papers . What then ? What ? Why he did but deliver Copies . Why , but does not he that delivers Copies ( for Instance , of a Libel ) spread it ? Yea , but he delivered but a very few Copies . Be it so : I do not say , How many he spread . He confesses the Iesuite delivered some , though very few ; And he that delivers any , spreads it abroad . For what can he tell , when the Copies are once out of his power , how many may Copy them out , and spread them farther ? Yea , but he delivered them to special friends . Be it so too : The more special friends they were to him , the less indifferent would they be to me , perhaps my more special Enemies . Yea , but all this was without and intent to Calumniate me . Well . Be that so too . But if I be Calumniated thereby , his Intention will not help it . And whither the Copies , which he delivered , have not in them Calumny against me , I leave to the Indifferent Reader of this Discourse to Judge . he spread abroad Papers of this Conference , full enough of partiality to his Cause , and more full of Calumny against me . Hereupon I was in a manner forced to give M. Fisher's Relation of the Conference and Answer , and to publish it . Though for some Reasons , and those then approved by Authority , it was thought fit I should set it out in my Chaplain's Name , R. B. and not in my own . To which I readily submitted . There was a Cause also , why at the first , the Discourse upon this Conference stayed so long , before it could endure to be pressed . For the Conference was in May , 1622. And M. Fisher's Paper was scattered and made common , so common , that a Copy was brought to me ( being none of his special friends ) before Michaelmas . And yet this Discourse was not printed till Aprill , 1624. Now that you may know how this happened , I shall say for my self , It was not my Idleness , nor my Unwillingness to right both my self , and the Cause , against the Jesuite , and the Paper , which he had spread , that occasioned this delay . For I had then Most Honourable VVitnesses , and have some yet living , That this Discourse ( such as it was , when A. C. nibbled at it ) was finished long before I could persuade my self to let it come into Public View . And this was caused partly by my own Backwardness to deal with these men , whom I have ever observed to be great Pretenders for Truth , and Unity , but yet such as will admit neither , unless They and their Faction may prevail in all ; As if no Reformation had been necessary . And partly because there were about the same time three Conferences held with Fisher . Of these this was the Third ; And could not therefore conveniently come abroad into the world , till the two former were ready to lead the way , which till that time , they were not . And this is in part the Reason also , why this Tract crept into the end of a larger Work . For since that Work contained in a manner the substance of all that passed in the two former Conferences : And that this Third in diverse points concurred with them , and depended on them , I could not think it Substantive enough , to stand alone . But beside this Affinity between the Conferences , I was willing to have it pass as silently as it might , at the end of another Work , and so perhaps little to be looked after , because I could not hold it worthy , nor can I yet , of that Great Duty , and Service , which I owe to my Dear Mother , the Church of England . There is a cause also , why it looks now abroad again with Alteration and Addition . And it's fit I should give your Majesty and Account of that too . This Tract was first printed in the year 1624. And in the year 1626. another Jesuite , or the same , under the name of A. C. printed a Relation of this Conference , and therein took Exceptions to some Particulars , and endeavoured to Confute some Things delivered therein by me . Now being in years , and unwilling to die in the Jesuites debt , I have in this Second Edition done as much for him , and somewhat more . For he did but skip up and down , and labour to pick a hold , here , and there , where he thought he might fasten , and where it was too hard for him , let it alone . But I have gone through with him ; And I hope , given him a full Confutation : or at least such a Bone to gnaw , as may shake his teeth , if he look not to it . And of my Addition to this Discourse , this is the Cause ; But of my Alteration of some things in it , this . A. C. his Curiosity to winnow me , made me in a more curious manner fallen to sifting of my self , and that which had formerly passed my Pen . And though ( I bless God for it ) I found no cause to altar anything that belonged either to the Substance , or Course of the Conference : Yet somewhat I did find , which needed better , and clearer expression ; And that I have altered , well knowing I must expect Curious Observers on all hands . Now , Why this Additionall Answer to the Relation of A. C. came no sooner forth , hath a Cause too , and I shall truly represent it . A. C. his Relation of the Conference , was set out . 1626. I knew not of it in some years after . For it was printed among diverse other things of like nature , either by M. Fisher himself , or his friend A. C. When I saw it , I read it over carefully , and found myself not a little wronged in it , but the Church of England , and indeed the Cause of Religion much more . I was before this time by Your Majesties Great Grace , and undeserved favour made Deane of Your Majesties Chapel Royal , and a Counsellor of State , and hereby , as the Occasions of those times were , made too much a Stranger to my Books . Yet for all my Busy Employments , it was still in my Thoughts to give A. C. and Answer . But then I fell into a most dangerous Fever ; And though it pleased God beyond all hope to restore me to health , yet long I was before I recovered such strength as might enable me to undertake such a Service . And since that time , how I have been detained , and in a manner forced upon other many , various , and Great Occasions , your Majesty knows best . And how of late I have been used by the Scandalous and Scurrilous Pens of some bitter men ( whom I heartily beseech God to forgive ) the world knows ; Little Leisure , and less Encouragement given me to Answer a Iesuite , or set upon other Services , while I am under the Prophets affliction . Psal. Psal. 50. 19 , 20 50. between the Mouth that speaks wickedness , and the tongue that sets forth deceit , and slander me as thick , as if I were not their own Mother's Son . In the midst of these Libellous outcries against me , some Divines of great Note , and Worth in the Church came to me , One by One , and no One knowing of the Others Coming ( as to me they protested ) and persuaded with me to Reprint this Conference , in my own Name . This they thought would vindicate my Reputation , were it generally known to be mine . I Confess I looked round about these Men , and their Motion ; And at last , my Thoughts working much upon themselves , I began to persuade my self , that I had been too long diverted from this necessary Work . And that perhaps there might be In voce hominum , Tuba Dei , in the still voice of men , the Loud Trumpet of God , which sounds many ways , sometime to the ears , and sometime to the hearts of men , and by means which they think not of . And as S. Aug. Serm. 63. De Diversis , c . 10. He speaks of Christ disputing in the Temple with the Elders of the Iewes . And they herd Christ the Essential Word of the Father with admiration to astonishment , yetbeleeved him not : S. Luk. 2. 47. And the Word the • … spoke to them by a means they thought not of , namely per Filium Dei in pucro , by the Son of God himself under the Veil of our humane nature . S. Augustine speaks , A Word of God there is , Quod nunquam tacet , sed non semper auditur : which though it be never silent , yet is not always herd . That it is never silent , is his great Mercy ; and that it is not always herd , is not the least of our Misery . Upon this Motion I took time to deliberate : And had scarce time for that , much less for the Work . Yet at last to every of these men I gave this Answer . That M. Fisher , or A. C. for him , had been busy with my former Discourse , and that I would never reprint that , unless I might gain time enough to . Answer that , which A. C. had charged a fresh both upon me , and the Cause . While my Thoughts were thus at work , Your Majesty fell upon the same Thing , and was graciously pleased not to Command , but to Wish me to reprint this Conference , and in mine own Name ; And this openly at the Councel-Table in Michaelmas-Terme . 1637. I did not hold it fit to deny , having in all the Course of my service obeyed your Majesties Honourable , and Just Motions , as Commands : But Craved leave to show what little leisure I had to do it , and what Inconveniences might attend upon it . When this did not serve to excuse me , I humbly submitted to that , which I hope was Gods Motion in Your Majesties . And having thus laid all that Concerns this Discourse before your Gracious and most Sacred Majesty , I most humbly present you with the Book it self , which as I heartily pray You to protect , so do I wholly submit it to the Church of England , with my Prayers for Her Prosperity , and my Wishes that I were able to do Her better Service . I have thus acquainted Your Majesty with all Occasions , which both formerly , and now again have led this Tract into the light . In all which I am a faithful Relater of all Passages , but am not very well satisfied , who is now my Adversary . M. Fisher was at the Conference . Since that , I find A. C. at the print . And whither These be two , or but One Jesuite , I know not ; since scarce One among them , goes under One Name . But for my own part ( and the Error is not great , if I mistake ) I think they are One , and that One , M. Fisher . That which induces me to think so , is First , the Great Inwardness of A. C. with M. Fisher , which is so great , as may well be thought to neighbour upon Identity . Secondly , the Style of A. C. is so like M. Fishers , that I doubt it was but one and the same hand that moved the pen . Thirdly , A. C. says expressly That the Jesuite himself made the Relation of the first A. C. p. 67. Conference with D. White : And in the Title Page of the Work , That Relation as well as This , is said to be made by A. C. and published by VV. I . Therefore A. C. and the Iesuite are one and the same person , or else one of these places hath no Truth in it . Now if it be M. Fisher himself , under the Name of A. C. then what needs these Preface to the Relation of this Conference by A. C. words : The Jesuite could be content to let pass the Chaplains Censure , as one of his Ordinary persecutions for the Catholic Faith , but A. C. thought it necessary for the Common Cause to defend the sincerity and Truth of his Relation , and the Truth of some of the Chief Heads contained in it . In which Speech give me leave to observe to your Sacred Majesty , how grievously you suffer him , and his Fellows to he persecuted for the Catholic Faith , when your poor Subject and Servant , cannot set out a true Copy of a Conference held with the Jesuite , jussu Superiorum , but by and by the man is persecuted . God forbid I should ever offer to persuade a Persecution in any kind , or practise it in the least . For to my remembrance , I have not given him , or his , so much as course Language . But on the other side , God forbid too , That your Majesty should let both Laws and Discipline sleep for fear of the Name of Persecution , and in the mean time let M. Fisher and his Fellows Angle in all parts of your Dominions for your Subject's . If in your Grace and Goodness you will spare their Persons : Yet I humbly beseech You see to it , That they be not suffered to lay either their Weeles , or bait their Hooks , or cast their Nets in every stream , lest that Tentation grow both too general , and too strong . I know they have many Devices to work their Ends ; But if they will needs be fishing , let them use none , but And S. Aug. is very full against the use of 〈 ◊ 〉 reti • … , unlawful Nets . And says the Fishermen theselves have greatest cause to take heed of them . S. Aug. L. de Fide & Oper. c . 17. Lawful Nets . Let's have no dissolving of Oaths of Allegiance : No deposing , no killing of Kings : No blowing up of States to settle Quod Volumus , that which feign they would have in the Church : with many other Nets , as dangerous as these . For if their Profession of Religion we • … e as good , as they pretend it is , if they cannot Compass it by Good Means , I am sure they ought not to attempt it by Bad. For if they will do evil , that good may come thereof , the Apostle tells me , Their Damnation's just , Rom. 3. Rom. 3. 8. Now as I would humbly Beseech Your Majesty to keep a serious Watch upon these Fishermen , which pretend S. Peter , but fish not with His Net : So would I not have You neglect another sort of Anglers in a Shallower Water . For they have some ill Nets too . And if they may spread them , when , and where they will , God knows what may become of it . These have not so strong a Back abroad , as the Romanists have , but that's no Argument to suffer them to increase . They may grow to equal Strength with Number . And Factious People at home , of what Sect , or found Opinion soever they be , are not to be neglected . Partly , because they are so Near . And it's ever a dangerous Fire , that begins in the Bedstraw . And partly because all those Domestic Evils , which threaten a Rend in Church , or State are with far more safety prevented by VVisdome , then punished by Justice . And would men consider it right , they are far more beholding to that man , that keeps them from falling , then to him that takes them up , though it be to set the Arm or the Leg that's broken in the Fallen . In this Discourse I have no aim to displease any , nor any hope to please all . If I can help on to Truth in the Church , and the Peace of the Church together , I shall be glad , be it in any measure . Nor shall I spare to speak Necessary Truth , out of too much Love of Peace . Nor thrust on Unnecessary Truth to the Breach of that Peace , which once broken is not so easily soldered again . And if for Necessary Truths sake only , any man will be offended , nay take , nay snatch at that offence , which is not given , I know no fence for that . It's Truth , and I must tell it . It's the Gospel , and I must preach it . 1 Cor. 9. And far safer it is in this 1 Cor. 9. 16. Case to bear Anger from men , then a VVoe from God . And where the Foundations of Faith are shaken , be it by Superstition or Profaneness , he that puts not to his hand , as firmly as he Can to support them , is too wary , and hath more Care of himself , then of the Cause of Christ . And it's a VVarinesse that brings more danger in the end , then it shuns . For the Angel of the Lord issued out a Curse against the Inhabitants of Meroz , because they came not to help the Lord , to help the Lord against the mighty . Iudg. 5. I know it's a Great ease to let every Thing be as it will , and every Iudg. 5. 23. man believe , and do as he list . But whither Governors in State or Church do their duty therewhile , is easily seen , since this is and effect of no King in Israel . Iudg. 17. Iudg. 17. 6. The Church of Christ upon Earth may be compared to a Hive of Bees , and that can be no where so steadily placed in this world , but it will be in some danger . And men that care neither for the Hive , nor the Bees , have yet a great mind to the Honey . And having once tasted the sweet of the Churches Maintenance swallow that for Honey , which one day will be more bitter then Gall in their Bowels . Now the King and the Priest , more then any other , are bound to look to the Integrity of the Church in Doctrine and Manners , and that in the first place . For that's by far the Best Honey in the Hive . But in the second place , They must be Careful of the Churches Maintenance too , else the Bees shall make Honey for others , and have none left for their own necessary sustenance , and then all's lost . For we see it in daily and common use , that the Honey is not taken from the Bees , but they are destroyed first . Now in this great and Busy Work , the King and the Priest must not fear to put their hands to the Hive , though they be sure to be stung . And stung by the Bees , whose Hive and House they preserve . It was King Davids Case ( God grant it be never Yours . ) They came about me ( says the Psal. 118. 12. Psal. 118. ) Apum Similitudine ardorem not at vesanum ; Non est enim in illis multum roboris sed mira Excandescentia : Calv : in Psal. 118. like Bees , This was hard usage enough , yet some profit , some Honey might thus be got in the End. And that's the Kings Case . But when it comes to the Priest , the Case is altered , They come about him like VVaspes , or like Hornets rather , all sting , and no Honey there . And all this many times for no offence , nay sometime for Service done them , would they see it . But you know who said : Behold I come shortly , and my reward is with me , to give to every man according as his Works shall be . Revel . 22. And he himself is so Revel . 22. 12. Gen 〈 ◊ 〉 . exceeding great a Reward , as that the manifold stings which are in the World , howsoever they smart here , are nothing when they are pressed out with that exceeding weight of Glory , which shall be revealed : Rom. 8. Rom. 8. 18. Now one Thing more let me be bold to Observe to Your Majesty in particular , concerning Your Great Charge , the Church of England . It's in and hard Condition . Shee professes the Ancient Catholic Faith ; And yet the Romanist condemns Her of Novelty in her Doctrine . Shee practises Church Government , as it hath been in use in all Ages , and all Places , where the Church of Christ hath taken any Rooting , both in , and ever since the Apostles Times ; And yet the Separatist condemns Her for Antichristianisme in her Discipline . The plain truth is , She is between these two Factions , as between two Millstones , and unless Your Majesty look to it , to Whose Trust She is committed , Shee'll be ground to powder , to and irrepairable both Dishonour , and loss to this Kingdom . And it's very Remarkable , that while both these press hard upon the Church of England , both of them Cry out upon Persecution , like froward Children , which scratch , and kick , and bite , and yet cry out all the while , as if themselves were killed . Now to the Romanist I shall say this ; The Errors of the Church of Rome are grown now ( many of them ) very Old. And when Errors are grown by Age , and Continuance to strength , they which speak for the Truth , though it be far Older , are ordinarily challenged for the Bringers in of New Opinions . And there is no Greater Absurdity stirring this day in Christendome , then that the Reformation of and Old Corrupted Church , will we , nill we , must be taken for the Building of a New. And were not this so , we should never be troubled with that idle and impertinent Question of theirs : Where was your Church before Luther ? For it was just there , where their's is now . There is no other difference between Us & Rome , then betwixt a Church miserably Corrupted , and happily purged . etc. Ios. Hall . B. of Exon. In his Apologetical Advertisement to the Reader . p. 192. Approved by Tho. Morton . B. then of Cov. & Lich. now of 〈 ◊ 〉 . in the Letters printed by the B. of Exeter . in his Treatise called , The Reconciler . p. 68 And D. Field . in his Appen . to the third part . c . 2. where he cites Calv. to the same purpose L. 4. Inst. c . 2. § . 11. One , and the same Church still , no doubt of that . One in Substance , but not one in Condition of state and purity ; Their part of the same Church remaining in Corruption : and Our part of the same Church under Reformation . The same Naaman , and he a Syrian still , but Leprous with them , and Cleansed with us ; The same man still . And for the Seperatist , and him that lays his Grounds for Separation or Change of Discipline , though all he says , or can say , be in Truth of Divinity , and among Learned Men little better then ridiculous : yet since these found Opinions have gained some ground among your people ; to such among them as are wilfully set to follow their blind Guides , through thick and thin , till S. Matth. 15. 14 they fallen into the Ditch together , I shall say nothing . But for so many of them , as mean well , and are only misled by Artifice and Cunning ; Concerning them , I shall say thus much only . They are Bells' of passing good mettle and tuneable enough of themselves , and in their own disposition ; and a world of pity it is , that they are Rung so miserably out of Tune , as they are , by them which have got power in and over their Consciences . And for this there is yet Remedy enough ; but how long there will be , I know not . Much talking there is ( Bragging , Your Majesty may call it ) on both sides . And when they are in their ruff , they both exceed all Moderation , and Truth too ; So far till both Lips and Pens open for all the World like a Purse without money ; Nothing comes out of this , and that which is worth nothing out of them . And yet this nothing is made so great , as if the Salvation of Souls , that Great work of the Redeemer of the World , the Son of God , could not be effected without it . And while the one faction cries up the Church above the Scripture : and the other the Scripture to the neglect and Contempt of the Church , which the Scripture it self teaches men both to honour , and obey : They have so far endangered the Belief of the One , and the Authority of the Other , as that neither hath its Due from a great part of Men . Whereas according to Christs Institution , The Scripture , where it's plain , should guide the Church : And the Church , where there's Doubt or Difficulty , should expound the Scripture ; Yet so , as neither the Scripture should be forced , nor the Church so bound up , as that upon Just and farther Evidence , She may not revise that which in any Case hath slipped by Her. What Success this Great Distemper , caused by the Collision of two such Factions , may have , I know not , I cannot Prophesy . This I know , That the use which Wise men should make of other men's falls , is not to fallen with them ; And the use , which Pious and Religious men should make of these great Flaws in Christianity , is not to Join with them that make them , nor to help to dislocate those main Bones in the Body , which being once put out of Joint , will not easily be set again . And though I cannot Prophesy , yet I fear That Atheism , and Irreligion gather strength , while the Truth is thus weakened by and Unworthy way of Contending for it . And while they thus Contend , neither part Consider , that they are in a way , to induce upon themselves , and others , that Contrary Extreme , which they seem most both to fear , and oppose . Beside : This I have ever Observed , That many Rigid Professors have turned Roman Catholics , and in that Turn have been more Jesuited then any other : And such Romanists as have changed from them , have for the most part quite leapt over the Mean , and been as Rigid the other way , as Extremity it self . And this , if there be not both Grace , and VVisdome to govern it , is a very Natural Motion . For a Man is apt to think he can never run far enough from that , which he once begins to hate ; And does not Consider therewhile , That where Religion Corrupted is the thing he hates , a Fallacy may easily be put upon him . For he ought to hate the Corruption which depraves Religion , and to run from it : but from no part of Religion it self , which he ought to Love , and Reverence , ought he to depart . And this I have Observed farther : That no One thing hath made Conscientious men more wavering in their own minds , or more apt , and easy to be drawn aside from the sincerity of Religion professed in the Church of England , then the Want of Uniform and Decent Order in too many Churches of the Kingdom . And the Romanists have been apt to say , The Houses of God could not be suffered to lie so Nastily ( as in some places they have done ) were the True worship of God observed in them : Or did the People think that such it were . It's true , the Inward VVorship of the Heart , is the Great Service of God , and no Service acceptable without it : But the External worship of God in his Church is the Great Witness to the World , that Our heart stands right in that Service of God . Take this away , or bring it into Contempt , and what Light is there left to shine before men , that they may see our Devotion , and glorify our Father which is in Heaven ? And to deal clearly with Your Majesty , These Thoughts are they , and no other , which have made me labour so much , as I have done , for Decency and and Orderly settlement of the External Worship of God in the Church . For of that which is Inward there can be no Witness among men , nor no Example for men . Now no External Actium in the world can be Uniform without some Ceremonies . And these in Religion , the Ancienter they be , the better , so they may fit Time and Place . Too many Overburden the Service of God ; And too few leave it naked . And scarce any Thing hath hurt Religion more in these broken Times , then and Opinion in too many men , That because Rome had thrust some Unnecessary , and many Superstitious Ceremonies upon the Church , therefore the Reformation must have none at all ; Not considering therewhile , That Ceremonies are the Hedge that fence the Substance of Religion from all the Indignities , which Profaneness and Sacrilege too Commonly put upon it . And a Great Weakness it is , not to see the strength which Ceremonies ( Things weak enough in themselves , God knows ) add even to Religion it self ; But a far greater to see it , and yet to Cry Them down , all , and without Choice , by which their most hated Adversaries climbed up , and could not cry up themselves , and their cause , as they do , but by them . And Divines of all the rest might learn , and teach this VVisdome if they would , since they see all other Professions , which help to bear down their Ceremonies , keep up their own therewhile , and that to the highest . I have been too bold to detain Your Majesty so long ; But my Grief to see Christendome bleeding in Dissension , and which is worse , triumphing in her own Blood , and most angry with them , that would study her Peace , hath thus transported me . For truly it Cannot but grieve any man , that hath Bowels , to see All men seeking , but as S. Paul foretold , Phil. 2. Their own things , and not the things which are Phil. 2. 21. Jesus Christs . Sua , Their own surely . For the Gospel of Christ hath nothing to do with them : And to see Religion so much , so Zealously pretended , and called upon , made but the Stalking-Horse , to shoot at other Foul , upon which their Aim is set ; In the mean time , as if all were Truth and Holiness it self , no Salvation must be possible , did it lie at their Mercy , but in the Communion of the One , and in the Conventicles of the Other . As if either of these now were , as the Donatists of old reputed themselves , the only men , in whom Christ at his coming to Judgement , should find Faith . No ( says S. Aug. Epist. 48. S. Augustine : and so say I with him ) Dam veniam , non Credimus . Pardon us , I pray , we cannot believe it . The Catholic Church of Christ is neither Room , nor a Conventicle . Out of that there's no Salvation , I easily Confess it . But out of Room there is , and out of a Conventicle too ; Salvation is not shut up into such a narrow Conclave . In this ensuing Discourse therefore I have endeavoured to lay open those wider-Gates of the Catholic Church , confined to no Age , Time , or Place ; Nor knowing any Bounds , but That Faith , which was once ( and but once for all ) delivered to the Saints . S. Jude 3. And in my pursuit of this way , I have searched after , and delivered S. Iod. 3. with a single heart , that Truth which I profess . In the publishing whereof , I have obeyed Your Majesty , discharged my Duty , to my power , to the Church of England , 1 S. Pet. 3. 15. Given account of the Hope that is in me ; And so testified to the world that Faith in which I have lived , and by God's blessing and favour purpose to die ; But till Death shall most unfeignedly remain Your Majesties most faithful SUBJECT , and most Humble , and Obliged SERVANT , W. CANT .