TO THE HIGH and mighty Monarch , CHARLES By the Grace of GOD , King of Great Brittaine , France , and Ireland , etc. Gracious SIR ; IF Loyal Duty may be counted presumption ? then doubtless the be • tO of my meanest worth must beg pardon for claiming so Royal a Patronage : Yet to whom should I prostrate my Pen and Pilgrimage ? if not unto your Sacred Majesty : Nay , none so able to Receive it , none so powerful to Protect it ; and none so justly to claim it , as your Sovereign Self . The subject treateth of my tedious and curious Travails , in the best and worst parts of the world ; which being begun in Your hopeful Infancy , are now finally accomplished in the fullness of Your thrice blessed Majority . The general Discourse it self , is most fixed upon the Laws , Religion , Manners , Policies , and Government of Kings , Kingdoms , People , Principalities and Powers ; and therefore so much the more fit for your Majesty . The defect resting only in me , the worthless Author , in handling rare and plentiful Subject , with a homely and familiar Style ; no ways fit for Sovereignty to peruse . Yet ( Royal Sir ) vouchsafe to remember how thankfully Alexander received a small Cup of water ; and what a high Valve was set upon the Widows Mite . If I have made use of my poor Talon , the profit redoundeth unto my Country ; which being shadowed under your auspicious Favour , shall leave a greater stamp to the work , and a deeper impression , of future-knowledge , to the curious Understanders . And how often wont your ever blessed Father , graciously to peruse Lines of mine , of far lesser note then these be : Yea , and ( viva voce ) the punctual Discourse of all my three voyages , which are now laid open to the Vulgar world ; and therefore I dare humbly expect a greater favour for a larger and more serious Task . So likewise your own Princely adventures beyond Seas , in measuring large Kingdoms , & the glassy face of the great Ocean : have invited me to lay prostrate my painful peregrinations at your Sacred feet . Humbly beseeching your Regal goodness , to remark the matter and manner of this Work ; howsoever the Gift , & the Giver be deficient . And questionless as the Bee , gathereth sweetest Honey out of sourest Flowers , your Royal understanding may find something , to underprop the Defects of my nothing ; and my soul to exult in the smallest spark of your Gracious Clemency . And lastly , the grievous Sufferings , tortures , and torments I sustained in Malaga , being taken as a Spy for your Late Father's Fleet , exposed against Algier : and condemned to death by their bloody Inquisition for the Gospels sake . These ( I prostrate say ) do command me to present the perfect passage thereof , unto your Royal & Religious consrderation . Sufficient Certificates , and infallible approbations are annexed to the Tragical discourse it self ; and it also humbly bequeathing all , unto your Princely Piety and Pity , to commiserate both my case and cause . Wherefore ( and as duty binds ) I shall ever beseech God to preserve your Royal Reign from wicked Achitophells , to guard your Sacred person with Heavenly Angels , and to guide your Monarchicke State , with faithful and Religious Counsellors . AMEN . Your Majesties most humble , and most obedient Subject , and Servant : William Lithgow .