TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL , SIR PAUL PINDAR KNIGHT . Worthy Sir , WHen I had ended this Discourse , & bethought my self of a Subject , who for h • … s loyalty and love to his King and Country , might answer and suit with the subject in hand , a • … worser as it were stand in stead as a fair light at the entrance of the door , to show others the way ; your self came to my remembrance ; who have so clearly expressed your affection to ei • … her . Indeed by that • … Law both of God and Natu • … e , every man according to that ability God hath blessed him withal ) is bound so to do , but the greater number want the means , and burdens of this nature m • … st commonly lie upon tO • … e backs but of a few , yea many there are , who ( thou • … h able enough ) in hard and dangerous times ( like foolish patients in a desperate disease , who will not be persuaded to be let blood though it would save their lives ( will not yield their assistance , till forced by ex remity or a stronger hand : this the Citizens of Constantinople proved by woeful experience , when they were surprised by Mahomet the first , having such a mass of money and treasure in their ho • … ses , that the Turkes were astonied thereat . I rather set before such , that true pattern and mirror of Magnificence , ( so highly honoured and admired , even until this day , for so many ways deserving of his Country ) Cosmo de Medicis , of whom the Florentine History thus reporteth . This Cosmo ( says he ) was the most esteemed and the most famous Citizen of Florence , ( being no man of war ) either in Florence or any other City , because he did not Hist 〈 ◊ 〉 . lib . 7. only excel all others of his time , in authority & rich • … s , but also in wisdom , for among other qualities that advanced him no be chief in his Country , he more then other men liberal and magnificent , which liberality appeared much more after his death then before , and though he did Princely things , yet in his conversation , riding abroad , or marrying of his children or kinsfolks , he was like unto all other men , modest and discreet , because he well knew that extraordinary things , which are of all men with admiration beheld , do procure more envy then those which without ostentation are honestly covered ; surely private men have equaled many Prince in Magnificence , I might allege many examples for this purpose . But I only show how much we are first obliged to God , then to all those who study to provide for the safety of their King and Country , the advancement of Gods Church and true Religion , of which number ( Sir , ) as you are one so eminent , here on earth , so may you receive your reward with the number of those , whose piety and deeds of mercy , shall receive their reward in another Kingdom . Yours in all observance to be commanded , H. P.