EN EAS SYLVIVS To Marianu's Sozinus , Health . SIR , YOur suit is unproper for my age , but to your own repugnant . For in and argument of love , what can I who am almost fortie writ , or you who are fiftie with convenience hear ? It is a thing which delights young spirits , and tires upon tender breasts ; but old men are as unfit auditors of Loves , as young men are of Morals . Nor is there any thing more ugly than age , which shall serve Venus with and impotent devotion . Yet shall you find some of these old ones in love , but not reloved , for they are equally contemptible both to maid and matron , nor was Woman ever taken but by the flourish of our years . If you shall be taught otherwise , it is but a covert illusion . But I know that and amorous tractate does extremely misbecome me , who having passed the Meridian of my time do now post to my evening ; yet is it not a greater indecency for me to write than for you to solicit me . It is my duty to obey , let it be your care to see what you impose ; for as there is the greater ripeness of years in you , so it will be the great requitie in me to subscribe to the Laws of friendship : which if your justice fears not to violate by and injunction , my folly shall not doubt to transgress by and obedience . Your good graces to me have been so many , that I cannot dare to deny you , although some looser wantonness were employed in the request , I shall therefore condescend to your petition so often reiterated , nor any longer oppose that which hath been solicited with so much vehemency . Yet shall I not , as your desire was feign any thing , nor will I there be a Poet where I may be and Historian . For who is so mad as to make use of a lie , who hath a truth can justify him ? Because your self have been amorous , and have not yet that fire extinct , it is your pleasure I should compose the History of two Lovers . This game somnesse does hold You from being reckoned old . I shall submit my self to your desires , but will not present you with fiction in so great a variety of truths . For what hath the World so universally common ? What City , Hamlet or Family is barren of examples ? What man arrived to thirtie hath not exploited something for love ? I ground this conjecture in my self , whom love hath a thousand times engaged , and Heaven hath disengaged a thousand times ; in that happier than Mars whom Vulcan captivated in and Iron Net , & exposed a scorned spectacle to the Gods ; but I shall rather touch at others loves than mine own , lest while I stir up the Embers of my ancient fire , I discover a spark still living . Yet will I give you the relation of a strange and almost incredible love , with which a noble pair were mutually inflamed , nor will I make use of old , and obsolete examples , but discourse of the wanton fires of our own age , which I will demonstrate to you in our own City , not Babylon or Troy , although one of the lovers was born in a Northern Climate . And perchance the story may furnish us with this benefit . For since the Lady which is our Theme , when she had lost her love , breathed out her soul in a mixed passion of sadness and indignation , and the Knight was never after the master of any true contentment , it may be a fair advertisement to youth to desist from such vanities . And the tender virgin may be informed by this accident not to loose her self in the pursuit of another . The narration may tutor young Gallants , that they address not themselves to this kind of war , where the Gall is so much predominant over the Honey , but that renouncing lasciviousness which does infatuate them , they would rather make virtue their design , which is the only possession that can make its possessor happy . If any man be a stranger to that infinity of misery's Which lie concealed in love , let him from hence correct his ignorance . Farewell Sir , and with attention hear that story which I by compulsion write .