TO HER HIGHNESSE THE PRINCESSE ELIZABETH , PRINCESSE PALATINE OF THE RHINE , DVTCHES OF BAVARIA , etc. AND ELDEST Daughter to Her Majesty the Queen of BOHEMIA . May it please your Highness ; WHat the Great PhilosopherAristot . polit . lib . 7 , cap . 16. hath observed of Men's Bodies , is , upon so much stronger Reasons , true of their Minds , by how much our Intellectual Maturity is more lingering , and sluggish than our Natural , That the too Early Conceptions and Issues of them do usually prove but weak and unuseful . And we shall seldom find , but that those venturous Blossoms , whose overhasty obedience to the Early Spring does anticipate their proper season , and put forth too soon , do afterwards for their former boldness suffer from the injury of severer weather , except at least some happy shelter , or more benign influence redeem them from danger . The like Infelicity I find my self obnoxious unto at this time . For I know not out of what disposition of mind , whither out of love of Learning ( for Amo • … dixit 〈 ◊ 〉 . 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 • … l. R • … dig . l. 16. 〈 ◊ 〉 . 15. Love is venturous , and conceives difficult things easier then they are ) or whither out of a Resolution to take some account from my self of those few years wherein I had then been planted in the happiest of all Soils , the Schools of Learning ; whither upon these , or any other Inducements , so it hath happened , that I long since have taken boldness in the Minority of my Studies to write this ensuing Treatise : That before I adventured on the endeavour of knowing other things , I might first try whither I knew my self . lest I should justly incur the Censure , which that 〈 ◊ 〉 〈 ◊ 〉 〈 ◊ 〉 • … . 6. sour Philosopher passed upon Grammarians . That they were better acquainted with the evils of Vlysses then with their own . This hasty resolution having produced so untimely and issue , It happened by some accident to be like Moses in his Infancy exposed to the Seas . Where I made no other account , but that its own weakness would there have revenged my former boldness , and betrayed it unto perishing . But as he then , so this now , hath had the marvellous felicity to light on the view , and fallen under the compassion of a very Gracious Princess . For so far hath your Highness vouchsafed ( having happened on the sighed of this Tractate ) to express favour thereunto , as not only to spend hours in it , and require a Transcript of it , but further to recommend it by your Gracious judgement unto public view . In which particular I was not to advice with mine own Opinion , being to express my humblest acknowledgement to your Highness . This only Petition I shall accompany it withal unto your Highness feet , That since it is a Blossom which put forth so much too soon , It may therefore obtain the Gracious Influence of your Highness favour , to protect it from that severity abroad which it otherwise justly fears . God Almighty make your Highness as great a Mirror of his continual Mercies , as he hath both of his Graces and of Learning . Your Highness most Humble Servant , EDVVARD REYNOLD'S .