To my worthy friends , and Brothers the Captains of the trained Bans , Of the famous CITY of LONDON . CAPTAINE . Martin Bond. George Wawker . Marmaduke Royden . George Langham . Iohn Venn . Edward Dichfield . Thomas Covell . Edmond Forster . William Ge • re . Samuall Carlton . Tobias Massy . Randolph Mo • wareing Henry Sanders . Nicolas Beale . Robert Davis . Mathew Forster . Iohn Bradley . Rouland Wilson . Iames B • nce . WORTHY FRIENDS . MOst Certain it is , that War hath bade its Original from the very foundation of Sovereignty , a • worser thence was reduced to and Art , confined within limited rules , and principles , and may ( in these our times ) be said to be either foreign or Domestic , and that either offensive , or defensive , preserving , and upholding some Nations , and Countries , and destroying , and ru • ning others ; but still the rule , and true scope of a lust War among all Nations , is held to be a firm Peace , which as it is best obtained with the Sword in hand , so is it best confirmed , by a prevalent Victory , to compass which many Authors have undertaken to lay down Rules , some through Military Discipline , some through Valour and Policy , and most through bloodshed , yet such defects are found in many of their precepts , that no positive rules can be collected thence , which in all points can make good the same , for it must be confessed , that they who frame to themselves , in their studies a model of le deing of and Army , to be come Victorious , find the same as full of Errors , as of Rules , when the application is made for a measure of War taken by book , falls out either too long , or too short , when it is brought into the field , to be put in practice , and sometimes such unlooked for chances , arrest even the best , and most experienced Captains ( though long acquainted with the Wars ) that their skill is not privileged from casualties , nor their Judgments , and knowledge ▪ from Vaniety of accidents , because a minute produ • eth that in the field which and Age hath not seen no n • r herd of before . Notwithstanding these difficulties , and uncertainties , I have endeavoured for my own recreation , to collect the most certain of these rules of Warfare , being such as admit of the least contradiction , and concluded the same in three Centuries , which I have termed Military Observations , and are the most material within the compass of a Soldiers & Captains knowledge , either before the War begun , or in the prosecution thereof , or after the Victory gained : the first is confirmed by the authority and aprovement of Ancient authors , and serves as a groundwork to the second , confirmed by reason , and experience , and both of these to the third , confirmed , and made good by practice , and the example of the greatest Captains that have left their memories registered in the books of honour behind them to posterity ; the two latter may hereafter see the light ; if this former find a fav • rabble construction in the World , and a friendly acceptance from you , to whose love in respect of our United brotherly affection , and friendship , I have presumed to Dedicate the same , & that in testimony of the Obligement due to your place from him that Entitles himself Your friend and Brother in Arms , L. ROBERTS Captain .