TO THE WORTHY AND LIVELY Pattern of a good OLD-AGE , Mr. Doctor CHADERTON , all the blessed comforts of it : and after it , everlasting happiness . Reverend SIR : THe Meditations here in this Treatise presented to you , are at their highest pitch of ambition , if they may obtain , that your judicious eyes ( at your convenient leisure ) shall pass over them . I suppose , it will be asked why they solicit you rather then any other , for this favour . It is , first for your many years with which GOD hath crowned you : and then also in respect of your experience in your own particular , of what in this Tract is delivered : that is , of GODS freeing this age from the Imputations cast ( in a generality ) upon it : and his deyning you above many others , the blessed and comfortable privileges , of which it is capable , and for which it hath the best helps , and most opportunities . I desire not to be made known unto you . It suffices , that to me you are well known : and • … hat , not by hearsay ( though with that precious ointment , a good-name Eccles 7. you are renowned ) but chiefly out of my many observations , when I was a Student in the University , and for a long time , one of your Auditors . Every way you ratify and make good this Encomium SENECTVTIS . And therefore yours it is , and to you it comes , both to be corrected and disposed of , incase it may seem in any degree , worthy your so much pains . And certainly , should I cause my thoughts to range abroad among the Worthies that are known unto me ; none would be found that might give so ample testimony to what you shall here read , or be so living and example of it , as your self . This ( I hope ) will excuse my presumption , and prevail with you for your pains in reading the Discourse , though it should not with your judgement for approving it . I beseech the ANCIENT OF DAIES , to continue and increase unto you , the good your many years have possessed you of ; that as they are found in the way of righteousness , so they may be to you a crown of glory , Prov. 16. and a crown of righteousness , 2 Tim. 4 ▪