TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE Sr. MAVRICE ABBOT KNIGHT , now Lord Mayor of the Honourable City of London . Right Honourable , MY respects unto you ( being your Honours engaged many ways ) have put me upon a design or project for you ; the God of Heaven graciously prosper it in my hand . The tenor of it is briefly this : to increase your honour , and to ease the burden of that laborious government , which now lies upon your shoulder . To mention your name before the glorious labour of so great and worthy and agent in the factorage of Heaven ( as the Author of this piece was ) and to make you a Protector of them : cannot ( I conceive ) in sober interpretation , but be conceived , to add honour unto him that hath , and cause him to have more abundantly . Blessed is the wing that is spread over any of the things of Iesus Christ to shelter them . Again , to put into your hand , and from your hand into your heart , the remembrance of that God , that will gloriously recompense your faithfulness in that great trust committed to you , cannot but ( by the blessing of him to whom blessing belongeth ) be a cordial means to strengthen your heart in the pang of government , and cause you to travail and bring forth with more ease . There is no labour , nor travail , nor sorrow , nor difficulty , nor danger , nor death that hath any evil or bitterness in it , when Heaven is before us , and the truth and faithfulness of the living God embracing us . If I have miscarried in point of good manners , or otherwise in this Dedication , your Honour shall do but justice to charge your own courtesy and respects always showed unto me , ( at least in part ) with the blame of it . Had not there been the tempter , doubtless in this case I had not been the transgressor . The God of peace prosper the government of this great City in your hand ; and make it a glorious rise and advantage unto you of your greater glory in the Heavens . And your Honour may assure your self that so it shall come to pass , unless that God that hears prayer shall reject the prayer of , Your honour to command in the Lord ; I G.