To my much honoured Lord , Thomas Lord Howard , chief of the Howards , Earl of Arundell and Surrey , Earl Marshal of England , Knight of the moſt Noble Order of the Garter , and one of his Majeſties moſt Honourable Privy Council , etc. My very good Lord , THe Fame of your Lordship's Heroic Virtues invites me to preſent to your gracious acceptance this Treatiſe , of which Honour is the Theam . Indeed to whom more fitly can she make her address , then to your Lordſhip , through whoſe Veins ſhe runs , from whoſe Boſom she flows , in whoſe Actions she ſhines , and by whoſe Protection she is ſecured from the inſolent Affronts of the Vulgar ? Being diſtreſſed , she makes You her fair Sanctuary , being wounded , ſhe makes you her sovereign Balm . Nay , ( which draws near to a wonder ) many put their Honour into Your hands , eſteeming it more ſafe there , then in their own . This is the firſt cauſe of my Dedication ; The next is , that the true Child of Honour ( the deplored Subject of this Book ) was a Debtor to Your Lordſhip for his Education , whoſe Advancement in Virtue , Honour , and Eſtate ; You made the greateſt part of Your Study . And , to ſay the Truth , where could ſuch a Guardian be found for him as Your Lordſhip , ſince between the renowned Ancestors of You both , Virtue , and Blood hath long ſince engendered a ſtrict Friendſhip , and between whom there was a near ſimilitude of good and evil Deſtiny , both having amply ſhared of Infortunity , and Glory ? I may add , that there cannot be a more lovely Sighed , then to behold and ancient , lofty Cedar sheltering with his Branches from the Rage of weather , a Young one of the ſame Kind , aſpiring to the ſame Height ; had not the Frost of Death , immaturely nipped this Noble Plant , it were and Heresy to doubt that he would have flourished under the care of a Lord , whoſe Virtue is too immenſe for one Region to contain , and whoſe Perfections are ſo many , and ſo tranſcendent , that they are able not only to adorn theſe more Polished Parts of the World , but to civilize alſo the more Barbarous , and to make and Athens of Madagaſcar . The Oblation of my Tears , and Supplications to God , not availing to keep him here , J have ſent my Vows after him , and have given him a Funeral Equipage conſiſting of the Teſtimonies of brave , good , and knowing Men , which will eternise him on Earth , as his Goodness will in Heaven . I , confess freely , I was unwilling to leave him to the Mercy of ſome grossly ignorant Chronologer of the Times , in whoſe Rubbiſh , Posterity might unhappily have found him lying more ruined then his glorious Predecessors were by the Tyranny of Time , or the Cruelty of Princes . Now in the last place , I muſt moſt humbly beſeech Your Lordſhip to take notice , that his whole Name have made and affectionate , but and imprudent Choice of me to be their weak Orator , to render Your Lordſhip ſubmiſſive , and due thanks for the Good You did , or intended him , and withal to make You a Religious Promiſe of their Prayers to God , and their Praises ; to Men , as in particular , I do of the vowed faithful ſervice of Your Lordship's moſt humble , loyal Servant , Anthony Stafford .