To the Virtuous , and excellent Lady , the COUNTESS of Arundell . MADAM , THE cauſes why I make this Dedication apart to Your Ladyſhip , are diverse . The firſt is , that sweet Lord ( the lamented Subject of this Book ) in whoſe praiſe , my Muſe ending , will expire like a Phoenix in a Perfume . He was extremely obliged to Your Ladyſhip in particular ; and therefore You deſerve particular and infinite thanks from all of his Blood and Name , of which I am one , who have ever had your Virtues in admiration . The ſecond is , that You , Madam , are none of thoſe Romance Ladies , who make Fiction and Folly their Study and Diſcourſe , and appear wiſe only to Fools , and Fools to the wiſe . By reading nothing elſe but Vanity , they become nothing elſe themſelves . They make a more diligent enquiry after the deeds of Knights , and Ladies errant , than after the Acts of Chriſt and his Apoſtles . The loss of their time is their juſt puniſhment , in that they ſpend a whole Life in reading much , and yet is that much , nothing . But you , Madam , are capable of the moſt profound grave Mysteries of Religion , and daily peruſe and meditate Books of Devotion . You deſpiſe the bold Adventures of thoſe Female Follies , and piouſly survey the lives of the Female Saints . You have rendered yourself a moſt accomplished Lady on Earth , by imitating our bleſſed Lady which is in Heaven ; who as ſhe was here the firſt Saint of the Militant Church , ſo is ſhe there , the firſt of the Church Triumphant ; having learnt that ſhe ſpent all her hours in works of Charity , you trace her ſteps , knowing that She , and Virtue , trod but one path . Hence it comes , that you are at no time ſo angry , as with the loss of and opportunity to ſuccour the diſtreſſed ; and that you are as indefatigable in doing good as heaven in motion . Hence it is , that the impetuous force of a Torrent may be as well ſtopped , as the conſtant flood of your goodness ; which never stays till it have watered , and relieved all within its Ken , commendable either for Knowledge , or Virtue . My third , and laſt ſcope in placing your Character in the Front of this Treatiſe is , that like a Star it may ſtrike a luſtre throughout this Book , and by its light chaſe away the darkness Oblivion would elſe caſt upon it . Questionless it will breed a holy emulation in any of your Sex , who ſhall here learn that there is a Lady , whoſe virtues are come to the Age of Conſiſtence , and can grow no further ; and from whom , not only her poſterity , but her Anceſtors , alſo receive honour ; They , in this reſembling the Morn , who though ſhe precedes the Sun , receives her ſplendour from him . Thus ſweet , thus excellent , Madam , I have received you from thoſe who have been truly happy in being daily witneſſes of all your Words and Actions . I conclude with this proteſtation made in me by Truth her self , that I am ſo conſtant and honourer ( I had almoſt ſaid and Adorer ) of Virtue wherever I find it , eſpecially when that in eſtimable Diamond is ſet in Honour ( as it is in you , Madam ) that ſhould I round the World in your Ladyships ſervice , I ſhould esteem it a Voyage far ſhort of Your Merit , and my Duty ; and that I ſhould not think the higheſt Title Imagination can rear , a greater addition to me , than is the ſubmiſſive style of Your Ladyſhips most humble loyal Servant , ANTHONY STAFFORD .