TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL , Sir RICHARD YOUNG , Knight Barone • the Worshipful , Mr. GILBERT HARRISON , Alderman ; M• . ROBERT EDWARDS , Deputy of the R • Worshipful Company of Merchant Adventurers ▪ M• . H •• H WINDHAM , M• . EDWARD FOORD , Mr. HUMPHR : BERINOTON ; MERCHANTS : And the reſt of the worthy Inhabitants of the Pariſh of Aldermanbury , LONDON : Saving Health , true Riches , and eternal Happiness . Right Worshipful , Beloved , and Chriſtian friends ▪ AS it was in the building of the Temple , many hands were employed in the raiſing of that glorious Structure : Solomon did raiſe a tribute of men for the work , and they were all employed according to their several abilities ; ſome did work in gold , in ſilver , in brass , in iron , in purple and blue ſilk ; ſome did hew and ſquare , others did bear and carry the ſtones and timber , to the raiſing of that ſacred pile : ſo it is in the Church of God , of which that material houſe was a clear repreſentation ; there is no man ſo mean , but may be ſome way useful to the houſe of God ; thoſe that cannot work in gold , and ſilver , and ſilk , yet may cut and hew ; and thoſe that can do neither , yet may carry burdens . This latter is the task that I have undertaken ; v • z . To ſerve the Church , in bringing forth this proviſion which is here preſented to you , of another men coſt indeed , yet not without ſome labour and care of my own , to prepare the table , and ſet things in order before you . I am the rather encouraged in it , becauſe I know that God can as well ſerve himſelf of my labour in this , as of the skill and ability of the learned Author : and if in this I may be a helper of the joy of Gods Church , I have wherein for to rejoice . Theſe ensuing Sermons were firſt preached unto you , they were yours in the delivery , and are yours of Right , as conceived and brought forth for you ; and I know not how you ſhould loose your Right in the publiſhing of them , but rather owe Patronage , Apology , Harbour and Recommendations ; therefore I have made bold to prefix your Names before them , and ſo to publiſh them for the good of the Church ; being well aſſured , that you will not grutch this communication , of your own right and intereſt in them , to others . For the Author , he needs not my Candle to light his Sun , nor my Pen to make new impreſsions of honour and love in your hearts , who have ſo fully known his Doctrine , manner of Life , Purpoſe , Faith , Long-ſuffering , Charity , Patience , Humility , etc. I may ſay of this poſthume Birth , that the Author died , as Rachel , in travel with it ; and it may well be called Benjamin , the ſon of his Right hand : whilst he was a carrying of you up into the Mount , to show you the land of Promiſe , God took him , and by Inviſible meſſengers , carried him to the fruition of Eternal Blessedness : he is taken out of your sighed , and if you deſire to find him , you muſt aſpire unto the heavenly Paradiſe , by walking in that tract which he hath in his Doctrine here chalked out unto you ; and in thoſe ſteps of his religious and zealous converſation , which he hath walked in before you . But leſt you ſhould let theſe things ſlip ; this book may be your continual Remembrancer , in this , he being dead , yet speaks . But his labour will be loſt , and my undertaking fruitless , except you be pleaſed to make the practice of theſe things your trade , and the meditation of them your Recreation . Here you may ſee wherein true happiness does conſiſt : the right placing or miſplacing of happiness is the Ruder of a men life , the fountain of his well or ill doing ; according to which , men take their marks , and ſhoot right or wrong , in all the actions of their lives : you will be miſtaken , if you ſeek it in theſe outward things , it is only to be found in God ; there is no other independent good , neither is there any other good that can be communicated to all the heirs of Bleſsing , but only God ; that which all muſt possess , and that together , muſt needs be ſome infinite thing . It will then be worth your while , to call off your affections from the world , and to abate of your eager purſuit after the things of this life : you are not made for Riches , but they are made for you : the Bee will forſake the Flower that yields her no Honey ; the fruit that the World affords you , is but like that which grows upon the banks of the dead Sea , a fair apple , which under a read ſide , contains nothing but duſt : it will be your wiſdom , not to cumber your ſelves about many things , when one thing is needful : the ſaying of the Roman General to the soldier that kept the tents , when he ſhould have been fighting in the field , Non Amonimium diligentes , will be uſed of God , if when he calls us to ſeek after true Happiness , yet we busy our ſelves only about things of and inferior Alloy ; God will not like ſuch busibodies : our chiefeſt care and pains ſhould be beſtowed , in the attaining of that which is our chiefeſt Happiness ; if you be induſtrious in this , your labour will not be in vain : you muſt think of Religion as of trading , which will bring no gain , unless diligently followed and practiſed : Ariſe therefore , and be doing , and the Lord will be with you . Give me leave to tell you , firſt , that God hath done much for you , exalted you to heaven , in regard of the means : It is true , your eyes have ſeen worthy Lights , ſhining in their life and Doctrine , and by death extinguiſhed ; and yet your loss hath not been more bitterly lamented , than in a good meaſure graciouſly ſupplied ; the cauſes of your hope and joy , have been in a good proportion equivalent to your grief and loss . Secondly , GOD looks for much from you ; viz. and adorning of the Goſpel , and walking worthy of it , in a holy , fruitful and obedient converſation : ſuch favours beſtowed , muſt needs raiſe great expectations ; and this expectation fruſtrated , doubles the judgement . But I hope better things of you , and ſuch as accompany ſalvation . You did receive the Author with ſo much love and honour , as that you cannot but countenance this Poſthume Birth , which was firſt conceived , and brought forth for you ; & your ſelves being witneſſes , contains no other things , than what you have herd and learned : and ſo , though others ſhould deny it , yet you muſt give unto it , Harbour and Entertainment . Therefore I have , in the name of the Widow of the Reverend Author , entitled you unto it . If it ſhall be approved useful to the Church , fruitful to you , & beneficial to any , I ſhall rejoice ; my prayers shall be for their success , and for your happiness . Yours , in the ſervice of your Faith , A. B