Mary Make-peace , of the Manor of Allwell , in Northamptonshire , to all the Sisters of her Female Society , Health , Hearts-ease , and Happiness . Sweet Sisters , ANd fellow Spinsters , ( for the weakest of us is no worse , and the best no better ) it is the Character under which all our Sex is comprehended ; I lovingly salute you all hoping you are in as good health of body , and in quiet of mind , as I was at the writing hereof : These are further to let you understand , that it is come to my hearing ; how by the course carriage of some among our Sex ; others , whose modesties are no way guilty of the like misdemeanour , are not privately bated , but ( even in Print ) publicly branded : & by such who consider not , that as there was a Maechael Helena , so there was a Matronlike Hecuba ; and as a lose Lais , so a loyal Lucrese . Nor that we might as well retort upon them , that as there was and Hercules , so there was and Herostratus ; and as a Salemon , so a Sinon . But all this is to little or no purpose : you know my name is Marry Make-peace , and have always studied to make peace betwixt both Sexes : Then , though they rail at us , let not us revile them : for patience must prove our best preservative : For as the Grammar rule learnedly instructeth us : Foemineo generi tri •• untur — propria quae maribus : which is , as I interpret it : Though the Feminine gender be troublesome , let us seek to please proper men , lest they bring us down upon our Maribones : which done , we shall prevent all prejudice and divert all disasters . I confess there is Tabitha Turbulent , of a terrible tongue ; and Franke Froward , who though she be given more to pouting than to prating , yet neither of them I hold to be necessary : Betrisse Boldface does all things without blushing : And Ellen Ever-heard makes too much noise among her neighbours : And of the like quality and condition are Parnell Prate a pace , and Rachell Rail at him : Vrsula Vpsefreeze is condemned to for her uncivil carriage ; as proved to be no better than a pot companion : As for Hannah Hit him home , and Ioaene Jowl him well , they are valued in the rank of Vixens , and will be loud by no allowance : these hnmours I like not . Marry again , ( for thats our women's constant phrase , when we bury our husbands ) There are on the contrary side , Grace grieve him not , a simple and good soul : Kate Kiss-well not cunning , but a conniving creature : Luce Lye-close not wanton , but a willing wench : Dorothy Doe-little not to be caveld at , because so called : for you know the Proverb , so said , so done , and little said soon amended : and for Sisly Sweet-lips my sister , and Margery Quiet my Cousen-german : if all the rest were of their simplicity , and modesty , men should not have such reason to cavell at us , nor we such cause to complain of them . Alas , why should not Ivory teeth bridle intemperate tongues ? and soft lips conceal fullen hearts ? or why should a fair face be the betrayer of hidden faults ? of all these things , as a Sister of your society , I thought good to advice you . Given at our Manor of ALL-VVELL . MARY MAKE-PEACE