TO THE RIGHT REVEREND Father in God WALTER LORD BISHOP OF WINCHESTER , Prelate of the Noble order of the GARTER , my singular good Lord and Patron . Right reverend Father in God , and my very singular good Lord . SETting aside more serious studies , and being desirous to recreate my self with some books of meditation , it was my good hap to meet with this little tract Of the Imitation of Christ : And having looked over some of it , I began to admire both the plainness and the pythinesse of it ; being so well fitted to the capacity of the ignorant , and yet not unworthy the perusal of the learned , insomuch that I find it to be true by mine own experience , that the high commendations so many have given of it , is not without just cause . For I must confess to the glory of God and mine own comfort , that I have profited more in the course of Christianity , by the perusal of this one small book of devotion , then by turning over many volumes of controversies . For I found in it great motives to self-denial , humility , obedience and devotion , to humility in our selves , to obedience towards superiors , to devotion towards God . I then began to inquire whither it were translated or no , and I find it is translated into all languages , and into english several times , yet could none of these altogether please me ; for I perceived some of them to stick too close to the letter , & others fly too far off : I have therefore taken a little pains to fit it to our own language and yet not leave the author too much . And because the Author thereof was too much addicted to one side , I made bold to leave out that which might offend any Christian palate , and have endeavoured that it should look with and equal and unpartial eye upon all good Christians . And it were to be wished that we had more books in this kind , and that we did especially apply our selves to such kind of books ; for men now adais are immoderately wedded to their own opinions , they labour to dispute well , not to live well , and delight more in books of controversy to strengthen them on that side they are , then in books of devotion to teach them what each good Christian should be . So that the admonition of the Apostle was never more seasonable then now , Let your moderation be known unto all men . Phil. 4. 5. That therefore others may be the better encouraged to peruse this so plain and profitable a book , I have presumed to shelter it under your Lordship's gracious protection . And to whom could I more fitly dedicate so pious a work then to your Lordship , in whom humility piety , and devotion , joined with a singular temper and moderation are so well met together . The assured confidence of all these does give great assurance , that you will favourably accept of the weak endeavours of Your Lordship's humbly devoted Chaplain WILLIAM PAGE .