To the Christian READER . ANd to whom should I more fitly commend this pious work of the Imitation of Christ , then to thee good Christian Reader whosoever thou art , and wheresoever thou dwellest ; I say wheresoever thou dwellest , for nowadays it is and hard matter to find a good Christian : the Prophet bid them run to & from , through the streets of Ierusalem , and seek in the broad places thereof if they could find a man , Ier. 5. 1. They were not so much troubled to find out a man as we shall be to find out a Christian . We so busy our selves about Controversies , that we forget to be good Christians . There was a time indeed when the name was first given at Antioch , Act. 11. 26. that it was then well set by ; but this lasted not long , for presently after they fell a siding among themselves , and one cried I am of Paul , another I am of Apollos , and another I am of Cephas , and another I am of Christ , and much ado had S. Paul 1. Cor. 1. 12. to appease these factions : for presently after they fell to them again , and have so continued , yea and increased in them even unto this day . But Christ is not divided , says the same Apostle , neither is this to imitate Christ the God of love and peace , who loved us when we were his enemies ; and the Apostle makes a good inference of imitation upon it . 1. Iohn . 4. 11. Beloved , if God so loved us we ought also to love one another : Nay as though there were nothing else required of a good Christian , and a follower of Christ , our saviour says , Ioh. 13. 15. by this shall all men know you are my disciples , if you have love one to another . Seeing then this is the proper and peculiar badge and cognisance of a disciple of Christ to love his fellow disciples , what preface would be fitter here , then and introduction to all Christians to be in peace and charity one with another . But alas how unwelcome a task is it , to entreat of peace and charity ! For he that goes about to part a fray , in all likelihood will have blows on both sides , especially where the opposites & combatants are fierce and violent , he that is eager on any one side shall be sure to find some fast friends , but he that bewaileth the miserable distraction of the whole , and does but set a foot forward to make up the breach , will find few to take his part , but shall be sure to have many about his ears : And therefore we may observe that presently after our Saviour had said , Blessed are the peacemakers , Mat. 5. 9. 10. he immediately adds , Blessed are they that are persecuted for righteousness sake : knowing well enough that if a man will undertake to be a peacemaker , he must presently prepare to suffer persecution , and I know none greater then that of peacemakers in religion for they suffer on all sides , either by sharp and bitter words , or by scoffing & jeering speeches . For although the hotspurs of these times be at deadly fewde and bitter enmity one with another , yet will they like Herod and Pilate , join together and muster up their forces against those who labour any kind of pacification and desire to be quiet in the land . we is me ( says David Ps. 120. 4. 5 6. that I am constrained to dwell with Mesech , and to have mine habitation among the tents Kedar : my soul hath long dwelled among them , that be enemies unto peace . I labour for peace but whn I speak unto them thereof , they make them ready to Battle . Never could the pious and peaceable Christian more truly cry out then now , My mother's Children were angry with me . Cant. 1. 5. A strange speech to call them Mother's children : had it not been a more easy & familiar way to say my Brothers or my Sisters were angry with me ( for so they must be , if they were her Mother's Children ) why then does she make such and involved speech of it , My mother's children were angry with me . True indeed though they cannot choose but be her brothers , ( as being her Mother's children ) yet she does not , she dares not call them brothers , for they will not acknowledge it , they hate the name of brothers , and make themselves professed enemies , and therefore she is forced to leave out this loving and affectionate compellation of brothers , and say in a kind of strange phrase , My mother's children were angry with me . Yet should no man be discouraged , from performing so worthy a duty , for though there be a per • ecution that attends upon peacemakers here , yet is there a blessing promised them hereafter . And seeing our blessed Lord and Master Christ Iesus , when he was about to leave his Apostles and Disciples , he left unto them this golden legacy : Ioh. 14. 27. Peace I leave with you , my peace I give unto you , Oh how well would it become us his Priests to be men of peace , to write for the peace of Ierusalem , to pray for the peace of Ierusalem , for they shall prosper that love it . Psal. 122. 6. I will begin this exhortation unto peace and Charity , from that common name which we all bear in that we are called Christians , and do all pretend to imitate Christ in our doctrine and practice . There was a time indeed when this name was much taken notice of and great danger for any man to own it , when they had no other argument then , nor any other cause of their cruel persecutions , but to hear a man confess Christianus sum , I am a Christian : But when these storms were blown over , and the Church began to be in peace , this name of Christian was not so much regarded . And yet methinks the very name of Christian is not altogether to be contemned , for , unless I am deceived whosoever hath but this appellation may challenge a brotherhood with me , for in Scripture I find a brother and a Christian to be the very same , so that whosoever is a Christian will necessarily be my brother . 1. Cor. 7. 12. 13. If any brother hath a wife , says the Apostle , that believeth not , and she be pleased to dwell with him , let him not put her away ; and if the woman hath and husband which believeth not , if he be pleased to dwell with her , let her not leave him : But if the unbelieving depart let him depart , a brother or a sister is not in bondage in such cases . Where the Apostle plainly shows that a brother and a sister are such as are Christians and opposite only to Infidels and unbelievers . Neither ought we to take that exhortation of Saint Paul 1. Pet. 2. 17. when he says love the brotherhood , in any narrower sense , but that we should love every one that is a Christian , not only because he agreeth with me in some opinions concerning religion , but I ought to love him in that respect he is a Christian , and professes Christ crucified . Neither ought we to love him thus with and ordinary kind of love , in wishing him well and doing him good , for so we ought to love and do good to all , but there is a more strict tie of love that lies upon us Christians one to another ; and therefore although the Apostle wishes us to do good to all men , yet especially to the household of faith , Gal. 6 , 10. that is , to such as be Christians . Were this precept of the Apostle practised as it ought to be , there would not be so much uncharitableness , nor peradventure so much dissension among Christians . Why can we not consider one another as united in this blessed name of Christian , and set aside for a time those names of faction and division • why should we not rejoice awhile in those things wherein we agree , and not always be wrangling about those things wherein we differ ? Of what moment those opinions are wherein we disagree I am not able to determine ; this I dare be bold to say , that the points wherein we are friends are of far greater consequence , then those are wherein we fallen out . And yet we so eagerly contend one with another , and damn each other to the pit of hell , as though our differences were very important , & our agreement not worth the talking of . For my part I should be loath to exclude any visible Christian Church from all hope's of salvation , and if I must needs offend , I had rather give account to a merciful God for too much mildness and Charity , then too much fierceness and severity : yet I hope to make it appear that my opinion of Charity shall not exceed the bounds of verity . A chief cause of the continuance of these dissensions is , that men mind not so much the common cause of Christianity , as their own particular engagements , nor stndy how they may agree one with another , as how to uphold the side they are on : whereas would they set aside prejudice and partiality and cast and equal eye upon all the Churches , they would not spy so many faults abroad , and so few at home , but would freely confess there might be greater concord among Christians then now there is . No other unity do I labour for at this time but that of charity , that Christians would not for some differences in opinion , pronounce such and heavy sentence upon one another , as is that of Damnation . If God should deal with us as we deal with one another , if he should censure us all , as we censure one another , I know not who should be saved : The Papist damning the Protestant , and some among us the Papists , and both of them any other that shall differ from them both . But my hope is , and my hearty prayer to God shall be , that he would be more merciful to all these then they are one to another . When I consider with my self the manifold distractions of Christians about Religion , and the great fierceness and violence used on all sides , every one thinking his own opinion truest , and consequently damning all others that differ from him , I could not but call to mind that prophecy of our blessed Saviour Mat. 24. 12. concerning these latter and worse times , Because iniquity shall abound ( says he ) the love of many shall wax cold : for although charity of it self be of a hight and diffusive nature , yet now clean contrary to the nature of it , it is in most men grown cold ; it being the nature of cold to contract and combine to congeal and draw into a narrow room ; thus is it now with our charity . For whereas like the heat in our natural bodies , it should diffuse it self into all the members thereof , unto the whole Christian Church , yet I know not how it hath , taken cold , for men contract their love now into a very small compass and narrow room , that is , to no more then to such who jump with them in the same opinion about Religion , leaving others who differ from them , to nothing but death and damnation . For not only in several countries but in the same Kingdom , in the same City , nay in the same family there are several Religions , or at the least several opinions about Religion reigning : So that what Saint Austine complained of in his time is truly verified in these , Epist. 147. Thou seest ( says he ) with how great and miserable distraction Christian houses and families are divided & troubled ; husbands and wives can agree well enough to go to bed together , but they cannot agree to go to Christs Altar together : There they swear peace one to another , but here they can have no peace . Parents and children live well enough together in one house of their own , but one house of Gods will not hold them both . Their desire is that those should succeed them in their own inheritance , who yet think they have no inheritance with Christ . Master's & servants divide the common Lord and Master of us all , who yet took upon him the form of a servant , that so he might free all : I say never more fully verified then in these days ; For in how many families shall we observe this great division , the husband goes to Church and the wife stays at home , or the wife goes to Church and the husband stays at home , and so between parents and children , Master's and servants . The father will give his son the portion of his land , who yet thinks he shall have no portion in the land of the living . The great division of the Christian world , was first between the East and West Churches , and this West hath been since subdivided into the Roman and the reformed Religion : So that the division among Christians which is considerable is but into three parts , the Eastern , the Romanist , & our Reformed . All Christian Churches , and so far forth the members of them brothers and sisters ; and not only Christian Churches , but also Catholic & Orthodox in these points wherein they agree one with another , & with the Primitive Church . Why may it not be with these Churches as it was with those seven Churches of Asia which S. Iohn wrote unto , in which there were some things commendable , & other things amiss ? they were encouraged in the former and reproved for the latter . And although some of them were better then others , yet you shall scarce find one of them to which he does not say , habeo adversus to pauca , I have a few things against thee : And yet we shall find that Christ himself was in the midst of all these seaven Churches , for he was in the midst of the seaven golden candlesticks , Revel . 1. 13. and had in his right hand seaven stars . Revel . 1. 16. For writing to the Church of Ephesus , he makes this one of his attributes : Apoc. 21. These things ( says he ) who holds the seaven stars in his right hand , who walks in the midst of the seaven golden Candlesticks . So that our Saviour walked in the midst of all these Churches , even in that lukewarm Church of Laodicea , which he threatened to spue out of his mouth . And let Room tell us never so much of her infallibility and unerring chair , yet questionless there is none of our Churches , no not the best of them , that our Saviour may not say to her , habeo adversus to pauca , I have a few things against thee . And as those several Churches , though some of them very faulty , yet were all several members of Christ , and helped to make up one body : so all those Churches , though some of them much to blame , yet may all help to make up one Chatholique Church : and why may it not be so in these . Churches I speak of ? For first they all agree in that one and only foundation of Religion , Iesus Christ as the Apostle calls him , No other foundation can any other man lay , then that which is laid , to wit Iesus Christ , and this no doubt is a sure and good foundation , and this makes them to be Christian Churches , they are all baptised into Christ , and look to be saved by his sufferings : And think not this to be a small matter ; for S. Paul desired to know nothing else , I esteemed not ( says he ) to know any thing among you but Iesus Christ , and him crucified , and it worked upon his affection as much as upon his understanding . God forbid that I should rejoice ( says he ) save in the cross of our Lord Iesus Christ , Gal. 6. 14. that is in Christ crucified . Beside this one foundation , they all embrace the two Testaments , the three Creeds , and the foure first general Counsels , and many other very material points . The discord among us Christians hath been long ago objected to us ; and certainly there hath nothing so much drawn some out of the Church , and kept others from coming to the Church , as these quarrels among our selves ; Unto whom I briefly answer : If they like not our differences , let them join with us in those things wherein we agree , and that is to be Christians , to believe in Christ and him crucified , and those other principal points whereof I speak , and to strive to imitate Christ to their power , and then our discords will less trouble them . It is true , we have not all built alike upon this foundation , but some no question have built wood and straw , as well as silver and gold ; yet all of us no doubt did strive to imitate Christ as near as we could , both in our doctrine and in our practice : and certainly in these superstructures of religion , good intentions must go far , or else it will go hard with many of us ; not that they altogether excuse the fault , but doubtless they take off much from the punishment . There is a difference between the East and west Churches , in what kind of bred the Eucharist is to be received ; that • East receiving in unleavene • bred , the west in leavened . And herein though they differ among themselves , yet the • both strive to imitate Christ , because the one Church thought our Saviour used then the bred that was leavened , the other , that which was unleavened . Either Church is the less blameable because they think both that they follow our Saviours example . S. Austin in like manner does prettily reconcile a difference between some concerning the time how often we should receive the holy Sacrament of the Lords supper ; for some it seems in his time thought we were bound to receive the Eucharist every day , others but now and then . Some ( says he Epist. 118. ) communicate daily , others but upon certain days , some will omit no day , others will only receive on the Sabbath , and the Lords day . There is a freedom to be used in both these : Some will say we must not daily receive the Sacrament , because we ought to select and set apart some days wherein we must live more carefully and religiously , and so come to the Sacrament more worthily and with greater devotion : On the other side , another tells us , yea but if the plague-sore of sin and violence of the disease be so great and dangerous , such sovereign medicines as these are not to be deferred . Of both these says he let every man take his choice , and do that which he thinks in his conscience he may best and most piously perform ; for neither of these dishonour the body and blood of our Saviour , but rather both of them do strive to honour this saving Sacrament . For Zacheus rejoiced greatly to entertain our Saviour in his house . The Centurion said , Lord I am not worthy thou shouldst come under my roof ; both of these did worship and honour our Saviour , though after a diverse , and as it were a contrary manner , both of them being miserable by reason of sin , both of them obtaining mercy for their sins . Thus one man to honour Christ dares not receive every day , another also to honour Christ dares not omit any day . And although these be but petty differences , yet why may I not apply it to controversies of greater moment , especially seeing that ancient Father S. Salvian lib . 5. de Providentia , hath found a good intention in the Arians the most pernicious and most dangerous heretics accounted that ever have been in the Church ▪ They whom we account heretics ( says he ) account not themselves heretics , for they so much esteem themselves good Catholics , that they defame us with the note and appellation of heresy . That therefore which they be to us , the very same are we to them . We are certain that they injure the divine generation in that they say the Son is less and inferior to the Father : They think us likewise injurious to the Father , because we make the Son equal unto him . The true honour of God is among us , but they think that to be the honour of the Deity , to believe as they believe . They are undutiful but they think it the greatest duty of their Religion : They are impious but they think this to be true piety . They err therefore , but they err with a very good mind and intention , not with a hatred , but with a good affection towards God , verily believing that they honour and love God . Although they have not the right Faith , yet they notwithstanding think this to be perfect love towards God . In what manner they shall be punished in the day of Judgement for this very error of false opinion , no man can tell but the judge himself . A good lesson for the hight • purres of these times , with whom it is a very easy matter to pronounce damnation upon the very lest disagreement in Religion , whereas this good Father would not determine any thing concerning these great heretics the Arians , but leaves them to the mercy of the judge , not being able to discern what they did deserve . You see that this holy Father finds out a good intention even in these heretics . And if there was a good intention among those that were so grossly erroneous , why may there not be good intentions found out among us also , who are not at such great odds , and acknowledged on all sides to have no such dangerous opinions among us . I speak not this any whit to countenance that opinion of the Arians , which is creeping into the Church again , but leave them to stand or fallen to their own master , and shall in the mean time be persuaded that they go not against their consciences , and so far forth hit will go better with them : yet with this holy Father , not free them from punishment , but must refer the manner and measure thereof to the time of judgement . Those of the Church of Rome are so impatient of this doctrine , that they care not for being saved unless they may be saved alone ; And their writers generally agree upon nothing so much , as that out of their Communion there is no Salvation . One of their late writers , ( Barckly Paren . l. 1. cap . 1 ) can profess thus , We ( says he ) proclaim with the whole Church , and we command with Moses that Heaven and Earth would hear us , that there is no communion between God and Belia , & that these Protestants do so far differ from us in matters of faith , that they altogether in vain expect those mansions of happiness which are prepared for us . And afterwards he says , He that dares believe a stubborn and obstinate Protestant can be saved , does by so believing fallen from the Catholic Faith . And that this is no private or obscure sentence of the Church , but that all Catholics are of the same mind , that none of them are ignorant of it , nor any can dissemble it , unless he be and unexpert Divine , or for fear or ambition prefers some men's favour before the truth . Another of your company Camp . rat . 10. avers the same , with a very great and solemn protestation , I call to witness ( says he ) Gods Throne , and that tribunal at which I shall • sand to give and account of these my reasons , and of whatsoever I have spoken or done , that either there is no heaven at all , or that it peculiarly and properly belongs unto us . I Campian , must ye be saved , and none but ye ? what is not heaven able to hold us as well as you ? Or will our salvation be any disparagement to yours ? It seems it will . But to come a little closer to you : Is it nothing with you at one breath , to throw so many souls headlong to hell , for whom Christ died ; and which is more who are already incorporate into Christ by Baptism ? It cost more to redeem their souls ; but you will let that alone for ever . Our comfort is that though you pass such sentence upon us here , yet you are not to be our Judges hereafter , but must your selves come to give and account as well as we , & peradventure of these speeches . Account us not men of so desperate and deplored and estate that we would wittingly and willingly run into hell ▪ why should not out salvation be as deer unto us , as yours is unto you ? or why should you not think us to have as great a care of our salvation , as you have of yours ? For could we be persuaded that we were in heresy , and that there is no salvation out of your Church , how quickly would we fly unto you ? How gladly would we be entertained by you ? what means and moans would we make to be members of your society ? Who can endure such peremptory pronunciations of Judgement , of God's eternal wrath and condemnation upon us , before we come to our hearing ? And seeing , God's mercy is overall his works , who can endure that you should interdict God's mercy , and judge what the sentence of the Judge shall be , before the day of judgement . Lib. 1. adverse . Pelag. So that if God had a mind to spare such sinners ( as you say we poor Protestants are ) yet by your verdict and prescription he could not be suffered to do it as S. Ierome long ago complained of Critobulus the Pelagian . Were we such tares in the field of the Church , as you would make the world believe , yet if you would imitate Christ , Mat. 13. you should let us grow till the harvest , lest you pluck up the good corn with us . Neither are you thus fierce alone , there are some of our own side , to requite you in your own kind , are as confident that you cannot be saved , as you are that we cannot ; so that the Question now is , In which of our two Churches salvation is to be had ? For taking for granted that we have excluded all others , and god heaven between us , we cannot be content to share it , but we must confine and engross it to one of our Churches , as though it could not be had in both , nay as though it could not be had out of both ; for I am verily persuaded , and dare undertake to make it good , that those poor Eastern Christians , who differ from us both , will yet come to heaven assoon as either of us : which were it well considered might be a good means to pacify this Question , and to abate the heat of many more between us . But this monopolizing of Christ , although it be generally entertained by the Roman Party , yet are not all our reformed Divines so strait laced , but many of them , and those of no small note can be content that others should be saved with them , and therefore they are called by you , by way of derision ( Preface to Charity mistaken ) good fellow Christians . As though they had so much of the good fellow in them , that they have too little of the good Christian . And indeed you have most reason to be angry with these good fellow Christians , for they are like to do you all the mischief , for having found that there may be salvation in our Church as well , yea , with more ease then in yours , we shall never be thinking of going any further . As for those who are so eager , ` that will confine salvation to one certain Church , you have some hope of them , that in time they may come over to you : And what you object to us as a crime , we esteem as our great glory , and account it one of God's special blessings that we live in the bosom of a Church that is so charitable , and we are willing to have so much of the good fellow in us , because we would not have too little of the good Christian : for though our Creed be comprised in a narrow room , yet our charity extends far , not only to you , but the Eastern Church . We have a little Sister , and she hath no breasts , what shall we do for our Sister , in the day when she shall be spoken of ? We have a little Sister . Cant. 8. 8. Though the Church of Rome call the Church of Greece Heretical and Schismatical ▪ , yet we of the Church of England , esteem her to be a Daughter of the Catholic Church , and our Sister , though now she be little , yet she was a great one , not inferior any ways to the Church of Rome , she brought forth many children , and gave milk plentifully ; but now alas she is little by reason of her long persecution , and her breasts dried up , for now she is in a manner barren and able to bring forth but few children . And although She be in this poor and desolate estate , yet the Church of Rome will do nothing for her , for when at the Council of Florence she desired aid of them against the Turkes , they gave her no succour at all , but left her in misery here , and adjudged her as they do us to death and damnation hereafter . What shall we do for our Sister ? so long as we acknowledge her for our Sister , we should be willing to do something for her in the day when she shall be spoken of ; for as yet no body speaks for her , no body laments her , but lets her alone , as if she deserved no pity , no succour , no commiseration , the Romanists have persuaded so many that she is schismatical and heretical in her tenants . But all those who esteem of her as a sister , I hope will do some thing for her in the day when she shall be spoken for , when her cause shall be pleaded , and she cleared from holding such dangerous and damnable Doctrines , then certainly she will have many to pity her , many to help her . But the confining of salvatito your own Party , hath not only sharpened the pens of many Writers to much bitterness and condemning one another , but also hath unsheathed the swords of many Princes and Potentates to the great and lamentable effusion of much Christian blood . S. Paul thought it a strange thing in his time for a brother to go to law with a brother : I speak to your shame ( says he ) . Is it so that there is not a wise man among you , no not one that is able to judge between his brothers , but brother goes to law with brother , and that under the Infidels ? 1. Cor. 6. 5. 6. What if S. Paul lived in these days , wherein not only a brother goes to law with a brother , but a brother goes to war with a brother , yea , and which is more , makes that to be a motive unto his war , to wit , Religion , which should be a forcible means of peace and reconcilement : Tantum religio potuit suadere malorum ? Is it possible that Religion should ever be the true mother of so much mischief ? No , no , ou • true mother the holy Catholic Church does not further such designs , but lament them , and does more justly complain then Rebecca did when twins strove in her womb , seeing it is so , why am I thus . For she could be content would her children but strive , and struggle one with another , but when they come to blows and blood , yea much effusion of blood , as we see at this day , how can she be but like Rahel weeping for her children and not be comforted because they are not ? Mat. 1 18. When was that ever more truly fulfilled then now , they that kill you shall think they do God good service ! Ioh. 16. 2. Do you not think you have done God good service in those many massacres in France , in every of which how many thousands of poor Christians have you swept away with such a sudden destruction , that had they been willing , you gave them not so much time as to repent them of their Protestancy ? Do you not think that you had done God good service , if that horrible design of the Gunpowder-Treason had taken effect , a prodigy not to be spoken of without horror and amazement , void of all humanity as well as Christianity . But do what you can , call us Heretics Schismatics , and what other disgraceful name you can invent , imprison us , banish us , strangle us , stifle us , burn us , hang us , we are yet your brothers . Certainly had our Savi-intended to begin or propagate his Church by this means , he could as easily have sent forth mighty men of war to compel others to believe in him , as poor fishermen who catch none but such as come to net , or are fairly allured to lay hold on the bait . If this open hostility were used against the Turks , the common enemy of the Christian name , there were some pretence for it ; and therefore we read that Moses , Exod. 2. when he saw the Israelite and the Egyptian fight , he did not say , why strive you , but drew his sword , and slew the Egyptian , but when he saw the two Israelites fight , he said , ye are brothers why strive ye . What a glorious sighed would it be to see the read Crosle once again advanced as it was in the days of Constantine ? and if we did not see it written in heaven , I hope we should find it true upon earth , in hoc signo vinces . Unto this holy war I suppose all they would come , who have promised to fight under Christ's banner . And set aside for a while this private interest of Protestant , and Papist , and Grecian , and Lutheran , and Calvinist , and Arminian , and Socinian , and if there be any other division among us , and take upon us that general livery of Christianity , and so join together to rescue our brothers from that wild Boar of the Forest which hath laid wast this goodly vine ; & afterwards we might see how we could decide the Controversies among Christians : For whosoever is in the right , I hope we are all well enough persuaded that he is in the wrong . Could Herod and Pilate , otherwise deadly enemies be made friends , and agree together to condemn Christ , and shall not those , who are already brothers and therefore should be friends , combine together to save Christ : I say to save Christ , for so long as we save and preserve his members , we save and preserve him ; but so long as we suffer his members to be thus persecuted and oppressed , he cannot choose but suffer with them : But we in steed of bandying against the common enemy , muster up our forces one against another , and find that to be true by lamentable experience , there is no greater hatred then of brothers that are falllen out . Seeing then that all Christians are brothers , I say brothers , as having one Father of us all , brothers as having one faith , one Lord , one Baptism , whereby we are born into the Catholic Church , and one food by the Sacrament of the Eucharist , which makes us groan to be perfect men in Christ ; seeing we are all these ways brothers , I may well say as Moses did , ye are brothers why strive ye ? or if ye must needs be striving about matters of Religion , strive and strive earnestly for the faith which was once delivered to the Saints . And because I say we are brothers I would not have you think we like not the cause we have in hand , or that we are ready to yield unto you , and presently join hands with you , as some of you imagine , and many of our side causelessly suspect , but this is all , we would have the breach no greater then it is , and would not have the world believe , because we differ in some things , that we agree in nothing . And although we call you brothers , we will not wink at your faults , or join with you in them , but this does put us in mind to admonish you more gently of them as brothers , though you rage never so fiercely against us , for by this means we shall express our charity towards you , and so heap coals of fire upon your head . God he knows we are far enough from yielding to you as Romanists , yet should we not be charitable to you as Christians , we were much to blame . But • ee how you mistake , or rather indeed pervert and abuse this our charity : For ( say you ) by your own acknowledgement , there may be salvation in our Church , but we all deny there can be salvation in yours , therefore all if they had care of themselves would have recourse to us , for it is the safer way to be a member of that Church where both sides yield there may be salvation , then in that where one side denies it . This were something if Salvation or Damnation depended upon opinion , but I suppose that charitable opinion of ours in hoping you may be saved , makes you never a whit the nearer heaven , but our selves , and that rough censure of yours in setting us all out for damnation , makes us no whit the nearer hell but your selves . And I had rather be a member of that Church which holds there may be salvation in both , then of that which holds there can be salvation but in one . For holding with the first I am safe wheresoever I am , but holding with the latter , I must be in danger wheresoever I am . I say wheresoever I am ; for I am not only in danger of my salvation , if I be in that Church wherein I think there is no salvation , but also in that out of which I think there can be no salvation , because I confine salvation to one of these , which though I think it be in this alone , yet it may be in the other alone . Many other motives unto charity might be showed , but these briefly shall suffice for me , The one is , that we are Christians , and therefore brothers , and so ought to love as brothers ; Another is , in that I hope our intentions are good , and that none maintains a false opinion perversely against his conscience ▪ and this last is , that for some opinions that are not so orthodox yet there may be hope's of salvation , although it be not without smart and punishment . Now let me say unto all Christians , as S. Paul does to the Corinthians 2. Cor. 6. 11. 12. 13. O ye Christians , our mouth is open unto you , and not only so , but our heart is enlarged , not only to the Roman , but even to the East Church , and to as many as call upon the name of our Lord Iesus . You are not straitened in us , but you are straitened in your own bowels , now for a recompense in the same , I speak unto you as unto Brothers , be you also enlarged . Let me bespeak all learned Prelates and Pastor's on all sides , as S. Austine Epist. 147. does Proculianus a Bishop and a favourer of the Donatists , I pray and beseech thee ( says he ) if there be any good disposition in thee , which many do extol , and commend , if it be not a counterfeit courtesy by reason of worldly honour , that the tender bowels of pity and compassion begin to yearn in thee , and that you would have these controversies discussed between us at the length , not by wrangling and railing one at another , but by fervent prayers and earnest supplications unto Almighty God , and by comparing all things peaceably and examining them in the spirit of meekness , lest the poor ignorant people which now yield to and willingly obey our jurisdiction and command over them , press us with this their submission and dutiful obedience to us in the day of the Lord Iesus , and say , they did as their leaders directed them , but rather by our unfeigned love and charity , being together with us drawn from those by paths of error and dissension , they should be directed into the right way of truth and peace . I will conclude all with our Churches prayer , that it would please God to inspire continually the Universal Church , with the spirit of truth , unity and concord , and grant that all they who do confess his holy name , may agree in the truth of his holy word , and live in unity and Godly love ! And although we cannot at the first attain to that perfection to be of one mind , yet let us begin to be charitable , and bear with one another ; for who knows but that by entertaining this bound of peace , we may in good time come to the unity of the spirit ; which he heartily wishes , and daily prayeth for , who is Thine in Christ W. P.