TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE RICHARD , EARLE OF CARBERY . The Argument . The Author here my Noble Lord acquaints What Paths they tread who led the lives of Saints , What Comforts he shall find , what good success , While he walks in the New-mans Diocese . I Found not forth Old Souldours turned to Swine By Harlots Charms , by fulsome Cheer or Wine ; But the Newborn ( a Theme to Worldlings strange ) • sing the Minds more then the Bodies Change ; I sing the Churches Change , Eclipse , Decrease , Her East , and West , with her Full Moons Increase . Such News I blaze , which no good Protestant Shall justly tax for Sparks exorbitant , Like to those Brats exposed to Brambles Flame By Midwives Doom to hide the Parents shame , Or those , for which of late our Pauls Churchyard And Smith-field in the Spoils with Vulcan shared . Truth smites the Chaste : while Wantons long to hear False Tales , at which they Nod , or fondly Jeer , Fooling away the Time , their precious Time , Lent them for better use in Prose or Rhyme , To win some Strays by means of Virtuous Books , Not Souls to tempt with Fornications Hooks . There , with much Gall Gulls one another flout : Hoere for Mistakes , the Lie , or Toys they pout , Forgetting Satans Ambush for Good Wits , Tongues trip , Pens blur , None free from Passion Fits , And yet for Words and Names , External things , They persecute their Christian Mates with stings , • ill tired at last with Conscience-griping Cares , Both Parties howl within the Devils Snares . Others by Lines and Cubes aspire to know The Higher Orbs , or in the Globe below They level Spires , the Climates , or the Laws , • unto whose Depth they pry no more then Daws ; And yet to gain applause , or Golden Fees , They hope for Swans to chop their gaggling Geese . Some Court Fair Dams with Fancies Madrigals , Chaulking the way to Paphian Lupercalls , Which they frequent with uncontrolled Lust Till Honour , Wealth , and Health lie in the Dust. Sometime Pelagian-wise they ruminate On men Freewill , and the Predestinate , Till they from Grace quite excommunicate Do pitch on Hell , and on the Reprobate . 〈1 page duplicate〉 〈1 page duplicate〉 Now , of long-handed Kings the mounted state , Anon , their slips or Fallen they personate With Satires sting , until themselves are stung ; Or else they sooth Great men with glozing Tongue , Until they feel worse Racks with Conscience seared , Then Poets feigned for stroking of Joves Beard . Some other while they dare more Curious peep Into the Concaves of the Infernal Deep , Of Limboes Vault , or Purgatories Pain Redeemed for Gold the long-white Robe to stain . With such Bald Stuff most Writers do oppress , In hope to purchase Fame , the Printers Press . Which shows , that Souls , like Seas tossed with unrest , Wave , till they set into Gods Port of Rest ; Or else that they , like Swine , fallen to worse Seas Then Gaderens for their prodigious Pleasant , Remonstrances , and Problems , which they pend , Of Rampant Zeal the Churches Peace to rend ▪ SO busy is men Brain : It always works And seeks to know what from the Senses lurks , Abstruse and hid , like Planets moving still ; But in default of Objects good or ill , Because it finds no business from without , Turns Monk within , and Idiot , or a Lout ; Or on it self with Atomes and Chymeres Plays Whirligig , until it ends in Fears , Distractions , Lies , and Schisms , just Penalties Due for the Search of Knotty Novelties . For want of Grace , and of Celestial Arms , Sighs , Tears , & Vows , thus by the Serpents charms Are Men seduced Old Adams Tree to taste , And with vain Fruit to break their needless Fast . Because Gods Word , whereby they might be saved , They slighted , it's no marvel though they raved . But our New man weaned from the Carnal Teat By Truths calm Breath , the Flaming Paraclete , With Drier Brain holds a Clear Intellect , So solid , that he others can direct A safer Course of knowledge to affect Then what the Windmill grinds of Satans Sect. Though Nature's sting in our Original Hath made us prove into the Snare to fallen : Yet we Newborn fight with the Spirits Sword , And triumph by the Second Adams Word Over the Dragons false enchanting Arts , With constant Faith repelling all his Darts , Those sober Cates contenting our repast , Which lawful are for tender Souls to taste . We would seem Inward more then Outward wise , Yet Both address with Saints to sympathise . For carnal Samians transubstantiate Change , ( The Old men Quirk ) the New man we exchange . Instead of Lethes Lake , or Phlegeton , • e Tophets Pain sing due to Babylon . For Limbus Patrum , or the Elysian Camp . Gods Paradise for Saints renews our Lamp . A Dolphin boar Arion from the Seas ; • mphions Harp , they say , did Thebes appease : But Jesus Christ the Third day to have rose From Josephs Tomb , we really disclose , Or by a Whale we Jonas bring to Land , Who Niniveh converted out of hand . For Cerberus , we blaze proud Satans Loss ; For Hercules his Club , our Saviours Cross . For Trivial Tales , and sence-alluring Toys , We read on Books Soul-ravishing to joys . For Talmud's we the Scriptures native sense ; And for Nice Schoolmen's Gloss , in our Defence , We can produce by Truths Prerogative The Chiefest Stars of the Church Primitive , 〈1 page duplicate〉 〈1 page duplicate〉 Or those , who in the Last and Present Age With Volumes rare repaired our New men Stage . To banish Humane Lies , and Brainsick Dreams , What Tree more full ? what Field yields riper Theames Then Christ his Life , and the New Testament ? Or in her Swathes the Churches fragrant scent ? This Lady here my New man warbles forth , Though fully not according to her worth , Yet so , My Lord , that you may clearly see : Though she was long obscured , she now reigns free , Clothed with the Sun , Crowned with a dozen Stars , And no Eclipse you from her Influence bars . But out alas ! how many boast of Faith ? Who never marked what Christian Scripture says : For what is Faith without Good works , or Fruit , But a dead Stock ? not worth a Moors pursuit ? Unless he dreams of Mecha's found Delights ? Or Millenairs to snare Voluptuous Wights ? Or of vain works of Supererogation , Souls to bewitch with Babels Fornication ? Our Saint is not with such Conceits defiled , Nor turns with such Extravagances wild , For he well knows , that as good Trees will bud , And bear good Fruit , so Saints do always Good , And never scorn to greet the Simplest Man ; To call home Strays they labour what they c •• . Such is our Saint the Naked he actires , And helps to warm their Souls with zealous Fires . According to his Power great or small , He saves distressed Saints from Tyrants Thr •• . He sues for Peaoe , and grieves to see debate . And daily prays Laws Rigour to abate . If he be forced to Law in his defence . He does it without spl •• n , or Saints offence . And if his Clapper hap to clatter wild , Before Sunset he grows more Calm and mild ; Or if that Filmy Piece in others blabbs His shame , he counts it like the Noise of Drabs . He sets not out his Lips to Farm , nor slander , Nor lets his Tongue before his Wits to wander . He holds his Word as precious as his Seal , And scorns False Cards unto the Least to deal . He dares not plot Revenge , nor scoff , nor rail , But bears with Knaves and Fools for Saints avail . He covets no men Goods , but if at Play He wins , He gives it to the Poor away . He spends his vacant Hours in thrifty Course , Lest Idleness corrupt him worse and worse . He prizeth Coin but excremental Dross , And toils for Others Good , though with his Loss . He does his Best to curb Promoting Scribes , Lest God require of him their winkt-at Bribes . At Night he scores the Deeds he did that Day , And the next Morning scowres their rust away . The Sabbath , like the Puritan , he weighs , And , like the Papist , keeps the Fasting days : The Former minds him of the Spirits Mars , The Latter helps to stint the Sensual Part. He daily strives so to compose his Mind , That seldom him doe Idol-passions blind , Nor cause him long to dote on Pleasures shape , Be it a Horse , or Hawk , a Dog , or Ape , He kindly speaks , means well , does good to all , But most to Saints , and helps up them that fallen . God root these Works in me , lest while his Way I others teach , my self a Castaway Become , like him , another's Floor that sweeps , And yet his own New house most nasty keeps . THe Heart still moves : It Loves and spreads with Joy Or wrung with Gall and Grief it feels Annoy . The Former flow , because Gods Flames inspire it , The Latter chance in absence of his Spirit . Of these Affects our Inward Man partakes , Amid his Joys sometime his Spirit akes : Yet his Griefs smart spring not for worldly Cause , But for men's Breach of the Creators Laws , For the Increase of Idols , Avarice , Of Drunken Healths , or the like Heathenish vice , For Concords Breach , for Christian Bloods effusion , For loss of Time , our Talents vain profusion ; Or else because he sees the Church of Christ Oppressed by Fiends , and Saints by Antichrist . Sometime he feels strange Qualms , near destitute Of zeal-bred heat , till entering to dispute With his Proud Foe , he like One cheered with Wine , Threats him with Thumps , to make his Pride decline : He calls him Monster , Belly god , and Slave , And vows his Fare to shorten , if be ra • e : With Davids Sling he knocks Gollahs down • , For standing out against his Master's Crown . Though he enjoys and outward fair Estate , And seems to some to be most fortunate ; • et in his Mind he weighs the Cause , th'Event , Men's Frailty , and his own coincident , Whereat he Lion-like for braver Prey His Courage lifts at full , not giving way To poor Conceits , but to the Noblest End ▪ His Cares , his Thoughts , and his designments bonds ; Which he Effects by a New Sacrifice To God , who gave those undeserved Supplies With knowledge of his Mysteries Divine , And Prudent Rules Old Passion to confine , When Thousands of his Brothers want that store , Who would perhaps have glorified him more , And never ceased , like Angels here on Earth , To praise those helps , since Others die of Dearth . His Spirit scorns that which the Body joys ; And checks that Lump , because it did rejoice In Airy Toys , in things mere transitory , Which draw the Sense from the bright Sun of Glory , And like to Golden Clouds may pass away By Humane Plots , or by Death in a day . HE reaps Content to see his Neighbours thrive , And their Amendment does his Soul revive , For he the Poorest Saint in Christ prefer • Before the Greatest Potentate that erres . He Joys , that he breathes of the Common Air ; Which is allotted for the Saints repair , With whom he sings , grieves , and Communicates , Swell for Sacred Rites , as Needful Rates . 〈 ◊ 〉 Joys , that he had learned from his Youth , •• ke Timothy , the Word of Sacred Truth , •• at taught to serve One God , One Advocate , 〈 ◊ 〉 could not brook of Balaams Snares to prate . Joys , that he no raking Money owes , •• en what to pay he on short warning knows , Without grim Sergeants Threats , or Sureties Thrall , 〈 ◊ 〉 without Robbing Peter to pay Paul . 〈 ◊ 〉 glories more of Souls and Bodies Health , •• en in the Blaze of Honour , Fame , or Wealth . 〈 ◊ 〉 cheer his Noblest Part he soars aloft , And views the Stars of Holy Stories oft ; He Courts the Of-Spring of fair Memory , Aswell Divine as Humane History ; By which true Glass he finds how short and vain Those Pleasures are , which Worldlings hold for Gain , Though Cause of Pain eternal after Deuth ; If not before of Dolor-racking Breath . Another while Wraths Cornet to prevent , Which he observes with burning Arrows ••• tO To aim at change , by Learned Art he strives To blunt their Shafts , and into Physic dives Aswell by Prayer as by Galens Quill , With Zealous Heart , as by Arabian Skill , Like Good Saint Lycia , for the Foure Humours foul He studies Cure , as Solace for the Soul . For which I •••• tO , and the Complexions Good He for 〈 ◊ 〉 F •• worser , which might insta •• the Blood : For what exceeds thee Temper Oily warm , Or Mayes mild Heat he knows breeds after-harm . Lest Nature dro • p • , he breathes his Park-horse oft , Not on the Rheumy Vale , or Marish soft , But on dry Hills to suck most wholesome Air , There , with Pure Gales the Spirits to repair . While Gulls fly out with Golden Wings excess , 〈 ◊ 〉 lives at home content with Fortune's less , •• tO daring by Another's Idol-store 〈 ◊ 〉 meet his wants , where Saints do languish more : •• worser if he should lash out in Pomp like those , 〈 ◊ 〉 Pomp and Store would cause him after-woes , •• en the Great Judge requires his Talents use , •• th strict Account of Stocks and Times abuse . Drinks no more then does a Saint befit , •• worser ever riseth with and Appetite , •• r , as a Type of Blessed Abstimence , Joys to sing of Diets Excellence ▪ •• worser to relate , when Girald lived , that they • f Cambriaes Soil did feed but once a day ; • s how the Greeks thought Platoes Tale a Lie , That twice a day they mealed in Sicily . No Beauty , Wine , nor Musics Harmony • ontents our Saint more then Good Company , Knowing their Vows , and mutual Hearts Consent Avail him more then Worldlings Blandishment . To end his Joys , on this he sets his Rest : That a Good Conscience is his daily Feast . THese harmless steps a Christian ought to tread And the same Life I strive and hope to led . And if these Rules My hopeful Nephew scan , He then shall pass for a Right Noble Man , Excelling vulgar Wits as Porcellan , Course vessels , as the New the Outward Man , By Virtue ranked within True Honours File Among the brave Heroes of this I'll , Crowned with a fair and brighter Coronet , Then One with Gold and Precious Stones beset , And be so skilled in Both the Fortune's Cures , That Poor men's Cries tend not to You nor Yours . While Vengeance strikes a Nembrodizing Lord . And his Proud Raze with Fates two-edged Sword , • ke Mordecai , unwearied in your ways , •• u shall we are out on Earth most happy Days ; And after Death when they feel endless Pain , •• u shall with Christ in Peace for ever Reign . •• changed bliss pursues a Pious-minded Peer , And such I hope attends you there and here , Which to seal up , and to set forth Your Train , • ere take your Choice of Posies various Strain : Without the New-mans Robes none are indeed True Noblemen , but born of Mongrel Seed . To be born Great , great Honour some esteem it : But to do Good I greater Honour deem it . Virtue so far excels Sire's Heraldry , As does Daylight the Dark , the Sap the Dry . A Noble Mind surmounts a Noble Birth ; But who hath Both-shines like Sun on Earth . Magnus honour nasci praelustri stemmate , Major Stemma Piis Factis nobilitare suum . 	 Virtus Naturam superat , sed amictus utrisque Dotibus ut Lumen Solis in orbe nitet .