TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE ROBERT EARLE OF WARWICK , AND TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE WILLIAM Lord Maynard of Elton , Lord Lieutenants for the County of Essex ; And to the right worshipful the Deputy Lieutenants , and Noble Captains of the same . RIght Honourable and right Worshipful ; God wins Rom. Ant. in the ancient Roman Coin the picture of Mars was usually stamped with a Javelin in one hand , a scourge in the other , and the Portrait of a Cock standing by him ; The Javelin intimated Prowess , the scourge Authority , and the Cock Vigillancie and indefatigable care : What was but engraven on that Coin is vively expressed in all your Honours and Worships actions , which doubtless moved that Royal hand to confer upon you the high charge of ordering his martial affairs in this County of Essex . Your high Authority and my service under it hath moved me to present unto your views a Treatise of War ; a subject in these perilous times very requisite to be regarded , especially by men of this honourable profession , since we perceive all doubts in adjacent dominions are now decided only by dint of the Sword : Proximus ardetucalligon ; our neighbours house is of a light fire , their Towns and Towers burn like Beacons : We know not how soon their flame may catch hold of our own buildings ( War being in a neighbour Province like fire in the next dwellings which can hardly be kept off , but by good help ) No help better to divert a war then a skilful Soldiery ; for that enemy which dares do much against a numerous people unskilful in the feats of Arms , will consider well before he attempts any thing against those that be Warlike , though of far less numbers ; nothing makes a people warlike so soon as maintenance of Marshal discipline , nor does anything make the Common wealth more safe then that . This was one motive which instigated me first to undertake this hard and difficult task , and not out of any ambition to teach , since it is well known that your Honours and Worships are well versed both in the Practic and Speculative knowledge of War : And inregard your Noble professions are adorned with the truest rules adherent to these actions , it is in a manner superfluus for me to commend these unpollisht Lines to your views , you being not strangers to this subject ; Yet as Mela said once in his description of Italy : De Italia magis quia ordo exegit quam quia monstrari eget pauca dicentur , nota sunt omnia ; the like I may justly say concerning this discourse of Warlik discipline , it is so obvious to your sighed that you need not the spectacles of Letters , yet something I must say rather for methods sake unto your Lordship's then necessity , and I hope it shall not seem impertinent unto your Honours , since your golden Spirits cannot admit of such effeminizing as the Pithagorians which inhabited Amicle a Town in Italy , who often being terrified with a vain rumour of their enemies approach , promulgated a Law , forbidding all such reports , by which means their enemies coming unawares upon them took the Town , from hence grew the Proverb Amiclas silentium perdidit ; therefore with Lucillius who was commanded to he silent , I must return this answer ( to those that ure not versed in these martial affairs but are altogether submerge • in security ) Mihi necesse est loqui , S •• oh enim Amiclas silentio perijsse . It is not unknown to your Honours and Worships who are experienced , how far both Officers and Soldiers are degenerated from former ages , in which they made the use and practice of Arms their glory ; but our age makes it a burden and a shame to use and bear that name which of all attributes and titles is most honourable , if such would with Cicero consider to what end they were born , with him they would confess Non nobis solum nati sumus sed etiam pro Patria ; Wherefore the noble profession of a Soldier is a thing of no small consequence , when as true Religion cannot be maintained , the honour and safety of our gracious King cannot be safe , the possession and welfare of our kingdom cannot be enjoyed , nor the subduing of our enemies cannot be achieved but by and under the shadow of the well managed Sword : For indeed the infinite chances , hazards and events of War are so doubtful and dangerous ( that as Iason said to Epaminondas ) he is not wise that does not fear them , seeing as I have said before the whole world is in combustion , we ought to fit our selves and provide for the hardest : for certainly expert commanders can easily conquer those that are Novices ; and a battle once lost hath and ill tail or consequence , as the great Soldier and Statesman Commineus says , un Battaille perdu a maunaise queúe , for it redoubleth the hope and courage of the victor's , and discourageth and astonisheth the vanquished ; it shakes the fidelity of Subject's , it ministereth matter and opportunity of conspiracy to Malecontents , of revolts to Towns , and of Allienation to confederates , who commonly sway with the good success : And for this cause all Princes have been very vigilant and careful to have their Commanders very expert and valiant , and their Subject's well exercised in the use of Arms ; that no sudden danger should dismay them , nor no Enemy too subtle for them ; for although a Nation be never so well versed in all Politic Stratagems and most able to manage a War , yet there are many accidents that the Engine of wit cannot evade , whereby mighty Armies may be dissipated and dispersed , and the greatest enterprises overthrown ; A • sometime it hath fallen out by the death of some one man , Pedro Mexia in Lodo ••• Bavaro , how by the death of Constructio the Emperor the design against Florence was lost sometime by the dissension of Leaders and Captains among themselves , Paulus Emil. in Carolo by a schism between Vrbat and Clement the Army was ruined sometime by mutiny of Soldiers , Sigon de regno Itallico Anno 896. how Rome was surprised by are • ulphus the Emperor through a sudden fear . sometime by means of a Tempest or unseasonable weather ; Paulus Em • l. in Ph • lipo secundo . sometime by Plagues or other diseases in the Camp , Nauclerus in Cro • the Christians overthrew the Soldan through a sudden fear . and as Guicchardine notes in his second Book , by mistake of a Commanmandement , either not well understood or ill executed , by a little timerity or disorder which may happen by some evil words or speeches even of the meanest Soldiers , and as Commineus further relates , Osorius in lib . 7. cap . 36. diverse Battles lost by diverse accidents . that be the Counsel never so well taken , and the plot never so well laid , yet it is seldom or never executed in the field as it is ordained in the Chamber ; Guic. lib . 5. the French were overthrown by a word mistaken what infinite care and pains therefore ( my Lords ) ought every particular Officer under your Honours Commands take in preparing themselves and fitting their Soldiers against the time of Service , that they may be able to eschew these dangers , Titus Livius in dec . 3. lib . 2. & d • c 4. lib 7. and vindicate honour and triumph to themselves , that they may seem worthy to be crowned with the wreathes of victory , Pedro Mexia in vita Imp. Adolph . as Valer. Max. lib . 2. reporteth that no Captain was worthy to be honoured with a Crown of Laurel , Guic in lib . 8. what victories hath been lost by Sun , wind and rain , etc. clothed in rich Purple , and mounted in the golden Chariot of Fame , unless he had fought some notable battle against the Enemy , wherein above 5000. men at the least were slain ; this victory begets such immortal honour and renown to the name of Captains according to their memorable actions which hath eternized their houses of dissent by contrary names of glory and fame , as by the example of the Warlike Roman , the three Metelli , whereof one of them ( as Salust and some others write ) because he had overcome King Iugurthe conquering the Land of Numidia was surnamed Numidicus ; the second conquered the King of Macedon , and was styled with the name of Macedon • cus ; and the third for conquering the I'll of Creete was honoured with the name of Creticus , and the like of diverse others ; and as the Roman were curious in conferring honours upon true desert , so also they were severe in punishing of base Cowardice or wilful neglect , and stupid ignorance ; for if they lost honour in that kind where as by their own endeavours they might have achieved it , they had as a duemerit the basest of punishment inflicted ; as whipping in the head of the Troops until the blood followed ; or manacled together with Irons : And for leaving of their General or Commanders in time of fight , they were spitted upon Stakes , and diverse other rigorous torments executed upon delinquents for the like offence . Therefore with the Prophet David I implore his aid ( who styleth himself the Lord of Hosts and a man of War ) that he would teach our fingers to fight and our hands to Battle , Esay 42. 13. that we may be ready when the Sword ( which God in our time avert ) shall come upon the Land , Psal. 18. 34. and the Trumpet blows and warn the people , we may then make a valiant resistance . But he that hears the found of the Trumpet and will not be warned ( says the Prophet Ezekiel ) if the Sword come and take him away , Ezek. 33. Ver. 3 , 4 , 5. his blood shall be upon his own head ; for he herd the found of the Trumpet and would not be admonished , but he that receives warning shall save his life . Your Lordship's and Worships Humble Servant , ROBERT WARD .