TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL THE MAIOR , THE WORSHIPFUL THE ALDERMEN AND BVRGESSES , AND THE REST OF THE INHABITANTS OF THE TOWNE AND PARISH OF BANBƲRY . Right Worshipful , etc. AS I could not but congratulate my own and your happiness in the enjoyment of your worthy Pastors labours , ſo both I and many other Chriſtians do now condole your miſery in the loss of the good Author . The greater your happiness was , the greater now is your miſery , and I fear many of you prized not the bleſſing ſo much as you ſhould have done , and that you knew not the greatness of the benefit ſo well by the fruition as now by the want of it . At Banbury even amongſt you was your Pastor born and bred , and there he lived and died . Miniſters are called Incumbents , ſo was he being diligently reſident in his place , they are styled Lights , ſo was he , like a candle or lamp which ſpent himself to give light to others . He ſpent his means and ſtrength amongſt you , and as himself in his sickness ſaid , He ſought not yours but you . Of all the Miniſters that ever I knew ſo experimentally , he was the moſt unblameable in his converſation . I had the happiness to live almoſt a year with him in his houſe , near foure years under his Miniſtry , and to be eſteemed by him one of his faithfulleſt friends , I have cauſe to bless GOD for him while I live , ſince it pleaſed him by his means , not only to reveal many ſaving truths unto me , but alſo to ſet them on with ſuch power , as I hope I ſhall never forget them . O , with what life and zeal would he both preach and pray ! and how ſtrict and watchful was he in his whole life ! being ( as every good Miniſter ſhould be ) Blameless , Sober , Juſt , Holy , Temperate , 1 Tim. 3.2 . Tit. 1.8 . of good Behaviour , given to Hoſpitality , apt to teach , a lover 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . will bear both readings . 2 Tim. 2.15 . of good things and good men . He ſtudied to approve himself unto GOD , a workman that needed not to be aſhamed , rightly dividing the word of Truth . 1 Tim. 4.12 1 Pet. 5.3 . Tit. 2.7 . There are two ſingular virtues in a good Example . He propounded to you the Examples of holy Writ , and was himself while he lived , and Example and Pattern of all good works , If that ſaying therefore of Austins be true , So many as a man ſhall edify by a good Example , 1 It may profit a world of people . 1 These . 1.7 , 8 2 It is laſting and may do good for a long time after . 1 Pet. 3.5 , 6. M. Harris at Hanwell . for ſo many he ſhall receive a reward of a bleſsed life , than ſurely he hath now received a full reward for all the good he did by his holy life , unto thoſe with whom he converſed . In a word , he was a moſt pious and accomplished Divine for his ministerial parts and pains ( as one of his near Friends ſaid truly ) he might ſooner be envied than matched and equaled ; being in this like Saul , higher than his brothers by the head . He was well skilled in both the Original tongues , being able to render the Text out of his Hebrew Bible or Greek Testament to another in our mother tongue , as familiarly almoſt , as if it had been Engliſh . For the Arts , he was a good Logician , as his exact Analyſis of the ten Commandments shows , a good Philoſopher , as his Sermons in manuſcript on the 104. Pſalme do witness , a good Rhetorician or Orator , as his printed Treatiſes abundantly testify . He had words at will and could readily and aptly express himself in his Sermons , which gift of Elocution is requiſite if not neceſſary for a complete Divine . He had by long He was a Preacher at Banbury above thirty years . Experience got the art of preaching , and he wrote a tract concerning that ſubject ; he had and excellent faculty in characterizing or fitly deſcribing a virtue or vice , or any other thing , and though he had no common-place-booke of his own , yet he could treat of any ſubject , I might alſo extol his other endowments , and without danger of exceeding magnify him for his ſtrong natural parts , his ſolid judgement and tenacious memory , and commend ſome virtues wherein he excelled to your imitation , as his Humility , Mercifullneſſe , Beneficence , Laboriousness and Diligence He went over in his preaching the whole Book of Judges , both the Samuels , the 1 Kings to the 11. C. or thereabout , all the Pſal . to the 106. & the whole Goſpel of Iob. beside all the principles of Religion often . in his Calling , and then alſo show how comfortably he died , being full of heavenly ſpeeches and godly Exhortations . Therefore I pass from himself to this Opus poſthumum , this firſt work of his which ſince his death came to light , viz. Sermons on all the Examples or Historical part of Geneſis , which Book containeth a brief and ſhort Story of the things done from the beginning of the world to the death of Joſeph , for the ſpace as it is thought by ſome of 2309. years , by Doctor Willet of 2368. years . Examples are not unfitly compared unto looking-Glaſſes , wherein one may behold as well what to eſchew , as what to follow : So you ſhould follow the Faith of Abraham and Obedience of Iſaack , but ſhun their lying and diſſembling ; follow Noah and Lot in their Righteousness and Zeal , but shun their drunkenness and inceſt . And becauſe and Example of a Perſon living amongſt you may be more prevalent with ſome then the Examples of others though ſingularly holy whoſe virtues they only read of ( as a Sermon delivered , Ʋiva voce , does more affect then the ſame read out of a Book ) So walk therefore as you had him for and Example , and be you followers of him , as he was of CHRIST , in the Graces before mentioned and all holy converſation . Remember him who had the rule over you , Heb. 13.7 . who hath ſpoken unto you the Word of GOD , whoſe Faith follow and Charity too ; for Maſter Whately was the moſt bountiful Miniſter to the poor I think in England of his means , your Conſciences will witness that he hath often preſſed and urged this Duty upon you , and as he was earneſt in persuading his Hearers to beneficence , ſo he practiſed the ſame Himself , entertaining ſome poor widow's or neceſſitous Perſons weekly at the leaſt at his Table , and giving the tenth of all his Eſtate that way , and ſee how GOD bleſſed him for the ſame , his Eſtate ( as himself told me ) proſpered the better after he took that courſe , and in his sickness he comforted himself with that Promiſe , Pſalme 41.1 , 3. Bleſſed is he that conſidereth the poor , the LORD will deliver him in time of trouble . The LORD will ſtrengthen him upon the bed of languiſhing . O follow him therefore who by Faith and Patience inherits thee Promiſes , let his good Example and wholeſome Inſtructions provoke you to all holiness , that you also may partake with him in that happiness of which he is now fully poſſeſſed , Your true Chriſtian Friend , Edward Leigh .