To the Right Worshipful Mris Helena Phelips , and Mris Agneta Gorges , grandchildren to the Right Honourable Lady Helena , late Lady Marchioness of Northampton , now with God , E. B. wishes the happiness of grace here and of glory hereafter . Gentlewomen , THough there be nothing more certain , more impartial , more sudden , then the stroke of Death , yet is there nothing so seldom thought upon , especially of those whose youth and health seem to suppose their graves a great way off . But I may not harbour such a thought of you . The piety of that Family whereof you are very suitable members is a sufficient prohibition . Piou • hearts are never barren of profitable thoughts : and among all those , wherewith even a gracious heart does most abound , none are certainly more advantageous then thoughts of Death ; which have ever more thoughts of Repentance , Judgement , Heaven and Hell for their companions . Yet the best may be bettered : and what I present you with may make your meditations more , and peradventure more useful then they were before . Some consolations you shall light upon ; which is you suffer to work effectually , they will go nea • to 〈 ◊ 〉 a cheerful expectation of that King of terrors which otherwise you might be sinfully afraid of . The poem ( if it may be called so ) is a plain one , because I meant to profit not to puzzle you ; and yet it is a poem , that your profit might come in the pleasingest way . To assure you that the rhythm is no disparagement to the divinity of the matter , were to question your ingenuity , a great part of that wherein you exercise your selves both day and night being written in verse , Lorin . in Psalmos . Tom. 1. p. 4. D. proves it by many good witnesses . which notwithstanding is the mighty power of God unto salvation . If you accept and gain by this poor present , and withal give it leave to wear your names into the world , my ends are accomplished : and your selves ( with all that honoured and religious family ) shall be remembered as often as I kneel before the throne of grace . And I will importunately beg of him that sitteth thereon , to increase the good gifts and graces of his spirit within you . What if your proficiency in the ways of piety be already famous ? yet if my prayers find good speed with God , you may fit in glory a degree the higher . Thus prayeth Your humble servant to be commanded . E. B.