TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE EDVVARD , Viſcount MANDEVILLE . Right Honourable , THere is a common ſlander that hath been raiſed , and vile aspersion that hath been , and ſtill is caſt upon the ways of godliness ; That they diſ-ennoble men's ſpirits , ( which Salvian complained of eleven hundred Sal. l. 4 de Gab. 1. Dei . years ago , Si quis ex nobilitate converti ad Deum coeperit , ſtatim honorem nobilitatis amittit ; o quantus in Chriſtiano populo honour Chriſti eſt , ubi Religio ignobilem facit ! ) That they make men rigid , melancholy , sour , uncivil ; That they dull their parts ; That they take them off from the delights of the things in the world ; That if men take up the power and strictness of them , they muſt reſolve never , to keep any correſpondence with their friends who are of rank and quality in the world ; and therefore although thoſe who have little of the world , and little to do in the world , may live ſtrict lives ; yet it is not for ſuch who are born to great things , whoſe fortune's are raiſed higher than other men's , who have references to many of quality & place ; it cannot be expected that they ſhould be ſo ſtrict ; this muſt needs hinder them in their outward accompliſhments ; if they begin to take ſuch a courſe , it is impoſsible they ſhould be complete every way , as beseems ſuch as they are : and thus many are compelled to be evil , leſt they ſhould be eſteemed vile , as Salvian complains of his time ; Mali coguntur eſſe ne viles habeātur : a notable ſpeech of his , fully suitable to our times . The firſt obſervance ( that I remember ) I had of this place in Salvian , was from your Lordship's ownhands , showing it to me in him , as and expreſsion that your Lordſhip was much affected with . But theſe men do not conſider how much they ſpeak againſt themſelves ; were this true , it were a ſnare , a judgement to be raiſed in outward excellencies above others . No ; it is not honour , they are not riches , parts , dignities that hinder godliness ; it is the baseness and corruption of men's ſpirits , in the enjoyment of theſe that hinders ; godliness raiſeth the excellencies of them , it draws out the chief good in them , and puts a higher beauty and glory upon them . God hath raiſed up your Honour , to convince the world of the falseness , malice , impiety there is in this evil report that is brought up , upon the good and bleſſed ways of godliness . Malice it ſelf cannot but acknowledge , that godliness in the strictness of it , & natural excellencies in the eminency of them , have a bleſſed conjunction in your Honour ; Godliness as the enameling of Pearls in thoſe golden natural endowments with which God hath mercifully & plentifully enriched you : and were it but for this ſervice only to God and his Church , in convincing the world of the vileness of this ſlander ; I may speak without suspicion of flattery , happy that ever you were born ; and I know , that thoſe who know your Lordſhip , will justify me in that I ſay . In this God hath honoured your Lordship exceedingly ; were there no other end for which you ſtill live in ſuch a generation , as you do , but only this ; yet in this you have great cauſe to bless your self in God , and in this great honour he hath put upon you , to make you ſo public and worthy and inſtrument of his . Who is it that looks upon you , and ſees your ways , but muſt needs confess , Now I ſee that strictness and power of Religion , may ſtand with a moſt noble , generous , ſweet , amiable , courteous demeanour ; I ſee it raiſeth and ennobleth parts ; and though it baniſheth baſe and ſordid pleaſures , which are beneath the dignity of a man , much more of ture Nobility and generousness ; yet it knows how to make uſe of the delights that God affords in this world , and order and guides them ſo , as by it they are enjoyed with a double sweetness , far above that which others find . And yet further , there are two more bleſſed conjuctures which add much honour to you ; the one is a facile yeeldablenes of ſpirit to any ( though much inferior ) in anything , where good may be done ; and yet a ſtrong , unmoveable , ſledfaſt , reſolute ſpirit againſt that which is evil . It was the high commendation that Nazianzen gave of Athanaſius , that he was Magnes , & Nazian . in Encom . Athanaſ . Adamas , A Loadſtone in his ſweet , gentle , drawing nature ; and yet and Adamant in his reſolute ſlout carriage againſt thoſe who were evil . The other is this ( which makes all beautiful and lovely indeed ) though God hath raiſed you high in birth , in abilities , in the esteem of men both good and bad ; yet the luſtre of the humility of your ſpirit ſhines beautifully thorough all , manifeſting it self in much gentleness and meekness ; and this is the height of all true excellency . A man of underſtanding is of and excellent ſpirit , says Salomon , Prov. 17. 27. the word in the Original , is , A cool ſpirit . In alſo poſito non altum ſapere difficile eſt , & omnino inuſitatum ; said quanto inuſitatius , tanto glorioſius , says Bernard , ep . 42. The Lord carry on your truly noble and generous ſpirit , that you may long hold forth the power , beauty and excellency of his grace . Let the height of all your designs be , to liſt up the Name of the great God . 2 Cor. 5. 9. We labour , says the Apoſtle , whither preſent orabſent to be accepted of him : the word tranſlated , Labour , loses the elegancy of it , it is 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 ; we love the honour of it ; it is ſuch a labour as we account it our honour and glory : We are ambitious ; to have high designs for God is a holy and a bleſſed ambition ; whereas the ambition of other men is low , & baſe : Infoelix prorſus ambitio , quae ambire magna non novit , says Bernard . Account your self bleſſed Bern. page . 1010. when your God is bleſſed . It was the bleſſing of Shem , Gen. 9. 26. Bleſſed be the Lord God of Shem ; the chief of Shems bleſsing was , that his Lord God was bleſſed . That which I seek , is to engage your Lordſhip for God , and to stir you up to anſwer fully the esteem , the expectations that men have of you , whoſe eyes are upon you as a public bleſsing , & and ornament to the procession of the truth . And yet this I deſire your Lordſhip would conſider , ( as I know you doe ) that Religion is a greater honour , and ornament to you , than you are to it ; it does and will more honour you , than you ever did , or can honour its Your birth made you honourable , but o how honourable have you been , ſince you have been precious in Gods eyes ! Eſay 43. 4. Your parts were always hopeful , but how apparently have they been raiſed ſince grace hath ſanctified them ? Although God takes it well at the hands of thoſe whom he hath raiſed in the things of the world higher than others , when he sees them forward in ſetting out his praiſe ; yet he would not have them think that he is beholding to them , as if the honour of God depended ſo upon them , as it would fail , did not they put to their help . No , God can raiſe his honour by other means , he can glorify himself , and get himself a great name , by low , mean , and contemptible things : It is not becauſe God hath need of honour from you , but becauſe he delights to honour you , that he is pleaſed to uſe you in his ſervice ; It is and advancement to whatſoever greatness you have in the world , to be employed for God , were it but in the meaneſt ſervice he hath to do . Where the heart is right , even in that , it glorieth more than in all the dignity that earth can put upon it ; But yet the greater Inſtruments the Lord raiſeth up for his glory , the greater ſervices he calls them unto , the greater things may we hope he intends for his Church . When S. John ſaw the Elders caſting down their crowns before the Throne , ſaying ; Thou art worthy , Oh Lord , to receive glory , and honour , and power , Apoc. 4. 10. soon after S. John herd every creature in heaven , and on earth , and ſea , ſaying , Bleſſing , honour , glory , and power , be unto him that ſitteth upon the Throne , and unto the Lamb for evermore , cham . 5. 13. And soon after that , he ſaw Chriſt with his Crown upon him , going forth conquering , and to conquer Chap. 6. 2. What great mercies might we expect , did we ſee God raising up truly noble and generous ſpirits , more generally in the great ones of the earth ? did we ſee the Elders and Nobles , caſting down their Crowns before the Throne of the Lamb , willing to deny all their glory , and excellencies , and eſtates , for the raiſing up the glory of Ieſus Chriſt ? Certainly , God hath great things to do in this latter age of the world , and he is a God with whom there is as great abundance of ſpirit as ever , when his time comes , how soon will ſuch a thing be , as the raiſing men's ſpirits to higher and more noble designs , than now we can imagine ? The obſerving the frame and work of your moſt precious noble ſpirit ( Right Honourable ) put me upon the thought of this Argument ; The chiefeſt book that I made uſe of , for the enlarging 〈 ◊ 〉 Meditations in it ( next the Scripture was that which I joyfully beheld in you 〈 … 〉 self , and your Noble and much honorred Lady ; highly honoured and lov 〈 … 〉 and that deſervedly , in the esteem , and hearts of all who know her and the truth , John Ep. 2. ver . 1. Such gracious principles appeared in your ſpirits , ſuch divine rules by which ye were guided , thoſe high and noble employments in which ye delighted , thoſe bleſſed qualifications , which as ſo many Diamonds in their luſtre , and beauty , ſparkled that light , that freeness , that ſtrength , that publikeneſſe , that holiness , etc. Thoſe comforts of a higher nature than the common drossy comforts of the world , that ye chosen to your ſelves , to satisfy your ſpirits in , and found contentment in the enjoyment of ; that cauſed the dilating of my thoughts about theſe things , and now making known themſelves publicly , they crave patronage from your Lordſhip , who have been the original from whence they came . And here I humbly preſent them to your Honour , and to your virtuous and noble Lady , as a glass wherein your ſelves and others may ſee the frame and workings of your ſpirits ; I dare ſay , that all who know you , and know that I had the happiness to be ſo near unto you , and to have 〈2 pages missing〉 excited to look about thee , if falſe . Art thou endued with ſuch a ſpirit as here thou mayest find ? nothing in the world , in hell , or in thy fleſh , ſhall be able to conquer thee ; as Chriſt himſelf , thou ſhalt endure ſuch croſſes and contradiction of ſinners , as theſe times are big with ; thou ſhalt deſpiſe the ſhame , and be able to reſiſt to blood , if God ſhould call thee to that honour . What excellency of ſpirit was in S. Paul , when Act. 21. 13 he took it ill that they dissuaded him from going up to Jeruſalem , where he was to meet with ſharp afflictions ; What mean you to weep and break my heart , says he , for I am ready not to be bound only , but alſo to die at Jeruſalem for the Name of the Lord Jeſus . Moſes refuſes to be called the ſon of Pharaohs daughter ; though himself , or ſome of his poſterity might happily have come to the Kingdom by it , and chooses afflictions rather with the people of God , etc. He would not become and Egyptian , though of Heb. 11. the Royal Stem ; but abide and Hebrew , who were abomination to the Egyptians : He knew , that the reproach of the Members did redound to the Head , and would be well recompensed by him ; and therefore he will ſuffer afflictions , and esteem the reproaches of Chriſt above all the treaſures of Egypt , a greater patrimony , says Ambroſe . So baſe are many ſpirits in this age , that they had rather cenſure than trace his practice . Scaliger tells of a Tree , to which when • xer • it . 18 • § . 27 , 28. a man comes , Ramos conſtringit ; but when he departs , ramos p • dit : Too many are like this tree ; when any Miniſters or Chriſtians , that have the reproach of Chriſt upon them , come near them , and have to deal with them ; let relations , promiſes , engagements be what they will , they ſhrink up themſelves , are troubled , ſadded , and perplexed , thinking it diſgrace unto them to have to do with ſuch ; but when they are gone , then their hearts dilate again , & their faces grow pleaſant : ſuch and adulterous generation there is , that are aſhamed , of Chriſt in any of his poor , reproached , deſpiſed Members ; & not only aſhamed , but like that Plant called the Tartarean Lamb , which in ſhape and proportion anſwers the Lamb , but grazeth and eateth up the grass round about it , ſuffering no green thing to be near : and theſe men are Lambs in ſhape , but eating up every green thing that is near unto them . Pſa . 14. 4. They eat up my people as bred ; they are the food their malice feeds upon . It is obſerved , the Pope was ſo busy and hight againſt Luther , that he neglected to look to all Chriſtendome againſt the Turk ; ſuch baseness was in a Popes breast , that he could eaſier have digeſted Mahumetism ; than Lutherdniſme ; & may we not think the Alcoran would be welcome to thoſe Confeſſors , who have enjoined their burdened in conſcience to burn their Bibles for Penance ; this , ſome living know to be a truth . There is much baseness in the ſpirits of men , and upon little occaſion it vents it self : 1 Sam. 12. Doeg haead 〈 ◊ 〉 malicious murderous ſpirit in him , & ſpared not thoſe that beware the Linen Ephod . The rich man , Luk. 12. 19. was all for earth , & nothing for heaven . A great man finding his sickness increasing , cauſed his bed to be made between , or upon his Coffers , where he had much gold ; a Lord came to him , and wiſhed him to go to his Chamber , and not lie there ; his anſwer was , I am well where I am , ſo long as I can tarry , for I am near unto my friends , meaning his Coffers and his gold . What drossy corporal souls have ſuch men ? The Gadarens drove Chriſt out of their Country ; they eſteemed their Swine above a Saviour : Demas embraceth the preſent world ; Ananias and Saphyra reſerve a portion for themſelves : ſuch ſpirits ever have been , and will be in the world . Spirits they are as much beneath common reaſon , as thoſe mentioned in this work are above it . It is choice , not common ſpirits , that will honour God in ſtormy times . Had not a choice and excellent ſpirit been in Nehemiah , the plots and practices of enemies would have daunted • eh . 6. 11. him ; but take a view of his ſpirit ; Should ſuch a man as I am flee ? and who is there , that being as I am , would go into the Temple to ſave his life ? I will not go in . He had a good cauſe , a good conſcience , Ve. ſ 13. 17 a good God , which advanced his ſpirit to ſuch resolvedness , that he would not take Sanctuary , and diſparage either of them by his fear or faintheartedness ; when he ſaw the Sabbath prophaned , he hid not his eyes from it , but contended with the Nobles about it . What Divine ſpirits were in the three Children ? Could Nebuchanezars greatness , mandates , threats of Dan. 3. 18. the fiery Furnace , force their ſpirits to falſe worſhip ? Be it known unto thee , Oh King , that we will not ſerve thy gods . Here they did obediently diſobey , As Groaſthead Biſhop of Lincolne once anſwered the Pope . knowing that nothing pleaſes God , but what he hath commanded in his Word : they would not deliberate in this caſe , we are not careful to anſwer thee , ſay they . When any enticements come to draw us from the pure worſhip of God , we ſhould ſtop our ears , charm the Charmers never ſo wiſely . Charles the Emperor , and two great perſons in this Kingdom , soliciting King Edward the ſixt to allow his ſiſter the Lady Marry to have •• ass , would not liſten , but bade them be conce •• tO , for he would ſpend his life , and all he had , rather than agree , and grant to that he See Act. and Mon. 2 Vol. p. 553. knew certainly to be againſt the truth ; the ſuit being yet preſſed , he burst out into bitter weeping , and ſobbing , deſiring them to deſiſt . The motioners ſeeing his zeal , and conſtancy , wept as faſt as he , and told one , he had more Divinity in his little finger , than they had in all their bodies . What a choice ſpirit was in that young Lord Harrington , who was a man of prayer : he prayed twice a day in ſecret ; twice with his ſervants in his chamber , and joined at appointed times with the family in prayer : he would never be idle , but always well , if not religiouſly employed ; he meditated on 4. or 5. Sermons every day , retaining five or ſix in his memory always ; he kept and exact account of his life every day , very conſcientious of honouring God to purpoſe , in public and private ; on the Lords day he would repeat both the Sermons with his ſervants before ſupper , and write them down in his night book before he ſlept , and on the morning of that day , he would as he made him ready , repeat thoſe Sermons he had herd the Lords day before ; and for the Sacrament , he received it very frequently , and always faſted the Saturday before , ſpending the whole day in Stock See in his funeral Sermons . examination ; prayer and humbling himself , that ſo he might be fitted to feaſt with Chriſt : he gave away the tenth of his eſtate unto the poor , & pious uſes , beside his occasional charity when he was abroad : Here was a choice ſpirit , beautified with variety of graces , not unfit for great & mean to propound for their pattern . Daniel in Babylon would not defile himself with the portion of the Kings meat , nor with the wine which he drank ; he had rather eat pulſe than defile his conſcience . When the writing was ſigned , the Lions den threatened , did he muſſle up his Religion , and ſhrink up his ſpirit ? he would not ſhut up his window , nor diminiſh his prayers , but thrice a day prayed , and gave thanks unto his God , as he did afore time ; here was a ſpirit for God and his ways , and not for the times . Happily ſome temporizing politician will charge Daniel of indiſcretion : no , it was the excellency of his ſpirit , that in caſe of danger , and that of life , he would not ſeparate external profeſſion from inward faith , when God ſhould loose by it : And what , doſt thou charge him with indiſcretion , whom the Scripture commends for his wisdom ? It was a proverbial ſpeech , Wiſer than Daniel , Ezek. 32. 3. and his heart did not accuſe him for that indiſcretion , when he was in the Lions den ; for he says , Innocency was found in him ; he was not aſhamed of his godliness ; that had raiſed him and he would maintain the honour of it . Such ſpirits have true excellency in them , & are not shy of the ways or ſervants of God , when the floods of iniquity overflow , & threaten to bear down all . Fearfulness to appear in Gods cauſe is a part of the old man , & when God puts into his , another , a new ſpirit , that waſts thy fearfulness ; the more thou haſt of Gods Spirit , the more thy old timorous cowardly ſpirit is abated . Mat. 9. 16. That is put in to fill up , takes from the garment ; and when grace fills up a man , it takes away from the old man , the old baseness , fear , and dastardliness in the cauſe of God , and a holy undaunted reſolution is begotten in thee to justify wiſdom , although thou damnify thy ſelf . Dan. 6. 10. According to the fullness of men's ſpirits are their carriages , with more or less confidence in their undertakings ; If Satan have filled the heart , men will boldly ſerve him , Acts 5. 3. Why hath Satan filled thy heart to lie unto the Holy Ghoſt ? Satan had filled his heart , and therefore he feared not to lie unto God himself . Dieu says upon the place , Implere cor alterius eſt audacem eum reddere , & he cites that place , Heſt . 7. 5. Quis hic eſt , qui implevit cor ſuum ad faciendum ſic ? Who is he that hath filled his heart ; in our Tranſlations , That durſt preſume in his heart to do ſo ? Hamans heart was filled with malice , and that made him bold to attempt the deſtruction of all the Jewes : And where godliness fills the heart , there will be as venturous & bold attempts for God . Paul being filled with the Holy Ghoſt ſet his eyes on Elymas , and ſo Acts 13. 9. 10. thundered and lightened againſt him , that preſently his proud malicious ſpirit was blaſted . When the heart of a man is filled with divine truths , it is not the preſence of men in higheſt place can daunt it . Eliſha had a double portion of the ſpirit of Elijah ; and did the greatness , or wickedness of Iehoram daunt him ? There appeared a Deity in his very ſpeech and ſpirit , 2 Kings 3. 14. As the Lord of Hoſts lives before whom I ſtand , ſurely were it not that I regard the preſence of Iehoſaphat , the King of Iudah , I would not look towards thee , nor ſee thee . He had a fullness of Gods Spirit in him , that could speak thus to one of the gods on earth . When a men heart is filled with divine influence , he fears not the enemies of goodness , neither is aſhamed of ought accompanies godliness , 2 Tim. 1. 7 , 8. God hath given us the ſpirit of power , of love , and of a found mind ; be not thou therefore aſhamed of the teſtimony , etc. When the power of God is in a men ſpirit , he will not be aſhamed of the Cross , nor refuſe to ſhare in the afflictions of the Goſpel . It is the honour of Religion , to have ſuch Diſciples as will own her , and ſtand for her at all times , and that with and undaunted courage , Acts 4. 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12. Peter was filled with the Holy Ghoſt , and ſaid ; be it known unto you all , and all the people of Iſrael , that by the Name of Ieſus Chriſt of Nazareth , whom you crucified , whom God raiſed from the dead , even by him does this man here ſtand before you whole ; this is the ſtone which was ſet at nought of you builders , etc. And after when he and Iohn were commanded ſilence ; what ſaid they ? Whither it be right in the sighed of God , to harken unto you more than God , judge ye ; for we cannot but speak the things we have seen and herd . It is a brand upon Nicodemus that he came to Chriſt by night ; and ſo of the chief Rulers that believed on him , but becauſe of the Phariſees did not confess him , leſt they ſhould be put out of the Synagogues : but it was Nicodemus praiſe , for that he had god boldness to ſpeak for Chriſt , when vilified , though himself ſuffered reproach for it : this showed ſome excellency and growth in his ſpirit , that he could both speak and ſuffer for Chriſt . So Ioſeph of Arimathea was timorous at Ioh. 19. 38. but being filled with grace , He went in boldly to Pilate and craved the body of Ieſus , Mark . 15. 43. With what holy boldness did thoſe men march through reproaches , afflictions , and perſecutions for the truths ſake . Reader , ſwallow thou this Book ( as Ezekiel did his roll ) and thou ſhalt be enabled to do as much . Principle and fill thy ſpirit with the precious truths contained in this little Treatiſe , and thou ſhalt find thy drooping ſpirit to receive , a heavenly warmth to come upon thee , and a holy boldness thruſting thee forward for God and godliness . Wickedness is too bold , and godliness too ſhamefaſt ; it hath loſt and ſuffered much through men's cowardliness . Reade , meditate , and feaſt thy ſpirit with what thou herein findeſt , and thou mayest walk bold as a Lion through thee amid of a crooked and perverſe generation ; thou ſhalt daunt wickedness it self , and make Religion truly beautiful , and honourable . If thou shouldst ſay , This book might have been kept in , there are too many already ; I anſwer thee , There be many , but few to purpoſe . The Sea is full of water , yet God adds daily to it by rivers , and ſhowers . Many would read little , if new books were not ſet forth daily Books do quicken up a drowsy age to the beſt purpoſe . New books are like new faſhions , taken up at firſt with affection . Notwithſtanding all the Munition of the Kingdom , there is new made daily . Books are more needful than Arms , the one defends the body , the other the soul . If thy ſpirit be choice and right , thou wilt acknowledge this work , ſolid , spiritual , and ſuch as hitherto thou haſt not met with many like it . If trees be known by their fruit ; what other ſentence may be paſſed upon the Compoſer of it , but that he hath profited in the School of Chriſt above thouſands ; hath had a large operation of Gods Spirit in his own soul , attained to a choiceness and excellency of ſpirit himself , & that he hath clearly differenced between precious and baſe ſpirits . I ſhall appeal to thy self , Chriſtian Reader , when thou haſt peruſed this Book , whither thou wouldst have had it buried in the dark . If he deſerves a curſe that withholds corn , Prov. 11. 26. thou wilt bless God for this corn the Author hath ſent to market . God made him a fountain not to be ſealed up , but to ſlow for common good . Veritatem celare eſt aurum ſepelire . In a fountain ſealed , and treaſures hid , Aug conf . l. 11. the Author knew was little profit . He hath let out himself to advantage thee , taken this off from his own ſpirit , to put upon thine . Do thine endeavour to better thy self by it , and if thou getteſt any good , give unto God glory ; if none , ſuſpect thy ſpirit , and ſpare thy cenſures : The Authors ſpirit is above them , and counts it a very ſmall thing to be judged of men judgement . My prayers are , that thou mayeſt profit much , attain true excellency of ſpirit , and follow God fully all thy days , that ſo thy end may be comfortable , and glorious . Thy Chriſtian friend , W. Gr.