TO THE WORTHY ( AND WORTHILY OF ALL WHO KNOW YOV TO BE MUCH HONOURED ) Mris SVSANNA STRANGVVAYES , Wife of GYLES STRANGVVAYES Esquire , Son and Heir to Sir IOHN STRANGVVAYES Knight . YOung Ladies and Gentlewomen that are studious of reading good Books , ( such as your self oft converse withal ) when they find their eyes wax dull and weary , put their book from them ; and for their better refreshing and diversion , change the Scene , and breathe themselves a while , till their spirits being thereby revived , they turn to their wonted strength and vigour . I have seen some of your Sex , ( especially such as have been gentily bred ) when they have wrought hard with their Needle upon some curious Work , have laid that aside , and taken a Lute in hand , or some other musical Instrument , and played a Lesson or two thereon , to recreate themselves therewith , and anon after fallen to their work afresh : So natural is it to all sorts of persons whatsoever to take delight in Variety . To harp always on one string , is harsh to the Eare. To feed still upon one Dish , does but glut the Stomach . Your wisest and learnedest Men both in Church and Commonweal , will sometime leave off their more serious Discourses , and entertain themselves with matters of harmless Merriment , and Disports . Such are these Stories I present unto your view . I will not promise any great profit you shall reap by reading them : but I promise they will be pleasing and elightfull ; the Scene is so often varied , the Passages so pretty , the Accidents so strange ; and in the end brought to so happy a Conclusion . Here , though one bit ( as we say ) will draw down another , you shall not cloy your self . These are but a few of running banqueting dishes : Take ( as you like ) here and there a little of each sort : which will but whet your Stomach , and set and edge on your Appetite , against you come to feed your Understanding with meats more nourishable and substantial . If you shall but kindly accept , and take in good part ( which the sweetness of your Disposition cannot otherwise choose ) this poor Pittance , you will encourage me to invite you to a more solemn Feast , worthier your self , and him , who shall ever love and honour your Virtues and Goodness . DONE Diego Puede-Ser ,