To all Fair Ladies , Famous for their Virtues , L. L. wishes the enjoyment of their Desires ; whither Celestial , or Terrestrial , but most especially to that Paragon of Perfection , the very Nonesuch of her Sex , famous by the Name of Mistress M. S. O stand my Friends ye sacred Treble-trine Of divine Sisters , o ye Muses Nine , Inflame my Genius , and my thoughts inspire With the bright beams of your Aetherial fire : O teach me words which yet were never known , The choicest Strains that flow from Helicon , And rape me up with Raptures ' yond the pitch Of vulgar thought ; my obtuse mind enrich With quick Invention , for I have a task Beyond my skill , therefore your aid I ask . Be then propitious unto my designs , And prompt my thoughts , that I in strenuous Lines , And words compacted by your proper pain , May gain excuse ; yet lest I should profane The sacred worth of those Fair Ladies , who May claim all honour as their proper endue , What Attributes , what honoured Titles shall My trembling Tongue , my Faculties , and all My labouring Senses study to confer On their Rare worths , who scarce know how to err ? Call I them Ladies ? why their Sex does claim The proper Title of that Gentile Name : Style I them fair ones ? of and Angels hue , That's but their right , I give them but their endue : Say I th'are virtuous ? why their actions show It most apparent , and the world does know I should but flatter , if I should confine My Tongue to style them Goddesses divine : Though others use it , pardon me , not I , I have no power for to Deify , Though I adore ye , and would sacrifice My Life to serve ye : what shall I devise , What shall I add , or what shall I express To found your praises ? O I must confess It is a Subject for and Homers Quill , By far transcending my unlearned skill : M' Invention's dull , or is it so sublime , To touch your worths , you being most divine : What new-coined Titles , what unheard of strains Shall I then frame , to blazon forth your fame's ? Alas , I'de best strike sail , waft to the shore , And Anchor there , not dare to venture over This Sea of Honour , ' less I had the Art Of Heraldry , your Titles to impart , Or skill to blaze them in their several Tables Drawn out with Or , with Argent , and with Sables ; Gules , Furs , & Azure , Bans , Bars , Chev'rons , crosses , Bulls , Bears , and Lyons , with the well-shaped Horses : Or that my Bark were better rigged and trimmed , Or that I had a fairer gale of wind to embreath the sails of my most slake Invention , And so transport me with quick apprehension . And now more than my Tongue can style ye , know I am obliged and eke engaged to show Unto the prospect of your glorious eyes , The sighs , the sobs , the woes , the misery's Of tortured Arnalt , who does living die Through the unkindness and strange cruelty Which fair Lucenda shows him : this his Fate He does entreat you to compassionate , And to bewail his sufferings , to complain Of her neglect and tyrantlike disdain , Which is the cause of his afflicting smart , And of the tortures which infest his heart . O if you chance but ever to distil A Pearl-like tear , he does believe it will Be of such force , that it will mollify Her flinty heart , convert her cruelty To courteous kindness , move her to repent Her peevish coyness , cause him sweet content . Then o ye Rare ones , since ye thus may save Our ill-entreated Lover from the grave , Express your pity , o bewail his fate , Tax the unkindness and inveterate hate Of coy Lucenda , blame her for neglect : O tell her , tell her , that such true respect She does not merit , since she still disdains His proffered love , his service , and his pains : And let the beams of your bright goodness shine Also fair Ladies on these Lines of mine , Which though unworthy of your gracious view , Vouchsafe to read , they being sent to you ; It'll please sad Arnalt , and exhilarate His pensive thoughts ; perhaps iT may recreate Your fancies wearied with excess of pleasure , But it'll reward me with too rich a Treasure , And so engage me , that I shall not know How to obsolve the Debts the which I owe Unto your worths , for why , they cannot be Repaid without some new-coined Mystery : Thus with my Book I kiss your fair white hand , And at the Bar of your just knowledge stand To hear our Doom ; it's you must Judgement give If by Oblivion we shall die , or live With Fame eternized : give your Verdict then , And with it life in spite of envious men . Say you'll protect it , say iT shall take a nap , Encurtained closely in your silken laps : Grant this sweet Ladies unto him who still Will be obsequious to your honoured wills , Yea , unto him , who ever will remain More than your servant , well known by the name of L. L.