To the Right Worshipful , Sir Iohn Cordwell Knight , and Alderman , Master of the Company of the Mercers ; Mr. Lybbe Chapman — Surveyor . Captain Thomas Chambrelan Mr. George Burrish Wardens . And to the Worshipful , the Assistants and Communality of the same Ancient and flourishing Society of MERCERS in the Famous City of London . RIGHT WORSHIPFUL , MY ordinary employment being of late for some time interrupted , and the usual course of my studies , not so much diverted , as quite stopped by the late general and miserable distractions of the Kingdom , and especially of the place I live in , I bethought my self of some means whereby I might mitigate my apprehension of the misery's issuing from these present distempers ; When ( I think God so directing it ) this Treatise , with some others of the same nature , came to my hands . The Author is of as general repute among us for learning , as any late Writer we have received from beyond the Seas these many years : and the Work is and Explanation of the xx . Chapter of the Revelation . The Subject thereof is The assertion of the Glorious Kingdom of Christ here on earth ; a matter no doubt of great comfort , and consolation to the Church of God . And as I am not ignorant that Apocalyptical Discourses in general are liable to many censures , and that this Divine Prophecy it self is as yet a sealed book , in so much that the great Calvin was forced to acknowledge , ( if the Io. Bodimus method Hist. cap . 7 reports wrong him not ) that he knew not what so difficult and obscure a Writer , as the Author thereof , meant : so I am sure this part thereof hath been subject to most diverse and contrary interpretations ; that what Epist. and Paulinum Quot babet verb • , tO •• Sacram • nt • . Hierome says of the whole , may well be said of this passage thereof : So many words , so many mysteries . Yet receiving my self much satisfaction and se • lednesse of mind from this exposition thereof , I thought that Gods people also might reap some benefit and fruit thereby : And this is the main cause , that I have made it public . Now that I have inscribed it onto Your Names I have deal • but right and 〈 ◊ 〉 therein . For owing the first grounds and foundation of my studies to Your large bounty and benevolence , I must acknowledge the first fruits thereof communicated abroad ( and indeed I ever intended them so whatsoever they had been ) to be Yours by • due claim and challenge of them . The Persians ( in whose Schools gratitude was taught , as Letters and Arts in ours , whose WORSER •• tate exuperant latae contra ingra • os leges . Amm. Marcell . lib . 23. 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . Themi • tO . Orat. 3. Laws punished the contrary almost as deep as we do Homicide , ) had and Order in their Xenophon 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , • . Colleges , which were for the education of them whose service was appointed for the King , that after their greatest promotions , and abilities in public attendance , they were to acknowledge all as received from the Classis of their first institution . My natural propension to thankfulness makes me confess I owe all that I am in good letters ( I best know how little that is ) to the foundation I laid thereof in Your excellent Seminary of learning , and to your extraordinary favour , and encouragement to good studies and endeavours . I pray God led You always along by the hand in all Your affairs and occasions . I am Your very respectful servant to be commanded , William Burton .