THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY . To the young , and unmarried Catholic Gentlewomen of England . WORTHY , and virtuous young Gentlewomen : My Pen for your spiritual good , is willing in theſe enſuing leaves , to ſpread it self . You are all Catholics in Faith and profeſſion , and therefore the more apt to receive ( if ſo Gods Grace be not wanting ) the impreſſion of the Advice & Coum sell , which in this Treatiſe is given . My main project at this preſent is , ſince you all ( to whom I write ) as yet remain in your Chaste and Virginal ſtate , & free from Marriage , to persuade you ( what in me lies ) to abandon this Wicked World , and to embrace a Votary and Religious life . A hard labour ( no doubt ) in your judgments , but facile and eaſy to ſuch of you , who have a feeling , & true apprehenſion of the joys of Heaven , and torments of Hell . I do not speak this , as if one in a married ſtate could not arrive to Heaven , and avoid Hell . Noe , God forbid ; For I acknowledge with the Apoſtle , Hebr. 13. Marriage to be honourable , but withal I hold Virginity to be more honourable . I here only propound the moſt ſecure way to come to Heaven , and eſcape Hell . And here I demand , if any of You were married , and after the death of your husbands , were to enjoy a great , and rich Jointure , of a thouſand , or two thouſand pounds yearly ; would you not be deſirous , that besides the common Courſe of making Jointures ( which perhaps might be subject to ſome danger ) to take ( by your learned Counsel ) the beſt means for the ratifying and better ſecuring of your Right to your ſaid Jointure ? I know , you would be moſt ſolicitous herein . You all pretend Title to the kingdom of Heaven ; a kingdom infinitely ſurpaſſing in worth , all worldly Jointures that the whole Earth can afford ; and will you then content your selves to seek by the common , and ordinary Courſe of a Secular life , to obtain this kingdom ( in which ſtate , as I grant , many living have gained it , ſo incomparably far many more have loſt it ; ) but that rather you will enter into that Vocation ( how severe , how ſtrict , how cross soever to flesh and blood it shall seem ) which may give you greater aſſurance , and more ſtrengthen your Intereſt , and Title to that moſt Bleſſed Kingdom ? This Treatiſe I have compoſed in form of a feigned Dialogue , as hoping that thereby you will be ſooner induced to the reading and peruſing it at full ; then if it were written in one long continued speech , without any viciſſitude , or change of Perſons . In the Perſons here feigned by supposal , I have thought good to incorporate all the Reaſons ( as delivered by them ) chiefly moving to a Religious & retired Life ; as alſo ſuch objections , as commonly are made againſt that moſt happy Courſe ; as you may be more fully inſtructed by peruſing the Argument , or subject hereof next following . And sing the chiefeſt bar , & • et in women to a Monastical life , is deſire of Marriage , & hope of children ; I will ( beside what is treated thereof hereafter ) inſiſt here a little , discovering the inſufficiency of this Motive ; showing that the accuſtomed misery's of a married life , and of having iſſue , ought much rather to ſway with women , for their forbearance of Marriage . And firſt , whereas Life is the deareſt thing to man or woman ; yet we find , that beside the certain great pains of Childbirth , Life it self in young married women , is for the moſt part , every one , or two years greatly endangered to be loſt : witness hereof is the daily experience of women dying in Childbed . What true deſire then can a woman have to undertake that courſe of life , wherein lies ſo great a peril of losing that ( I mean he • Life , ) which is moſt deer unto her ; and that her body thereby shall , before its prefixed time by God , become meat for worms If any one of you had a Jewels ſet with rich and Orient pearl , valued at ſome hundreds of pounds , how careful would you be in keeping of it ? & how would your care be doubled from endangering the loss of it , at any time ? And yet only for the enjoying of a little momentary pleaſure ( attended after with multitude of misery's ) you can be content ſo often to hazard the loss of your own life , the moſt precious Jewel , that God & Nature hath beſtowed upon you in this world . O fondness of Judgement ! But to proceed . Admit , that a woman in bringing forth her Children , should be freed from all danger of death ; yet to how many other inſupportable afflictions does she become thrall , & lie open ? For we observe ( and this not seldom ) that the Huſband becomes unkind , withdrawing his love and affection , from whence it is due , & placing it on others where it is not due . Again , the Husband ( I mean , no few number of them ) does oftentimes diſſipate and waſte his Eſtate and Patrimony in ſenſuality and riot , to the utter overthrow or beggary ( in the end ) of Himself , his Wife , and Children . But ſuppoſe , the Husband be exempt from theſe diſorders ; yet • f the wife have many Children , falls it not often out , that the children through the negligence of their Father , are brought up in all liberty and diſſolution , to the inconſolable grief of the poor Gentlewoman their Mother , & to the eternal Damnation of the Children's souls ? And what comfort then can that woman have , to be and instrument of bringing forth that Child , who shall become for ever , and Heir of Hell-fire ? O how many wives are there in England , who find by over late , & too dearly bought experience , all this to be true , which I here affirm , of the frequent dangers , griefs , and afflictions of mind commonly accompanying Marriage ? From all which languors of ſpirit , that woman delivereth herself , who forbearing marriage does determine to lead a Religious life . In proof of the Truth her ſaid , I appeal even to the certain knowledge of diverse of your selves , who , if you will but caſt your • es upon ſome of your own • yndred , and friends , ( at leaſt of our acquaintance , that live in • ate of marriage ) muſt needs confess that all , or diverse of thee a •• re mentioned misery's and calamities , do daily oppress many • f them . You are yet free ; beware • en of ſuch dangers . Nor will any further enlarge my self in • his place upon this Subject , but will refer you to the ſerious peru • ll of the Book it self . If this Diſcourſe were a ſecond Sir Philip Sidneys Arcadia , reating of amorous Conceits ; with what a greediness would many of you read it ? Condemn then your own want of spiritual fervour in ſuch of you , as but only vouchſafe to caſt a curious eye here & there upon theſe leaves ; & yet it may be in part ſaid , that this Book in general diſcourſeth of the ſame subject , of which the Areadia does ; to wit of Love . But the Arcadia , of sensual and Ʋayn • Love , attended on with sin , and Repentance ; This , of chaste , and holy Love , whereby a Soul by solemn vow eſpouſeth herself to Chriſt her Bridegroom : ſo verifying thoſe words of the A Preſent 1. Cor. 11. you a chaste Virgin Ʋre •• Christ . I only wish , that what Coſmophila ( a feigned young Gentlewoman in this Dialogue ) is ſuppoſed to do , you really , and truly would act her Sceene , in your proceedings : So might you by a mortified life , not only avoid all spiritual dangers both of foul and body ; but infallibly purchafe to your selves , and eternal Crown of Glory . If any of you reap ſuch profit by this my Labour , as by the • eading hereof , to shake hands for ever with the vanities of the world , and happily to Cloister your selves in ſome devout Monaſtery ; how fully should I think • ny pains to be recompenſed herein ? And with this I ceaſe , inreating your remembrance of he ( only for my intention at eaſt , and endeavour of aduaning your spiritual good ) at the beſt times of your devotions . Yours in all Chriſtian Charity . N. N.