TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE Sr. THOMAS ROE Knight ; Chancellor of the most Noble Order of the Garter , and one of his Majesties most Honourable Privy Council . TO whom rather should I address this present discourse , then to your Honourable self , who by your Ann. Dom. 1628. and once since that time Embassy extraordinary for his Majesty of England into Germany well observed the country and the present estate thereof , where many passages here mentioned were acted . And much the rather do I humbly present it to your Honourable Patronage , because , upon that happy occasion , it pleased our gracious God to put then into your mind and to nourish therein ever since , a serious consideration of the deplorable distractions of the Christian Church ; as he did into good b Nehem. 1. & 2. Nehemiah's mind , of the lamentable estate of Ierusalem in his time . Your compassionate and tender affection was , and is still much moved to c Segnius irritant animos demissa per aures , quam quae sunt oculis subjecta sidelibus , Hor. observe the living stones of the New Ierusalem lying in the dust , or drenched in their own blood , some of her Priests and their slocks clad in Sackcloth , others with their people by sword and fire cast out and banished : and which is worst of all , your Honour well discerned how difficult a task it was to cure this fearful malady : because disaffection of parties & dissension of opinions , unless God prevented the mischief , would not admit the binding up of the wound . Nor did these miserable calamities of Gods people only vex and grieve your pious and religious soul , but also so roused and summoned up your Honours most serious thoughts , that with worser As the good Samaritan not only pitied , but took care of the wounded man . and hearty and godly providence , with a sincere and prudent circumspection you presently consulted with other most learned , religious & Christian lovers of Gods Church about the peace thereof , so far as possibly may be attained , and so far , as it lies in the power of Christian Princes , of most judicious Divines , and of truly zealous people , guided by them both : that as much as may be , we may all be e Christians should be peaceable one with another : the devil and the world raise stirs too many to molest though Church . of one mind and accord , and think , and speak one and the same thing , as the sacred Scripture often and straightly gives us in charge . For this end Mr. Iohn Dury a Divine of singular piety & learning , truly studious of the Churches peace , and incomparably sedulous to advance the same , and first interested in the work by your Honourable means and encouragement , hath so much prevailed with many illustrious f This by several instruments signed by them will plainly appear . Princes & States , and the most eminent learned men in Germany , and the parts adjoining , that the work is very well promoted , and and hearty inclination wrought towards a good correspondency for Ecclesiastical peace . God grant your Honour life and health , that to your great comfort , and all true Christians joy , you may shortly see the work come to more maturity and perfection . Amid your Honours grave and weighty intendments for this and other occasions of much concernment , may you please to reflect on this discourse . I conceive that there be many passages therein very considerable for these and after times : and that they will make much for the exciting of our thankfulness to God : when we behold from what beginnings , in and 100 and few more years , Gods truth hath risen , and Papistical and Anabaptistical error fallen . It is remarkable that the points by D. Luther mainly opposed were Indulgences , the Popes boundless power , merit of works , Purgatory , Communion but in one kind : all When walled Cities and Castles are taken , Villages must yield . Isor . chief points and palpably and and undeniably gross . And on the other side , that he stood up against the Anabaptists rebaptization of themselves , their not baptizing infants ( as not commanded by Christ ; ) their having all things in common ( as had the Primitive Christians , Acts 2. 44. ) and against the Antinomians heresies concerning the law , and other like erroneous fancies . It is also observable that Dr. Luther striking at the Popes unlawful power , never sought to exalt himself to honour or He left his wife and three children in want and distress too manifest a sign thereof . riches . For though , as he says , he himself with other learned men executed Episcopall Authority in visiting the Churches of Saxony , & reforming things amiss : yet he knowing his talon fittest for the Chair of Wittenberg , never would rise higher ; but wrote a book concerning Christian Episcopacy , and installed Nicolas Amsdorf Bishop of Neoburg , and George Anhaltinus Bishop of Mersburg . And in regard that Luther studied and read , as Professor , Philosophy of diverse kinds , was well versed in the Father's , and in Aquinas , Scotus , Occam , & other Schoolmen , and attained to the Greek and Hebrew tongues : he was thereby 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . Arist. enabled rightly , and soundly , and gravely , and not Some who know nothing dote about questions and strife of words , etc. 1 Tim. 6. 4. ignorantly , rashly , or humorously to judge of these studies , and of their use in Theology . It was also very commendable in him , that he disliked railing discourse without solid and concluding arguments , slighted foolish and groundless calumnies , reproved young students forward and rash attempts without authority for the promoting of his cause , blamed the heady and disorderly tumults raised by the Boors and vulgar sort , confessed ingenuously his doubting of some points , his ignorance in others , and craved pardon , if having been lately a Popish Monk , he should in any point err from the truth . Seeing this was D. Luthers prudent and religious course , I shall never marvel at his The cause required it . And God sweetly moderated Luthers vehemency with P. Melanct • … hons mild and calm temper . Heroical Spirit , and impregnable confidence of Gods assistance , and of the success of his attempts : and on very good ground famous and worthy Princes countenanced and assisted him , as a man , by his then opposites , convicted of no error , doing much good service in the University , offering his cause to any just trial , appealing from the Pope to the General Counsel , and in his whole course manifesting Lutheri vitam apud nos , nemo non probat . Eras Epist. lib . 5. a true correspondence of his life with his doctrine . Much more I might here add , but will not longer detain your Honour from the discourse it self . I humbly beseech our gracious God , who enabled D. Luther to be and excellent instrument for the reformation of the Christian Church , for beating down of error , and setting up of Gods Truth , that he would implant in us all , quiet , temperate , and Christian affections , Luthor endured not to have any one called a Lutheran . And Erasmus says , Prorsus odi ista dissidiorum nomina : Christi sumus omnes . lib . Ep. 2. and love of Christs Name , & still more and more perfect the settling of Truth , and building up of his Church , until we all become living stones in the Spiritual Temple sitted for our God . The same God of peace crown your Honourable self , and all sincere promoters of Christian peace , with peace external and internal here , and with eternal bliss hereafter . So prayeth he , who is Your Honours ever to be commanded Thomas Hayne .