TO THE High and Mighty Monarch CHARLES , King of great Brittaine , France , & Ireland , Defend . of the Faith , etc. Wiſhing a glorious Conqueſt on Earth , and a triumphant Victory in He •••• Great SIR , APPELLES having drawn and exquiſite picture , ambition tickling Fancy , ſet it to the view of Cenſure , and covertly concealed himſelf ; Time , brought to light and Artiſt , more curious than Acute , he ſees , diſlikes , Appelles mends , and puts • … to the view again ; in ſhort time after , he returns , reviews , 〈 ◊ 〉 and ſtill diſlikes ; Appelles marking his tranſcendency , and find • ng his imbecility , diſlodges himſelf and suddenly lets ſlip this • … itter Curb , Suitor ne ultra crepidam . So , if I , O King , like to this unskilful Artiſt , have preſumed , Icarus-like to soar above my pitch , and Phaeton-like to mount the Chariot of the Golden Sun ; Let it , I beſeech you , be im • … uted to Error Amoris , which I am always bound to offer , and not to Amor Erroris , which I may not , I must not , nay , I dare not proffer . Be pleaſed then , to cast your Princely eye , upon this undigeſted lump of Virgins wax , and do but grace it with one Royal ſmile , and then you Arm , and make him able to encounter with that triple headed Monſter , baſe ingratitude , ( at this preſent your Majesties greatest and heaviest enemy ) but , could it infuſe into me the ſtrength of Sampſon , I would tie thoſe Foxes tails together , ( that go about to disturb your Peace ) and drive them into a Deſert , where they ſhould never return again , either to deſtroy your Corn , or hurt your Paſture ; but , O my good wiſhes , fallen ſhort of my true hearts intention : howſoever this vigor it will add unto me , that I ſhall neither expect the hope's of any , nor fear the votes of many ; but merrily chant this Miſcellany ; Nec habeo , nec careo , nec curo : And ſo upon the bent knees of my heart , praying for your Majeſties long and happy Reign over us , I humbly kiss your Royal hand : Your Majeſties poor , and unfortunate , yet moſt true , and loyal Subject . G. A.