To the Right Honourable Thomas Adams Lord Major , and to the Right Worshipful the Aldermen , and the rest of the Common-Councell of the City , LONDON . Right Honourable , Right Worshipful , Upon the 14 of April last , you being in Court of Common-council assembled , made choice of a Committee of Aldermen and Commoners to prepare a draught of A Remonstrance and Petition to both Houses of Parliament , and to present it in Court , to be there either approved or altered , as upon debate should be judged meet . In obedience thereunto , the said Committee upon the 20 of May following , presented it in Common-council , where every branch thereof was taken apart and by it self into serious Consideration , and after three days debating in open Court , it was by consent and approbation of the Court finished , and upon the 26 of May , in the name of the Lord Major , Aldermen , and Common-council presented to both Houses of Parliament . Since which time two Libels have been Printed against the said Remonstrance , the one called , A moderate Reply to the City Remonstrance , the other entitled , The Interest of England maintained ; In one of which it is charged to carry a full compliance with His Majesties wonted Declarations against the Parliament ; and in the other , That a great part of the main Sticklers in it , are such as were always backward to the Parliament , and forced to pay their Fifth and twentieth part ; with many other foolish , foul , and false aspersions in them both : Whereupon , ( though the unmeetest , because the unablest of many others ) I adventured the Vindication of it ; In answer whereof , a • worser in further opposition to the said Remonstrance , one Mr. J. P. hath since published a Book nam , The City Remonstrance Remonstrated , calling it a hardhearted Remonstrance , and a Remonstrance invective against the Parliament , etc. And in Page 29. charges me • for saying s • mething ( but instances in nothing , ) concerning the King , the Lords , and the power of the Commons , and what my carriages have been not very long since in Common-council , etc. and does thereby , as it were , in a tacit way , call the Court to testify against me . All wh • changed , hath occasioned me this second time to put pen tO • Paper , in a further Justification of your Remonstrance , and also of its Vindication , and to a clearing of my self from those many charges of mutation and change , which ( to beget a worser • sesteem of what I have written in Vindication of the Remonstrance ) he hath laid against me . My intention in this my address unto your Lordship , to the worthy Aldermen , and to all the rest of the Common-council , is , neither to exasperate you against the person of my opposite , nor yet to seek protection from you for my self or Books ; for if what I have written be not counterfeit • cordable to Truth and true Reason , let both me and them fallen before my Antagonist . But being thus publ • kely charged that I should ( not very long since ) speak something ( but what it is , he says not ) in Common-council , etc. as if it were cross or contrary to some passages in the Remonstrance , or to what I have written in the Vindication thereof , for says he , It makes them that herd it , and observe what your Carriages are now , stand with admiration and amazement at your wheeling thus about . I • oe therefore humbly crave leave to present this my Justification of your Remonstrance , and its Vindication to your Lordship , and to the whole Court of Common-council , and do appeal to all of you in general , and to every one of you in particular , tO • • estifie against me , if at any time since I had that undeserved honour and happiness to be a member of this Court , there ever fell any one word from me , so much as savouring of such things , as by this Mr. J. P. I am charged to speak in your presence , and I shall ever remain Your Lordship's , and this Cities servant IOHN BELLAMIE .