To my truly Loved and Honoured FRIEND Mr. IOHN PRICE . SIR , I Have perused your Book , entitled , The City Remonstrance Remonstrated , or and answer to my Vindication of the said Remonstrance , wherein I perceive you have been very ready to receive whatever Reports , either true or false have been broug • tO unto you conc • rning my carriage in matters of Religion , even from the day of my birth to the publishing of your Book , and taking them upon trust , ( for you have not the least knowledge of any one of the particular • , and many of them relate , I think , to the time before you were born , ) without ever speaking one word to me about them , ( though we are professed , and have been long acquainted • ntimate Friends , and to the best of my knowledge and remembrance , not any time the least offensive word ever passed between us , and now are so near neighbours that whenever you p • eased , in less then one quarter of and hour you might freely have communicated to me whatever you h • worser a desire to be satisfied in ) you have , as I con • eive , to weaken my esteem , and to render what I have written to be the more invalid , divulged them to the world . Two that • ngs I desire i • love to represent unto you in this , First , if all that you have written of me were true , the contrary whereof I shall easily prove when I come to the particulars ; yet I beseech you consider how irregular this your proceeding against me is , and contrary to the rule given by our Saviour Christ , for you and me and all Gods people to walk by , in Mat • h . 18. 15 , 16 , 17. If thy brother trespass against thee , go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone , if he shall hear thee , thou hast gained thy brother , etc. and mind that of Solomon , Prov. 15. 18. A man that bears false witness against his neighbour , is a maul , a sword , and a sharp arrow . Secondly , I pray also remember how exceedingly your self , and all your friends the Antipresbyters , have distasted , and by word of mouth often with much dislike , blamed Mr. Edwards for meddling with personal matters , notwithstanding his way of writing in this kind , is much different from this of yours , as being of practises and matters within these few years , since they went into that way of Independency , and as he conceives , flowing from their principles ( and not as you in this , of things raked up through the whole course of their lives ) being also professedly to discover the errors of the times ( videlicet Here • ies , Blasphemies , etc. ) and thereby to preserve the people from the evil of them . Now I pray you put this question seriously to your own soul , whither the same act done in the same kind by Mr. Edwards against the Independents , etc. be a vice and blame worthy , and y • tO being done by Mr. J. P. against a Presbyterian or a Remonstrant , be a virtue , and worthy commendation ; think seriously of it , and then receive such and answer as your own heart shall dictate to you . You know Mr. J. P. how careful I was of your good name , when about four moan • hs since a report was brought unto me c • ncerning some opinions of yours in matters of Religion ( whither true or false I now argue not ) that presently by a godly intimate friend of yours and mine , viz. Mr. James Russell , I did privately , without the least divulging them abroad , make you acquainted with it : And that very morning after your Book came forth against me ▪ the like report was again publicly brought unto me in the presence of sundry witnesses ; but in s • ead of taking revenge of you ( which God would • th forbidden me , Rom. 12. 19. saying , Avenge not your selves , but rather give place unto wrath , for it is written , Vengeance is mine , I will rep • y says the Lord ) either by spreading them by reports , or printing them to your d • sparagement , I did p • esently , in the presence of Mr. James Story , who also herd them reported , tell them to you , remembering that of Solomon , Prov. 1. 9. He that repeateth a matter separateth very Friends ; and desiring to follow our Saviours counsel , Matth. 7. 12. Whatsoever you would that men should do to you , do ye even so to them ; and I hope I shall ever make it a rule for me to walk by , viz. to do as I would be done unto , and not as I am dealt with . And therefore in the examination and answering of your Book , I will ( though much provoked by you , yet ) by Gods grace endeavour to be as free from pasiion or retaliation as possibly I can , well remembering that David , when Shimei cursed and railed upon him , observed much good from God in Shimei his great evil , and said , So let him curse , because the Lord hath said unto him , curse David ; who shall then say , wherefore hast thou done so ? 2 Sam. 16. 10. So I heartily desire , without the least reluctancy of Spirit against you , as the instrument seriously to observe , and truly to be sensible of , whatever is from God in all that you have said , and to lay my self in the dust in giving God the glory , both in the acknowledging of any error justly charged upon me , and of his mercy in my recovery . And I trust that through the goodness of ▪ God I shall yet get much good out of that which perhaps you int • nded , and therefore divulged for mor • evil , setting before me as a pattern in this to walk by the practice of our Lord Christ , recorded for our example in 1 Pet. 2. 21 , 23. Who when he was reviled , reviled not again , but committed himself to him that judgeth righteously ; and with freedom of spirit I do heartily both praise the Lord , and thank you for your plain deali • g with me in any thing wherein as you profess , you really and singly intended my spiritua •• good , and pray the Lord to give you repentance , and to pardon you in every thing wherein in this transaction you have done otherwise . Thus with the real dem • nstration of • y true love and affection to you , I crave your leave to go on to the answering of your Book , earnestly desiring that if yet after all we cannot agree in judgement and opinion , we may still close together in heart and affection , which ( whatever the event shall prove ) shall always be the desire , prayer , and endeavour of Your cordially loving and faithful Friend Iohn Bellamie .