TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD , IAMES Lord Archbiſhop of Armagh , Lord PRIMATE of all IRELAND . May it pleaſe your Grace , THeſe little Tractates , as they derive their being from your Graces command ; ſo ( like rivulets to the Sea ) do they return to you again . Accept them as the firſt fruits of your own Induſtry upon the Author ; who muſt ever acknowledge he owes himself alſo . What Epiſt . 31. Paulinus writes to St. Auguſtine , Os tuam fiſtulam aquae vivae , & venam fontis aeterni merito dixerim , cujus deſiderio ſitivit in te anima mea , & ubertate tui fluminis inebriari terra mea concupivit , was indeed the cauſe of my thirſting alſo , and the Load-Stone that gave me a happy draught in your ſervice , many years agon out of my native soil into this Kingdom , which , me thinks , this year by your abſence hath ſuffered a great Eclipse , and yet we cannot grudge the Church in this floating age , ſuch a Steers man , nor ſo pious a Prince , ſo precious and Earering . That which is related of the forenamed Father , Eraſ . in Ep. ad Arc. Told . and open . Auguſt & Poſſidō . de vit . Auguſt . In ipſâ menſâ potius diſputationem quam opulation • m worser • lig • bat . Menſam habebat hoſpitibus expoſitam , said frugiferis ſermonibus , magis quam exquiſitis edulijs opipuram , ſemper de re quadam frugifera commentabatur , ut non minus animi convivarum reficerentur quam corpora , is ſo well known to be your Graces daily practice , that it needs no further application , the offals of whoſe Diſcourſe carefully gathered up , were able to perfect a Divine to every good work . In a word , Ibid. Quaſi Deus voluerit in Auguſtino tanquā in una tabulâ vividum quoddam exemplar Epiſcopi repreſeatare omnibus virtutum numerum abſelutum , etc. Eraſmus his deſcription of him , by what S. Paul requires in a Biſhop , me thought in the reading ( mutato nomine ) it was your own Picture , by which if others in this age had been drawn , I believe the office had never been ſo much as queſtioned . The very subject's of both theſe Diſcourſes were they wrote by whomſoever , could not but claim and Intereſt in your Grace . The Converſion of Sinners , by a Conſtant Preaching , who ( unless a Stranger in Iſrael ) but muſt acknowledge to be your Character . Nay , this and much more , is no news to Fred. Spanhemius Profeſſor of Divinity in Geneva ( dubiorum Evangelicorum parte tertia ) in his Epiſtle Dedicatory , largely P. Bertius in tabul . Geograph . Speaking of Dublin and the College , adds this only , Fameuſe pour la preſence de Iacobus Ʋſserius Theologien honime de gran le crudition & piete , & ſur tout celebre par ſes eſcrits , natif . de Dublin . Ioan Selden , marmor Arundell in editionis cauſa , Reverend ſs Antiſtes Jacobus Uſſerius Archiep Armachanus , vir ſummâ pieta • e , judicio ſingulari , uſ que , ad miraculum doctus , & literis ſeverioribus promovendis natus , etc. I • . Caſaubonus , Abrah Scultetus , Cambden : with diverse others . By which , it is evident , that if ſome ſo advanced have miſcarried , the fault hath not been ( as the vulgar apprehends ) in the soil , but in the ſeed : Et hiſce commemorandis , nos vel utilitati publicae great ulamur , vel divinae benignitati gratamur . Vt eſt enim modeſtiae , non agnoſcere laudes , ita gratitudinis , non tacere viros , per quos Deus tanta commoda largitur humano generi . Strangers , whoſe large Relation from abroad may prevent any further from home , only it's no flattery to atteſt it . Your continued Motto of 1 Cor. 9 16. Vaemihi ſi non evangelizavero , both in your Epiſcopall and Archiepiſcopall ſeals , is as worthy of memory , as imitation , where that Woe may light I know not , but ſurely S. Pauls 2 Cor. 4.8 . repoſita eſt mihi corona , will be your portion . How little your Grace affects theſe kind of expreſſions , I am not now to learn , And for my self , let this be my plea againſt any miſ-judgings in others , Egregia virtutis exempla veluti lumen in edito ponenda ſunt , ut omnibus praeluceant , multoſq , ad aemulationem accendant . Rare examples ought to be ſet up like Mat 5.15 , 16. lights , where they may be seen ; and in the words of S. Paul , I wiſh it might be a Rom. 11.14 . means to provoke to emulation thoſe which are my fleſh , and might ſave ſome of them , Lu. 10.37 Factu ſimiliter , is the only intended moral : Be ſtill the Honour of your Nation , the ſacred firſt fruits of this College , the Prime light of this our Iſrael , where ( according to Ioſhua's wiſh ) you may like the Sun ſtand ſtill in the Firmament of our Church , till all the enemies of it , be made its footstool . So prays many thouſands , and among them , as having moſt cauſe , Your Graces moſt humble and affectionate Servant N. BARNARD Drogheda Aprill . 28. 1641.