To the whole Congregation of Believers aſſembled at St. Margerets Church in Weſtminſter , on Saterday December the 25. 1647 in the afternoon , Grace , Mercy , and Peace , from God the Father and the Lord Ieſus Chriſt . Worthy Chriſtians , I Had at the appointed time of preaching , the ſame judgement befell me which befell to Zacharias the Father of John Baptiſt Lycia 1 , 20. When I thought to have ſpoken unto the people that waited for me , and marveled that I tarried ſo long , I was ſtruck dumb and not able to ſpeak . And could I conceive it had been done by and Angel I ſhould ( as a cauſe of it ) ſuſpect in my self the ſin of unbelief . But , as it is , I am conſtrained to uſe Zacharias his way of expreſſing my meaning . On the day of your meeting in the Temple I could only beckon but remained speechless , whence you all perceived I had seen a Viſion in the Veſtry : and were not long in suspense what kind of one it was . But whatſoever it was I was tranſported or carried away with it , and am yet dumb by it . But as the Angel , though he struck Zacharias speechless , yet took not away his writing tables , v. 63. So I conceive by the tenor of that order which commands a conſtraint both of my Tongue and Heals : I am not interdicted the liberty of Pen and Paper , but I may lawfully uſe both without contempt . And ſo by this means I shall ( ſaving my regard to authority ) now acquaint you with that meſſage of God , I ſhould then [ viva voce ] have delivered in your hearing . It is true ▪ I in this Sermon repreſent as in a Sciagraph all the Joints of the Hiſtory of Chriſt : but inſiſt only on the bleſſed mystery of the Union of the two nature's ( God and Man ) in one perſon without reaching unto his birth ; or ſo far as his conecption by the wholly Ghoſt . Nor indeed as it falls out is there any need I ſhould put forward to speak of his Nativity though that were properly opus diei the work of the day , For all the circumſtances do ſufficiently proclaim the Nativity and are now newly revived . Was all tho World taxed , Lukt 2. 1. when the Meſſiah was born ? Alas for the day of the Lord ! It is ſo now . Was their no room for Chriſt in the Inn , Lycia 27 ? There is none for him now in the Churches ▪ Were there Wiſemen that ſought to worſhip him , and a Herod that under pretence of worſhip ſought to deſtroy him Mat. 2. 1 ? It was ſo now : there were that came to Church to worſhip Chriſt , and there were that came to apprehend his Miniſters . Was there a voice herd in Ramah , lamentation and weeping , and great mourning , Mat : 2 18. There is another Rachel whoſe child is not , if the news of Cornehill be true , Do theſe things cauſe a neceſſity of Chriſt his going into Aegipt the sons of Iſrael's quondam bondage Mat : 2 18. There will I fear ( but O the good God prevent that neceſſity ) be ſuch another violence , to drive us to ſuch another flight , Laſtly was that Herod not longlived : Mat. 2 19 ? I prophesy no eternity to the men of his carriage : Pſalme 55 23. But beloved , I muſt once more crave your patience , for I muſt leave you and wait upon the Committee . Whom as Gentlemen I reſpect as in Authority I Honour : as my Enemies I love , bless , and pray for : Mat. 5 , 44 : and ( that I may perform all the duties I owe upon that ſcore ) I shall labour to do good to : I muſt tell them that I have read a ſtory of Tiberious the Emperor . That he ( upon the relation which Pilate made unto him of our Saviour ) had and intention and to that purpoſe ſignified his meaning to have Jeſus of Nazarath reputed and received among the Roman Gods. But the Senate of Rome withſtood it , becauſe that Honour had been given him by ſuch as never asked their conſents . But after this I provoke any Hiſtorian to show me where that great Council did ever any act either Honeſtly , Wiſely , or like true Roman : but were made the properties & inſtruments either of the Caeſars lustest , or Soldiers villainies . And now I wiſh theſe men ſeriouſly to advice how much ſhort this inſolence is of the former ? When men may not Honour , Miniſters may not preach Chriſt without their Licence under pain of impriſonment without Bail or main prize . I speak not this out of Stomach for what I ſuffer , but as heartily as I would beg pardon for my sins do I wiſh them a better exit , hoping yet they may acquire a better and more glorious concluſion then theſe diſtempers can promiſe or the Roman Council had . And now I return to give you and account of that which otherwiſe migh ſeem ſtrange . Which is that way of application you shall meet with all , reversed upon my self . I confess it is not usual ; nor indeed proper for one that speaks to others . But firſt , as it is the Miniſter of Chriſts part to appear in innocence a Dove , Math : 10 16 : So as the Doves feed their young ones with that which themſelves have taken down : ought Preachers to digeſt in their own breasts , and be fore-taſters of that spiritual food they divide to others ▪ and this I had laboured to do . Secondly theſe meditations being now to be read , not herd : I thought good ſo to diſpoſe them , that each Reader might as I have done ſuc • in the juice and influence of them : and by reading as it were engage himself upon the practical part of them . Unto both which no way ſo Organical as prayer . And I do humbly pray that every Reader may be alſo a Believer , and have a heart open as well as and eye . For I conceive ( with humble reverence ) that the Gospel if it go no further then the eye or ear is mortiferous and deadly , a killing letter . But if it be tranſmitted to the more noble and vital parts it is Sovereign , Food and Physic , Meat and Medicine . Chriſt in the Fleſh , may vouchſafe to accept the Stable and the Manger but coming in the Spirit he muſt have a Temple to entertain him . And by ſo providing , we ſhall ſupply what was wanting not at Bethlem only , but at Weſtminſter alſo . If any of you ſhould be ſo ignorant as not to underſtand what I would be at in all this . I muſt tell you that though I cannot aſſent to the mind of them that would have the obſervation of this feaſt ſuperſtition ; yet you that give place to the Devil Eph : 4. 27. are more injurious to Chriſt then any , Sin , sin , that is it muſt be taken down , it was sin and the Devil that snatched this bred of life out of your mouths that ſent me to Priſon Revel . 2. 10. Can you ( knowing what Chriſt is ) think to honour Chriſt in commemoration of the Nativity and at that ſeaſon ſo shuffle the cards that sin ſhall be Trump in every dealing . Remember Iohn Baptiſt muſt be born before Chriſt You muſt Repent if the Kingdom of God be at hand It is certain that that Spirit which confesses that Jeſus Chriſt is come in the fleſh is of God , 1. Iohn . 4. 2. and ſo on the contrary the Non confeſſor thereof is the 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 That Spirit of Antichriſt , verſ . 3. I remember St. Auguſtin , with a great deal of pains proves every Heretic to be a denyer of the coming of Ieſus Chriſt in the fleſh whatſoever his Heresy be . But me thinks Origen with much more eaſe and plainness shows that the beſt way to confess Ieſus Chriſt to be come in the fleſh , is by not committing of sin ; unto which purpoſe he lays that text , 1. Iohn 3. 8. & 9. to the forementioned 4. c . 2. v. where in 4 , Chapter to Be of God is the Predicate to this Confeſſion as the Subject . And in the 3. Chapter to be born of God is the Subject and not committing sin is the Predicate . So that not to commit sin is the remote ( and but once removed ] definition of the confeſſion of Chriſts Nativiny , or coming in the fleſh . So that the commemoration or confeſſion by way of Obſervation of the Day to the end is not Antichriſtian ( they were miſtaken that adviſed the Parliament ſo ) But the Drunkenness and Gluttony the Luxury & Riot etc. , Theſe are Antichriſtian , & ſo far Antichriſtian that where theſe are ! Men ( even when they would confess ) do deny Chriſt Ieſus to be come in the Fleſh . And of theſe ſince the ſecular magiſtrate diſtinguiſheth not it behooveth us Miniſters to be careful . For though I know not what State arguments there may be to prove the Holly & Ivy ſuperſtitions : yet when theſe things ſhall be ſet up , ſooted and ſmoked with the ſins of Intemperance and Excess , I ſhall think them fitter Trophies of a Chimney-ſweepers Birth day , then a Saviours , When we ſhall eat and drink and riſe up to play , I muſt think theſe are Ceremonies fitter for the Golden-calf which Aaron made in Horeb : then the lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world . And verily ( let me be angry in it ) I judge it a cauſe of greater fear and danger then a Priſon or a Goal , lined with a good conſcience , This therefore was my firſt intention to persuade you all by renouncing sin to celebrate the feaſt of Chriſts Nativity for then we beſt testify the belief of his coming when we moſt fear to offend him or his father . And in this way I would be glad to keep Chriſtmas with any one Being very deſirous that all you which would have herd me that Day had been both almoſt , and altogether ſuch as I am , Except the Fleet. Which I muſt confess I take very pati • ntly ; bleſſing God that it overtook me not in any evil deed , but in welldoing or at leaſt the intention of it . Neither ſhall the error of the Committee in ſending me to it , ( And Oh that it were the greateſt they are guilty of ) make me forget the Joy of Chriſts Incarnation , or the Good will towards men the Angels ſung . They are Men ſo was my Redeemer , for whoſe ſake , and through whoſe Grace I can ſuffer greater wrongs then theſe and yet never hate the Men . Indeed there is ſomewhat in it that is not Man but Devil To make men Dumb as to matters of Duty and Faith : that is the Act of the Unclean Spirit Math. 12 22 : It is that hath [ in a sense ] made me lame ſo that I cannot walk . But if it hath made me Dumb and Lame . it hath made them Deaf ▪ and Blind . And truly Without a Miracle I fear neither of us are like to recover . And becauſe my infirmity is but and appendant to theirs , I ſhall heartily pray for them , that they may receive their sighed even in this their day that they might ſee the things that belong to their , the Churches , and the Kingdoms Peace : That Chriſt would ſay Epphata : Be opened . That they that have ears to hear may hear What Chriſt himself hath ſaid himſelf to them , to me , to the Parliament and all : Mat : 22 , 21. Give unto Caeſar the things that are Caeſars ; & unto God the things that are Gods. And then I doubt not ( for I ſuffer but by sympathy ) but I shall be able ( with him Acts 38 : ) to walk and to praiſe God . Unto which time whither it be the pleaſure of God , to prolong my days I know not ( for it hath ſome analogy to that time whereof our Saviour speaks , when he says many Kings & Righteous men have deſired to ſee and have not yet seen . ] but this I reſolve on : While I live not to ceaſe day and night , praying for the haſtening of it . For the time we live in now ( I am confident ) is part of that mentioned Mat. 24 : 21 : Except theſe days ſhould be ſhortened no fleſh can be ſaved : and the Promiſe which cloſeth the ſame verſe : it revives me doubly in relation to the general with hope : to my own particular with care : to give all diligence to make my calling and Election ſure . 2 Pet : 1 ▪ 10. The Elect ( that is they that add to their Faith ; Virtue , and to Virtue Knowledge , and to Knowledge Temperance , and to Temperance Patience , and to Patience Godliness , & to Godliness brotherly Kindness , and to brotherly Kindness Charity ) have and intereſt in better times . For their ſakes theſe days ſhall be ſhortened . Wherefore God ſtir up your hearts to endeavour be of that Number & to increaſe it . Neither is this ſpoken by way of Pharisaical impoſition to eaſe my ſelf but what ever others intend , it is my reſolution ( and the good Lord Keep it for ever in the purpoſe of my heart ) to begin this only ſaving health in ſtead of all others , Pſalme 116 18. For believe it I am very ſenſible we live in the worſt of times , and that I am one Chriſt Jeſus came into the World to ſave that is to ſay the Chief of Sinners . And From the Fleet , Ianuary 8. 1647. Your Debtor in this ſervice N. BERNARD .