TO HIS Excellency ROBERT Earl of ESSEX , Viſcount Hereford , Baron Ferrars of Chartley , Lord Bourchier and Lovain , one of His Majeſties moſt Honourable Privy Council , and General of the Army raiſed by the Parliament , in defence of the true Proteſtant Religion , his Majeſties perſon , the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom , and the Privileges of Parliament . IT is a lovely thing ( says the Philoſopher ) to 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . Ariſt . benefit one , but to do good to a nation , it is a thing divine . Your Excellencies love to England , in not counting your blood , your life deer to preſerve it ; the eminencyes in your perſon of virtue and valour , of courage and courtesy , of greatness and goodness , of mercy and meekness , of admirable prudence , and unwearied patience , the worthy deeds already done unto this Nation , by your providence ; all theſe obliges all true Engliſh hearts , to bear a part in the National acknowledgment of your worth , and in accepting what is done by your Excellency with all thankfulness . Your noble candor may be pleaſed then , to pardon this preſumption of dedication , in a ſtranger to your knowledge , but and honourer of your virtues ; the rather , becauſe the obſcureſt clot upon the fallow , reflects ſomething of the sun beams , as well as the mountains , as the whole globe . Theſe enſuing meditations are now muſtered , to attend the Camp : and if the banner of your protection overſpread them , he ſhall be comforted , who by them deſires principally to comfort the Natio , yea the world . For if it be true as Saint Auguſtine writes , that if one drop of the joys of heaven ſhould fallen into hell , it would ſwallow up all the bitterness of it : Tanta eſt dulcedo caeleſlis gaudij , ut ſi una guttula difflueret in infernum totam amaritudinem inferni abſorberet , Auguſt Rom 5. 3. Rom. 8 37. Heb 10 35. Deut. 33. 26. 27. it may be hoped then , that a few drops of heavenly joys , here preſented [ under your Excellencies countenance ] to my Countrymen , engulfed in and hell of outward misery's , may avail to allay their bitterness , and clear their eye sighed ( as Ionathans was after his taſting honey ) to ſee through and hell of horror , their heavenly recovery . It is Englands preſent duty , to rejoice in tribulations , to triumph under terrors , to confide under conflicts , to expect ſalvations , to view God by the eye of faith , as a refuge , as interwining us in his everlaſting arms of preſervation , as healing our breaches , as staunching our wounds , as preparing all ranks among us , to enjoy a perpetual unity , peace , amity , joy and jubilee , in deſpite of hell and Room . All this God will do for us in righteousness , but by terrible things . And during his pouring vials of wrath upon the Antichriſtians , the Engliſh Church ( with the other reformed ) muſt ſtand on a ſea of glass mingled with fire . She ſhall apparently ſee ( as in a glass ) Antichriſtian Rev. 15. 2. 3. tumults , riſing like wave after wave , yet Chriſt calming them , and cauſing all attempts ebb into emptiness , come to nothing . She ſhall ſtand on a ſea mingled with fire : enduring hight ſervice from inward contentions , and outward afflictions : theſe a while ſhall heat her , but not fire her ; ſcorch her , but not roſt her ; bruiſe her heel perhaps , in ſome loſſes , but they ſhall not break her , nor crumble her , into a total deſolation : for the ten Kingdoms muſt ſtand by and unalterable decree , to undo Antichriſt , Rev. 17. from the 12 , to the end . though they a while may seem to favour and fight for him . And ſhe ſhall ſtand with the harps of God , ſinging the ſongs of Moſes ſongs of judgement , praiſes ; for every new judgement upon her troublers , and deſtroyers : and ſinging too , the ſong of the lamb , ſongs of mercy , praises , for every new deliverance , vouchſafed her from on high . All bleſſings from the omnipotent Lamb ( who warreth againſt Antichriſt , and will conquer ) are craved for your Excellency , by all the real lovers of this Nation , among Minimorum minimus Tertul. ad Trallian . whom I reſt the meaneſt of Chriſts miniſters , and to July . 20 1644. Your Excellency moſt humbly devoted in all Chriſtian ſervice , IOHN BEVVICK ,