To the right Reverend , the faithful Ministers of Gods Word , of Britain , and Ireland . RIGHT REVEREND . GRace be to you , and peace from God our Father , and from the Lord Jesus Christ . At the direction of the General Assembly at Edinburgh , Anno 1644. I put my hand to the work of the Psalms ▪ whereof I give to you now this last edition , The work is for the public service of God in his Church , and it concerns you especially to endeavour by all means that this work may be done for the glory of God , and edification of his people , whose souls are committed to your charge . That this may be done worthily , diverse things in my • … udgement are required . First , That the interpretation approven , and received by our Church be not changed in the verse , by any particular men opinion ; for the interpreters in some dark places differ in opinions concerning the sense : If the verse follow one interpretation , and the Text another , consider how impertinent that will be . Secondly , That all dfficile words be shunned , by reason , that many people and children must sing that are unlearned . Thirdly , That , so far as is possible , no words of the Text be wanting , for in the Text there be no idle words or superfluities to be retrinched , as in men's discourse . Fourthly , If any words be added , that they be pertinent to make the sense clear ▪ as we see in the Text some words added . which are printed in smaller letters . PSAL. 16. 2. PSAL. 27. 8. PSAL. 54. 17. etc. Fiftly , A special care would be had that the verse be very clear , and easy to be understood by the most ignorant , that unlearned people and children may as Gods word directs , PSAL. 47. 7. Sing with understanding , It is better pertinently to add some words for explication , as we see done in that • … Text it self , then without them to leave the matter so obscure , that the people & children should sing they know not what : • … Cor. 14 〈 ◊ 〉 . I , said the Apostle , will pray with the spirit , and I will pray with understanding , and I will sing with the spirit , I will sing with the understanding also : This above all must be regarded , that the verse be very clear and easy to be understood : It is far better without all controversy , that diverse words in a pertinent paraphrase be added , that people may understand what they sing , then to want one word of the Text , whereby the song is made obscure ; The Apostle preferreth five words with understanding , to ten thousand obscure : 1 Cor. 14. 19. Saint PAUL is a great enemy to obscurity , and all faithful Pastors must , and will set their face against it in all things that concern the souls that their Master hath bought with his blood , and concredited to them : Let therefore all difficle words be shunned that are not in the Bible ; as for the words of the Bible , all should understand them . Sixthly , A special care would be had , that so far as may be , the words of the Text be not changed with any other , that those that have their Bibles before them may read the words of the text in the song ▪ when other words are in the verse , the Text seems uncouth to him that readeth or sings : It greatly edifies when the words of the Song are the words of the Text ; and this would be very carefully considered , and aimed at by all that meddle with the trial of our labours , that most diligently they compare the words of the verse with the words of the Text , that none thereof be wanting , nor any others put into their place , so far as is possible to do the same ; the Text must be the only touchstone for trial . Seventhly , He that meddleth with such a work would have good understanding in the Hebrew , which is the Original and fountain ; The want of this , or the not taking heed , hath made all English verse that I have seen , make a very great fault , in mistaking that which is said of God himself , in the PSAL. 82. 1. where it is said , God stands in the congregation of the mighty , he judgeth among the gods ; All the Psalms in English verse that I have seen , by the mighty , there understand mighty men , which is a very great mistake ; the Original Hebrew clearly lets us see , that it is God himself that is there called El : those be the words , Elohim nitsav bagnadath El , that is , is Piseator in his version hath very well ▪ Deus stat in coetu Dei , which he interpreteth thus , hoc est Deus stat in coetu suo , id est in coetu a se ordinato : Our English version in this verse would be mended ; where as it h • … that God stands in the Assembly of that • … mighty , it were better and more clear to put God stands in the Assembly of God ▪ Now right Reverend , this is my last labour which I have set down with the Text interlined , that the judicious reader may ▪ have under his eye both the Text and the verse , and may them more easily confer them together , and discern . I desire that no man esteem that in a mercenary way I am seeking gain by those my labours , though the work hath been both painful and chargeable , I with a most willing mind offer all in a freewill offering to the Lord ; seek gains who will , I will have none , nor do I stand in need , praised be the Lord : I hope the judicious Reader shall find this last edition mended in many things ; If any thing hath been observed by any in the former editions , let them consider if it be mended in this last , which , as I have hitherto done , I submit in all humliity to the judgement of my Brothers in the Ministry . The spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets : 1 Cor. 14. 32. From GLASGOW ; the day 1648. Your humble servant in the LORD , M. ZACHARY BOYD .