TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THOMAS ATKIN Eſquire , LORD MAJOR Of the City of LONDON . Right Honourable , THis Sermon had waited upon you ſooner , had not ſome intervening accidents , and occaſions hindered . At length , ſuch as it is , It here humbly preſents it self unto your Honour . And truly my Lord , you have all the reaſon in the world to own it ; for it's more yours then mine . It was your deſire ( which with me hath , and ever ſhall have the force of a command ) that brought it , firſt into the palpit , then into the press ; yea ſo much as the very Text and all was your choice ; which to me is a mighty rock of confidence , that you earneſtly deſire to know what it is God requires of you in your place ; being willing to do it ; and I am ſure you have power . And theſe three complete a good Magiſtrate : Skill to govern , Power to manage that Skill , & will to actuate both . Much of that bleſſed work , I was then ſuch and earneſt and humble suitor for , I already ſee happily accompliſhed . Your pious care for the more ſtrict obſervation of the Lords Day ; Your unparalleled zeal for the ſuppreſſing of ſwearing , drunkenness , and other the like God-provoking , Land-devouring , Soul-damning abominations : your vigorous activity , fidelity , sincerity , for the Reformation , preſervation , good every way of this great City ſhall ſtand upon record to your everlaſting Honour . When I think of it , I cannot chooſe but ſay with Ezra . Ezra . 7.27 . Now bleſſed be God , who hath put ſuch a thing as this into your heart . And then pray with David,1 Chron. 29.18 . Keep this for ever Lord , for ever in the thoughts of the heart of thy ſervant ! Iam. 5.2 • . To be instrumental in the reformation , though but of a family , yea though but of a particular perſon , it's the moſt choiceſt , and moſt glorious piece of ſervice that can poſſibly be accompliſhed by the sons of men : but to be instrumental in the reformation of a City , and ſuch a City , ſo populous , ſo exemplary , ſo influential into the whole Kingdom ; Dan. 12.3 . O the height , the depth , the breadth , the length of this dignity ! Luk. 1.16 . The Lord give you and humble heart , that you may not be exalted above meaſure , through this abundant honour he hath put upon you ; which is ſuch , that truly , my Lord , were there no other end for which you live but this , yet in this you have great cauſe to bless your self in God ; and in his name we bless you . And now , what remains but that you gird your ſword upon your thigh , and ride on ? that you advance ſtill forward , and do nobly , for your self , your people , and your God ? Conſider I beſeech you , how great the truſt is , this City hath committed to you : It has given you the Keys , the Sword . The Safety , the Government . They have all caſt themſelves ( as it were ) at your feet , ſaying , This is the man we will have to rule over us . Thus ſhall it be done unto the man , whom London will honour , and thus has it been done to you . And now , will not you honour London my Lord , that has thus honoured you ? And wherein can you honour it more , then in reforming it ? It was the honour of that City Jeruſalem , above all other Cities in the World , that it was the Holy City . Mat. 4.5 . O that it might be Londons honour ! To ſay London is rich , or London is wiſe , or London is ſtrong , this is ſomething : But to ſay London is holy , this is more then all . Ier. 9.23 , 24. Let not the wiſe man glory in his wisdom , nor the ſtrong man glory in his ſtrength , nor the rich man glory in his riches : but let him that glorieth , glory in this that he underſtands and knows me , says the Lord . This will make it honourable in the eyes of God , in the eyes of the Saints of God ; Deut. 4.5 , 6 , 8. yea , and in the eyes even of the very enemies of God . You cannot honour the City more , then by endeavouring to make it a holy City . And my Lord , as ever you ſeriouſly minded and intended any thing , I beſeech you mind and intend this . Its the thing we look for at your hands . Its the thing you muſt do , or do what you will , what you can , you do juſt nothing . Doe ! nay , you undo every thing . Reform us my Lord , or you ruin us . what a perfidious thing were it , for your Honour to betray the City ? My Lord , reform it , or you betray it . And your late solemn Covenant ; and the Oath upon Oath you have taken ſince , o what mighty engagements ſhould they be upon your ſpirit ? The vows of God are upon you my Lord ; ſo that its no arbitrary thing . Necessity is laid upon you , and woe to you , if you do it not . Yet again , reform London my Lord , and you reform England . If London be wicked , ungodly , profane , how will profaneness flow from it , as from a fountain , into the whole Kingdom ? And on the other ſide , if London be pious , religious , well ordered , well governed , reformed , how will all the Counties , Cities , Villages , Places round about , by its example , be encouraged likewiſe to a Reformation ? Once more ( and I will uſe the mightieſt argument in the world , and that which ſo raised the brave ſpirit , of that great Apoſtle , to ſuch invincible patience & unwearied activeneſs for Gods glory and the Churches good ) 2 Cor. 5.14 Let the love of Chriſt conſtrain you . I read of holy Job , that being a man in authority ( as you are ) he was ſuch a terror to wicked and ungodly men , that they durſt not show their heads , but were glad to Iob 30.3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7. fly into woods , wilderneſſes & ſolitary places ; and there hide themſelves in cliffs , and rocks , and holes of the earth , and cut up mallows among the buſhes , and Juniper roots for their meat . It's a copy penned for you my Lord , by Gods own hand ; write after it . I know you fear not the face of man . Your Honour knows what it is to lie in a priſon for your Countries good . Bear not the ſword in vain . Draw it and cut off thoſe that will not otherwiſe be reclaimed . Make wicked and ungodly men afraid of you . Let not Drunkards dare to go reeling and ſtaggering in the ſtreets ; nor Swearers dare to open their mouths in oaths and blaſphemies in the ſtreets ; nor children & others dare to be playing up & down the ſtreets on the Lords Day . Aaron may ſpeak : but it is Moſes Rod that does the wonders . we that are Miniſters may cry out againſt theſe things : but you have power in your hands . Let not ſin dare any longer to affront Word and Sword . Its a precious opportunity God has put into your hands , improve it . You may do more good , and bring in a greater revenue of glory to God now , in a few hours , then it may be you ſhall ever be able to do again in many years . Cloſe your eyes againſt all diſcouragements . Laugh in the face of difficulties . Pass by with generous magnanimity and brave contempt the deriſions of men , viler then the earth . Iob. 30.8 . You are high in place and office : Be higher in affection and reſolution . To the work in good earneſt , and go through ſtitch with it . Every eye that looks upon you , will bless you . The prayers of all Gods people will be for you . And , though we will not preſume to ſay to you , as Nestorius ſaid to the Emperor , Socrat. lib . 7.29 . Mihi o Imperator , terram tu haereticis purgatam tribue ; & ego tibi coelum retribuam , Give us London purged of Drunkards , Swearers , Sabboath-breakers , etc. and wee'll give you Heaven : Yet Jeſus Chriſt ſhall ſay , Well done good and faithful ſervant . And not only we that now live , but ſucceeding ages ſhall call you bleſſed . Your name shall be like a precious ointment to the children ; yea , to the children's children that are yet unborn . Your Honours moſt humble and obliged ſervant ELIDAD BLACKWELL .