TO THE HONOURABLE THE Committee of the County of Kent , Ioſeph Boden wishes wisdom from above to discern the frauds , and Chriſtian reſolution to reſiſt the undertakings of the Babyloniſh brood ; together with a full recompense of all your labours for the truth , both with and increase of grace and peace in this world , and eternal glory in the world to come . Honourable and Beloved ; AS this Sermon came from you into the world , ſo now it returns from the world to you again : your approbation , and requeſt ( which is command enough ) encouraged me to , and in the publication ; and your Patronage ſhall be all the ſhelter I will seek , in caſe of detraction . I know the matter will diſpleaſe many , becauſe here the Church of God is put upon acting againſt the Antichriſtian Synagogue , and party : but I matter not theſe men's diſpleaſure : for I profeſſedly seek , and press a diſappointment of their design , and a diſsipation of them , ſo far as they drive it on wittingly , and willingly againſt the Lord and his Chriſt . There is a generation of men who pretend daily to pray ( as they are taught ) Thy kingdom come , and yet their plots and endeavours , are againſt nothing more , then the coming of Christ his kingdom : ihe enlightening of theſe men's eyes , or the binding of their hands is chiefly aimed at , in the enſuing Diſcourſe : for the preſent therefore I am reſolved not to weigh what they cenſure , becauſe I look upon them either as blinded , or wrong biased , and ſo neither a conſiderable party , nor indifferent Judges . If the plainness of the ſtyle be either queſtioned , or blamed , my anſwer is ready , it was choſen on purpoſe , that if any good do iſſue , upon either , the preaching , or publiſhing of this piece , the praiſe may be of , and to God , not the weak and unworthy Inſtrument . Theſe notions found acceptance with you , in the delivery , and therefore , though now they may want that life and vigour which then they ſeemed to have , yet I hope ( for Gods not men ſake ) they will find a proportionable acceptation with your eyes , to that of your ears : ſome enlargements of particulars which you herd in the Pulpit are here poſsibly omitted , for memory may fail me to gather up theſe fragments . All the materials are faithfully laid together , only one uſe in the cloſe , ( as proper to the point , and neceſſary for theſe times ) is briefly added . If singularity in point of offenſive Arms be laid to my charge , I reply , that now men generally call for , and inquire after news , and though this may seem to ſuit theſe wanton wits in the publication , yet the Text clears it , to be and old truth ; novel only in caſe of diſcovery . And the truth is , this beſt ſuits my genius , for I wholly deſire to be the diſciple of old truths , and have no heart to tamper or be taken with them , who affect to be master's of new hereſies : as there are too many ( who through fair shows , but without doubt , for baſe ends ) do trouble the Church with their found fancies , and new fangle toys , in theſe turbulent times : but I leave them to their juſtly deſerved cenſure , with the Apoſtles wiſh , Gal. 5. 12. would to God they were even cut off that trouble us , and to the Church of God with the ſame Apoſtle I write thus . Rom. 16. 17. Now I beſeech you Brothers , mark them that cauſe diviſions , and offences contrary to the Doctrine which you have received ; and avoid them . Oh! that whilst we hunt thePſal . • 0. 13. Boars which out of the wood do waſte the Lords vineyard , we would alſo have and eye to endeavour the catching of thoſeCant . 2. 15 Foxes , thoſe little Foxes , that spoil the vines . For though they come to us in ſheeps clothing , yet inwardly they are ravening wolves . Shortly thus , I ſee not but malignants of the new garb in the Church , may do as much hurt as thoſe of the old one , in the State . Let me not for this be thought , and enemy to the endeavoured Reformation , it is the deſire of my soul to ſee it up , in its full beauty , and ſtrength , only I would have old Babylon broken down , and all new Babels kept down , that while we have voted , and vowed out bypast ſuperſtition , we may not be obſtructed , or burdened in the work of the Lord , with new Jesuitic all plots of faction and schism , leſt while men plead for liberty , they turn Libertines : and after we have covenanted ; ſincerely , really , and conſtantly , ( through the grace of God ) to endeavour , that the Lord may be one , and his name one in three kingdoms , we be not found by every men ſeeking , and ſetting up himſelf , to neglect the keeping of the union of the ſpirit in the bound of peace , and inſtead of advancing the Lord Ieſus , to be the beginners and fomentors of confuſion , in all the Churches of Chriſt . But from this occasional digreſsion Ireturne . And if the needlessness , or tardiness of my pains in this ſubject , be laid in the way of that profit which might otherwiſe be reaped hereby , I would remove this obſtacle thus , although this be but to write Iliads after Homer , yet all men either have not seen , or will not make uſe of , or cannot underſtand the Labours of the more Learned : theſe therefore may be useful to ſome , and I have my aim , if either for condiction , or confirmation , I can benefit any , though they be the meaneſt of the people for parts , or place . And I might have been ſooner in print , if I durſt have thought any thing the Lord had imparted unto me , worth public view , or any ways able to ſtand up againſt a general cenſure : but ſince you worthy Patriots may not be nonsuited by him who is unexpreſsibly engaged to your , and the Countries ſervice , and that I muſt out and abroad , among the crowd of other scribblers , theſe Lines through Gods mercy may prove in good time for kenned , ( where they were bred , and for which , they are chiefly publiſhed , ) although otherwiſe they be too late for Chriſtendome . I will not any longer ſtand or ſtay to anſwer for my self , by a larger Apology , I muſt leave my defence in other things to you moſt induſtrious Gentlemen ; And I ſhall think my Lot very ſtrange , if you ( who under God ) have been the Saviours of the County , cannot ſhelter me among ſo many , eſpecially ſince ( for deſires to do good ) I fear not Tongue , if I can eſcape Gunſhot . It will be happiness enough to me , moſt faithful Patriots , if upon the review of theſe my unworthy Labours , your ſpirits be heightened into actium againſt the enemies of the truth ; It is and honourable ſervice , for you to ſpend and to be ſpend in . And by quickening you hereunto , my hope is to ſee you every way successful , under Boaz his bleſsing , of doing worthily in Ephratah , and being famous in Bethlehem . In confidence whereof I make bold to ſubſcribe my self , Your ſervant in all offices for Chriſt , againſt Antichriſt . Ioſeph Boden .