To the right Honourable , ( the Honourable ) the right Worshipful , ( the Worshipful , etc. ) the Generality of the honourable East India Corporation . RIght Honourable , etc. Two things have coacted and impulsed me to trouble your Honours , etc. with this rude Epistle : The one is and ardent desire I have not only to express my endeared affection to the honourable Society , but also my willingness ( though uninvited , in coming to counsel before I am called , presuming of your gracious pardon if not good acceptance ) to manifest or make known unto you what my weak capacity conceiveth behooveful for the welfare and indemnity of the honourable Company of India Merchant's in their right worthy famous actium of Commerce . The other is for vindication of my good name , never yet justly tainted ) by declaration of the intolerable wrongs which I Richard Boothby , and honest poor member of the India Company , and your trusty servant , hath undergone both in India , by lewd , malicious , tyrannical , fraudulent , juggling fellow-servants ; and also at home , by partial , injust , ingrateful , unconscionable , corrupt Governors , and timeserving Committees in the India Courts . For your encouragements in that worthy actium of Commerce , be pleased to conceive charitably and friendly of the opinion , or rather assured knowledge of a weak unintelligent Merchant , that the trade to and from India , & from port to port in the several places of India , and other Kingdoms near adjacent , is the most hopeful , beneficial of any part of the world ; wherein by Gods blessing , a competency ( if not a superfluity ) in estate is to be attained unto with small stock , in 4 , 5 , 6 , or 7 years time ; which 3 or 4 times so many years spent in other Countries , will not so suddenly supply with far greater stock . The danger of the trade by sea , especially in those oriental parts , is small , taking the opportunity and season of the year in the time of the favourable monsons , or trading winds , the seas so calm and pleasant , that from India to Persia , Bantum , Mocco , Madagascar , Mauritius , and other parts , the ships commonly tow their long Boats , Skiffs , and Barges at their Stern to and again ; and by a voyage in three , foure , or five months time too and again , there may be gained , 30 , 40 , 50 , 60 , 80. and 100. per cent . profit , and more in several sorts of commodities , according to the judgement and discretion of the intelligent Merchant , in making choice of his commodity , and attaining it at the best hand . Hereof I will not much insist , having more at large discoursed thereof in a rude pamphlet tending to encouragements to plant in Madagascar ( which perhaps may hereafter come out in print ) where I could wish my self and family securely ( with others my Countrymen ) seated in that most famous , pleasant , wholesome , fruitful Island , as I suppose , transcending all others in the world , if my weak purse and decrepit unable body for travel , would permit . The other cause moving me to this occasion for vindication of my good name , in manifestation of my wrongs , will be superfluous to insist upon in this Epistle , for that the present declaration thereof hereunto annexed , will more at large demonstrate the same . Be pleased , right honourable , etc. courteously to accept the admonishments & advertisements of and unintelligent Merchant ( especially in matters that are not within his line , or beyond the reach of his apprehension ) yet in some things I may peradventure say more by industrious observation and affectionate duty to your Honours Corporation , its welfare and indemnity , then others ( it may be ) either can or will . In the first pla • e it were good at your general Courts ( especially at the election of your Governor , Deputy , Committees and Officers , ) not to be absent to lend your votes in • busing fitting persons thereunto , men fearing God , and hating covetousness ( for by your absence and small appearance of late at such times , the time-serving Governor and Committees , are better fitted to band together , to continue in their places , or to elect new , such men as they either know or presume will be for their accommodation the one to the other , in their own private ends . ) And if at such election some pious Divine spend and hour , or less , in godly exhortations in a Sermon , to persuade to upright dealing between all parties , as well in the differences between the Court and their servants , or their servants one against another , as for their fidelity and industry in managing the main affairs , or joint stock of the Company . It may not perhaps be accounted or found and irksome , needless , or impertinent matter to spend and hours time in such businesses , nor yet a superfluous charge , to gratify a worthy Minister for his pains therein : For surely , the partiality , injustice , uncharitableness , and ingratitude of those Courts , have wrought much wrong and oppression to their best deserving servants , and caused connivance at their most wicked , lewd , fraudulent , and worst deserving servants , being blinded with their heaps of ill-gotten goods , by bribery , and bopes to match such ill-deserving men in marriage to their daughters . In the next place I think it not amiss to put you in mind , that charge be given to those Courts , to make choice of their India servants , men of good repute and credit in life and conversation , as well as of men of ability and understanding to manage their affairs , and that no lewd , debauched , illlivers , prodigal unthrifty persons , profane swearers , drunkards , and lascivious persons , of which sort too many have been entertained , by favour and friendship in Court , even of their own sons , kindred or friends , and by letters from great men to pleasure them , ( sent out as the phrase hath been , for sacrifice , or by such voyages to reclaim them , which is rather the next way to thrust such persons into the Devils mouth , and to make them ten times worse then ere they were before ) which turns to the dishonour of God , the prejudice of the honourable Company , and their own souls hazard , countenanced by example of superionrs there , given to all excess of riot , and delighting to make others children of Belial as themselves . Thirdly , it were better in my weak judgement , to make plain downright accord and covenant with their servants concerning private trade , rather then by indirect conniving thereat , to covenant with them for less salary , which they regard not in any comparison to their benefit by private trading , ( though they enter into large bonds to the contrary , which they know the Court never hath put in suit , nor ever will , as not effectual by the laws of the Land ) which is as difficult a thing to reclaim in their servants , as for a hungered starved Cook to dress curious dainty viands for a great Feast , and be bound under great penalty , not so much as to lick his fingers . But other plain covenants and agreements may be devised to the better contentment and accommodation of their servants and themselves , ( as my self hath heretofore demonstrated my opinion more at large in the particulars to the India Court , which were too large to relate in and Epistle . Fourthly , why should it not be as easy and facile a matter to them at home to make choice of their President and Council in India , as to make choice of succeeding Captains , Master's of Ships , and Commanders at Sea by occasion of mortality : And in my opinion the same course they take in the one , may as well be observed in the other ; and not to leave the choice of succeeding places of eminency in India , to their servants own choice , where greatness of power , hope's of favour and private respects , will cause servants to vote one for another , though to the great prejudice of their Honourable Employers , and the ruin of honest men in India , who are conscionable in their duties to God and to their Master's , whereby much disaster hath befallen in the Companies affairs , by the jugglings and defraudments of deceitful persons in chiefest places of eminency , and intolerable wrongs done even to their equals , for not running the same course , or not conniving thereat , as this plain Declaration will in part manifest . And its worthy the consideration of the Honourable Company , to endeavour its reformation . For a wicked President , and his packed main part of Council , can easily in India make malicious show of great crimes feigned to be committed , against and honest man , and to arraign him , condemn him to prison , suspend the salary , and ship him home a delinquent , before ever he make his purgation to the Court at home , and so he and all his are in possibility to be ruined unjustly . For it is no small matter of moment , considering the multitude of dangerous disasters that depend thereon , whereof for fear of discouragement to any undertaker in those adventurous employments , I forbear the relation , which I could manifest of dangerous consequence both at Sea and Land , for a man to make a long dangerous voyage to India , and without just cause to be dismissed from his fair fortune's to seek redress in partial unjust India Courts at home , where corrupt Governors and Courts when they have voted the innocency of the party abused , and promised restitution of wrongs , shall yet unconscionahly for by respects , recall their former votes , and plead in the defence of the malignant parties . It's not for the accommodation of the honourable actium of commerce to question the Presidents power and authority , but rather to defend it , ( though never so wicked a tyrant ; ) nor for the honour of India Courts to be curious Inquisitors into the Presidents actions , ( be they never so impious , fraudulent , or oppressfull . ) And so long as such corrupt Courts at home are not reformed , it were better for and honest man so abused , to hang himself ( were it not for the danger of his soul ) then to undergo such wicked censures at home . In those India elections it is good to make choice of pious Ministers , both for residency in India , and aboard your Shipping . The choice of lewd men of that worthy function , hath done much hurt among your servants by their evil example , surpassing others in those lewd consuming sins of soul , body , and estate , Alea , Vina , Venus : Some of which have dishonoured God , their nation and profession in a high degree , and made no conscience to leave their spurious bastards in India , to be bred up in Paganism , and at ripe years to be had in esteem in regard of their whiteness , by a lewd Christian bawd , to make a common harlot of . Fifthly , it seems strange to me , that a government in India by a President and Council , should be established by a private Commission never seen to any in my time ( or before or since ) but to the President himself , who under colour of that power and authority , rules as a Tyrant , according to his own wicked disposition , Hoc volo , hoc jubeo ; which whosoever shall question , is in danger ipso facto to be arraigned for his life as a traiter or mutiner : who having by usurpation crept into the place of Presidency , makes choice of three more of Council , whom he pleases , which he proudly calls ( His Council , ) like ambitious Cardinal Wolsey ( Ego & Rex meus ) And if but one of them stick close to him , whom he will be sure shall be a son of Belial fit for his purpose : then in regard of his double voycc , he carries all consultations or acts of Court which way he pleases , against the other two , and they also must in the end of necessity comply , or else their own ruin shall shortly be effected . Therefore in my simple opinion , it were more just , that lesser power were in the President , and more in the Council ( as I hear it is since lately somewhat amended in that point , upon my complaint and abuse done unto me by such Wild government . And me thinks it were not amiss that the Presidents and Counsels Commission , were at least once a year read at a public Assembly , both to Merchant's and Seamen , that all men may know how to render due obedience to superiors , nor the superiors to Lord it too much over their inferiors . And also why should not hereto be added good Laws and Ordinances for directions on both sides , how to behave themselves in their duties to God , their loyalty to their Sovereign , the welfare of their honourable employers , and the peace , tranquillity , and love one towards another ; which I leave to your Honours and Worships considerations . I may not let pass one thing , which I conceive hath been a curse to your worthy design , and caused no small disaster to betide to the Honourable actium of Commerce , and that is a crying sin of parents , wives , children and friends of your deceased and dead servants in India , by abusive wrong done to the estates of the defunct three sever all ways : The first is in regard of their bonds and covenants formally yielded unto , which never any have kept , nor ever any will observe : and because they will keep close their private trade with all the secrecy they can , they never keep Merchantlike accounts for fear of being seized upon by some malicious , tyrannous , or malevolent President , or others in authority , if they chance to do or say any thing that displeaseth them , so that in stead of formal fair accounts , they kept their reckonings in lose papers in their pockets , or bid in some private place , which at the end of every voyage out and home to any Port in India , they lacerate and dismember in pieces , trusting in their Banjan Brokers to be master's of their Warehouses , or keepers of their goods and moneys . And if any of these servants die , ( being loath to commit trust to their own countrymen , ) the Banjan defrauds their Executors of all or greatest part of their estates , and so perhaps if they trust some supposed friend their Countrymen , they do the like ; or else wanting time in their extremity of sickness , cannot give their friend true information : And if they do , peradventure the Banjan and the supposed friend agree together and divide the estate into shares between them . The second is , that if the President , or some authorized by him , find out any estate of the deceased , the goods are sold at and outcry , and the moneys brought into the Companies Cash , for the benefit of the Executors . But the abuse therein is insupportable , as formerly in India Courts at home . For two or three , or more , will covenant together to buy them at underrates , either by selling them by the lump in great parcels , that the meaner Merchant hath not means to pay for them ; or if divided , the greater and more able persons , will threaten the underlings to fit on their skirts , or to do them some mischief , if by bidding a higher price then they , they seek to buy them out of their hands : And this I have seen with my own eyes ( with grief , ) but being a prisoner , could not prevent the mischief to the defunct , which otherwise I would have endeavoured to have remedied . The third abuse to the deceased servants estate , is acted by the Court Committees at home , and that is by defrauding the Executors of the deceased of the benefit of the exchange for their moneys brought into the Cash in India , which in my time was double money at home : for if any man bought of the deceaseds estate in India , and did not there make speedy payment , his covenant was to pay double money out of the salary at home , or otherwise as agreed upon : and my self have paid such exchange of double moneys abated out of my salary at home by the India Court , even for things bought , charitably to give away to poor men , having lost all their goods and necessaries in a ship fired by Portugals , which for want of money , being a prisoner , and all my estate seized upon , I was contented to yield unto ( as other men did , ) rather then not to express a charitable affection to the indigent , according to my poor ability , or credit . Now the India Court think that they supererogate in their charity , to pay the Executors of the defunct the principal , brought to their accounts in India , ( though they make three , foure or five for one or more of their servants moneys ; ) and yet by that time the accounts are cleared , which happily may be six or twelve months , or longer time after the deceased have repaired from the remoter or furthest parts of the Kingdom , to seek after their deceased estate , sometime ( nay I doubt often ) they have been forced to depart home , after great expense and charge , by waiting the Courts time to clear the accounts , with little or nothing , perhaps not enough to bear their charges down again . In some particulars of other men's , I could give bewailing intelligence of these passages ; but I will instance only in my own being living : then if the abuse be so great to the living , much more may the Executors of the deceased feel the burden of these intolerable defraudments . My self being eminent in India , and one of Council , being maliciously arraigned for a delinquent , ( as the ensuing story will relate ) had my goods seized upon , and sold , volens nolens , before my face , at 40. per cent . l • sse of the principal , revengefully acted on purpose to make me a Bankrupt ; ( which maugre the Presidents Devilish malice , could not be effected ) though he and his lewd favourite , notwithstanding their massy estates of twenty or thirty thousand pounds a man fraudulently got in India within six years time , or less , after their return from England , with all the super abundant favour the India Court could bestow upon them ; yet were forced to take sanctuary in the Kings Bench and Fleet ; and there , but for the tenor of a Statute of Bankrupts against them , would have defrauded their creditors also at home , ( which brought them perforce to and under composition . ) Again , my estate being seized upon , as before mentioned , among other goods I had two great and large fair Persia Carpets , fit for the Footstool , or Chair of State of a Christian Prince , which would have covered the pavement or floor of about twenty foot square , or more , and cost me in Persia the first penny , about fourtie pounds . These it seems the ambitious President took for his own use , to the honour of his magnificency , and never brought them , or their proceed , to the Companies account . For which demanding restitution , he put me off to the India Court , affirming that at his coming from India , be left them ( for their use ) in the Custom house at Surrat , and the Court denieth to give me any satisfaction for them , alleging that they were never brought to their account , and therefore not able to make them good , though the unjust Governor had voted before in Court , in favour of the juggling President , their mere hireling juggling servant , against their loyal brother servant , that it was not for the accommodation of their actium of commerce , to wave or question their Presidents power and authority , but to support and maintain it ; neithor for the honour of the India Court to be curious inquisitors into their Presidents actions ; which is so horrible and detestable and ignominy to the honour of the India Society to defend , that that Honourable actium of Commerce , could not be supported , but by fraud , oppression , tyranny , imprisonment , bonds , and the like , and murder too , if occasion so fell out : And so far these Governors are from accusing consciences in such practices , that they take it to be and honour for them so to do . But I have not yet done , I must further instance in more particulars in my own behalf . At my departure from India , ( a prisoner ) I left in the hands of a succeeding President , a Trunk of rich apparel , good books , Divine and History , and other necessaries , which at and easy rate I valued at fourscore pound ; and had I stayed in India , would not have taken half as much more money for them . And these goods it seems were sold at and outcry ( according to my former relation of such practises ) for 32 l. and no account to be given to whom they were sold , nor any particular of any thing how sold , but all in lump at 32 l. which money being brought into the Companies Cash , and three or foure years after coming to account with the Court , they were so far dishonest , as not only to deny me the exchange for my money , but also to keep back the principal , being part of 1200. l. they are yet indebted unto me . Yet once more : My wife sent me out of England , a Token ( to me of great esteem ) viz. her own and all her three children's pictures in one fair Map , or Table , to the full proportion of every one . That honest well reputed Gentleman of the India Court , and my especial kind friend , Captain James Slade , took upon him to bring it ( by Gods blessing ) in safety to my possession : But before his arrival , I was shipped home unjustly ( a malefactor . ) At the arrival of the Fleet in India , whereof Captain Slade was Admiral in the ship Discovery . Great enquiry was made by the present President , for things of rarity , to be bought and bestowed upon the Sultan , or Govervour of Surrat : but in all the Fleet , none was found of greater esteem , then my wife and children's pictures ; which the President having intelligence of , sent to Captain Slade , to bring the same aboard the ship Charles , chief Admiral in the Port , to be viewed there by President and Council . At which consultation it was decreed , that my pictures should be bought at good valuable rate , and to have credit for the same in the Companies books of accounts . And so the pictures were detained aboard the Charles , till order could be taken for their safe transport to Surrat . But the next day the ship Charles being fired by shooting of Guns at drunken healths ( a detestable abuse and damage to the honourable Company ) the ship and all things within her , were burned , and my pictures consumed . At the India Court ( upon intelligence and certificate under Captain Slades hand , and his brother's , Mr. William Slade , Purser of the ship , and also of Mr. Nathanael Mountney , second of Council to the President ) I demanded restitution for my wife and children's pictures , and tokens ; but most dishonestly denied , saying , that in regard they were burned , they were not liable to make them good unto me . These abuses are , as I am able to prove , to my damage 500. l. And if such persons expect honour for acting and supporting fraud , robbery , envy , malice , and cruel oppression , to the ruin of a whole Family , one of their own Corporation , and living , what can be expected but far worse from them to the dead ( mere hirelings , no way allied by Corporation , Adventure , or otherwise among them . ) But surely , if I be not partial in my own cause , I conceive they merit such honour as Haman had for intending the ruin of a whole Nation , yet strangers in blood and religion unto him . There be many other things beside these mentioned at present , that require your Honours , etc. reformation ( if you expect a blessing from God upon your adventures , which may well be conceived that such abuses and crying sins have hitherto brought a curse upon that so worthy honourable actium of Commerce ) and upon examination will be brought to light ; as this for one more ; The India President usurps the power to fine men at his pleasure for delinquency , as he pleases maliciously to conceive against any : and those whom he envies and malignes , shall have heavy fines set upon them , which he knows the Court at home will not remit , having their estates in possession : for all is fish that comes to their net , unless in favour to a Minion , or some chief in Court . And this cost and eminent Merchant in India , and at present in London , 500. l. though he brought certificates out of India to clear him from all aspersion cast upon him , ( and to try a suit in Law with them , is to no purpose , for they boast they will be too mighty for any to withstand them , having a common rich purse against a private poor one , to manage their unjust designs . ) Likewise , if the offender be his favourite , or hath a good purse to bribe , his Fine shall be made easy to prevent a heavier punishment at home , ( as unconscionable to be questioned or arriagned twice for one thing , censure being formerly passed upon him . ) I could instance somewhat in this point in the case of life and death , but I am more charitably minded then to cast aspersion upon any , having undergone ( at least ) a formal trial for his life . One thing more , right honourable , etc. be pleased to give me leave to admonish you of , Your honourable actium of Commerce is like in time to suffer much , if you follow not the example of the Portugals , Dutch , and Danes , by strengthening your selves by some accommodable plantation near India , both for a refuge for your shipping , and strengthening thereof ; and also to fetch off your servants in India , upon wrong offered them by tyrannical heathenish Moors : A taste whereof you have had heretofore by imprisoning your chief and all other servants , and threatened with drubbing and chawbucking , and your Christian adversaries in that actium will ( for want thereof ) dominier too much over you : And the best place for you to settle a plantation , is ( in my conceit ) at Madagascar , where if you set not foot in speedily , others of our nation , who ( by report ) have made entrance thereinto , may peradventure defeat you , and wring your charter from you for your neglect to the good of this Republic . This business I leave to your wiser considerations , and to such encouragements in that business , as lately I have in my weak capacity , conceived behooveful , which may peradventure hereafter ( if not with this ) come out in print to the public view . Yet I may not omit to put you in mind , that you make better choice of your Governors and Court Committees at home , and that ( good part or greater at least ) out of men well qualified , and of good report , bred up in India , rather then Shopkeepers , or ignorant Merchant's , some of which were never further at Sea , then aboard your brave ships in the Downs a feasting . For though some such men may be virtuous and well qualified for their breeding , and by long continuance in their places of Committee , have got good experience , yet they have only the theoric , and are too short in the pracktick , and both are necessary , as by enlargement I could give better testimony . I conceive some men may object , I say thus much to insinuate my self , to get into place of Committee ; which I am so far from the thought or desire , that I should more willingly accept of a poor pension from the Company , or to be and Alms-man in their Hospital at Blackwall , which I am able to prove I have well deserved , even for my good endeavours to that charitable work . Thus , right Honourable , right Worshipful , and others , a faithful loving member of your worthy Corporation , being ruined in estate , by partial , uncharitable , unjust , corrupt Governors , and time-serving Committees in your India Courts , and being at present , lame , inmpotent , diseased , and in a manner bedridden , and already half in his grave , yet hath endeavoured , not without great pain , to manifest his zealous affection to your Honours , etc. welfare and indemnity , which he hath been the rather induced unto , being deprived of all means to do you service in India , as a servant or friendly accommodation upon his own adventure ( wherein his duty as a member of the Company , should not have been wanting . To which employment my affection hath been so addicted , as I think never any men that was banished his native country , hath been m • re desirous to return thither again , then mine hath to revisit India : But now having lost all my fortune's , hope's and limbs , and ready for the grave , ( when God shall be pleased to fit me for my dissolution ) I humbly entreat your Honours , etc. to accept of my honest , loyal affectionate intents , ( in this tedious Epistle , though I want not matter to enlarge to a far greater volume , ) in as good part as it is presented unto you . And if it please your Honours , etc. out of your grace and goodness , to take into consideration the distressed estate of your true , loyal servant , so much abused , wronged , and oppressed , abroad and at home , to cause restitution for the same , from your Honours , etc. substitutes and servants , the chief delinquents , wrongers and oppressors' , or out of the general stock , as to your Honours , etc. shall seem most agreeable to justice , charity , and repute of the honourable India Corporation ( which is the most humble petition of your late industrious loyal Servant , I doubt not but thereby you shall do a business pleasing to God , acceptable to the Honourable high Court of Parliament , ( to ease them in righting private men's wrongs , to the better furtherance of the weighty affairs of the Republic , more considerable : ) For which your Honours , etc. most humble impotent Petitioner , and all his distressed Family , shall ever pray for your Honours , etc. temporal and eternal felicity . Richard Boothby ,