To His Excellence , WILLIAM Earl of NEWCASTLE , Viscount Mansfield , Lord Ogle , Baron of Bolsover , Bothall , and Hepple , Governonr of the Town and County of Newcastle , General of all His Majesties Forces in the North Parts of this Kingdom , and in the Counties of Nottingham , Lincoln , Rutland , Derby , Stafford , Leicester , Warwick , Northampton , Huntington , Cambridge , Norfolke , Suffolke , Essex , and Hertford , One of His Majesties most Honourable Privy Council . Sir , THis Sermon is Yours in right of the Author , being first Preached , then Published by Your special Command . Therefore it flies thither most justly for Protection , from whence it had a being . But You have yet a nearer Interest in it from the Subject , ( a great Victory got with as great hazard of Your own Person . ) We are not so Sacrilegious to rob God of His Glory , Neither are we so stupid or fanatical , as to separate the Sword of the Lord and Gideon . So long as and English Chronicle shall be extant , this Northern Good Fryday will be remembered , to the perpetual Honour of Your Noble Family . In managing Your great trust ( conformably to Your Soverai ne ) You have rather expressed His temper , who would suffer no Man to depart away from him discontented , then the disposition of Vitellius , who thought no Smell in the World so Sweet . 〈 ◊ 〉 •• at of a slave Enemy . God grant that 〈 ◊ 〉 to the bad may not prove accidentally cruelty to the good , Nor Christian pity to spare effusion of blood , give the ulcer space to turn to a Gangrene , so to make the Cure both more costly , and more dangerous to the body Politiq • e . He is blind that does not see how God hath blessed His Majesties Armies beyond probability , and how all His Forces have almost ever proved Victorious in the Field ; Witness for this County . Seecroft , Tankersley , Yarum , Atherton , etc. Those losses which we have sustained have been upon surprises , and especially by the negligence of Scouts . The cold of the Feet strikes quickly up to the Head , And the carelessness of the meanest Officer may endanger the Life of the Greatest . But it is as superfluous as uncomely for me , like another Phormio , to discourse to Your Excellence of these things , which are out of mine Element . Accept , I beseech you , this Mite , as a poor expression of my obedience and gratitude ( two forgotten virtues in this Age ) for Your singular favours to my self , And to the Churches of this Province , which owe to your Protection their present Liberty to serve God according to their Duty , and the Laws and rites establ • shed , and to these Northern Counties , which by Your endeavours are total • in a manner freed from the fury of Sedition , which lies now gasping within the Walls of Hull . God Almighty prosper Your Excellencies Arms , for the happy reducement of the rest of your great charge to Obedience and Peace , To the glory of God , the Service of His Majesty , Your own lasting Honour , the tranquillity of this distracted Kingdom , and the unmas king of all Political and Ecclesiastical jugglers ; which is the constant expectation , and shall be the daily Prayer of Yarl , Iuly , 18. 1643. Your Excellencies Most Assured And Obliged Servant , JOH : DERENSIS .