TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL , The Knights and Gentlemen Deputie-Lieutenants of the County of NORFOLK . Honoured Sirs : GIve me leave to join you together in one Epiſtle whom God and your Country hath joined together in one ſervice ; It is not in my purpoſe to blazen your worth before the world , your own actions ſpeak you in the gate , and wiſe men had rather do worthily then hear of it ; only obſerving your unwearied labour of love for God and your Country . I count it my duty to come forth and meet you with this pen-ſervice in testimony of my thankful reſpects to you . You read Numb . 25. when the wrath of God brake out againſt Iſrael , that Phineas ſtood up and executed judgement , and the wrath was not only diverted but himſelf bleſſed , yea the bleſſing was a bleſſing of peace though wrought out by the ſword : your like actium in this time of wrath will carry the like bleſſing on your ſelves and houſes , yet your work is rather to bring men to juſtice then to execute it . Many bleſſed comforts w • it on your ſervice . Firſt , we read in Scripture but of one man ſo potent in heaven that he could command the Sun to ſtand ſtill , and he was a Soldier , Joſhua ; but of one man of whom it was ſaid , that he had and heart after Gods own heart , and he was a great Soldier , David : but of one man of whom Chriſt gave that great testimony , I have not found ſo great faith no not in Iſrael . And he was a Soldier too the Centurion , thus would • h God honoured your calling . Secondly , your work is good , for you are the Miniſters of Reformation . I read of a King of Meth , sometime in Ireland , that being asked how certain noisome birds that came flying into that country and bred there might be deſtroyed : Was anſwered thus , Nidos eorum ubique deſtruendos : The way to be rid of them was to deſtroy their neſts . Now for a long ſeaſon many noisome birds have been flying over into this Kingdom , and have bred here ; the work of theſe times , is to deſtroy thoſe neſts of Jeſuites and Jeſuited perſons , and it is that work which now you are upon . Foelix neceſſitas quae ad mel • ora ducit . Though it coſt ſome pains its worth your labour , happy is that necessity which leads to better things . Thirdly , your cauſe is juſt alſo , agreeable to the Law of Nature ; for , Conſervatio ſui ipſius est opus naturaliſſimum , to the Law of God : for David though not the repreſentative body y • tO lawfully took up arms for his own defence ; to the Law of the Kingdom , for what more legal then that the Houſes of Parliament ſhould bring in Delinquents to trial , and how can that be without Arms when the Delinquents betake themſelves to their Arms ? Vetuſtatem ſi ſpectes eſt antiquiſſima , ſi dignttat • meſt honoratiſſima , ſi juriſdictionem • ſt copioſiſſima . The Schoolmen ſay three things concur to a juſt war . Firſt , Juriſdictio indicentis , and for that you have the Authority of Parliament , which , as one writes , if you reſpect Antiquity , is of all Courts the moſt ancient ; if dignity , is of all Courts the moſt hononorable ; if authority and juriſdiction , is of all Courts the moſt copious . Secondly , Offenſio patientis , and for that you have matter too much , and your enemies too little , the great cauſe of their arms is but ſome piece of prerogative ( if they pretend truly ) a cauſe infinitely beneath ſo unkind & bloody a war as this is . Thirdly , Intentïo boni convenientis , and for that I dare ſay you are bellando pacifici , your war being to prevent war , and your preſent bleeding to prevent ſome great sickness which this State would ſink under . Fourthly , your Forces live and march under as many prayers as ever Engliſh Armies did , you have preces arma • as ; and though Joſhua fought valiantly , Exod. 17. yet the prayers of Moſes ( who was not in the fight ) god the field . Fifthly , If you do overcome , you ſhall not make your ſelves ſlaves by your own victories ; we may truly ſay of ſome , Dum vincunt victi ſunt : when they have overcome others , they are ſlaves themſelves ; your Religion , Laws , and Liberties ſtand all ready to reward your prowess . And ſixthly , If you be overcome and die , you die for God and your Country ; who can bring his life into a better market ? bleſſed are thoſe that die for the Lord , ſo that word • is rather to be read , Rev. 14. 13. Wherefore as heretofore ſo now much more labour to hold forth the virtues of him that hath called you to this great employment . As Soldiers are more honoured then others , ſo they ſhould be more virtuous ; he had need carry much grace in his heart that does daily carry his life in his hand ; and your Soldiers ſhould as well overcome the Countries' with their good examples , as the Enemies with their ſwords . When Joſhua went out to battle againſt the Amalakites his men were all choſen or choice men , Exod. 17. 9. And says the Lord Deut. 23. 9 when the host goes forth againſt thine enemy then keep thee from every wicked thing . It is ordinarily obſerved , that when the jews marched out of Egypt into Canaan , they carried in their colours ſome ſignificative sign , Judah carried a Lion in his Standard , Ephraim and Ox , Reuben , the picture of a man , Nepthali and Hind ; a Lion noting their courage , a Man noting their skill and underſtanding , and Hind noting their ſwiftn • ſſe and readiness for execution ; and and Ox for patience , ſtrength and obedience . Such colours ſhould thoſe wear in their lives that are Soldiers for God . The enemies of the Churches had their Colours alſo ; the Bear , the Leopard , Quo modo fidem praeſtabunt autboritat • queen • Deo ſunt perſidi . Conſ . ſa •• ff . pa . 56. etc. Dan. 7. cruel in humane practiſes , being more fit to be worn in their lives then ours . How can men be faithful to you that are unfaithful to God ? Dr. Ferne , your Adverſary and mine , writes thus of the Parliaments Forces ; If a liſt of the Army againſt his Majesty were examined , there would be found if not a conſiderable number of Papiſts , yet of ſuch as they that employ them would have cauſe to be aſhamed of , etc. It may be ſome of your Soldiers would ſay as Davids did , Let me go over I pray thee and take off his head . But let your anſwer rather be ▪ Let him alone , and let him reproach , it may be that the Lord will look on mine affliction , and that the Lord will requite good for his reproaching this day . And as formerly ſo now yet more and more let your endeavour be to wipe off ſuch aſperſions by ſending and employing ſuch Soldiers as may not ſtain your good cauſe with their ill practice , let your Motto be , Militia fine malitiam . And as for your success either it will be good or bad ; if bad , meaſure not the goodness of your cauſe thereby . Eventus est ſtultorum argumentum , It is Gods courſe to give by denying , Non habendo habemus . Wicked Benjamin who took part with the delinquents of G • beah , muſt firſt prevail againſt not repreſentative , but all Iſrael , who took up arms to do juſtice , that Iſrael might be the more provoked againſt them . Judg. 20. And if your success be good , let your men carry it humbly : humility after mercy makes men fit for more mercy . And he that boaſts in his own body , Qui gloriatur in viribus corports gloriatur in viribus carcer • . boaſts in his own priſon : Rejoice not , says Solomon , when thine enemy falls . Pro. 24. 17. Your Soldiers may rejoice in Gods providence , but not in their enemies blood . Zonarus writes that this was the manner amongſt the Romans when any triumphed , that and Officer ſtood behind him , ſaying , 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , look what is behind , and there he ſaw a bell and a whip ; a whip noting that for all his greatness he might come under the laſh of miſery , which bell-like would found very loud . Nos autem rerum magis quam verborum amatores ſumus • tilia potius quam plauſibilia ſectamur , & in his ſcrip is non lenocinia eſſe volumus , led remedia . Salv. Epiſt . ad Solon . To the end that the Abbot might have and happy beginning of this work from ſome lucky manner of preſage , he ſolemnly appointed the day of St. Perpetua and of St. Felicitie , in which he would lay the firſt foundation Cambd. Britan ▪ Lincolnſhire . Thus have I taken the boldness to preſent you with my rude thoughts and this ſmall Treatiſe , concerning which I ſay as Salvian , I have not ſought ſmooth but profitable words . And in which becauſe it hath pleaſed God to lay the foundation of your proceedings in your good success at Crowland , by the hand and Command of that worthy Gentleman Sir Miles Hobert , I wiſh you that bleſſing which the Abbot of Crowland when he began to built the Abbey would have made the foundation thereof , Perpetuam foelicitatem . Your humble Servant in the Goſpel of Chriſt Jeſus . W. BRIDGE .