FOR The Right Honourable the Earl of Lauderdaile Lord Metellane . YOur Lordſhip , I truſt , will not be diſpleaſed that your name is ſet before theſe Truths which your heart does love , and whereunto in the beſt companies of the whole Iſle you have given at many occaſions your cheerful countenance and zealous patrociny ; in the ſtudy whereof I have been oft both encouraged and aſſiſted by your Lordship's pious , wiſe , and learned informations . It has been of a long time the wiſh of my heart to have had nothing to do with Polemic writings ; the bodies of ſojours are no more ſubject to wounds and manifold hardſhips , then the minds and names of diſputant Divines do lie open to various vexations . The weary , ſtarved , bleeding should • er longs no more for a ſafe peace , then a ſpirit haraſſed in the toilsome labyrinth of thorny debates , pants for that quietness which only the final overthrow and full ſubjugation of error can produce . How pleaſant will that day be to the sons of peace , when the Lord ſhall make good that word which by the mouth of two of his ancient witneſſes he has eſtabliſhed , when according to the Teſtimony of Iſaiah , Iſa . 2. • ſyllabically repeated by Michah , Mic. 4.3 . we ſhall beatrice our ſwords into plow-ſheares , and our spears into pruning hooks , that we may walk together in the light of the Lord ? But ſo long as Divine Diſpenſation beſets our habitations both spiritual and temporal , the Church no less then the State , with great numbers of daring and dangerous adverſaries , we muſt be content , according to the call of the Prophet Ioel in another caſe , Ioel 3. • ▪ to prepare war , to beatrice our blow ſhears into ſwords , and our pruning hooks into spears ; in this juncture of time the faint muſt take courage , and the weak ſay I am strong . It ſeems that yet for ſome time the ſervants of God muſt earneſtly contend for many precious truths , which erroneous ſpirits do mightily impugn : for the help and encouragement of others in that warfare , I , though among the weakeſt of Chriſts soldiers , do offer theſe my endeavours . It was my purpoſe to have made a farther progress , and to have handled all I mention in my Preface ; but being called away from my preſent ſtation by theſe who ſet me therein , upon the occaſion your Lordſhip knows , my ſtudies in this kind are broken off ; ſo that this eſſay in Brownism and Independency muſt go forth alone , or nothing at all . My ay • in theſe two is , and was in all the reſt ; Firſt , in and historic way to ſet down the original and progress of the error ; next its complete parts together in one table , that at one view the whole face of the way may be repreſented ; for I conceived it many ways advantageous and very ſatisfactory in debating either a truth or and error , to be brought to ſee the fountain and original whence it hath ſprung , the ſtreams and iſſues whither the Tenet tends of it self , or is drawn by its followers ; to behold a way not in its pieces , but the whole together from the head to the feet , the beginning , amid , and end without any concealment or diſguiſe . Thirdly , my purpoſe was to have examined the principal parts of every error in a ſhort , clear , and popular method , conſidering the main Scriptures that uſe to be alleged in the point either pro or contra . I believe this my method will not be diſpleaſing to any . I know it was acceptable enough to many of the Congregational way when lately I did uſe it againſt the Canterburian Faction ; but poſſibly ſome of the matter of my historic part may fallen out to be faſhions to the followers of the Tenets which I labour to lay open ; for it is inavoydable to make a true and a full narration of any erroneous way , but ſuch things muſt be told which will be diſpleaſing to ſome ; yet I hope I have given as little offence in this kind , as any other could have done in ſuch a way of • reatiſing ; for all the paſſages that may be pungent of the tendereſt skin , are ſuch , as not only I conceive to be very true , but ſuch alſo which I ever make preſently good by ſufficient Teſtimonies ſet down fully at the end of every Chapter in the express words of the Authors . Secondly , the opinions or practiſes I allege , are ſuch as the parties themſelves to this day do openly avow , or elſe have been objected to them by very honeſt men long ago in print , and to this day , ſo far as I know , are not taken off by any tolerable anſwer ; in all that is over and above , I will undertake to give ample ſatisfaction wherein ſoever I give the leaſt offence to any . I date appeal to your Lordship's knowledge , and to many others who have been acquainted with all my bygone walking , how averſe I have ever been from cauſing grief to any , eſpecially good men : ſo far as I am conſcious to my moſt ſecret intentions , it is my hearts deſire that all our preſent controverſies might quickly either be ended or compoſed by calm , meek , and peaceable means , and theſe alone . That lately renewed Committee for Accommodation , O if it might pleaſe the Lord to ſhine upon it , however I may not ſtay to ſee its success ; yet wherever I am , my beſt wiſhes ſhall be poured upon it , eſpecially when I ſhall hear , as I have great reaſon to believe is only intended , that it abides circumſcribed within the bounds of that prudent Order whereby it is renewed . For firſt , that Order is ſo far from holding out and Accommodation for all the ſects of the Land , that it ſpeaks only of the differences that are among the members of the Aſſembly . Liberty of Conſcience , and Toleration of all or any Religion is ſo prodigious and impiety , that this religious Parliament cannot but abhor the very naming of it . Whatever may be the opinion of Io. Goodwin , of Mr Williams and ſome of their ſtamp , yet Mr Burrowes in his late Irenicon upon many unanſwerable arguments explodes that abomination . Likewiſe our Brothers who ſeek to be accommodate , will be willing I hope to profess their going along with us , without any conſiderable d • ſſent , as in the Directory for all the parts of divine worſhip , ſo in the confeſſion of Faith and Catechiſm . Secondly , the Order expreſſes only the differences in Church-government ; what other opinions we have mentioned in the following Treatiſe , I hope our Brothers will either diſavow and pass from them , or elſe be content to bury them in their own breaſts , till time and better information make them die and vaniſh without more moyſe . Thirdly , the intent of the Order is to bring up the diſſenting Brothers • oh approve of the Government agreed upon in the Aſſembly and allowed by both Houſes of Parliament ; or if that cannot be , to ſee how in ſome practiſes they may be forborn . This does ſuppoſe that our Brothers ſhall not be permitted to print , preach , or publiſh any thing againſt the Government eſtabliſhed by Parliament ; alſo that in the practice of this Government they ſhall be obliged to join ſo far with their Brothers as their principles may ſuffer . This being , I doubt not but in many things they ſha • l be much forborn ; for whatever be the unadviſed rashness of ſome in their way , yet if they may be pleaſed , according to their frequent offers ( as I remember ) to be conſtant members of our Presbyteries and Synods , and there to give were it but their conſultative voice , I believe that few of them ſhall ever be preſſed to much more ; for if they agree among themſelves , and govern well their own Congregations , no controversy that concerns them will ever come before any superior Aſſembly ; and if any complaint of their male adminiſtration , or any matter of ordination or excommunication ſhould come from them to be cognoſced in a Presbytery or Synod , the reſult might ever be to them as a matter of advice to be executed in their own Congregations by their own Pastor's , if they did find it right : or if it appeared wrong , the General Aſſembly , or at leaſt the Parliament , would give them ſo much ſatisfaction , as on earth can be expected . Albeit I am in opinion , that no caſe merely Ecclesiastical ſhall ever need to go from a General Aſsembly to a Parliament ; theſe two bodies are ſo friendly and near of kin , that none who knows their nature and conſtitution will ever fear their diſcord . I dare ſay , that all the jealouſies which are preſented to the Parliament of England of a National Aſsembly , are mere Bugbears and childiſh frightments , ariſing alone out of misinformation and unacquaintance ; for both reaſon and experience will demonſtrate that the Parliament of England cannot have on earth ſo ſtrong pillars and pregnant ſupporters of all their Privileges , as free Proteſtant Aſsemblies eſtabliſhed by Law , and kept in their full freedom from the loweſt to the higheſt , from the Congregational Elderſhip to the General Synod of the Nation . No ſuch Bars as theſe are imaginable either againſt Tyranny or Anarchy ; they are the mightieſt impediments both to the exorbitancy of Monarchs , which has been and is our miſery ; and to the extravagancy of the common multitude , attempting to correct and ſubject all Parliaments to their own fooliſh deſires , which is like to be the matter of our next exerciſe and trouble . Proteſtant Aſsemblies examined to the bottom , will be found real and cordial friends to all the Iuſt , Legal and reaſonable Prerogatives of a Monarch , to all the equitable and profitable Liberties of the meaneſt ſubject ; but above all to every due privilege of a Chriſtian Parliament . Sometime we laugh , sometime we grieve to ſee men afraid out of mere ignorance with that which we know is their great good . I am persuaded that after a little experience , Congregational Seſſions , Cl • ſſicall Presbyteries , Provincial Synods , and National Aſsemblies will be embraced and ſluck to by the Parliament of England as the greateſt and moſt useful privileges of their great Charter . My fourth remark upon the Order in hand is , that it speaks alone of the queſtions of Government , whereby the Assembly was retarded , but nothing of the conſtitution of Congregations which never came to any conſiderable debate , much less did ever retard the Aſſemblies proceedings : and albeit the words of the Order might be extended beyond the Government to the conſtitution , yet we may not think that the Houſe does intend to tolerate the gathering of ſeparate Congregations ; in this point we hope that the deſired accommodation ſhall satisfy our Brothers , and all tolerations ſhall be needless . Themſelves are witneſſes of our moſt earneſt Deſires , of our very real endeavours , ( and we wiſh , they had been much more our helper • and real Aſſiſtants ) for purging of all Congregations , ſo far as ever they have been in any time , in any place , for making them ſo void of ignorance and all scandals as Scripture or any reaſon can require : In theſe our earneſt requeſts we truſt the Parliament at laſt will show us favour . But when the Aſſembly and Parliament have done their uttermoſt , to have the Churches purified ſo far as is poſſible , if notwithſtanding of all that can be done , our Brothers will yet ſeparate , and peremptorily refuſe to communicate as Members , in the beſt ruled Congregations , either of England , or of any other reformed Church ; we confess , that by ſuch a Declaration , our Brothers would put us to a great deal of perplexity ; for ſuch a ſeparation as this , were as we conceive , the moſt palpable and unreaſonable Schism that ever yet was herd of in the Chriſtian World , much contrary to the word of God , and evidently deſtructive of the neceſſary peace of all theſe Churches wherein it ſhould be tolerated ; beſide its clear contradiction in terms , not only to the Order of the Houſe , but to the ſolemn League and Covenant of the three Kingdoms . Notwiihſtanding we truſt that the grace and mercy of God , ſhall be ſo richly poured out upon this revived Committee , as ſhall enable them to expedit both us and our Brothers from theſe otherwiſe unextricable Labirynths . Would to God that our Controverſies with them were brought to a happy perjod , that both they and we , with all our power might concur to reduce the reſt of our poor Brothers , who this day are pitifully entangled in manifold hereſies and Errors ▪ that ſo all the children • n of God being delivered from the ſnares and chains of darkness , might make it their great task and only contention , who ſhould honour moſt the name of their Father , by the fragrancy of their godly , charitable , humble , chaſte , and ſober converſation . Your Lordſhip is conſcious to the firſt designs of the Noble Patriots of that your Nation , it was never their mind to have trifled ſo much time in jangling with their Brothers of this Iſle , about new and needless queſtions , but expecting a facility of settling truth and Peace within theſe S • as , their hearts were farther abroad , their thoughts were large for the propagation not of their own but of Chriſts Kingdom , and that not ſo much in the Light as in the heat and life thereof . They have the more to anſwer who here and elſewhere have been the unhappy inſtruments , not only to fruſtrate theſe great and gracious enterpriſes for the Weal-public of Chriſtendome , but alſo to bring the undertakers to ſo low a condition , that they be obliged this day to God alone for any tolerable ſubſiſtence and their very being : albeit we are hopeful the Lord is reſerving good things for them , who had ſo much Faith , charity , and Courage , as to venture all for the cauſe of God , and their Brothers , the more unkind men have proved unto them ; The Lord who hath been witness to all their intentions , actions and ſufferings , will in his own time accordingly reward them , and will not let them be aſhamed of their firſt hope's and conſtant deſires , upon the which himself for a long time did ſhine ſo evidently from the Heaven , as ever upon any enterpriſe on the Earth . Though now that brightness be much eclipsed , and overclouded , yet we are expecting with paſſionate deſires , and confident hope's , the diſſolution of theſe clouds , and the diſpelling of the preſent darkness by the ſtrength of the Beams of his ancient and undeſerved kindness , towards that now ſuffering and much diſtreſſed Nation . But inſenſibly my pen hath run beyond the bounds of a ſhort Epiſtle , albeit my experience of your Lordship's readiness to dispense with your friends indiſcretion , makes me ſecure of my pardon . I will detain your Lordſhip no longer , I lay down my Book at your Lordship's feet , to be given to the world by your Lordship's hand . If it be received with ſo much candor and charity by every Reader , as I know it is offered , it may poſſibly prove ſerviceable . Thus wiſhing to your Lordſhip in theſe days of deep and dangerous trials , and too great defection of many , conſtancy , and daily increaſe of affection to all truth , Piety , Justice , and every Virtue , I remain , Your Lordship's in all Chriſtian duty to be commanded . R. Baily ▪ London , Novemb. 19. 1645.