TO THE MOST NOBLE LORDS , WITH THE HONOURABLE KNIGHTS , CITIZENS , AND BURGESSES , Now assembled in PARLIAMENT . IN Epistles Dedicatory , sometime men render and account to the world , by what Principles they were Led to such a work Sometime they maintain and strengthen , what they have done , by New Arguments . Sometime ad captandam Benevolentiam , they present their whole Design , in a brief Epitome , that so they may invite the Reader . But I shall do None of These . The first I need not : For if the Ten Kings must hate the Whore , Eat her flesh , and Burn her with her fire ; Will not every good Christian offer himself a ready Servant to This Work , a Willing Soldier under this Standard ? The Second , I cannot ; without questioning my own Diligence , or ( which is worse ) my Readers Gentleness : Either of which every Writer carefully shunneth . The third I will not , left I be injurious to my self : For , Humane Nature is ever Novorum avida ; and the Soul of vast comprehension ; the Book therefore would seem but Crambe bis cocta , to All that read the Epistle ; and but create a nauseam to Those that had already gathered all , by viewing thee Breviate . If it be the Glory of a King's Daughter to be clothed in Needlework ; surely This poor Birth will need more then Figleaves , to make it Beautiful . When it is Clothed with its Best Robes , It will not be worthy to appear in so Great a Presence . How much less then , when presented only in a bore and naked Skeleton ? The Work then of These Lines , is to lay prostrate at Your Feet ( most Noble Lords , and Gentlemen ) the Retirements of Your Humble Servant in the Last Recess . If you shall ask me , how I dare take the boldness to interrupt Your more serious Thoughts , with These Things of Little Worth : All I shall plead for my self is but This , the bow must be sometime unbent ; and if then This Pamphlet may be called for , it is all I aspire to . For , Your Protection , and Your Patronage , not Your Trouble , is My Request : Of which being no whit Doubtful ; with all Humility commending This to Your Noble Favour ; Your selves and Counsels to the Almighty ; I crave le • we for ever to remain Your most obliged and devoted Servant ROBERT BROOK .