TO The Honourable Houſe OF COMMONS , Now aſſembled in PARLIAMENT . Worthy Patriots , GOD hath made you like the Brazen-Serpent ; thoſe that have been ſtung with the Serpents and Dragons of Room , have looked upon you and been healed . You have overcome , and slain many Lyons of difficulties that have been in the way ; yea , you have found honey in them . The Church is not in her travels and labour , as thoſe ſtrong women of Iſrael , that could bring forth alone ; Therefore God hath ſtirred you up to help her in her pangs ; be courageous therefore , and languiſh not in this ſo great and neceſſary a work of Reformation . All truth is ſweet , even natural truth ; therefore the Heathens in their Sacrifice to Minerva ( their Goddess of Arts ) offered honey , crying out , 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , truth is ſweet ; but spiritual truths are ſweeter then the honey and the honey comb ; And this is the truth , even that about Doctrine , Diſcipline , and the Worſhip of God , which the godly deſire above all their outward advantages , And above all thoſe works of Reformation you have in hand ; eſpecially provide againſt the general ignorance in people by a solid and ſerious Catachizing ; and againſt the profaneness of people by powerful Diſcipline , that ſo the Sacraments may be diſpenſed comfortably . As in this Kingdom , the Lawyer , the Physician , the Tradeſman can go comfortably in his calling , ſo provide that the Paſtor alſo in the Diſpenſation of Ordinances may do it with joy , and not with grief ; The very Heathens were careful about their Idol Sacrifices , Procul , O procul eſte prophani : And we read in Story , that the Prieſt being to ſacrifice , asked this queſtion , 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 ; who was there ? Anſwer was returned , 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , good and honeſt men . And now in this work of Reformation , go on exactly , conſult not with fleſh and blood , leave not in your Building any nails or hooks ſtanding out , that may tear thoſe who go by . And that God may delight in your works , labour to reform your own lives , and Families , leſt you be as the Torch or Candle that gives light to others , but conſumeth it self . The great God of Heaven go along with you , ſtrengthen , ſettle , and eſtabliſh you . Your humble Servant in Christ Ieſus , ANTHONY BURGES .