TO THE HONOURABLE HOVSE OF COMMONS now Assembled in PARLIAMENT . WHen first it pleased You to require our service in Preaching at Your late Public Fast , we resolved to close our eyes against all Clouds of discouragement arising from our own unworthiness and insufficiency , and to set our selves wholly to seek what the Lord would command us to deliver in his Name , at such a time , to such and Honourable and awful Assembly , Psalm . 82. with a total denial of our selves . And albeit we should have been glad to have been spared this exposing of our selves to the public view ; yet , You appointing otherwise , we hold it equal that the joint entreaty of the Representative Body of the whole Communality of the kingdom should be regarded , and have chosen rather that others should censure us of weakness , than You should charge us with Disobedience : Your Request being no less than a command ; and Your acceptance sufficient to give valve to things of themselves both mean and worthless . Wherefore , according to our Duty , so willingly as the consciousness of our slender performances would permit , we obey Your Order , and do now , although somewhat late , humbly offer these two plain Sermons ( for , who expects other in a Fast ? ) at the footstool of Your Tribunal , as a lasting Monument of Our Gratitude for Your encouraging Approbation of , and solemn Thanks for our weak endeavours in the preaching of them . If in some places we have taken that just liberty which all others have done before us , we trust it shall not be imputed ; so long as in the most material passages we have kept to the very words which at first we used , so far as was necessary ; and have not wittingly swerved and hairs breadth from the sense and substance in the residue . we have indeed pared off some Repetitions , which in speaking had their use , the more to inculcate , and the better to set on the matter , but would not have been so grateful in Writing , because Readers account every thing too long that hath any thing too much . We have likewise contracted some expressions , which in discourses of so much length , could hardly be so concise as we desired , Memory being not always at hand to give birth to every Conception of our minds in such forms as we intended . And some few things we have added , where straits of time , or defect of memory made some balks in the first delivery . What ever our performances be , we humbly leave them in Your hands , and under Your Honourable Protection , which we are bold to expect , because they are by Your own Act drawn from us , and that in a time so queasy and distempered as can hardly bear that food , or Physik which is needful for it . Seldom does a wise Reproof , a necessary Exhortation , or wholesome Doctrine meet with and obedient Eare. The God of Heaven steer all Your weighty consultations by his own Counsel , to his own Glory ; cover You still under his own Wing , and make You the most accomplished , best united , & most successful & glorious house of Commons that ever sat in that High Court ; but chiefly in the effectual endeavouring of a further Sanction of , and stronger Guard about our true Palladium , the true Religion , already established among us ; in the perfecting of the Reformation of it ; in the erecting , maintaining , protecting , and encouraging of and able , godly , faithful , zealous , profitable , Preaching This was our joint & earnest suit to You , in Preaching ; and we now again beseech You to set your hearts and hands to this work , as Benhail , Obadiah and other Princes in Iudah did . Ministry , in every Parish Church and Chapel throughout England and Wales ; and in the interceding to the Kings sacred Majesty for the setting up of a Faithful , Judicious , and Zealous Magistracy , 2 Chr. 17. 7 , 8 , 9. where yet the same is wanting , to be ever at hand to back such a Ministry : without either of which , not only the power of Godliness will soon degenerate into formality , and zeal into Luke warmness ; but , Popery , Arminianisme , Socinianisme , Profaneness , Apostasy , and Atheism it self will more and more crowd in upon us , and prevail against us , do You all You can by all other means . And now , commending You to God and to the Word of his grace , Acts 20. 32. which is able to built You up further , and to give You and inheritance among all them which bee sanctified ; and these our Labours to his further blessing , whereby all may speedily be brought under the line of his Covenant , The Sum of both Sermons . which is our Safety ; that he may continue with us , which is our Glory ; and we with him , which is our happiness : we rest , Yours , most devoted to the service of Your Faith in all Duty , Cornelius Burges . Stephen Marshal .