TO THE Truly pious and worthily honoured Lady , the Lady RUTH SCUDAMORE . Honoured Madam , I Have obſerved your Ladyship careful in two things : to improve the duty commanded in the Law , and to embrace the promiſe tendered in the Goſpel ; the former hath been a spur to holiness , the latter a curb to unbelief . The conſideration of this ( together with the remembrance of thoſe manifold favours which your Ladyship hath plentifully vouchſafed to me and mine ) hath provoked me to dedicate this Treatiſe unto you , which although it hath much controversal matter in it , yet it is not without many practical Directions and Conſolations . It hath been Gods goodness unto you , that although in theſe times of calamities your portion hath been one of the afflictions in Paul's Catalogue , without ſettled abode ; yet God hath leſt your mind fixed and immoveable in the truth , being enabled to 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 magnify Grace in the highest manner , out of the real ſenſe of your neceſsity and unworthiness , yet to avoid Antinomianism : and on the other ſide , to be punctual and exact in the duties of mortification and holiness ; yet to take heed of Pharisaical Popery . And indeed , this is the right ſenſe , when we are ſo diligent in working out our ſalvation with fear and trembling , as if there were no grace to justify ; and yet ſo resting and believing in the grace of Christ , as if no good thing had been done by us . Madam , go on with the aſsistance of God , and account the things of grace more excellent then the things of parts ; and while others rejoice in opinions , and new notions about faith and holiness , do you delight in the things themſelves . The Lord keep his best wine for you in the later end of your age , and give you to ſee the fruit of your Prayers , a ſettled reformation in the Church , that ſo ( when your time ſhall come ) you may depart in peace , feeling much of the power and love of God living , and much more of them , dying . Madam , this is the prayer of your Ladyships humble ſervant in the Lord , Anthony Burgeſs . Septemb. 21. 1646.