To his Excellency , ROBERT , Earl of Eſſex , Viſcount Hereford , Baron Ferrars of Chartley , Lord Bourchier and Lovaine , one of His Majeſties moſt Honourable Privy Counſel , and General of the Army raiſed by the Parliament in defence of the true Proteſtant Religion , His Majeſties Perſon , the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom , and the privileges of Parliament . THere is no man this day upon the face of the earth whom it more concerns to have this name of God The Lord of Hoſts preſented to him in the due luſtre & glory of it , then your Excellency , whom the Lord hath not only honoured to ſtand up even in the before front to maintain his cauſe , and the cauſe of his people , but he hath even put upon you this his own name , he hath made you the Lord of his Hoſts . It is that which every Soldier may juſtly glory in , that God himself ſeems to affect the glory of Arms , when he cauſeth himself to be as it were surnamed THE LORD OF HOSTS . The beams of this glorious name puts ſome luſtre upon the meaneſt in and Army ; What a luſtre then does it put upon your Excellency , who ſtand ſo near it ? Happy the time that ever you were born to be made uſe of by God and his people in ſo noble and honourable a ſervice as this . We read ZECH . 3. 3. of Joſhua , that great inſtrument of Reformation , in the return of JUDAH from her Captivity , that he ſtood in filthy garments , but the Angel spoke to thoſe who ſtood before him , ſaying , Take away the filthy garments from him : and unto him he ſaid , Behold , I have cauſed thine iniquity to pass from thee , and I will cloth thee with change of raiment . Thoſe who ſtand up moſt eminent and forward in the cauſe of God and his people , shall ever have ſome who will ſeek to ſtain their glory by ſlanders and reproachful names , to put them into vile garments : what viler garment can there be then the garment of Treaſon and Rebellion ? But the Angel ſtands by to take off theſe vile garments , and to cleanse his ſervants even from this nominal iniquity : he will put change of raiment upon them , he will one day make it appear that there were none ſo faithful to God , their King and Country , as they : The Lord that hath choſen Jeruſalem , says the Text , ver . 2. will rebuke them who thus ſtand up againſt his ſervants . The Lord who hath ſet his heart to bring mercy to Jeruſalem , to his Church , will certainly rebuke ſuch as ſtand to reſiſt the great inſtruments thereof . Wherefore that which the Angel of the Lord proteſted to JOSHUA , v. 6. I may in the name of the Lord with a little change proteſt unto your Excellency , Thus says the Lord of Hoſts , if you will walk in my ways , and if you will keep my charge , then you ſhall have and eminency in my houſe , and I will give you places among theſe that ſtand by . That is , among the bleſſed Angels in the heavens . If a cup of cold water ſhall not go without a reward , ſurely then the venturing eſtate , liberty , limbs , honour , blood , life for the cauſe of Chriſt , ſhall not go without its reward . Wherefore moſt noble Lord of our Hoſts , yea of the Hoſts of God , Go on with true Heroic magnanimity , and proſper , in the name of this glorious Lord of hoſts . The prayers of the Churches are for you , the bleſsings of the Saints are upon you . I believe never any General upon the earth hath been mentioned more in heaven then your Excellency hath been , and yet is in this cauſe . That which is storied of the Cross appearing to CONSTANTINE , with theſe words , HOC VINCES , I may with far more confidence apply to this name of God , The Lord of hoſts . This I preſent unto your Excellence , with this Motto , Hoc vinces : The name is in it self a box of ſweet ointment , give me leave to open it before your Excellency , that it may be fragrant indeed , and add quickening and ſtrength . To that true noble heroic ſpirit fit for great actions , that God hath honoured you withal , I here humbly preſent it opened and poured forth . The bleſsing of it be upon you , and thoſe great things undertaken by you , which is and shall be the prayer of Your Excellencies in all humble ſervice and duty , Jer. Burroughes .