To Mr. WILLIAM PRINNE , etc. MY deer Brother , and late companion in tribulation , you propound your twelve Questions to all sober minded Christians , cordially affecting a speedy settled Reformation , and brotherly Christian union in all the Churches , ( as you write in Front ) and myself being one of these , ( and no other you shall find me ) doe with the right hand take your Propositions as made to me among the rest ▪ craving your leave to return you a brotherly Answer . And brotherly in nothing more , then by a candid and Christian dealing with you all along , and that also in a matter of such high moment , as concerns the kingdom and glory of Jesus Christ . The zeal whereof is that alone , which puts me upon this task ; it being otherwise far beyond my thoughts , that you and I , having been fellow-sufferers , and spectacles to the world , upon that tragical stage of Antichristian tyranny , should ever come upon the Theatre as Antagonists , one against the other , about the Kingdom of Jesus Christ . But surely as and Antagonist against you I come not , but in the bowels of a brother . And had not the Book had your name in the Front , my stomach had not stooped so low , as to take it up or down . But because most men are apt to take all upon trust , where they find Mr. Prinnes name engaged : and the Cause being so precious , as it hath by right taken up my whole heart , to become and Advocate to plead the excellency of it : I could not , though the meanest of all , but for the love of Christ constraining me , and by his grace assisting , undertake this task . Otherwise unwilling in hoc ulcere esse unguis , as the Roman Orator said in another case . And this Answer was brought to the birth soon after yours : but it wanted a Midwife , whereof you have plenty . And I have had many interruptions . Nor am I so quick of foot , as you . But I may say , as Ierome once to young Augustin ; Bos lassus fortiùs figit pedem . And so in the spirit of love I come to your Book .