To our dread Sovereign Lord The KINGS moſt Excellent MAJESTY . May it pleaſe your Majeſty , we do moſt humbly and thankfully acknowledge , that by Your Majeſties vouchſafing to this your Principality the truſt of a branch of Your Royal Mint , is and honour that neither our Anceſtors nor our ſelves durſt wiſh for ; and we do as humbly and as thankfully acknowledge and confess , that by it you have not only honoured us more , then any of Your Royal predeceſſors ; but you have thereby offered us the means to enrich our ſelves , to the making of us happier then our father's , in freeing us from the cares and fears that hindered us from driving into theſe Mountains that promiſe a mass of treaſure . For be pleaſed to know , that before Your Majeſty vouchſafed unto us this great favour , we were fearful to adventure far into the mountains , becauſe we had far to ſend before we could make the ſilver currant , that we ſhould at charge recover . Nor was our care of carriage and recarriage the leaſt hindrance to our proceedings , from all which by Your Majeſties goodness , and the endeavours of Your induſtrious and faithful ſervant Thomas Bushel , we are happily freed ; for which favour , we whoſe names are hereunto ſubſcribed in the behalf of all the inhabitants of this your Principality of WALES , do render all humble and hearty thanks , and for them , and our ſelves , do hereby promiſe to Your ſacred Majeſty , that we will do our utmoſt endeavours , to find out that meaſure , which we believe God and Nature from the Creation hath preſerved for Your Majeſties uſe ; that thereby we may approve our ſelves Your Majeſties loyal and moſt obedient Subject's and humble Servants , Thomas Milward Knight , Chief Justice of Cheſter . Marmaduke LLoyd Knight . Richard Price K. Baronet . James Price Knight . Sampſon Eure Knight . Iohn Lewis Knight . Timothy Turnor Eſquire . I. Littleton Eſq . Walter LLoyd Eſq . Thomas Price Eſq . Robert Corbet Eſq . Evan Gwin Eſq . Morgan Herbert Eſq . Iohn Ʋaughan Eſq . Vincent Corbet Eſq . Humfrey Greene Eſq . Iohn LLoyd Eſq . David LLoyd ap Reighnald Eſq . Thomas Phillips Eſq . Iohn Edmund Eſq . Hugh LLoyd Gentlem. David Rees Gent. Iohn Bowen Gent. William Watkin Gent. Iohn Meredith Gent. Iames Kegitt Gent.