THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY . ( TO All the worthy Citizens of LONDON , Born in the Town of STAMFORD in the County of Lincolne , that have been or intend to be Benefactors to the same : And more especially to those two worthy Brother's and members of that City , Mr. Robert Bullack , and Mr. Iohn Bullack , who have not only been Pious and charitable Benefactors to their said Native town ; but also liberal and indulgent Encouragers to this present Survey thereof ) . GEntlemen , I here present unto you for a Newyears gift , the Survey of your Cradle-places ; a Work upon which I fixed my first thoughts by the motion which some of you by letter made unto others , who either not at leisure , or not willing ; or hindered by some other impediment , I know not what , forbore the enterprise : Which I perceiving ( though the unfittest of many others ) have presumed to set my Pen on work , rather then your desires should be altogether frustrate , or that I should conceal what I know ; have herd , or read of my Native town . As it is homely , so I hope it is harmless ; if it appear not worthy of your applause , yet I hope it will no way appear worthy of your displeasures ; take it therefore as it is meant , not as it might have been made better by me , for it is the best that my poor Invention , observation , or reading can afford , or the treasury of my Notebook can render . It had come to your views some Months before this , had not the troubles of these Times hindered my intended speed : Yet glad I am I have finished it at the end of the Old year , hoping it would have been published at the beginning of the new . If it be thought useful for the Public , I desire for the public good it may be published , and that what Errors have escaped my Pen , may by the Corrector be amended , by the Reader pardoned , and the whole substance of this Survey be by you kindly accepted ; From him who is and ever will be a lover of you and your Native place whilst he is Your Friend , Richard Butcher . Stamford the 1. of Ianuary , 1646.