To the Honourable House of COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT . OBedience is a virtue of such great worth , that Luther did rather desire to have grace to be obedient , than power to work miracles . Out of this very Principle it was , that I first adventured to preach before such a grave and judicious Senate , Mallem obedire quam miracula facere . Luther . coram tam multis viris & tam paucis hominibus . And from the same Principle it is , that I now present the Sermon to a more public view . The time allotted for the making of it , was so short ( by reason of your more serious affairs ) that it might have been a sufficient Apology , to excuse both the preaching and printing of it , had not pure Obedience justly silenced all such Apologies . And now it is printed , the Sermon it self is so poor and mean , that it may fitly be answered to me , what Apelles once did to a Painter , who having drawn many Lines in a little space of time , and boasting to Apelles that he had done so much in so short a time ; it was replied , That he wondered that he had drawn no more . But yet howsoever , my humble request is , That you would accept of this poor Mite , this little Goatshair , which your commands ( like a Midwife ) have brought into the world . And indeed the kind entertainment it found in the hearing , and the great acknowledgement of your Thanks ( far above all expectation or desert ) afterwards , is and abundantly sufficient incitement against all discouragement whatsoever . The subject of the Sermon is of great concernment . It is about the ruin and repair of Kingdoms and Nations ; a matter suitable for you that are the representative Body of the Kingdom . since ruins Kingdoms . When Nicephorus Phocas had built a mighty Wall about his Palace for his defence , he herd a voice in the night , crying 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . Though thou buildest thy walls as high as Heaven , since is within , and this will easily batter down thy walls . since is like a Traitor in our own bosoms , that will open the gates to the enemy . since weakens our hands , and makes them unapt to fight . since takes away the courage of our hearts . It was not the strength of Ai that overcame the Israelites , but Achans since . Sin causeth a great Army to be overcome by a little one . 2 Chron. 24.24 . The Army of the Syrians came with a small company of men , and the Lord delivered a very great host into their hand , because they had forsaken the Lord God of their Father's . The sins of England , are the enemies of England . These beleaguer our Walls , and are as so many Canaanites always rising up in rebellion against us . But now on the contrary , Repentance and Reformation repairs and upholds Kingdoms and Nations : this is their Fortress and Tower of defence ; their Munition , Armour , and Wall of Brass to defend them . Righteousness exalteth a Nation , but sin is a reproach to any People . Prov. 14 34. The Lord in mercy ruinate our sins , and not the Nation ! the same Lord work a National Reformation , and make you his Instruments in this great work ! Much hath been done by you this way already ( which is acknowledged in this ensuing discourse , with great thankfulness ) The Lord enable you to perfect what you have begun . He that is the Finisher of our faith , finish this much-desired Reformation ! It is very observable , that when God raised up Magistrates , such as Nehemiah , Zerubbabel , and others , to pity Sion that lay in the dust , and to repair her breaches : at the same time he raised up Prophets also , such as Haggai , Zechariah , and others , to strengthen the hands of the Magistrates , and to encourage them in so noble a service : and therefore it is expressly said . Then the Prophets , Ezra 5.1 . Haggai and Zechariah prophesied unto the Iews that were in Judah and Jerusalem in the Name of the God of Israel , even unto them . Then ( and not before ) rose up Zerubbabel and Jeshua , and began to built the house of God which is at Jerusalem ; and with them were the Prophets of God helping them . And Ezra 6.14 . The Elders of the Iews built , and they prospered through the prophesying of Haggai the Prophet , and Zechariah the son of Iddo ; and they built and finished it , according to the Commandment of the God of Israel , etc. By both these Texts it appears , that the Magistrates began and finished the reparations of Gods House , by the help of the Prophets of God . Suffer me , therefore ( as diverse others have done before ) the unworthiest of all Gods Ministers , according to my duty and place , to beseech and exhort you to the consummation of those blessed good things which you have begun to do for the Church of God in England . And the God of all blessings , bless you and yours . So prayeth Your much obliged Spiritual Servant , EDMVND CALAMY .