TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE House of LORDS Assembled in PARLIAMENT . IF all Noblemen were as good and religious as they are presented to the World in the Epistles prefixed to the Books that are dedicated to them , we should not have so much cause to complain of great men's Iniquities , or of poor men's flatteries . S. Augustine in his Book of Retractations , Retracts it as a great fault , that when he dedicated a Book to Mallius Theodorus , he praised him more then he deserved , though he confesses that he was doctus vir & Christianus , a Learned and Christian man : It is none of the least misery's of great men , that they want faithful friends to tell them their vices as well as their virtues . King Ahab had 400. flattering Prophets who were the cause of his ruin . Hence is that old Proverb , that there are only two things that never flatter great men , Death and Horses . For Death seizes upon great as well as small . And a Horse will cast down a great man as well as any other , if he rides not well . This Sermon speaks plain language , and this is the only Reason ( for ought I know ) that it received such kind acceptance , for otherwise it wants that neatness of phrase , and eloquence of speech which such Noble Auditors are accustomed unto , I have often herd of Great men , that complained upon their Death beds , that none would tell them of their faults , but never of any that complained he was told too much . Theodosius the great Emperor confesses of S. Ambrose , notwithstanding his severe carriage towards him , Theod. Solum novi Ambrosium dignum Episcopi nomine ; That he knew none worthy of a Bishopric but Ambrose . It is a custom to send Sermons out unto public view under the Patronage of some Nobleman or other . This Sermon hath this pre-eminence , That it comes forth under the Patronage , and by the commands not only of one Lord , but of a House of Lords . The Lord make it to obtain that end for which it was preached ! That you ( my Lords ) may make Joshua's choice your choice . The subject matter of the Sermon is very common and ordinary . But herein I follow the example of Chrysostome , who when he was made Patriarch of Constantinople , the first Sermon that he preached before the Emperor Arcadius and the great Courtiers , was a Sermon of Repentance . This is the message that I have received ( says Chrysostome ) from my Master Christ to deliver unto you . Repent for the Kingdom of God is at hand . Haec autem non dubitabo vobis assiduè revocare in memoriam . Haec neminem reverentes neque potentes aut divites timentes ad vos loquemur . The Lord bestow this great grace of Repentance upon you , and inable you to serve God with all the ingredients mentioned in the following Sermon ! Two things I would desire your Lordship's always to remember . 1. That the best way of thankfulness for mercies received , is to serve the God of those mercies , and to serve him with the mercies we receive from him . 2. That the best way for the House of Lords to prosper , is to endeavour earnestly and faithfully to reform the Lords House , your own houses , and first your selves . Some things I have added which were not preached , which relate to all men in general as well as great men , which I then omitted for brevity sake , but have here interserted I hope without offence , that so this Sermon which is printed for a general good , might have somethings in it tending to the good of all men as well as great men . The Great God make the House of Lords as the House of the Lord wherein service may be done to God , and for Gods cause . So prayeth Your Honours much obliged Spiritual servant Edmund Calamy .