TO THE HONOURABLE HOVSE OF COMMONS Assembled in Parliament . AMong all the Mercies which God hath vouchsafed to bestow upon this Kingdom by your help , the procuring of a Monthly Fast , from his Royal Majesty ( during the wars of Ireland , and the unsettled condition of England ) is not the least . For by this means the Churches of England are set in a monthly posture of war to fight with Prayers and Tears ( which are the Churches weapons ) against all the enemies of our peace and prosperity : And may very fitly resemble the Tree of Life , mentioned Revel . 22. 2. which yielded her fruit every Month , and the leaves of the tree were for the healing of the Nations . I doubt not but through Gods blessing , this Monthly Fast will prove and England-and-Ireland-healing Fast , if it be celebrated as it ought to be , with weeping , mourning , and brokenness of heart for since , and from since . Great is the efficacy , and omnipotency of prayer and fasting : So great , Vincit invincibilem ligat omnipotentem . as that it would require rather a large volume than a short Epistle to express it . And therefore I purposely wave it , as a theme in which a child cannot want eloquence , & in which I should sooner know where to begin , than where to make and end . As the Jewes had their Monthly Feast , which they called their New Moons , in 2 King . 4. 23. Amos 8. 9 Numb . 29 〈 ◊ 〉 H • … b Antiqu • … ty . which the Word was preached , their shops shut up , & special sacrifices offered up to God : And as they had their Feast of Trumpets , in which they blowed their trumpets all day long ( especially in their first New Moon ) from Sunrising , till night : So , Blessed be God , we now enjoy our Christian New Moons , and Evangelical Feast of Trumpets . We have not o • … ely our Monthly Sacrament Feast to refresh our souls withal , in most of our congregations , ( which would be as the hidden Manna , Revel . 2. 17. and unspeakable consolation to the Religious party , if you would be pleased ( most , noble Senators ) to appoint by your authority some spiritual rails ( as you have taken away other kind of rails ) to keep away all dogs and swine from polluting that holy Ordinance ) but we have also our New Moon F • … st , in which the Word is preached , trading ceases , and Sacrifices of prayer , praises , and alms , are tendered up to God , in the name of Jesus Christ . We have our Feast of Trumpets , in which our godly Ministers throughout the whole Kingdom lift up their voices as a Trumpet , and all the whole day ▪ are either the mouth of the people to God , or Gods mouth to Esay 58. 1. the people , showing unto England their sins , and to the people of this Land their transgressions , and calling them to humiliation , and reformation . From hence it comes to pass , That ( if Englands just fears , and Irelands misery's should so long continue by reason of our sins ) we are likely to be blessed by the providence of God , bringing good out of evil , with twelve National , solemn , public Fasts every year , which ( if rightly kept ) will be as the twelve Gates of the New Jerusalem , spoken of , Revel . 21. Every fast will be as a Gate to let us in , into a part of the New Jerusalem of Mercy , and happiness promised to the people of God , here upon earth . And there is one thing more , which adds much to this new monthly mercy , and that is , That notwithstanding your most weighty and important affairs , you are pleased to keep this Fast , your selves in your own Persons , after a most solemn and religious manner every Month . Which pious example no doubt will be a notable encouragement to all the Kingdom to follow so good a President , and a mighty provocation to the religious and solemn observance of it . It is said expressly of the King of Niniveh ( though a Heathen ) that he came from his Throne , laid his robes from him , and that his Nobles and people from the greatest of them to the least put on sackcloth . And , as Chrysostome well observeth , Their sackcloth prevailed more with God , then all their purple robes : Quod non poterat Diadema , id saccus obtinuit . Such a famous example do you hold forth , who are the chiefest of our Tribes ; to which I doubt not but the lowest of our people ( unless they will be worse than Heathens ) will cheerfully conform . This ensuing Sermon was preached at your last Monthly Fast , and it is now by your command exposed to public view . There is nothing in it , that makes it worthy the Printing , but only your kind acceptance of it ; which is as a Royal stamp upon some inferior metal to make it currant . It is the property as of God in Heaven , so also of all earthly gods who are truly noble , not only to give great gifts worthy of the givers , but also to accept of poor and small gifts , though unworthy to be given , when given with a thankful heart , as of a 〈 ◊ 〉 Art • … xes . handful of water , a cup of cold water , a poor widows mite , a little goats hair , and semblably of this following discourse , which now becomes public under your Patronage . The Lord grant it may accomplish that for which it was Preached ! That Englands mercies may be a motive , and a means of Englands humiliation and Reformation . And that by confessing our sins with a happy confusion of face ( as the Text requires ) we may prevent that unhappy confusion , which is otherwise likely to come upon us . The same Almighty God multiply all his gifts and graces upon you , be a Sun and a shield unto you , appearing always in the Mount of straits , causing all Mountains to become a Plain before you , & enabling you to consummate all those good things which you have begun to do for this Church and State . So prayeth your much obliged spiritual Servant , EDMVND CALAMY .