To the right Worshipful Sir Dennor Strut , Knight and Baronet , to the right Worshipful William Heveningham a worthy Member of the Honourable Houſe of Commons , to the Worshipful Nicholas Bacon , and Henry North , Juſtices of the peace , to the Worthy Thomas Baker , Nathaniel Thurſton , and John Bayles , Eſquires , and to Mr. John Mayhew , etc. Noble Knight , and Worshipful , and generous Gentlemen : I being bound to ſome of you in the bonds of affinity , to all in affection but above all in duty ; I cannot but hold it my duty to proffer you the beſt of my endeavours , and for want of any thing worthy , I do here perſent you my good will . I preſume not upon your Patronage , but only beg your acceptance ; conſidering that if theſe my endeavours be worth the accepting , they ſhall need the less aſsiſtance . But if any thing here brought forth be deformed , it is ſure moſt fit that he which begotten it ſhould father it . The world , peradventure , may wonder that I draw ſo large a circle , and then turn it to a cypher ▪ that I preſume to ſtamp ſo many worthy Names in the front of this my unworthy work , and then speak nothing of the worth of your worthy perſons in particular : But let the world know that it is not for want of worth in your ſelves that I forbear the ſame for I do ingenuouſly acknowledge I may juſtly draw your virtues into as large a Volume , as any other who have been moſt copious in that kind . But I , for my part , do hold it a labour little useful to paint over that to make it pass for currant , which does ſhine moſt perfect in its own colour . Beside , I am reſolved your modeſt ears would be rather offended , then fed , with the found of your own praises though unfeigned . But the chiefeſt aime of my deſires herein is to do you ſome ſervice ; not flatter for aſsiſtance . Therefore , if upon perusal hereof ( if your more ſerious employments will admit the ſame ) you ſhall reap any benefit , or at leaſt content , I ſhall , in this kind be ſufficiently ſatisfied . Only I deſire that upon your judicious view hereof , you would vouchſafe a favourable cenſure ; of which I am the more confident , becauſe I know you cannot expect any thing poliſhed from a hand ſo uninſtructed . But not to be too full in a Preface , to too empty a Sequel , I implore your pardon , and deſire to be employed , your Servant in all humility . Edward Calver .