TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE the Lord Viscount Say and Seal , etc. Peace . NOBLE SIR , LEarned Casaubon assures me that when the Greek Vide Annotat. Casaub. in G. Nys . Epist. and Amb. & Bas. Pacem ecclesiam , pacem Christi amissā quaerere , & turbatā componere , & repertam tenere curavimus said hujus ipsius fieri nos vel participes vel autores , nec tēporis nostri peccata me ruerunt — nec Antichristi ministri sunt passi , qui Pace sua , id est , Impietatis sua unitato se jactant , agents se non ut Christi Episcopos , sed Antichristi Sacerdotes . Hilarius contra Auxentium . Father's wrote to a wicked man they were wont to salute him with that Apostolical benediction , Grace be unto you : but when they wrote to a religious man they used the ordinary Hebraism , Peace be unto you , because Peace does suppose Grace , and does comprehend all outward blessings . I am sure your very enemies gave you this testimony at Oxford , that you were a man of Peace , but as it follows in the Psalm , when you spoke for peace they were for war . Psalm 120. 7. All that your Honour desired was , that ( as it became gowned men ) they would take up their books , and lay down their arms ; that they would not protect Delinquents any longer , but yield them up to a legal trial . You desired that nothing might be tumultuously attempted , but all things orderly reformed . You engaged your Honour to them that what Plate you found in places fit for Plate , the Treasury or the Buttery should remain untouched , and most Societies engaged themselves by a solemn promise , that they would never give their consent that their Plate should be put to any other use then what was suitable and according to their oath , and the intention of the Donors , their successors having in all these respects as great and interest in the Plate as themselves ; Nay they generally confessed that they had no more power to alien their Plate then their Lands . In confidence of their promise you told them you did leave their Plate in their own custody , which otherwise you would have secured , and in confidence of your Honours promise they brought forth their Plate , and made public use of it , even whilst the soldiers were in town ▪ Your Lordship found the University ( as the Reverend Doctors had left it ) groaning under a kind of Anarchy ; for it was thought fit by the Roundhouse , that the University should be dissolved , and every man left to do what seemed good in his own eyes . It was suggested by a Doctor well read in Politics , that if they did not dissolve the University , the Parliament would dissolve it ▪ But your Honour made it appear how much you did abhor and Anarchy , and honour the University ; you assembled those few Governors of private Colleges which were at home , and the Substitutes of all that were absent , you consulted them how the University might be put into its right posture : You assured them that it was not the intent of the Parliament to change the Government or infringe the Liberties of the University , & that though the new Statutes were justly complained of , yet you conceived it fit that the University should for the present be governed by Laws that were none of the best , rather then left quite without Rule , or government ; they all confessed that you behaved your self more like a Chancellor then a soldier , for the University was not overawed by a garrison , or overruled by a Council of war . You did not impose any Taxes upon the University , you did not go about to persuade them that Guns were Mathematical Instruments , and therefore they might buy guns with that very money which was bequeathed and set apart for Mathematical Instruments ; you did not importune any Scholars to list themselves in your Regiment , nor did you desire that Doctors would turn Commanders , or that any Commanders should be created Doctors , or boys created Master's , lest there might be and Anarchy even in Convocation by such a Premeditated Confusion ; and yet such counsels and practises have been suggested by some , that are none of the meanest Rank . When I was commanded by special warrant to attend your Honour , ( deputed by both houses of Parliament for the service of King and Parliament to settle Peace and Volumus & nos pacem , sed pacem Christi — pacē in qua non fit bellum involutū ; pacē , qua non ut adversartes subjictat , sed ut a mices jungat , Hieronym . Ep. and Th. contra errores Ioh. Him • ros . truth in the University of Oxford , and to reduce the said University to its ancient order , right Discipline , and to restore it to its former privileges and liberties ) there was notice given of a pestilent book very prejudicial both to truth and peace , and upon search made , the book was found in the chamber of Mr. Webberly , who had translated this Socinian Master-Peece into English for his own private use , as he pretended ; to which vain excuse I replied that I made no question but he understood the book in Latin , and therefore had he intended it only for his own private use , he might have saved the pains of translating it . Beside the Frontispice of the book under Mr. Webberlies own hand did testify to his face that it was translated into English for the benesit of this Nation . Moreover there was and Epistle to the Reader prefixed before the book ; ( I never herd of any man yet that wrote and Epistle to himself ) and therefore sure he intended to print it . Finally , he submits all to the consideration of these times of Reformation , and the Reformers have thought fit that it should be answered and published . I desired at the first Intimation to decline the service , because it were better to confute Socinianisme in Latin ; but I have since considered that 1. The opinions of Abailardus , Servetus , Socinus , are already published in English in a book entitled Mr. Woe •• ns defence against See Mr. Gatak • rs defence of Mr. Wot • . Mr. Walker , and therefore if this Treatise had been suppressed , their opinions would not be unknown , for they are already divulged . 2. The opinions being published in English without a confutation , it is very requisite that there should be some Refutation of the errors published also , for it is not fit that a Bedlam should go • abroad without a Keeper . 3. If there be but just suspicion of a Design to introduce damnable heresies , it is requisite that the grounds of suspicion should be manifested , especially if it be such a pestilent heresy a • Socinianisme is ( which corrupts the very vitals of Church and State ) it is fit the heresy should be early discovered left both Church and State be ruined by it . 4. The Parliament is much blamed for imprisoning the Translator without cause : and it is much wondered at that his Chamber should be searched by officers : now the cause of both will appear . The Translator and his work were so famous that there was notice given of his good service intended to this Nation , upon notice given there was a search made , now upon search made the book being found , and the Translator apprehended , the Parliament is rather guilty of his release then of his Imprisonment . 5. The Translator cannot complain of the publishing of it , because ( as hath been shown ) he himself intended to publish it , he submits all to these times of Reformation , and so do I , let the Reformers judge . This book belongs to your Honour , because it is but a Prodromus or Forerunner to make way for a full answer to Master Webberlies Translation , and therefore I present it to you , not only because Master Webberlies book was seized on by your Lordship's warrant ; but because I know your Honour hath ever patronized the true Protestant Religion , for Protestants do not place Religion in shadows and ceremonies ; and because you justly abhor all superstitious rites , whither old or new , all judicious men will esteem you the stricter Protestant . That you may testify your dislike of Schism as well as Heresy , you have discovered and refuted the uncharitable and bitter error of the Brownists . You have studied Nazianzens law of Martyrdom , neither to seek nor fear danger ; the first would be rashness , and the second cowardliness . 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . You are not of the sect of 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , etc. Gr. Na. zimz Orat. 20. Elcesaita fidem in persecution negā dam docebant & in cord servandam . Aug. de Hare sibus ad Quod. vult . Deū . the Elcesaites whereas Eusebius and Augustine testify ) taught men to deny the faith in time of Persecution , and yet to keep it still in their heart , forgetting that of the Apostle , that with the heart man believes unto righteousness , but with the mouth confession is made unto salvation . Rom. 10. 10. You have learned to be a good Christian , and therefore a good Subject ; Conscience will bind you to obedience , and no other Bound will hold men close to their duty ( to that Allegiance which is due by the Law of God and the Land both ) in these treacherous times . It was the wisdom of Euseb. de vita Const. l. 1. c . 11. that famous Emperor to banish all Renegado's from his Court , 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , as Traitors against God himself , for he considered that they who betrayed God for fear , would not stick to betray their Prince for gain . I dare say that you are the Kings sworn servant , and all men say that in your place you do advance the Kings Income to the highest , nay some have been bold to say that you have less care of the subject's profit , then of the Kings . Your devotions speak you a Royalist , none prays more heartily for the Vide Dinothuw • worser • bell • Ga • ico ; cunden de be • oh Belgico . Dimetr . Meteran . Hist. Belg. P • pellinier • . Memoires de la ligue . Insidi • sub pacis nomine latebant 1572. Barth . 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , etc. At saptens quondam rite ho • pradixit Homerus . Exhorts ille , domus , pauperque extorris & exlex , Quem bellum civil juvat , crudele , nefandum . Aristop . 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . Vulpt • bus at que leves voltis confidere Mergi ? 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 Mergus , fulica , Ardea , mihi Gavia videtur esse ; a Gull , or Sea. goose , vide observe . Flor. Chr. in locum . Nullâ id ratione queamus Ante lup • s quàm connubio sibi junxerit agnam . At nunquā rectà efficias incedere Cancrum , Non facias unquam ut lavis sict asper Echinus . Petra Romana est Mola Asinaria , demergatur sola in profundum maris , in collo nostro non suspendatur . Barret . worser • Iur • Regu . King ; It is your Judgement that the Kingdom cannot be preserved without and union between the three Estates by which the kingdom is governed , and if you might have been herd you would have petitioned , and solicited for and happy union between King and Parliament , only you conceive that and union between a Court of Justice and capital Delinquents , is intolerable , and and happy union between Protestants and Papists altogether impossible : We cannot forget how many leagues the Papists broke in 6. years space ; I reckon from 1572. to 1588. Wise Homer and witty Aristophanes were both in good earnest when they said that no man that had either wealth or Innocence could delight in Civil War , and Aristophanes showed himself as good a Statesman as a Poet in his sweet lines of Peace , where he advises all men to beware how they enter into a league of Peace with men that are unpeaceable ; and sure Delinquents and Papists are none of the trustiest or meekest men ; What ( says he ) shall Gulls confide in Foxes ? 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 The Papists will certainly count us Protestants Gulls indeed ( well we may be as innocent as doves , but we are as simple as Gulls ) if we confide in Jesuited Foxes ; let the wolf and the sheep be first married , and see how they agree : let us try whither we can make a crab go straight forward , or make a Hedgehog smooth . — 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , etc. If we say to the Pope as the men of Jabesh said to Nahash , Make a covenant with us and we will serve thee , the Pope will answer like Nahash the Ammonite , On this condition will I make a covenant with you , that I may thrust out all your right eyes , and lay it as a reproach upon all England , all Israel , all the Reformed Churches , 1 Sam. 11. 1 , 2. If we have lost our eyes already , let us be avenged on the Philistines ; the Lord strengthen us , as Sampson said , that we may overthrow the pillars upon which Room stands , so shall we be avenged of the Roman Philistines for both our eyes . Judges 16. 28. But there are other Philistines namely Arminian and Socinian Philistines , by which Church and State are much endangered , and it is the business now in hand to lay open their mystery of iniquity to the public view . we may say to these pestilent Heretics Tacit. A • . l. 4. Vibane the 2d . did account my worthy Predecessor S. Anselm his own Compear , and said he was the Patriarch and Apostolic of the other world . The Archbishop his Relat. p. 171. The like privilege offered to this Archbishop by the English Friar Bar •• si • s ; see the large supplement of Canterburies self-conviction page . 20. What offers were made by Signior Co • , I leave to one more skilful to demonstrate . as well as to malignant Statesmen , Ita nati estis ut mala vestra ad Rempub. pertineant ; for there are no greater Statesmen in the world then the English Arminians , and Popish Socinians ; for such Monsters hath England nourished as are not to be found in all Africa . Herod and Pilate , the Roman and the Racovian Antichrist , are made friends in England , all the Grand-Malignants , Arminians , Papists , and Socinians are of one confederacy , all united under one head the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury , the Patriarch or Pope of this British world , alterius orbis Papam as his Brother-Pope hath given him leave to phrase it , because he saw the Arch-Bishop too proud to acknowledge his Supremacy , but forward enough to maintain any other point of Popery , & ready to join with him to suppress all Pure Protestants . If this Design take effect , there may well be a reconciliation professed & established between Room and Canterbury , the two Popes may divide the spoil of the Church between them if they can but agree at parting . Whither some have not endeavoured to make such a Reconciliation ; whither all points of Popery almost have not been greedily embraced in England , and that of the Popes Supremacy only rejected , more out of pride then conscience , let the prudent judge , they have light and evidence enough , and new evidence is daily produced . The Lord unite the King and Parliament , that Truth and Justice , Piety and Peace may be established in our days : so prays Aprill , 18. 1643. Your Lordship's humble servant , Fr. Cheynelz . It is ordered this eighteenth day of Aprill , 1643. by the Committee of the House of Commons in Parliament concerning printing , that this book intit • led The Rise , Growth , and Danger of Socinianisme , etc. be printed . Iohn White .