TO THE HIGH AND HONOURABLE The LORDS and House of COMMONS of England in PARLIAMENT Assembled . My Lords and Gentlemen , ABout twelve years ago there came to my hand a little tract written in Latin by one who styled himself JOHANNES CAMILTONUS , and professed himself to have been sometime a Probationer in that College of Iesuites in Germany , whereof JACOCUS DEL RIO , at that time Provincial was the Visitor : This book , in the year 1607 was by him written and dedicated to the Protestant Electors of Germany , as a Discovery beforehand of those most damnable 〈 … 〉 Society then had in agitation against the people of Germany . The title of this book was , De studiis Iesuitarum abstrusioribus , concerning the more secret and reserved practises of the Iesuites : Whereunto had those Princes , to whom this book was Dedicated , given such timely • are and belief as they might have done , they had in all probability prevented the greatest part of those unparalleled misery's , which since the beginning of the wars there ( and that was not till eleven years after the publication of this book ) these Jncendiaries of Christendome , have brought upon the Germane Nation , to the astonishment of all the world . But we see what hath since been permitted to these fellows to do , and what the neglect of a timely taking heed to a seasonable warning hath brought upon those then flourishing Princes and States . That we therefore might learn by other men's harms to re 〈 … 〉 e our own particular , I have endeavoured the publication of this translation under your honours protection ; having taught this Discoverer to speak our language , for the public benefit of our English Nation , against them , I dare boldly say , even your selves being my Judges when you shall have read this small tract , that the same course hath been taken by these common Incendiaries for breeding a disturbance , and bringing all things into a confusion both in our Church and State , that was then projected , and since then acted upon Germany . Nor do I think , but it is sufficiently known to your Honours and grave Wisdoms , that the same wheel of mischief , that wrought all the woes of Germany since the year 1618. hath for some years last passed , been set also at work in England , Scotland , and Ireland : witness all the factions and fractions in Church and State , the disturbances and discontents between the Prince and the people , the fearful divisions betwixt the Clergy and the Clergy , betwixt the Court and City , and betwixt the King and his Commons , yea , even betwixt the two Crowns of England and Scotland , all which have received their birth and breeding from the devilish designs of those sons of division , the Society of Jesuites , and been fomented almost to a perfect flame by their Agents , and Adherents , their deluded Disciples of this Nation , and had undoubtedly broken out , and produced in short time , the like effects among us , that they have done in Germany , had not Almighty God in mere mercy to this Nation , and in his Divine compassion to his poor Church in England thus ready to perish , stepped in to our rescue , by his blessed hand of providence stirring up the spirits of our noble Peers to represent to his sacred Majesty the eminent danger , and graciously inclining his Royal heart to harken thereto , and so that we may say with the Psalmist , Ps. 118. 23. This was the Lords doing , and it is marvelous in our eyes . And the same God , if it be his blessed will , in his own time , by his own means , perfect that good work of mercy , which he hath so gracioussy begun for us of this Land and Nation , by rooting out from among us that disloyal brood of Inigo Loiola , that our eyes may see it , and we may say , the Lord hath been megni •• ed upon the borders of England . For assuredly , though the Romish Factors , may now justly say , as EDOM did in the Prophecy of Malachy , 1 : 4. We are impovverished , but we will retur • e , and built up our desolate places , ( for they cannot but be sensible of their own 〈 … 〉 ets defeated both by Sea and Land , by water in the year 1588 , by F •• e , 1605 , and it is not to be doubted that they apprehend a fear of the miscarriage of their great and long intended plot of 〈 ◊ 〉 begun to • eake out this year 1641 , all which notwithstanding , they still retain a resolution 〈 … 〉 and built up their desola • e places ) yet I desire them , to read and take notice of the words following in the place before-cited , yet , thus says the Lord of Hosts , They shall built up , but I will destroy , and men shall call them the border of wickedness , and the people with whom the Lord is angry for ever : And your eyes shall see it , and men shall say the Lords name hath been magnified upon the borders of England . And to speak truly what I think , I must confess that I have conceived and hope of a long time , that this year 1641. which completeth the Century since that Society had their Bull from the Pope , under protection whereof they have wrought so much mischief , would show unto the world and apparent alteration in the body of that Monster , the Society of Jesuites . A point which I am the rather induced to believe , because I have been certified as much in effect from a couple of their own men of eminent note for learning , the one , PAVLUS FLOR • NIUS and Italian , the other CHRISTIANUS FRANKEN a Germane , the former whereof was DIVINITY READER , the other PHILOSOPHY READER in the Imperial College of Iesuites at Vienna , both which , above threescore years ago , upon just grounds expressed in a book by them published , forsook that Religion , and became Protestants . That book also is to be seen , and if it please this Honourable House to command it , shall be published also in English , for I find it written in Latin . And , if their prediction fail not more in the conclusion then it hath done in the progress hitherto . I am confident that this mayprove a very fatal year to that Society But I fear I hold you too long from the Book it self Humbly therefore commending you all to Almighty God in my due and daily prayers . I leave this Discovery to your consideration , and rest Yours in all the duty of a Minister of Christs Gospel . W. F. X. B.