TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE , THE LADY KATHERINE BROOK , Wife to Right Honourable , ROBERT , Lord BROOKE , Baron of Beuchampen-Court . Much honoured Madam , KING Solomon , the wisest of men , having tired himself in seeking to obtain happiness by the studies of learning , and knowledge , and at last , finding that he that increases knowledge , increases sorrow , he turns himself another way , and seeing the knowledge of the creatures could do him no good , he thought to try what delight the use of them could bring unto him ; in the pursuance whereof , he gave not himself over to brutish , and unmanly pleasures , but to the free use of such creatures , as the Lord hath bestowed upon the sons of men , for their refreshing and delight : among which he reckons up gardens and Orchards stored with all sorts of fruits , and flowers : these he might have enjoyed with much profit , and comfort , if he had used them aright , but seeking for happiness in them , no such honey could be sucked out of the daintiest of those flowers ; no such wine out of the fruitfullest of those grapes : and therefore he concludes , looking upon all the works which his hands had wrought , that all was vanity and vexation of spirit . Eccles. 2.11 . Now as the Lord afforded unto him such choice delights : so he hath bestowed upon your Ladyship a confluence of outward felicities ; and among them Gardens ( if I may guess ) not far inferior to Solomons : and those beautified , and inameld with variety of the choicest flowers , whose lively verdures , and fragrant smells ( if I mistake not ) your Ladyship is much pleased with : yet herein I presume in a much different way from Solomons , as not seeking happiness in them ; but rather desiring by those objects to raise up your soul to such contemplations , as may truly further your eternal happiness : and if your Ladyship shall find such heavenly odours in those flowers , whose purest matter is the earth : and whose freshest beauty is so fading : what will you do in a Nosegay of flowers , whose matter is divine ; and whose smell , and beauty will never decay : Such anon I do here humbly present unto your Ladyship : you may use it summer and winter without fear of withering ; yea , herein are flowers both for food and physic : for meats , and medicine . Length of time will no whit impair , either the beauty or Virtue of them , and therefore they do most transcendently excel all earthly flowers whatsoever : Indeed I must ingenuously confess , that few of them grew upon mine own soil ; yet before I could bind them together in this handful , my labour was not small in walking through so many Gardens , out of which I have selected them : neither as I hope will it be offensive , or prejudicial to the worthy Planters , and Owners of them ( some of which are with God , others now living ) that I thus disperse them abroad , themselves having first made them common : If your Ladyship please to vouchsafe your favourable acceptance of them , I doubt not but they will take the better with others ; and if God may receive the glory , and his People benefit by these my labours , I shall have mine end , whose ambition it is to to be esteemed . Alcester . Septem . 20. 1641. Your Honours humble servant , and remembrancer at the Throne of Grace . SAMVEL CLARKE .