To all the Churches of Ieſus the Chriſt , coming out of Mystical Babylon , gathered , or ſcattered , that follow the Lamb , the Lord JESUS whereſoever he goes . BEloved in CHRIST , Disdain not to Read this Learned Treatiſe of Maſter John Cotton , of Boſton in New-England , out of any prejudice thou mayeſt take againſt the perſon , or publiſher of it . What if ſome judge him a Schismatic ? yet he regardeth not men raſh cenſure : Seeing he can with holy Paul , that before his Converſion perſecuted the Church of God , ſafely Apologiſe for himself ; Acts 24. 14. That after the way that you call Heresy , ſo worſhip I the God of my Father's ; believing all things that are written in the Law , and in the Prophets . Verſe 15. And have and hope towards God , which you your ſelves alſo allow , that there ſhall be a reſurrection of the dead , both of the juſt , and unjuſt . Verſe 16. And herein do I exerciſe my self , to have always a Conſcience void of offence towards God & towardman . But yet this I confess unto you , that I am less then the leaſt of all the Meſſengers of Chriſt ; for I am not worthy to be called a Meſſenger , or Miniſter ; for I perſecuted the Church of God , that profeſſed the Faith of Jeſus the Chriſt ; that held forth all his Royal Offices , King , Prophet , Prieſt , according to his outward adminiſtration , in admitting of Members into his Spiritual Kingdom : And ſided with the Antichriſtian Prelates , and Biſhops , that denied , that Jeſus is the Chriſt , whom the Spirit of God calls Liars , and Antichriſtians , That denyeth the Father and the Son , 1 John 2. 22. For though I , with the Antichriſtian Biſhops , and Prieſts , did acknowledge Jeſus the Chriſt , our high Prieſt that ever lives to reconcile us unto God ; yet we have perſecuted them that hold his Kingly and Prophetical Office to be eternal , aſwell as his Prieſthood , and the gathering of his Church according to his Royal Commiſsion , Matth. 28. 18 , 19 , 20. Hence it is , that Chriſt divided , becometh not Chriſt to the divider ; this according to the Vulgar Latin , Solvere Jeſum , to dissolve Jeſus , that is , to receive him only in part , and not in the whole , which is the ſpirit of Antichriſt . Now when the Lord opened the eyes of my underſtanding , and convicted me of all the abominations I had done in my spiritual Captivity under Antichriſt , eſpecially , that I had crucified Jeſus the Chriſt in his Members , being pricked in my heart , I trembling cried , what ſhall I do ? The Spirit and the Bride , the Lambs wife , ſaid ; Repent , and be Baptised in the name of Jeſus , etc. Then I gladly received the Word , was Baptised , and was added to the Church , Acts 2. 38 , 39 , 40 , 41 , 42. Yet , by the grace of God , now I am , what I am ; And having from ſome Friends , received this Learned Conference , kept it by me as a precious Diamond of great worth , from which my soul , through the great goodness of God , did reap much spiritual comfort . And did wait , hoping that ſome learned and faithful friends of his , would long ago have Printed a larger , and and exacter Copy of it : But finding none , ( I that am less then the leaſt of all Saints ) could not any longer conceal it , but thought with my self , I was bound in Conſcience to publiſh it , in this learned Age , wherein there is ſo much enquiry after truth , for the benefit of poor , hungry , empty , self-denying Spirits ; rather then ſuch a Learned Tract of heavenly light , ſhould always lie in the duſt , as unseen , and forgotten . For this cauſe alone , I have attempted ( Courteous Reader ) to preſent • oh thy view this Learned Treatiſe ; Not • hat I have any relation to that Lear • ed man ; nor any command from him • oh do it : But only in love , that this his Learned Diſputation might not be • uried in ſilence . Read it therefore ( Beloved in Chriſt ) not for his ſake that publiſheth it ; but for his ſake that was • he Author of it ; or rather for the God • f Truths ſake . For whoſe cauſe the Learned Author contendeth for the Faith in theſe days , wherein the Goſ • ell of Truth hath ſuffered ſo great Ec • lipſes , through the rage and tyranny of the Popiſh Antichriſtian Prelates and Prieſts . Thine that earneſtly desires to exalt the Lord Jeſus the Chriſt , in all his royal Offices FRAN. CORNWELL .