TO THE HONOURABLE AND Truehearted lover of his Country , Sir HENRY VANE Junior , Knight , sometime Governor of New-England ; Treaſurer of the Navy Royal , and a Member of the Houſe of COMMONS . Sir , 1 Cor. 14 27 THe Churches of the Saints and the World , may not be unfitly compared to the Pearl and the Pebble : though both of one natural ſubſtance , earth ; yet the one of rare price , whoſe beauty is the sunbeams enclosed ; the other wanting it , is caſt away as refuſe . What makes the Saint more excellent then his neighbour , ſeeing both are born of fleſh , both ſubject to the ſame corruptions , sickness , death , but this ? Epheſ . 4. 24 The Saints excellency is nothing elſe but the Image of Jeſus Chriſt the Sun of righteousness ſhining in him : For as the moon and stars derive their light from the sun ; 1 Cor. 1. 30 ſo all the wisdom , righteousness , holiness a Saint hath , he deriveth from Chriſt . Hence David the King does ſo prize their fellowſhip , All my delight is in thy Saints , Pſal . 16. 3. thine excellent ones that are in the earth , and them that excel in virtue . Yea , it is a ſure note of a Citizen of Sion , that he honours them that fear the Lord : Pſal 15. Whereas worldly men without grace , are rendered in his eyes as vile . Hence the Spouſe acknowledgeth that all her excellency comes from plantation ; Let my Beloved come into his garden , Cant 4 16. and eat his pleaſant fruit . Yea , Chriſt declareth to Nicodemus that a believers holiness comes from regeneration ; Joh. 3. 5. that in Chriſt he may only glory . How does the Lord diſcover this his excellency to a believer , by his calling , till that time he lies amongſt the refuſe of the world , Tit. 3. 3. as fooliſh , diſobedient , deceived , ſerving diverse lustest and pleaſures , living in malice and envy , hateful , and hating one another . But then the kindness and love of God to man appeared , Col. 1. 13. by delivering him out of the kingdom of darkness , and tranſlating him into the kingdom of his deer Son . By which it is manifeſt , that he is one of the Choſen generation , the royal prieſthood , 1 Pet. 2. 9. the holy nation , the peculiar people , whom he hath called out of darkness into his marvellous light . But when does the Lord diſcover the truth of his calling to his conſcience ? Then when he gives him precious faith ; for that only diſtinguiſheth him from the world that lies in sin . Gal. 3. 22. The Scripture concludeth ( father , mother , son , daughter , nay the infant that is born of the moſt holieſt parents ) all under sin , that the promiſe by the faith of Jeſus Chriſt might be given to them that believe . So that in that ſame hour the Lord gives him faith , he gives him and evidence in himself , Heb 15. 1. that he loved him in Chriſt before he was born , Rom 9 11. before he had done good or evil , Act. 13. 39. that he hath juſtified him from all thoſe things he could not be juſtified by the Law , Heb. • . 14. that he hath purged his conſcience from all dead works , that his perſon is accepted , his sin diſcharged , Act 26. 1 • . and he hath a right to the purchaſed inheritance amongſt them which are ſanctified . Thus the love of Chriſt revealed to die for him , to take away his iniquity , and reconcile him to God ; the Spirit given to take away his heart of ſtone , Eccl. 36. 25. 26. gives him and heart of fleſh , to cauſe to walk in his flatutes ; yea , and draws his heart to yield obedience to every commandment of Jeſus the Chriſt . The truth of this grace given , Right Worshipful , you can give a true testimonial ; for you were once in your natural condition as well as others , till it pleaſed God who ſeparated you from the womb , Gal. • . 15 , 1 • . to call you by his grace , to reveal his Son in you ; you conſulted not with fleſh and blood , but left your native soil , 〈 … 〉 ( in the perſecuting times of the Prelates ) choosing rather to ſuffer affliction with the people of God ( according to the light they had received ) then to remain in England and enjoy the pleaſures of ſin for a ſeaſon . Yet there the Lord exalted your Worſhip to be the Governor : And in that dawning light , coming forth out of mystical Babylon , the Lord diſcovered much spiritual knowledge , of the riches of his freegrace in Jeſus Chriſt , amongſt you ; you being freed from the yoke of the TaskMaſters here , the Biſhops , that kept you in bondage : you had liberty there to debate thoſe Queſtions ; which the naming only of them here , would have rendered a man odious . But Satan that envieth the peace of the Saints ; ſtirred up a ſpirit of contention amongſt you ; eſpecially when theſe Queries came to be debated . 1 Whither there are any gracious conditions , or qualifications wrought in the soul before faith ? 2 Whither any man can gather his evidence of the aſſurance of his Juſtification from his Sanctification ? 3 Whither there be and active power of Faith , and other gifts of grace in a Chriſtian converſation ? The one ſide would not believe themſelves juſtified , no farther then they could ſee themſelves work ; making their Marks , Signs , and Qualifications , the cauſes of their Juſtification . The other ſide , laid the Evidence of their Juſtification , only by Faith in the free Promiſe : for there are foure things that makes remiſſion of sins perpetual to a believer . Firſt , The cauſe of Remiſſion , the ſacrificed Body of Chriſt on the Cross , or accurſed Tree ; Heb. 10. 4. By one offering , he hath perfected for ever them that are ſanctified . Secondly , The ground is a free promiſe tendered to us from God ; as to Adam , The Seed of the Woman ſhall break the Serpents head , Gen. 3. 15. John. 3. 16. 1 John 4. 10. Thirdly , The mean is , Faith apprehending it , Phil. 3. 9. Fourthly , The Spirit of Chriſt ſealing of it , Epheſ . 1. 13. This truth revealed for the comfort of poor drooping Saints found great oppoſition ; But the good Lord , ſtirred up your gracious ſpirit , to countenance , and defend them in the amid of ſtrong oppoſition ; and though you were ſleighted , and ſet light by at the end of your Government , as not worthy to be and aſſiſtant , with many other Inſtruments more ; yet the good Lord ſtood by you , and strengthened you , and delivered you from the hands of your oppoſers , perſerved you from the dangers of the Sea ; and though at your return to your Native Soil , you lived like Joſeph , a while , in a deſpiſed condition , yet the Lord raiſed you up to fit amongſt Princes . So that though you were willing to loose life , friends , preferment , for Chriſt ; found you not then , life , peace , joy , in the Lord Jeſus , which was better to you , then all worldly amity ; according to his own promiſe , In the World you found affliction , but in him you found peace : And when you were called to be a Member of the high Court of Parliament , in our diſtreſſed and diſtracted times ; the Lord made you and • nſtrument to defect the Treacherous plot of thoſe two brothers in evil ; Thomas Lord Strafford ; and William Lord Archbiſhop of Canterbu • y , that contrived the deſtruction of our fundamental Laws , ratified by the Statute of Magna Charta , by • abouring to ſet up and Arbitrary Government , and keeping on foot a Po • is Army , conſiſting of Iriſh Re • else , and others , to compel the faith • ull , and truehearted Nobility , and loyal Commons of England , • oh ſubject themſelves to their illegal Taxations : hazarding the loss of he favours of the King , Nobi •• ty , Parents , Friends , and Allies , together with thoſe places of Ho • our and Maintenance , the King of clemency had freely beſtowed ; ra •• er then his Country ſhould be ru • ed , and enthralled , by ſuch accor •• 〈 … 〉 a branch of that goodly Caedar , under whoſe ſhade , the Innocent and oppreſſed , tender Conſciences that ſtand for a through Reformation , agreeable to the Word oh • God , find reſt ) ever be forgotten , and left unrewarded ; God forbid : I • is worthy to be written on a Pilla • of Marble ; and recorded in the Chronicle : that after-ages may never forget to show kindness , and mercy to your Noble Poſterity that did not think your life ( together with your nearest relations deer unto you , ſo as to part with them , that you might purchaſe you Countries Liberty ; I cannot judge him Englands Friend , that enviet • your honour , and promotion ; Se • ing you are ( for the love you hau • showed to Chriſt his Truth , and poor Members , together with you • Native Country ) worthy of double honour . Now ( worthy Sir ) ſeeing all your excellency is nothing elſe , bu • the Image of Jeſus Chriſt , the Son of righteousness ſhining in you . Diſ • ain not to receive from the hand of a poor deſpiſed Inſtrument that preſents this Treatiſe , The Learned Conference of Maſter John Cotton , that he had with the Elders , at the Bay of Boſton in New England . Though I am the leaſt of all Saints , not worthy to be called a Saint ; becauſe • n the time of the Prelates reign ; I • ided with them , in perſecuting the Faith of Jeſus Chriſt , and impriſoning of his Members ; But did it • gnorantly , through unbelief , and when the Lord pierced my heart for it ; I trembling , cried , What ſhall I do ? The holy Spirit and the Bride ſaid , Repent , and be baptised in the name of Jeſus , for the remiſsion of sins , and I ſhould receive the gifts of the Spirit , etc. Then Noble Sir , though I procraſtinated it for a ſeaſon , at laſt , I was not diſobedient to the heavenly voice , but aroſe , and was Baptised ; For this cauſe , have been much oppoſed by my old Friends , and Countrymen ▪ But yet remain a Loyal Cove • nanter , that stands for a Reformation in England , and Ireland , a • agreeable to the Word of God , and the beſt Reformed Churches : Seeing it is not the voice of the Churches , but Chriſt in the Churches we Convenented to harken unto as Maſter Caſe his Sermon yet teſtifieth . Firſt , To extirpate Popery ; ( which I apprehended at the taking of the National Covenant ) was that Doctrine of Antichriſt , which does univerſally oppoſe the doctrine of Jeſus the Chriſt . Affirming what Chriſt denieth ; and denying what Chriſt affirmeth . Secondly , Prelacy , viz. The Government of Archbishop's , and Biſhops , and all Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that Hierarchy , Root and Branch : as a Plant the heavenly Father hath not planted . Thirdly , Superſtition : viz. Whatſoever is ſupra Statutum , that hath not the word of God to warrant it . Fourthly , Schism : Namely , from all thoſe that teach , and counterfeit •• ſent not to the wholeſome words , even the words of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt , and to the doctrine which is according to godliness ; from ſuch I muſt withdraw , 1 Tim. 6. 3 , 5. Fifthly , Heresy : Even from all them that deny that Jeſus is the Chriſt ; They are Antichriſt that deny the Father and the Son . Whoſoever denyeth the Son , the ſame hath not the Father , 1 Joh. 2. 22 , 23. Sixthly , That the Lord may be one : viz. Even the Lord Jeſus the Chriſt , whom God raiſed from the dead , and • et him at his own right hand in the • eavenly places ; Far above all principality , and power , and might , and dominion , and every name that is nam , not only in this world , but that which is to come : And hath put all things under his feet , and gave him to be head over all things to the Church , Which is his body , the fullness of him that fills all in all , Epheſ . 1. 20 , 21 22 , 23. Seventhly , And his Name to • one in the three Kingdoms : ( that is , as I conceive it ) his power , authority , and royal Commiſſion muſt be exalted in all his Offices , to be the eternal King , eternal Prophet , and eternal Prieſt , in all things appertaining to the conſcience : ſeeing the loyal Spouſe of Chriſt hath no Head , no Husband , no Lord , no Lawgiver , but royal King Jeſus . That we , and our poſterity after us , may live in faith , and love ; and the Lord may delight to dwell among us . For the keeping of which Covenant , I had rather choose to die , then to deny the faith of Jeſus the Chriſt : Knowing , that he which confesses him before men , him he will confess before his Father . But he which is aſhamed of Chriſt , • and his words , in this sinful and adulterous generation , of him alſo ſhall the Son of man be aſhamed , when he comes in the glory of his Father , with the holy Angels , Mar. 8. 38. Thus I deſire , in the firſt place , Mat 22. 21 to give to God the things that are Gods ; and , in the next place , render to the high and honourable Court of Parliament , whereof your Honour is a Member , and to your King , when the Lord ſhall put it into his heart to return unto his Parliament , and to join with you , all your dues , Room . 13. 7. tributes , customs , fear , honour ; and ſubject my self to obey all your juſt , legal , and civil commandments : Knowing , that you ſet not up the Sword for nought ; • Pet. 2. 14 but to be a terror to them that do evil , and a praiſe , a guard and defence , for them that do well . Your poor Orator at the throne of grace , that earneſtly prayeth , that the Lord will give you , and the great Council of the Kingdom , wisdom and prudence , to bear with tender Conſciences , that deſire to exalt Jeſus the Chriſt in all his Royal Offices , FRAN. CORNWELL . Orpington , in Kent , the ninth Month , 1645.