To all loyal Covenanters , contending for the Faith of JESUS the CHRIST , once given to the Saints ; Mat. 16. 16 , 17. C Ʋrteous Reader , be not too cenſorious concerning him that is the Publiſher of this little Treatiſe , styled , The difference between the Chriſtian and Antichriſtian Church , as if he condemned the Ages and Generations that are passed , as in a loſt condition ; becauſe he says they have built their houſe upon wood , and hay , and ſtubble , and not upon the ſure rock Jeſus the Chriſt : Far be it from him to judge ſo • aſhly of the Ages and Generations passed , or preſent , concerning their final eſtate ; for • ee is commanded to judge no man before • he time , knowing that they ſtand and fallen to their own Maſter : And , we ſhall all ſtand before the judgement ſeat of Chriſt ; And then and there every one ſhall give and account for himself to God , Rom. 14. 4 , 10 , 12. Knowing , as it is recorded in the inſpired Scriptures , that If any man built upon this foundation ( Jeſus the Chriſt ) gold , ſilver , precious ſtones , wood , hay ſtubble ; Every men work ſhall be made manifeſt : for the day ſhall declare it ; becauſe it ſhall be revealed by fire : and that • fire ſhall try every men work . If any men work abide , which he hath buil • thereon , he ſhall receive a reward : If any men work ſhall be burned , he ſhall ſuffer loss ; but himself ſhall be ſaved yet ſo as by fire , 1 Cor. 3. 12 , 13 , 14 , 15. Secondly , Know that the diſcovery of this truth was ( as the viſion that is his for and appointed time ) and is become unto us , as the words of a book that is ſealed , which men deliver to one that is learned , ſaying , Read this I pray thee : And h • says , I cannot ; for it is ſealed . And that • book is delivered to him that is not learned , ſaying , Read this I pray thee : And • he says , I am not learned , Eſay 29. 11 , 12 ▪ So that it is not in him that is learned , no • in him that is unlearned , to diſcover the myſtery of iniquity , by which Antichriſ • hath filled the Temple ſo full of smoke , that no man can ſee how to enter into it , unti • God enlighten him ; which cauſed the Lord Jeſus in the days of his fleſh , to break out into and Eucharistian of praiſe , looking on his Diſciples , I thank thee , Oh Father , Lord of heaven and earth , that thou haſt hid theſe things from the wiſe and learned , and haſt revealed them unto babes . Even ſo , Oh Father , becauſe it ſeemed good in thy sighed , Mat. 11. 25 , 26. That the whole glory in diſcovering of truth to any , might be given unto God . Thirdly , Know ( gentle Reader , who art a ſearcher after truth in theſe inquiring times ) that the Publiſher wrote this Treatiſe , to diſcover that the difference lies not ſo much amongſt us in point of Baptism ; as it is about the Doctrine of the Faith of Jeſus the Chriſt , the Son of God ; which whoſoever believeth and confesses , that Jeſus the Chriſt is the Son of God , it is lawful to baptise him , Act. 8. 36 , 37 , 38. And , to which Faith of Jeſus the Chriſt , and Baptism , the promiſe of receiving the gifts of the holy Spirit is given , Act. 2. 38 , 39. And though for publiſhing this myſtery of Faith , which hath been hidden for ſome Ages and Generations that are passed , he ſuffer reproach and contempt from the hands and tongues of ſome ; yet , if the will of God be ſo , it is better he ſuffer for welldoing , then for evil . Yet the love that he bears to the loyal Covenanters in the Nation , constrains him to do it , rather then his Countrymen ſhould ever remain in blindness , under the power of Antichriſt . Thine , who is the unworthieſt of all the ſervants of Chriſt , ( who is content it ſhould be ſaid of his good name , that is as a precious ointment , as Luther ſaid of Moſes his body , Let it die and rot , ſo God may be glorified , and Jeſus the Chriſt exalted in all his royal Offices ; ) FRAN. CORNWELL .