TO THE HONOURABLE , and the true lover of all conſcientious Covenantours , that ſtand up for a through Reformation , according to the word of our good God , in England , and Ireland , CORNELIUS HOLLAND Eſquire , a Member of the Houſe of Commons Aſſembled in Parliament . SIR , DAvid deſcribeth the godly man , by his pleaſure , and by his pains : Firſt , the pleaſure of the godly man , in theſe words : Pſal . 1. 2. He delights in the Law of the Lord . Secondly , the pains of the godly man : And in that Law he meditateth day and night ; not only in the day appointed for man to labour in , but in the night alſo appointed for man to reſt : the reaſon is , becauſe it is his meat and drink , to do the will of his God . ( Honoured Sir ) The Word of Chriſt being the Rule of Englands Reformation ; the good Lord ( that writeth his Laws in his peoples hearts , according to his new Covenant of Grace : Heb. 8. 10. ) put it into my mind , ſeriouſly to conſider , What Schism was , that I had covenanted againſt . And ſearching the Scriptures , I found it thus written , 1. Tim. 6. 3. If any man teach otherwiſe , and conſent not to the wholeſome words , even the words of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt ; and to the Doctrine which is according to godliness . Verſ . 4. He is proud , knowing nothing ; but doting about Queſtions , and ſtrife of words ; whereof comes envy , ſtrife , railings , evil ſurmiſings . Verſ . 5. Perverſe diſputings of men of corrupt minds , and deſtitute of the truth ; ſuppoſing that gain is godliness ; from ſuch withdraw thy ſelf . Yea , and after a further enquiry , to underſtand aright the things that are controverted amongſt us ; by the good providence of the Almighty , I found two Texts of holy Scripture , ſetting forth two ſorts of men , Diametrally oppoſing one another , as light does darkness , truth does falſehood ; the one that • s written : 1 John 5. 1. Whoſoever believeth that Jeſus is the Chriſt , is born of God . And the other , thus ; 1 John 2. 22. Who is a liar , but he that denyeth that Jeſus is not the Chriſt , He is Antichriſt , that denyeth the Father and the Son . And when I thought to underſtand the difference , it was to hard for me , until I went into the Sanctuary of God ; where the Father of glory , of his good pleaſure , revealed to me ( the moſt unworthiest of all his ſervants ) the truth of that ; which ( I conceive ) is the root of all our Controverſies , and gave me to underſtand the meaning of the Scriptures , 1 John 5. 1. Whoſoever believeth that Jeſus is the Chriſt , viz. the eternal King , Prophet , Prieſt of the Church of the new Teſtament , ratified with his blood , whom the Father of glory hath exalted to be Lord and Chriſt , Acts 2. 36. and head , Epheſ . 2. 20 , 21 , 22 , 23. Is born of God . Seeing no man can ſay , ( that is confessed ) that Jeſus is the Lord but by the holy Spirit , 1 Cor. 12. 3. Hence I find it written , Joh. 1. 11. Jeſus came to his own , but his own received him not , that is , for the Chriſt , that Meſſiah which was to come : but only for the Carpenters son ; Matth. 13. 58. The reaſon was , becauſe none could underſtand that Myſtery : but they only to whom the Father of heaven revealed it , Matth. 11. 14. Hence , when Jeſus demanded of his Diſciples ? Whom do men ſay that I the Son of Man am ? Peter anſwereth , thou art the Chriſt , the Son of the living God : Jeſus anſwereth , Bleſſed art thou Simon Bar-Jona ; for fleſh and blood hatb not revealed this unto thee ; but my Father in heaven . And thou art Peter , and upon this Rock ( Jeſus the Chriſt , whom thou haſt confeſſed ) I will built my Church , and the gates of hell ſhall not prevail againſt it , Mat. 16. 16 , 17 , 18. Many for fear durſt not in thoſe days confess Jeſus to be the Chriſt : Inſtance the Parents of the blind man : Becauſe the Jewes had agreed , that if any did confess , that he was the Chriſt ; He ſhould be put out of the Synagogue , John 9. 22. But ſo many as received him ( viz. to be the Chriſt ) to them he gave power to be called the ſons of God ; even to them that believe in his name ; which were born not of blood nor of the will of the fleſh , nor of that • will of man , But of God , John 1. 12 , 13 ▪ And as for that other Text of the holy Scripture that does univerſally oppoſe it the heavenly Father gave me thus to interpret it : 1 John 2. 22. Who is a liar ( videlicet • orne of the evil one , who is a liar , and the father of lies , and abided not in the truth , John 8. 14. But he that denieth that JESUS ( whom he confesses died for his sins ; and roſe again the third day , according to the Scriptures ) Is not the Chriſt , viz. the anointed King and Prophet of his Church , in all his outward adminiſtrations and inſtitutions , in admitting of Members into his spiritual Kingdom , according to his royal Commiſſion , Matth. 28. 18 , 19. Mark . 15. 15 , 16. ( though he acknowledge him to be his eternal Prieſt that ever lives , to make interceſſion to God for him , Heb. 7. 25. He is that Antichriſt ( viz. and enemy and adverſary to Jeſus the Chriſt ) that denieth the Father and the Son , He that denieth the Sons Authority , to be the eternal King , and his Commiſſion to be in force , Matth. 28. 18 , 19 , 20. Mark . 15. 15 , 16. and to be the eternal Prophet ; and his word to be the eternal rule for Doctrine and Government ; aſwall as his eternal Prieſt to reconcile him to God Denieth the Father , that ſanctified the Son , and ſent him into the World , John 10. 36. and raiſed him from the dead , and exalted him to be Lord and Chriſt , Acts 2. 36. Hence it is ( my Honoured friend ) Firſt , that in all my writings , I have ſtudied to exalt Jeſus the Chriſt , it being the Primitive . Faith once given to the Saints , Math. 16. 16. Secondly , to diſtinguiſh Jeſus the Chriſt from all others nam with the name of Jeſus in Scripture Record : as Joſhua is called Jeſus , Hebr. 4. 8. etc. others . Thirdly , becauſe I find the Scriptures giving that Title to him in diverse places . John confesses , I am not the Chriſt , John 1. 20. The Woman of Samaria ſaid , I know the Meſſiah comes which is called the Chriſt , John 4. 25. Apollos mightily convinced the Jewes , showing by the Scriptures , that Jeſus was the Chriſt , Acts 18. 28. Now that I received from the Lord , I could not but make known to you , You being one of the tender hearted Loyal Covenanters , a Member of that High and Honourable Court , under whoſe ſhade Conſcientious Covenantours ( that contend for the faith of Jeſus the Chriſt , once given to the Saints ) find reſt . Know ( worthy Sir ) that the departure from the faith of Jeſus the Chriſt , is a cauſe of ſo many Schisms , and Hereſies maintained in the earth . Disdain not therefore to read a little Treatiſe , called the Difference between the Chriſtian , and Antichriſtian Church , Deliniated according to the Scripture Record , though the truth therein contained ( like the Two witneſſes , Revel . 11. 3. ) have long mourned in Sackcloth : Yet if God give you and heart to receive it , It will be a Jewel ſurpaſſing all earthly Treaſure . For if Ieſus the Chriſt be your Prophet to teach you , his heavenly Father will , Matth. 17. 5. Acts 3. 22. 23. He will then be your King to protect you , Matth 28. 20. Your Prieſt to intercede for you , Joh. 27. 20. Your Judge to acquit you , Joh. 12. 48. and if the love of Chriſt draw you to keep all his Commandments ( though in the world you meet with of • liction for his ſake ; yet in Chriſt you ſhall find peace ) for the Father , Son , and Spirit will dwell in your heart , and take it for the Sanctum Sanctorum , where they will abide to cheer and refreſh you , Joh. 14. 23. And if you confess , him in this world before men : He will confess you before his Father , and proclaim it to your eternal peace and comfort , ( Euge bone ſerve ) Well done thou good and faithful ſervant , enter into your Master's joy . Matth. 25. 21. Orpington in Kent ▪ the tenth Month , the firſt day , 1645. Yours , who contendeth for the faith of Jeſus the Chriſt . FRANCIS CORNWELL