To the Right Worshipful , the Mayor , Aldermen , and Common Council , with the Burgesses of the City of GLOUCESTER . Gentlemen , SIlent and calm times , and and equal stream of secular Affairs are more acceptable to men of the present age , because they are times of enjoyment ; whereas the greater Changes and Confusions of the world do more delight Posterity , or such as survive the trouble of those Changes . For this a pleasure to behold at such a distance the Risings and Falls of Nations and their Governments , as to see the raging Sea from the secure Land. And it does not seldom come to pass that and universal Concussion , and the shaking of the pillars of the earth , does cast it into better frame and settle it on a firm Basis : So that the men of the former Age do labour , and those of the later enter into their labours . Even so , this the Calamity of these Days to be engaged in such a War and the woeful attendants thereof ; yet their felicity to be engaged for the highest interests in this life , which will exalt them , whatsoever the success be ; and if prosperous , will make the faithful in the land a perpetual Excellency , and the joy of many Generations . The Actium of these times transcends the Barons Wars , and those tedious discords between the Houses of Yorke and Lancaster , in as much as it is undertaken upon higher Principles , and carried on to a nobler end , and effects more universal . And in this you have acted not the least part for a particular Government to your own safety and honour , and by a general acknowledgement not a little to the preservation of the whole Kingdom . Wherefore out of abundant respect to my deer native place , having collected some Memorials of its fidelity and Industry , I humbly present them to your view , who were witnesses of , and boar a part in those performances . I remember my own thoughts when we were in the height of Danger , and ready to fallen into the depth of Misery , That I did seem to refresh my self in the conceit of the future joyous remembrance thereof , when we should out live those extremities . And you also must needs be abundantly satisfied in reminding those manifold hazards and exgencies which you by patience and perseverance have in good measure overcome . For which cause this Historical Relation , though it tenders it self to the review of all serious men , yet unto yours chiefly , that your joy might be yet more full . Neither ought we to be so injurious to Divine Providence , as to bury or keep secret the influence and working thereof upon the endeavours of a willing people . Hitherto you have run well , nothing remains but perseverance , that the concluding part may be blessed and honourable . Let your City ever flourish and prosper under the protection of the Highest . Gentlemen , Your humbly devoted servant , JOHN CORBET .