TO the glory of her Sex ; The Right Honourable , both by the firſt and ſecond Birth , the worthy and moſt religious Lady ; the Lady FRANCES HOBARTE . MADAM ! YOur Honour knows I have ever been afraid of the Preſs hitherto I have ſtood out againſt all importunity , and I was peremptorily reſolved never to have publiſhed any thing in Print : but now I am enforced , whither I will or no , to ſend abroad theſe two small pieces . And ſince they muſt out , I humbly preſent them to your Ladyſhip : Not for any worth that is in them : Not for your Honours protection of them ; let them go forth at their own peril : nor yet for the subject's ſake ; the matter of them in the general not ſo directly , and properly complying with your Ladyſhips condition : they are rather for the inſtruction of Magiſtrates : But I dedicate them to your Honour : becauſe they are your due . Whatever I can perform in the ſervice of God , and more by far then ever I am able to do , low to the gracious Lady Frances . To ſay truth , your Honour called for them , and here they are : take them with favourable acceptation . Something your Ladyſhip will meet withal in both Sermons appliable and uſeful in regard of your ſelf . The NAIL ( I mean the good Nail ) will give your Honour a freſh sighed of that Noble Gentleman , worthy Sir JOHN HOBARTE , your Honours lately deceaſed huſband . He was a gallant Nail : by the grace of God well filed from all ruſt and ruggedneſs : He was a bright Nail , as burniſhed gold , ſhining more and more every day he lived ( that I can testify to the comfort of my ſoul ) by a godly converſation . He was a great and a ſtrong Nail : His abilities were beyond the common pitch : He had a good head for wiſdom and underſtanding : He had a good heart ; Faithful and zealous he was for God , for Religion , for his Country , for our Solemn Covenant : He was a fixed Nail not only in the Capitol , but alſo in the Sanctuary : his care and painful endeavors were laid out not only for the Commonwealth , but for the Church alſo : yea he himſelf was a little ſuncturary to the faithful Maniſters of Jeſus Chriſt . He was a ſtout Nail , ſteeled with Chriſtian reſolution and courage ; not counting his life dear if he might have ſacrificed it ( as partly he did ) for the Kingdoms peace , his Countries ſafety and the Churches ſettlement . He was a Nail on which the Welfare and proſperity of our Sion did much depend . And for our ſins God hath plucked out this uſeful Nail . We ſee this great Nail turned into a little Wheel : and he is now rolled into the Houſe appointed for all the living . I will not tell the world of your Ladyships immoderate ſorrow , and how you fit diſconſolate , ſighing , ſobbing , and mourning like a faithful Turtle bereft of her mate : I will rather guide my ſpeech to your Honour , and direct your eye to the Wheel . Worthy Sir John Hobarte , he was a ſtately Wheel , he moved bravely in his time , and did much of Gods work with all alacrity ; yea he counted that life worſe then death , when his motion was any whit ſtopped by infirmity of body , ſo as he could not be active in the Public ſervice as he deſired . This Voluble , and ſwift Wheel , is now broken at the Ciſtern : and your heart Madam , was almoſt broken too . Oh! I beſeech your Honour , look up to the throne of glory ; it is the voice of the Lord hath turned the Wheel : He hath spoke • n , and hath done it . Submit , Submit with humility , patience , cheerfulneſs . Rejoice rather : what a world of comforts may your Ladyship have in your loſs ? He did worthily in his life , he died religiouſly : I ſaw him draw his laſt breath : but ſo much Majeſty , and peace in a dying countenance I never ſaw . A ſtranger would have thought he had been only in ſome ſweet-contenting ſleep , or taſting the heavenly joys . What and Honourable name hath he left behind him ! Is it not as and ointment poured forth , even as the fragrant ſpikenard ? The Nail is pulled out of this lower wall , but it is not loſt : it's only advanced , and ſet up higher . He is fastened in the wall of the New Jeruſalem , he ſhines , and ever shall ſhine bright in glory . And we all ere long shall roll after him ; and then shall your Ladyſhip enjoy a better Communion with your huſband then ever . Be content to wait , is it not a little while ? I intended a very ſhort Epiſtle , but my pen begins to be free , and eager of its way . I can hardly hold it in : it would fain be dropping out ſomething of your honours goodneſs . I well know how little your Honour affects the praiſe of men ( your praiſe is in the Goſpel ) and your Ladyship well knows how much I abhor baſe flattery . And God he knows , my deſign is not to make you proud by ſpeaking your virtues to your face , but only this ; I would moſt gladly take occaſion to publiſh ſomething to the world of thoſe eminent Graces , which the Lord hath wrought in your Honour by his holy ſpirit : that your Ladyships example may be propounded as a pattern to all Chr • ſtian women , which they may ever look upon , and follow . Elect Lady ! I could tell them , how I have ever found you walking in the truth , even in the moſt perilous and ſeducing times : with what obedience you have always herd the word , reſigning up your will to Gods Command : How your deportment was to your Noble yokefellow : the heart of your huſband did ſafely truſt in you : All that were but lookers on , did ſee tO • e entireneſs of your heart , the intention of your love , your loyalty , and faithfulneſs , joined with all diligence , and care . You made in your ſtudy and work , to do him good in regard of his body , in regard of his eſtate ; but eſpecially , and above all in regard of his ſoul . I could take occaſion by this my dedication to tell the world : That even whilst you are on earth , your converſation is in heaven . I can truly teſtify that your Ladyship is a widow indeed , continuing in faſting , and prayer , and reading , and meditation ; and that this is your work night and day in the temple , in your cloſet , in your family : That's remarkable ; in your family you obſerve Davids hours . Every morning , every noon , and every night you have prayer , Scripture read and expounded ( and that by and able , and a called Minister of the Goſpel ) beside repetitions of Sermons , ſinging of Pſalms , and conſtant Catechiſing ( a moſt neceſſary work ) the Noble Olive-plant , your precious daughter anſwering with the firſt , with all readiness , and cheerfulneſs , to her immortal honour . I confeſs hearing the anſwers of young Mrs. Philip Hobarte , and the reſt , I could not but think thus with my ſelf : This day is that Propheſy fulfilled in mine ears . I will pour out of my ſpirit upon all fleſh , and your ſons , and your daughters shall Propheſy , and your young men shall ſee Viſions ; and on my ſervants , and on my handmaids will I pour out of my ſpirit , and they shall Propheſy . Madam ! Wil not your honour be offended if I ſhow my folly , and boaſt a little to the world ? You are my glory , my Crown , and my rejoicing : the comfortable Harveſt , and precious Seal of my Miniſtry . And this is diſcerned by others , as well as by my ſelf . Your parallel is not to be found : or at the leaſt , ſcarcely was ever any Chriſtian ſeen , who did thrive , and grow ſo faſt in Grace as your Honour hath done , eſpecially of late years . Now , if either your Honour or any others that shall caſt their eye on theſe my free expreſſions , and think me indiſcreet in writing thus to your Honour : I Apologise for my ſelf in the words of Chriſt when he prayed vocally , and loud at Lazarus his grave ; Not for your ſake Madam ! but becauſe of the people which ſtand by , I ſaid it . I propound a pattern to other Chriſtians , and other families : and my ſole aim is , the glory of God , and the provoking of many to a holy emulation . The God of heaven and earth ; the God of my father bleſs your Honour , and your noble and hopeful daughter . I beg for you the upper and the neither ſprings . The God of all Grace perfect all Grace in you : be filled with the Spirit , with inward peace and joy of the Holy Ghoſt . Be the Lords darling . Believe me Gracious Lady ! The tongue shall cleave to the roof of my mouth , and my right hand shall forgets its skill : before I shall ceaſe to bear your Honours name at my heart : and to preſent it unto the Lord as often as I appear at the throne of Grace . July 23. 1647. Be ſure Madam ! I am Your Honours moſt humbly Devoted ſervant for ever . Thankful for your Superlative favour , bounty , and care . And As under God your Honour raiſed me from the grave . So ( if I can believe mine own heart ) I am your Honours faithful Paſtor : who if God ſhould call him to it , would willingly lay down his life to eſtabliſh your Ladyship in the truth and grace of Jeſus Chriſt , and to further your eternal Salvation . IOHN CARTER .