To THE HONOURABLE House of COMMONS . THe Scope of this Sermon , which not long since exercised your Patience ( Worthy Senators ) was not to contend for this or that Opinion ; but only to persuade men to the Life of Christ , as the Pith and Kernel of all Religion . Without Which , I may boldly say , all the several Forms of Religion in the World , though we please our selves never so much in them , are but so many several Dreams . And those many Opinions about Religion , that are every where so eagerly contended for on all sides , where This does not lie at the Bottom , are but so many Shadows fighting with one another : so that I may well say , of the true Christian , that is indeed possessed of the Life of Christianity , in opposition to all those that are but lightly tinctured with the Opinions of it , in the language of the Poet , 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 Wherefore I could not think any thing else , either more Necessary for Christians in general , or more Seasonable at this time , then to stir them up to the real Establishment of the Righteousness of God in their hearts , and that Participation of the Divine Nature , which the Apostle speaks of . That so they might not content themselves , with mere Fancies and Conceits of Christ , without the Spirit of Christ really dwelling in them , and Christ himself inwardly formed in their hearts . Nor satisfy themselves , with the mere holding of right and Orthodox Opinions , as they conceive ; whilst they are utterly devoid within of that Divine Life , which Christ came to kindle in men's Souls ; and therefore are so apt to spend all their zeal upon a violent obtruding of their own Opinions and Apprehensions upon others , which cannot give entertainment to them : which , beside its repugnancy to the Doctrine and Example of Christ himself , is like to be the Bellows , that will blow a perpetual Fire of Discord and Contention , in Christian Commonwealths : whilst in the mean time , these hungry , and starved Opinions , devour all the Life and Substance of Religion , as the Lean Kine , in Pharaohs Dream , did eat up the Fat . Nor lastly , Please themselves , only in the violent Opposing of other men's Superstitions , according to the Genius of the present times ; without substituting in the room of them , and inward Principle of Spirit , and Life , in their own Souls : for I fear many of us that pull down Idols in Churches , may set them up in our Hearts ; and whilst we quarrel with Painted Glass , make no scruple at all , of entertaining many soul Lustest in our Souls , and committing continual Idolatry with them . This in general , was the Design of this following Discourse , which you were pleased ( Noble Senators ) not only to express your good Acceptance of ; but also to give a Real Signification of your great undeserved Favour to the Author of it . Who therefore cannot , but as the least Expression of his Thankfulness , humbly devote it to you ; presenting where again to your Eye , in the same From , in which it was delivered to your Eare. Desirous of nothing more , then that it might be some way useful to You , to kindle in you , the Life and Heat of that , which is endeavoured here , to be described upon Paper : that you may express it , both in your private Conservations , and likewise in all your Public Employments for the Commonwealth . That you may , by your kindly Influence , effectually encourage all Goodness : and by virtue of your Power and Authority ( to use the Phrase of Solomon ) scatter away all evil with your eye , as the Sun by his Beams scattereth the Mists and Vapours . That from you , Judgement may run down like Waters , and Righteousness like a mighty Stream , to refresh this whole Land , that thirsteth after them . Which , whilst You distribute them plentifully to others , will bestow , both Strength and Honour to Your selves . For Justice and Righteousness are the Establishment of every Throne , of all Civil Power , and Authority ; and if these should once forsake it , though there be Lions to support it , it could not stand long . These , together with a good Peace , well settled in a Commonwealth , are all the outward Felicity we can expect , till that happy Time come , which the Prophet foretelleth , and is therefore more then a Platonical Idea ; When , the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb , and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid ; and the Calf , and the young Lion , and the Fatling together , and a little Child led them : When , the sucking Child shall play on the hold of the Asp , and the weaned Child shall put his hand on the Cockatrice den : When , they shall not hurt nor destroy in all Gods holy Mountain ; for the Earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord , as the waters cover the sea . I have but one Word more , if You please to give me leave ; That after your Care for the Advancement of Religion , and the Public Good of the Commonwealth , You would think it worthy of You , to promote Ingenuous Learning , and cast a Favourable Influence upon it . I mean not , that only , which furnisheth the Pulpit , which you seem to be very regardful of ; but that which is more remote from such Popular use , in the several kinds of it , which yet are all of them , both very subservient to Religion , and useful to the Commonwealth . There is indeed a 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 as the Philosopher tells us , a Bastardly kind of Literature , and a 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 as the Apostle instructeth us , a knowledge falsely so called ; which deserve not to be pleaded for . But the Noble and Generous Improvement of our Understanding Faculty , in the true Contemplation of the Wisdom , Goodness , and other Attributes of God , in this great Fabric of the Universe , cannot easily be dismanaged , without a Blemish cast upon the Maker of it . Doubtless , we may as well enjoy , that which God hath communicated of himself to the Creatures , by this Larger faculty of our Understandings , as by those narrow and low faculties of our Senses ; and yet no body counts it to be unlawful , to hear a Lesson played upon the Lute or to smell at a Rose . And these raised Improvements of our Natural understandings , may be as well subservient and subordinate , to a Divine Light in our Minds , as the Natural use of these outward Creatures here below , to the Life of God in our Hearts . Nay , all true knowledge , does of it self naturally tend to God , who is the Fountain of it : and would ever be raising of our souls up , upon its wings Thither , did not we 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 detain it , and hold it down , in unrighteousness , •• the Apostle speaks . All Philosophy to a Wise man , to a truly sanctified Mind , as he in Plutarch speaks , is but 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 Matter for Divinity to work upon . Religion is the Queen of all those inward Endowments of the Soul , and all pure Natural knowledge , all virgin and underflowered Arts & Sciences are her Handmaids , that rise up and call her Blessed . I need not tell you , how much the skill of Tongues and Languages , beside the excellent use of all Philology in general , conduceth to the right understanding of the Letter of Sacred Writings , on which the spiritual Notions must be built ; for none can possibly be ignorant of that , which have but once herd of a Translation of the Bible . The Apostle exhorteth Private Christians , to whatsoever things are lovely , whatsoever things are of good report ; if there be any virtue , if there be any praise , to think on those things ; and therefore it may well become you , ( Noble Gentlemen ) in your Public Sphere , to encourage so Noble a Thing as Knowledge is , which will reflect so much Lustre and Honour back again upon your selves . That God would direct you in all your Counsels , and still bless you and prosper you , in all your sincere Endeavours , for the Public Good , is the hearty Prayer of Your Most humble Servant , RALPH CUDWORTH .