To the Right Honourable N. N. Sir EDVVARD DERING Knight and Baronet , wishes happiness here , and hereafter . MAy it please your Honour . In that which is so serious as Religion I dare not be a trifler : nor can I love a man that is so . Divinity is ever Grave , neither toying nor yet sullen . Piety and Gravity are twin sisters , both descended from above , owning their high birth from the supreme Sanctity and sovereign Majesty of Heaven . As they come from high , so they descend low , even to the centre of a Man ; and take possession of his heart : there they dwell , and from thence they send forth , ( like Rivers from their Springhead ) many notable assurances of their residence there . While that some vent Levity and Wickednesses because they have received Religion no deeper then into their brain . Many men are Christians according to a certain common since they have of Religion . Now in the Brain of man , The common Sense and the Fantasy are near neighbours , hard is the condition ( and yet the condition ) of some , with whom Fancy leads the way . These Brain-Christians , are so much in skill , that they forget Practice . With the head a man may know , even unto others wonder , and his own pride : But with the heart a man believeth Rom. 10. 10. unto righteousness : If this storehouse be well filled , The mouth will show the abundance Matth 12. 34. of the heart within , and then with the mouth confession is made unto salvation . If coldness or emptiness be there , you may find it in the dull Rom. 10. 10. and barren language of the Speaker . The most certain and most absolute symptom of a good heart , well filled , is Truth of what the Tongue delivers . A good man out of the good treasure of the Matth. 12 35. heart bring • h good things . Now nothing is good but Truth . Truth , it is one of the glorious titles and attributes , which our Savi • ur ( in whom was found 1 Pet. 2. 22 no guile ) hath taken to himself I am the Way ( says he ) and the Truth , etc. All Fraud , Falsehood and Lying are from Hell . When the Devil speaks a lie , he speaks of his own : for he Ioh. 14. 6. is a • liar and the father of it . He began with a Ioh. 8 44. Gen. 3. 4. lie at first , and it hath been his own ever since . Verum Evangelium veritatem amat , veritatem colit , veritate alitur & Augel • i • ( says your Andradius ) The true Gospel loves the Defence • . Trid. l. 2. Truth , honoureth the Truth , hath nourishment and growth by Truth . Maxentius Johannes affirmeth very well , Nullum vitium est , quod non sumat à mendacio initium , neque vir • us cujus non sit origo veritas . There is no vice , which hath not beginning from a Lie : nor any Virtue , whose original is not Truth . If after this , you find me wittingly false in any assertion , or in any authority which I shall produce , your Lordship hath here ( I have sent it ) wherewith to stop shame into my mouth . But if by these following papers your Honour find your old Anonymus false and foully false , on whose side must he be , and they that follow him ? Christ and Truth go together ; woe to the adverse party : they are enemies and must be one day under foot . When this old Soldier had often pretended much valour to encounter any man that I should bring ; and had almost persuaded me into and opinion of his Ability : At last , in near two years time being pressed by me , he concluded , plainly , • oh discourse with none . Some were married . I undertook for ene unmarried ! Others were skilled in the Eastern languages ! I undertook that no word should be instanced , but English and Latin . Then it was dangerous ! I undertook that also upon my own head . Lastly , it was to no purpose ! And indeed I found it to no purpose to press him farther . Quo front ! quâ fide ! with what forehead he made these darings , with what faith he hath performed them , I well remember , and can justify : Herein he is guilty of much untruth . Yet lest he might seem to have a guilty cause , as well as a pretenced valour , his pen was ready against all men , and he offered me the choice to design unto him , upon what particular subject he should write . I answered him , that I was so confident and so assured of the Truth and goodness of our Religion , that I gave him liberty in all the latitude of Controversies betwixt us , to make his own choice ; even there where he thought himself ablest , and the best provided : only desiring that he would be curious to pick out his best arguments , and that he would be brief . He promised a speedy discharge , and made his present election to prove Saint Peters supremacy : I said I was glad he had pitched on a point so material , but ( said I ) you have taken one as difficult for you to prove as I could wish . It is now a twelvemonth since , yet hath this man herein been as mute as death . Is he not guilty of another untruth ? I am little at leisure , and the least of any in skill for these Eristicke discourses : but I serve Truth , and that will prevail . I do therefore again and again exact and challenge him to perform his undertaking in that subject , and with that brevity as was promised . In the mean time having perused foure several Treatises of his writing , two in print , and two under the pen , I have good cause to ask , How well he can justify what I find in them ; not in the whole Treatises ( they are not of such weight and worth ) but in foure passages taken severally , one out of each Treatise . Nor will I pick out that which is sleight and easy : Nor will I take less then what I find concerning one entire passage and the particular subject there handled . The Reasons why I am bold to present the trouble hereof unto your Lordship's hand are few , yet enough to exact this of me . Foure they are , and very powerful with me . Duty , Gratitude , Good manners , and Piety . First in way of Duty I do owe the First fruits of my pen , in matters of Religion , unto the person ( if he were living ) but now unto the happy memory of ***************** Here were some • lines that would by circumstances have expressed the name of that Honourable person , whom I choose rather to omit . This first motive leads me fairly on unto my second , which is Gratitude to your Lordship in whose Noble Person , and deer love , his Lordship now lives , more then in all the world beside . Your Favours , great and many , all free and noble , like your self , have obliged me to this Gratitude . And among many other , the many earnest and affectionate wishes , zealously and prayer-like expressed , for my embracing that Religion , which your Lordship hath with strong belief for true , lodged in your own soul , though in truth , to the great hazard of that excellent soul . And high obligement as it is : and able from a duller spirit then mine , to extort this Gratitude . In the next place Goodmanners have impelled me hereunto . Some conferences this old Gentleman hath held with me in your honours presence to whom he is well known . Wherefore ( and for other reasons also ) . I hold it a degree of Goodmanners , not to run this into his hand , without saluting your Lordship and as it were first asking leave . Lastly Piety to God , and to the Church my mother , and piety due unto your Lordship's soul , whose great abilities and rich endowments of mind , may herein examine these , and hereby , take occasion to examine other Truths , and then clear away the misty clouds of Popery : which are far more dangerous and deadly to your soul , then unto millions beyond Sea , who either have not the like abilities within , or so fair daylight abroad , by the free Gospel revealed , as is unto your Lordship in this blessed Island . God eternal grant that you may see , and know his Truth : and not like those whom the Apostle expresses to be Ever learning , and never able to come to the knowledge of Truth . And this for one only Advocate and Redeemer Jesus Christ his sake , shall be prayed in your Honours behalf , by Your Lordsh . ever obliged and most humble servant to his power , Surenden-Dering , 28. Jan. 16.39 . / 40. Edward Dering .