TO MY SONNE KENELME DIGBY . SONNE , The calamity of this time being such , as hath bereft me of the ordinary means of expressing my affection to you ; I have been casting about , to find some other way of doing that in such sort , as you may receive most profit by it . Therein I soon pitched upon this consideration ; That Parents owe unto their children , not only material subsistence for their body ; but much more , spiritual contributions to their better part , their mind . I am much bound to God , that he hath endued you with one very capable of the best instructions : and withal , I do therefore esteem my self obliged , to do my utmost for moulding it to its most advantage . If my aim therein do prove successful , you will with more ease digest those inconveniences and distresses , which already you have begun to be acquainted with , and that threaten daily worse unto you . For how can a man suffer his heart to be dejected att the privation of any temporal blessings , while he considereth the inanity of them ; and that nothing is worthy his serious thought , but what may accompany him to his eternal habitation ? What needs he fear the desolations of war , and the worst that they can do against him , who have his estate in their power , when he may be rich with a much nobler treasure , that none but himself can rob him of ? Without doubt , he that shall seriously reflect upon the excellency of his own nature , and upon the admirable perfect and happy state he shall most certainly arrive unto , if he but wean himself from those worldly impediments , that here clog his souls flight ; can not choose but look with a disdainful eye , upon the glattering trifles , that weak spirits delight themselves withal . If he deem it not requisite ( as of old , the famous wise man did ) to throw away those encumbrances , to the end he may the more freely attend unto divine contemplations ( for worldly goods , duly used , may be very advantageous both to ones self , and to others ) yet at the least , he will not repine att fortune's recalling of what she formerly had but lent him , and but permitted him the use of . To the end then that you may be armed against the worst that may arrive unto you , in this unhappy state of affairs , in our distressed country ; I send you those considerations of the nature and Immortality of humane souls , which of late , have been my chief entertainment . The progress you have already made in the study of Philosophy , hath ( I am persuaded ) enabled you to benefit your self , with what I have written upon this subject : on the serious examining of which , if you will employ but half the time , that I have done in spinning out my thoughts , and weaving them into the piece you see , I doubt not but you will thereby receive so much contentement , as well as profit , that you will not repent you of your pains . Beside that , intellectual entertainments are the purest , and the noblest , and the most proportionate to men nature , and prove the most delightful to him , when they are duly relished . You will presently agree , that the matter j handle , is the most important and the most weighty , within the whole extent of humane nature , for a worthy and a gallant person to employ himself about . The advantage which man hath over unreasonable creatures , is , that what he does , is by election ; and he is himself master of all his actions ; whereas they are impelled by outward causes , unto all they do : it is properly said of them , that aguntur magis quam agunt : He only is free : and in all varieties of circumstances , hath the power to choose one , and to reject and other . Now , to have this election wisely made , and becoming a man , requires that it be steered by knowledge . To do any thing well , a man must first know thoroughly all that concerns the actium he is about ; and chiefly the end of it . And certainly , of all his actions , the government of himself , is the most important , and neereliest concerning him . The end of that government , and of all a men aims , is by all men agreed to be Beatitude : that is , his being completely well , and in a condition of enjoying the most happiness , that his nature is capable of . For arrival whereunto , it is impossible to pitch upon the direct and sure means , unless it be first determined , whither the Beatitude we speak of , do belong to this life , or be not to be attained , till we come to the next : or rather , whither or not , there be and other life beside this , to be happy in . For if there remains and eternity unto us , after the short revolution of time we so swiftly run over here on earth ; it is clear , that all the happiness which can be imagined in this fleeting state , is not valuable , in respect of the future ; nor any thing we do here is considerable , otherwise then as it conduceth to the making our condition then , better or worse . Now the way to be sure of this , is either infallible authority , or evident science . They that rely on the first , depend of others : and they only who know , are absolutely complete of themselves ; and have within themselves , the principles whereby to govern their actions , in what is of highest consequence to them . It is true , every body is not of a strain of wit and judgement , to be of this rank : and who are not , must be contented to believe others , and be satisfied with what is taught them . But he that will be of a superior orb , must make this his study . This is the adequate entertainment of a worthy person . To conceive how high and excellent , this science of governing a man in order to Beatitude in the next world is , we may consider , how among all arts that concern this life , the art of a statesman , unto whom belongeth to see a common wealthwell governed , is by much the noblest . All other arts , are but ministerial to him . He makes use of the soldier , of the lawyer , of the orator , of the antiquary , of the physician , as best conduceth to the end he aimeth att , of making the commonwealth he governeth , happy and flourishing . All other meaner trades serve him in a yet lower degree . Yet after all , he must take his measures from the Metaphysitian or Divine . For since the government of a society of men , aimeth att giving them the best being they are capable of ; and since men well being here in this life , is but instrumentally good , as being the means for him to be well in the next life ; It is evident , that the statesmans art , is but instrumental to that , which shows , how every particular man must govern his life , to be partaker of a happy eternity . And consequently , if a statesman have not this science , he must be subject to a braver man then himself , whose province is to direct all his actions unto this end . We are told , how reverently great Cesar listened to the discourses of learned Achoreus , how observant Alexander was of his Master Aristotle , how secure Nero trodden , while Seneca guided his steps , how humble Constantine was to saint Sylvesters precepts , how Charlemaine governed himself in his most important actions , by Alcuines advise : In a word , all the great men of antiquity , aswell among the Romans , as among the Gretians , had their Philosophers , and Divines in their kind , belonging to them ; from whom they might derive rules of living and doing as they ought upon all occasions , if themselves were not Master's in that superior and all directing science . He that sees not by his own light , must in this dangerous ocean steer by the lantern which and other hangs out to him . If the person he relieth upon , either withholdeth the light from him , or shows him a false one , he is presently in the dark , and can not fail of losing his way . How great and authority had the Augurs and priests among the rude Romans , to forbid any public act , or to break any assembly upon pretence of Religious duties , when they liked not the business that was in agitation ? The like may interested Divines among Christians do , if the ministers of state have not some insight into Divinity . He leads a vexatious life , that in his noblest actions is so gored with scruples , that he dareth not make a step , without the authority of and other to warrant him . Yet I do not conclude , that he whom I design by the character of a brave man , should be a professed or a complete Metaphytian or Divine , and consummate in every curious circumstance that belongeth to this science ; it suffices him to know it in bulk ; and to have so much Divinity , as in common occurrents , to be able to govern himself ; and in special ones , to understand what , and why his Divine persuadeth him to any thing ; so that even then , though not without help , yet he governeth himself , and is not blindly governed by and other . He that aimeth att being a perfect horseman , is bound to know in general ( beside the art of riding ) the nature and temper of horses ; and to understand the different qualities of bittes , saddles , and other utensils of a horseman ; But the utmost exactness in these particulars , belongeth to farriers , saddlers , smith's , and other tradesmen's of all which , the judicious rider knoweth how to make due use , when he hath occasion , for his principal end ; which is , orderly governing his horse . In like manner , he whom we design by a complete brave man , must know solidly the main end of what he is in the world for : and withal , must know how to serve himself when he pleases , and that it is needful to him , of the Divines high contemplations , of the Metaphysitians subtle speculations , of the natural Philosophers minute observations , of the Mathematicians nice demonstrations ; and of whatsoever else of particular professions , may conduce to his end ; though without making any of them his professed business . To lay grounds for such knowledge as this , is the scope of my ensuing discourse . My first aim , was to beget it in my self : to which end , the digesting my thoughts into order , and the setting them down in writing , was necessary : for without such strict examination of them , as the penning them affords one means to make , they would hardly have avoided being disjointed and roving ones . Now that I have done that , my next aim is that you , unto whom I wish as much good as to my self , may reap as much benefit by the studying it , as I have done by the composing it . My end then being a private one ( as looking no further then you my son , and my self ) I have not endeavoured to express my conceptions either in the phrase , or in the language of the schools . It will serve our turn , to comprehend the substance , without confining our selves to any scrupulous exactness , in what concerns only form . And the same consideration hath made me pass slightly over many particulars , in my first Treatise of the Nature of Bodies ; upon which learned and witty men might spin out large volumes . For in that part , I aim no further , then to show what may be effected by corporeal agents . There , possibility serveth my turn , as well as the determinate indivisible point of truth . I am obliged to that , only in my main great theme ; which is the soul . In regard of which , the numerous crooked narrow cranies , and the restrained flexuous rivulets of corporeal things , are all contemptible , further then the knowledge of them serveth to the knowledge of the soul . And a gallant man , whose thoughts fly att the highest game , requires no further insight into them , then to satisfy himself by what way they may be performed ; and deemeth it far too mean for him , to dwell upon the subtlest of their mysteries for science sake . Beside this liberty that the scope I aim att alloweth me of passing very cursorily over sundry particulars ; I find now att my reading over all together , what I have written to deliver it to the Printer , that even in that which I ought to have done to comply with my own design and expectation , I am fallen very short ; so that if I had not unwarily too far engaged my self for the present publishing it , truly I should have kept it by me , till I had once again gone over it . I find the whole piece very confusedly done ; the style unequal and unpolished ; many particulars ( when they are not absolutely necessary to my main drift ) too slightly touched , and far from being driven home : and in a word , all of it seems to be rather but a lose model and roughcast of what I design to do , then a complete work thoroughly finished . But since by my overforward promising of this piece to several friends , that have been very earnest for it , I have now brought my self to that pass , that it would ill become me to delay any longer the publishing of some thing upon this subject ; and that obligations of and other nature permit me not att the present to dwell any longer upon this ( beside that , so laysy a brain as mine is , grows soon weary when it hath so entangled a skean as this is to unwind ) I now send it you as it is ; but with a promise , that att my first leisure , I will take a strict survey of it ; and then in and other edition , will polish , correct and add what shall appear needful to me . If any man shall take the book out of your hand , invited by the title and subject to look into it ; I pray you in my behalf represent unto him , how distant my profession is , and how contrary my education hath been , from writing of books . In every art , the plainest that is , there is and apprenticeship necessary , before it can be expected one should work in it a fashionable piece . The first attempts are always very imperfect aimings ; and are scarce discernible what they are meaned for , unless the master guide his scholars hand . Much more will the same happen in so difficult and spiny and affair , as the writing upon such a nice and copious subject as this is , to one that is so wholly ignorant of the laws of method as I am . This free and ingenuous acknowledgement on my side , will I hope prevail with all ingenuous persons , who shall read what I have written , to advertise me fairly ( if they judge it worth their while ) of what they dislike in it : to the end that in and other more accurate edition , I may give them better satisfaction . For beside what failings may be in the matter , I can not doubt but that even in the expressions of it , there must often be great obscurity and shortenesse ; which I , who have my thoughts filled with the things themselves , am not aware of . So that , what per adventure may seem very full to me , because every imperfect touch brings into my mind the entire notion and whole chain of circumstances belonging to that thing I have so often beaten upon ; may appear very crude and maimed to a stranger , that can not guess what I would be att , otherwise then as my direct words do lead him . One thing more I shall wish you to desire of them who happily may peruse these two Treatises ; aswell for their own sakes , as for mine . And that is , that they will not pass their censure upon any particular piece , or broken parcel of either of them , taken by it self . Let them draw the entire thridde through their fingers , and let them examine the consequentnesse of the whole body of the doctrine I deliver ; and let them compare it by a like survey with what is ordinarily taught in the schools : and if they find in theirs , many bracks and short ends which can not be spun into and even piece , and in mine , a fair coherence throughout ; I shall promise my self a favourable doom from them , and that they will have and acquiescence in themselves to what I have here presented them with : whereas , if they but rauell it over loosely , and pitch upon disputing against particular conclusions , that att the first encounter of them single , may seem harsh unto them , ( which is the ordinary course of flashy wits , who can not fathom the whole extent of a large discourse ) it is impossible but that they should be very much unsatisfied of me ; and go away with a persuasion , that some such truths as upon the whole matter are most evident ( one stone in the arch supporting and other , and the whole ) are mere chymeras and wild paradoxes . But ( Son ) it is time my book should speak it self , rather then I speak any longer of it here . Reade it carefully over , and let me see by the effects of your governing your self , that you make such right use of it , as I may be comforted in having chosen you to bequeathe it unto . God in heaven bless you . Paris the last of August 1644. Your Loving Father KENELME DIGBY .