TO THE FAITHFUL WITNESSE OF CHRIST Mr. Henry Burton . Worthy Sir , THE first draught of this Treatise , was conveyed unto you ( attired in a borrowed garment ) presently after , the matter therein contained had been preached in our Monthly Propositions , and public meetings duly observed among us , according to the order prescribed in our Discipline , not unknown unto you . The reason was because of the great interest you had therein ; not only in regard of the spiritual brotherhood , and former acquaintance ; but especially in respect of the subject thereof . You being one of the eminent witnesses of Christ , that had suffered for the testimony of his truth , according to the Prophesy mentioned , Revel . 11 7. etc. yet then lying unburied , in one of the public places of the great City , Castle Cornet in Garnezey , ( where some few years before two other Brethren ( and the Author also , for a whole week of months had been unjustly imp • … oned , and unlawfully detained , for the same testimony . ( And though you were then overcome by the beast of the bottomless pit , who had made war against you , and by her killed with that most uncivil and unnatural death , I mean that close-confined Prison : yet that faithful and true witness , the beginning of the creatures of God , had bounded and determined it , having faithfully promised by the said Prophet in the same chapter to raise you again , at the ending of the limited time of three days and a half : whereof you were then , by the means of this Treatise informed and assured , some five or sixe Months before it came to pass . The application thereof unto you , being made as plain , ( as if it had been already effected , ) by that perspective , the Table of the Parallel of the 42. journeys and months ( of both the Jewish and Christian Churches ) of their wildernesses ; set in view in the beginning of this book : And for the use of all such as are desirous to follow the footsteps , and understand with the book of the Revelation , likewise the true perjod of time in which the notable Accidents of the Christian Church traveling through her said wilderness , came to pass . And thus to observe her progress all along the same . That is first her entry therein , or the means and degrees by which she came at length to fallen into that vast and dry wilderness of Idolatry , a right shadow of Death ; and so gross , that all the former Pagans , could not parallel it . Then secondly how long she hath continued under that blackness of darkness and ignorance , thicker and obscurer then that of Egypt . And lastly the very time when God in his mercy began to bring , and lead her out of the same , taking vengeance by degrees , of all her persecutors . The said Treatise indeed at its first flight did but intend your particular comfort , and encouragement in your most undaunted faith , Jonas-like during your said death . Whereof when you were risen , and ascended up in a cloud , to the heavenly Armagedon or Parliament calling you ; it would needs take it self to its wings , being somewhat better feathered then at first , and follow you oversea , there to observe more of its contents . Trusting by the former true events , to see a further accomplishment of many more , wherein it hath in nothing hitherto been deceived , having observed among many other wonderful mercies of God , first the second tribe of the Christian Israel , passing over , & treading under foot that proudly overflowed Euphraticall Jordan . Secondly the Covenant of Circumcifi onrenewed in Gilgal , ( where I am sure that the twelve stones are set up for a monument to posterity of the drying up of the said Jordan ) about the revolution of the 1641 year ( being the first of the last tenth , of the last Month of the long tribulation , and the first also of the raising of the Church , ( agreeing with the particular time of your forementioned raising , which was as is noted in the treatise , the first day of the last month of your death ; ) And the beginning of the conquest of the premices of the ten Kingdoms of the great City ) or tenth part of them , which was to be the first consecrated to God , & to be brought under the yoke of the Lamb Iesus Christ . It observed immediately after this the celebrating of the Christian Passeover , the next Sabbath day following . Thirdly , the compassing about of the City Jericho by the three several shouting Companies ( having with them the Ark of the Lord ) with the downfall of her walls and the sacking thereof . It admired especially observing , that by the command of Joshua , Rahab the Harlot was to be put out of the camp , there to be ( by the special charge thereof committed to you ) prepared , according to the law , and thereby fitted , for to be shortly married to the Lamb , her promised husband : as soon as she should be stripped of her whorish Babylonish garment , as soon as the nails of the Courts of her scratching persecution should be cut off ; and finally as soon as all the Ceremonies borrowed hairs of her alluring and enticing whoredoms should be shaved off . The most part of which perceiving to be now effected , it could be contained no longer , but would needs escape out of my hands to fly abroad . God grant it a favourable entertainment , that it may return again with a safe conduct to its owner , to carry the good tidings of Reformation , most necessary and wanting in the state both Civil and Ecclesiastical of the Country of his abode . The prosecuting and obtaining whereof I desire , that it may be by you , to your powered , further , whereby you shall oblige me to continue for ever Yours in the Lord I . D. L. M.