TO THE HONOURABLE THE KNIGHTS , CITIZENS , AND BVRGESSES , OF THE COMMONS HOVSE OF PARLIAMENT . MOst Noble , and Right worthy Senate ; Moses telleth us , that when God had commanded him to make the Tabernacle and all the instruments thereof ; according to the pattern which he had showed him in the Mount , he bade him withal , to speak unto the children of Israel , to bring for the building thereof , gold , silver , brass , silk , purple , scarlet , fine linen , goats hair , rams skins , etc. Of all whichthings , every one whose hearts moved them willingly , brought presently a free offering to the Lord : All which materials were delivered by Moses , to the workmen called by God , and by him appointed to do the work . Who were Betsalcel , Aholiab , and all other wisehearted men , in whom God had put wisdom , to make all that he had commanded him . This Tabernacle ; and likewise the Temple by Salomon were but types of the new Jerusalem , which comes down out of Heaven from God . About the building whereof , you , Worthies of the Lord , being now employed , by the like calling and appointment , And having to the very same end , printed of late and published , and order for all peoples , nations , and tongues living under the Dominions of our Sovereign ; by which you gave them to understand , that you earnestly desired , and expected that all ingenious persons in every Country of the Kingdom should be very active to improve the present opportunity , by giving a true information of the state and condition of all the Parishes in their several Counties , concerning preaching Ministers , etc. In obedience to which I made all speed possible to bring a small freewill offering , which as I suppose may somewhat conduce and serve for the furtherance and effecting of the said building . It is a parcel of Gold , which though it be but in over , yet is already judged , by the touch of it , to the true stone of trial , the Scripture ; to be purer then that anciently so much renowned , of Ophir ; or that overmuch now prised , of that new discovered world . It was found of late , digging ( under hard Taskmasters and detainers of hire ) with a company of hard labouring yokefellows : who for the space of these five and twenty years past , have night and day dug , at that goldenpit of the Revelation of Saint John , to discover the most rich and glorious mysteries hidden therein . A vein whereof , having but lately opened , it gave presently great hope and assurance of most rich treasures , lying yet further and deeper , which may now with some more labour be attained unto , ( if the work be continued , and necessary tools , with convenient furniture be supplied and furnished for the same ) for the furthering of the said spiritual building , the perfect model whereof is therein most excellently set out and described . I thought therefore that I was in most humble duty bound , this day being a day of good tidings , to hold no longer my peace in concealing of the same , but that I was to acquaint first of all your honours , as being they to whom it concerns now most , in presenting herewith a proof thereof : the which though it be wrapped up in a very course , yea borrowed cloth , yet contemn it not therefore , no more then Christ did the two mites of the poor widow , it proceeding also from a sincere heart . Your acceptance thereof will set many more at work about the same pit , which will furnish work enough for all and the best , with a bundance of most rich spiritualltrea sure , necessary for the perfecting of the foresaid building . It will very much encourage my forementioned 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 to follow hard the said work , when they shall see me returning to them furnished with and authentical approbation and authorising of their said labour in the said work of the Lord , being with all furnished , by your most equitable justice , and Parliamentary authority with a lawful power and necessary implements to work with them in my former station in the said task , without any more fear or danger of interruption by any Sanballats or Tobiah's . The which favour of yours shall oblige for ever Your Honours and Worships most humble daily Orator I D. L. M.