To the tender Consciensed , scrupulous , doubting Christian . DEare and beloved Christians , for your sal • … es in special who are apt to be troubled with many doubts and fears about the Constitution and Government of the visible Church , and the way of Worship and Communion in it , have I drawn up this present Answer , as to undeceive you in the Apologists , the Apology , and their Churchway , so to satisfy you in your scruples and doubts about Presbytery . It was my love , care and respect to tender consciences , that more especially moved me at first ( now some seven years ago ) to fallen upon the more through studying and searching into the controversies of the Church , etc. And the grounds which now of late have afresh revived my thoughts and studies that way , are , 1. The recovering and reducing conscientious Christians who are not too far engaged . 2. The settling some who are wavering and doubtful . 3. The keeping of others from falling ▪ Now the first born of my latter thoughts and studies in this kind , is this Antapologi • … , which I here recommend to you for a true glass to behold the faces of Presbytery and Independency in , with the beauty , order , strength of the one , and the deformity , disorder and weakness of the other : And good Reader , I have some reason to believe and hope , that if you will indeed read and consider , look impartially and thoroughly into this glass , you may be either changed into the image of it , or at least so stumbled at Independency , as to be kept from falling into it , and willing in the mean time to wait upon God in that way of his , and Assembly of so many learned and godly Divines , to see what he will be pleased to speak by them : I at first intended , and accordingly provided materials for a large Epistle to this Book , the more to make way for it in the hearts and consciences of the people , as well knowing there are laid in before hand by many of the Independent party , many prejudices both against my person and the Book , to hinder if possible the fruit and benefit of it , yea to keep people from so much as reading any part of it , that so receiving and believing the Independent Grounds without hearing or examining the other side , they may be still kept in ignorance and error : I had many thoughts and purposes in my Epistle , to have given the Reader and account of my especial call to the making this Answer , as also to have laid down the Principles and Rules I more especially went by in the studying of these controversies , and then to have Apologized for my self and Book , by answering some objections and clearing aspersions cast abroad in this mistaking age , and by representing to the Reader my many sufferings , constant labours , etc. and so to have compared my grounds moving me to make this Antapologia , with the Apologists grounds occasioning their Apologetical Narration , and my Principles with their three Principles expressed in their Apology , and my sufferings , troubles , patience and labours , with their exile and patience , etc. and then left them to the Reader to judge in those matters between us ; but conceiving the danger of this way in comparing with the Apologists , lest I might become a fool in glorying , and run into the same fault I charge upon the Apologists , and lest it might be thought I sought to commend my Answer by such ways rather then by the strength of the discourse it self , I resolved to forbear all those comparisons and vindications of my self , and to refer all to God ; and that I may not hold the Reader too long in the porch , I will only insist somewhat upon justifying and clearing the lawfulness of the way and manner of this Answer , and the grounds I go upon for matters of fact reported in it , and this I must do of necessity , for beside other grounds calling for it , within these few days , just before the Antapology was coming forth , a Pamphlet , entitled The Anatomist Anatomized was printed , rather to prepossess the Reader against the Antapology , then to answer the Anatomy of Independency ( as all may see ) and to be a shelter rather against this shower ( as the Anatomizer calls it ) ready to fallen , then to dry up the drops already fallen : But 〈 ◊ 〉 shall by the help of God , not only satisfy the Reader , that this covering is too narrow , and the stuff too slight to keep out the shower from wetting , but make and advantage of it , even to gain the greater credit and belief to the things asserted in my Book , and to remove this opinion from lurking in many other bosoms , and in particular to make the charge fit heavier upon the Anatomizer , by speaking particularly to the matters of fact concerning him , in accepting of his motion and request , of proving the reports concerning him by witnesses , and before a judicatory , I must therefore answer to the three Propositions of the Anatomizer as they have reference to the Antapology . 1. That many things reported in this Antapology are misreported . 1. Let the Reader observe , that the Anatomizer though he play the foregame , and will be before hand in speaking to a Book before it come forth ( and because truth will hardly overtake a • … you that is set out foure or five days before it ( as himself speaks ) therefore he will be sure to send forth in time even some days before reports come out ) yet the Anatomizer does not say all things reported are misreported , so that though many things may be misreported , many things also may be truly reported ; and in page 4. in the definition he is pleased to give of the Antapology , it's a Collection of such faults , as either meant mistakes and malice , or perhaps mens own infirmities have made , either beyond the seas or here , he denies not the truth of all the reports and fa • … les , but grants them with a perhaps . 2. I desire the Reader to consider , that for the matters of fact related in the Apology , which in this Answer I speak unto , asserting the contrary upon Reasons and grounds laid down by me , I never intended by such and Answer , to make a Judiciary infallible proof ( which as it's not necessary in the way of answering matter of fact , so neither can it be by rational men expected , as if without that no sufficient Answer were given to disprove facts ) but only a rational probable proof from Letters and other Manuscripts going under the names of the Apologists , and superscribed to their known friends , from reports of men of credit , and such who have lived among them , hearing and seeing things , and from many circumstances of place , time , etc. by which in reason men may well judge accordingly , and for this kind of proof I believe I can make as rational and conscientious a one to satisfy my self and all indifferent persons , to judge according to what I write , as hath been made these many years ( for since the Apology came forth , I have used a great deal of care , diligence and circumspection , both by 〈 ◊ 〉 to know the truth of things I formerly had been informed of , and by inquiting particularly of many persons concerning circumstances and their proofs , and questioning with them how they knew such a thing , etc. as also by forbearing to insert matters related to me upon a single tes • … money and witness , where there were not other strong circumstances con • … ing to make them out ; ) And yet for all the care I have used , it's possible that among so many things related by 〈 ◊ 〉 , there may be some mistakes in the reports of some circumstances in matter of order and time , place or number ( though I know none such ) and yet the report and fact true , ( A report may be true and yet mistaken in one circumstance , which when it comes to scanning may prove more foul in another ▪ ) so that the • … se stands thus , whither the Apologists relating such and such matters oh • … fact , and Answer • … er having evidences and testimonies by him of Letters written in their names , reports from credible men , as godly Ministers and Christians their own friends , with other circumstances concurring , hath not reason to question the truth of such facts , and to answer to them , by laying down his grounds why he judges otherwise ; and for my Answer to the Apologists , if in their Reply they deny any of the matters of fact I speak unto , I will in my Rejoinder at the end of it , print all their Letters , with other Letters of their friends that I have by me , and name the parties from whose hands I had them , and how I came by them , and relate other circumstances which for present I have concealed , and then let the Reader judge whither I had not reason to believe , and Answer as I do . But as for a Judiciary proof of all matters of fact in my Antapology , I not seeing those Letters writ , and most of my Letters being but copies , and many of the facts being done beyond the seas , considering also it's possible the relators may mistake in some things , I cannot positively and judicially sware , and make out such a kind of proof , 3. For some matters of fact spoken to in this Antapologia ▪ I know and am certain of in my own knowledge , and had them from some of the Apologists own mouths , and though they 〈 ◊ 〉 have forgotten them , I can for a need rub up their memories , by minding them 〈 ◊ 〉 the places , times and occasions which they cannot deny ; I have also some original Letters by me to prove some things asserted by me in this Answer , and for the most material things of their preaching and acting for their way , beside that the things themselves speak and are notorious , I have many ear and eye witnesses both of Ministers and people which I can produce , so that if I have reason to beeleeve a report of any thing I see no • … , nor bear not upon the place , as that there was a siege at Yorke and a great victory obtained by the Parliaments Forces near Yorke , etc. I have ground to believe many of the particulars instanced in by way of Answer to the Apologetical Narration • … Now finding several passages in the Apology in point of fact , related with height of confidence , contrary to my knowledge and to the testimony of many , with a concurrence of other circumstances which I could not doubt of , & observing other matters of fact brought by the Apologists to take the people with , against which though there were not such strong proofs , yet in the drawing up my Answer to such p • … ticulars , whither might not I now upon probable grounds as one sufficient witness with the circumstance of place and time , etc. question these , and judge them to be much like the others . 4. Particularly for M. Simpson , because he hath publicly printed that the Antapology is a • … ction of such faults as either men's mistakes and malice , or perhaps me • … own infirmities have made either beyond the seas or here , ( in which sentence it is to be observed by the way he confu • … es all that's brought by himself against the Anatomy or the Antapology , himself taking up reports suddenly , and believing here says , before he ever saw any one sheet yea or one page of the Antapology , branding a Minister and his , Book for a collection of such faults as either men's mistakes and malice have made , by tellin • … this not only to a particular Church , but to all the Churches in the World , as printing does , ) and because he puts up a req • … est , that the Reader will not believe a • … y reports of this kind in the Book that i • … coming forth ( meaning the Antapology ) until the Authors of them will appear and bring their witnesses to a fair , hearing in any lawful though the strictest • … licatorie , etc. and because he says , in what he is guilty before men he will confess ingeniously ; That the Reader may not be • … uded to believe what's said by him there , and by that be prepossessed against the truth of the Antapology , I accept of his motion and request , and if he will be pleased to procure any lawful though the strictest Judicatory , yea the highest , I am ready for so much as concerns him , to appear and bring my witnesses to a fair hearing , and if the Judicature will give time , and grant Warrants to bring in the witnesses that they may be deposed , I doubt not but beside a rational Answer by way of writing ( which I intended ) to make also a full Judiciar • … proof , yea to prove more then yet I have charged Mr Simpson with , only I desire if I must be put to this trouble , that Mr. Simpsons small and just request may be granted by the Judicature , that he may suffer if he have done what in the Antapology is reported of him , and if I cannot make it good , then I am contented to suffer , and I am willing also to be judged by his own Law , Pag. 7. Lege Remmia , to be branded with a K in the forehead , if I do not by witnesses prove his preaching and acting for his way , upon condition he may be served so if I do , and to the letter K to have the addition of L and P. But it may be objected , Why does Mr. Simpson of all the Apologists put forth such a Book before hand , and dare it thus ? I answer in his own words , some may perhaps conceive it's a sign of guilt to speak so much , and I conceive Mr Simpsons guilt and consciousness caused fear , and fear that hastened him to thrust forth something in the way of the Antapology , to blast the credit of it before it was come forth , and the truth of it is , he of all the Apologists hath been most faulty both in Holland and in England , and for the close of this concerning whats reported in the Antapology of M. Sympson , I shall speak in the words made use of by himself , God takes the wise in their own craftiness , and will destroy such wisdom , and so I believe he hath done this of M Sympsons forestalling the Antapology , • … ad M. Sympson remembered a late example of M. P. and M. W. brought in to prove what they had said and written of a Person of place , and the issue of that • … iall , or had he stayed till the Antapology had come forth to have read what I charge him with , he would never have written thus . 2. Propos. That this not way of God to divulge men's personal faults , supposing the matter of facts to be true yet the divulging of them in this manner is not according to the Word of God . I answer , all that is brought by the Anatomizer for proof page 5. out of Matt. 18. and his other grounds are nothing to the case and point in hand , namely of making this Answer , and I would ask Mr Sympson , whither it be lawful to make any Answer at all to the Apology , if it be , then certainly if the Apologists have personal things and matters of fact , no man can answer them fully , and as they ought to be answered , but he must speak to personal things and matters of fact , and the fault of divulging personal things is not in the Antapologist but in the Apologists : As for the 18. of Matth. that speaks of private offences , and of offences that may be in that way healed , and the other grounds brought by M. Sympson speaks to offences already repented of , and not of such which in stead of being judged faults are made use of publicly to draw men into a way of error by , I give therefore these two distinct Answers : 1. The Apologists have publicly and openly sinned in avowing some things in the Apology , and they never yet repented of them , ( as I herd ) but M. Sympson justifies himself , and them in his Anatomist anatomized , page . 4. Now the Apostles rule is 1 Tim. 5. 19 , 20. though Timothy may not receive and accusation against and Elder under two or three witnesses , yet them that sin openly may be rebuked before all , that others may fear , now as the ▪ Apologists by Printing told all the Churches , so by Printing it may be told to all the Churches , the remedy ought to be proportioned according to the disease , the plaster to be as large as the soar , the Apology hath spread it self to the Parliament , City , Kingdom , and so ought the Remedy ; may Independents publicly & confidently write untruths , and may not others in way of answering plainly point at them , but this against the way of God , and not according to the Word , 2. This may not only lawfully be done , but this ought to be done , when men shall tell sine stories , and bring matters of fact , interweave them all along to prove such a way by , and to gain people to errors by such Rhetorical arguments , he who answers such a book , and would preserve people from errors is bound to disprove all he can those matters of fact , and to speak to those popular arguments , by weakening the truth of those Relations all he knows , and secondly by showing how they are not argumentative nor evincing , supposing they were true : This well known by them who are versed in the writings of the Protestants against the Papists , how in many of the Controversies , especially upon the notes of the Church , the Protestant writers do , wherein they stand on matters of fact , disprove them by matters of fact and personal things , as upon Unity , Holiness of life , etc. and I conceive in giving and Answer to the Apology , I could not have declined matters of fact without gratifying the cause of Independency , and wronging the truth ; I suppose the excellency of and Answer , as distinct from writing Tractates upon such a subject , or such a point consists in three things : 1. In not speaking whatever a man pleases , or bringing in whatever he hath a mind to , but in following the text before him , and in keeping his discourse close to that . 2. In not omitting any material passages , skipping over the knots , passing by the hard arguments and falling on the weak , snatching here and there , but going through all . 3. In labouring to take the Authors mind laid down in the words and scope , and in not wresting and fastening another sense upon the Author : All which I propounded to my self in falling upon this Answer , and have aimed at in it , and therefore could not omit matters of fact nor personal things brought by the Apologists , especially when all along they are with much art framed and set to gain credit to the Church way , to prove some main principles of their way , and to effect their desires ; For instance , how is a story with the Apologists practice upon it , page . 16 , 17 , 20 , 21. brought to prove the effectual success of submission and Noncommunion , how is their good carriage since their return into England , and their exile made use of to move for a Toleration , how is all that Narration of 3 , 4 , 〈 ◊ 〉 ▪ pages , of their enquiry into the Word of Christ , etc. laid down as so many grounds to possess the Reader of the truth of the Church way , let the Apologetical Narration be analized , and it will be found there is no point of fact , or personal thing in it , but is brought in some way or other as a motive or argument for their way , so that of necessity I could not avoid matter of fact , unless I would betray the truth . Paul in the second of the Galathians 11 , 12 , 13. openly rebukes Peter , because he was to be blamed for his withdrawing and separating himself , and because others thereupon were carried away with it , and so because the Apologists doe not only withdraw and separate themselv • … , but by their Apologetical Narration do even compel others also , I cannot but speak . 3. Propos. That it's not argumentative against the cause that , falsely called Independency , nor rational or conducing to decide any , or this controversy . 1. That the Apologists and the Anatomizers way is not falsely but truly called Independency , I refer the Reader to these pages in this present answer , 201 , 202 , 203. Secondly , were all the matters of fact , and the Narration of them argumentative for the Apologists cause to move the Parliament , and to draw the Reader to their way , and is not the disproving of them argumentative against it , if this be not argumentative against Independency , then I am sure the greatest part of the Apologet. Narration is nothing material for it , and where • … before then was that story of a Minister deposed , and matter of fact upon it inserted in the Narration with many other , and supposing that to be true , that ther's no reasoning from the quality of the person to his cause , why then do you so much do it in your Apology , taking all occasions to magnify your party , and reasoning from your persons to your cause , from your sufferings , patience , etc. but whither there be any strength or not in that , it matters not , this strongly argumentative in any point to overthrow men's own mediums , and that the Antapology does ; in a word , there's more consequence then the Anato • … zer is willing to see in that main Assertion of the Apology , That one Church may non-Communion , but not excommunicate another ( as he terms it , ) to the miscarriages of M. Sympson and his Church , for might Presbyterial Government take place , we should not have men so easily principled into Anabaptism , nor make a covenant with separation , etc. as in this answer in many places is proved . And so much for answer to Mr. Sympsons Book as far as it concerns the Antapology , and may be a block in the way of it , Now beside this , there is one objection more that hath been in the mouths of some Independents , and may be instilled into many more to hinder the fruit 〈 ◊ 〉 benefit of this Answer , namely ( against the manner of the Answer ) that this 〈 ◊ 〉 Answer full of bitterness , malice , reproaches , railings , and that this a book written against Gods people and good men . For consultation of this objection , I present to the Readers apprehension these following particulars . 1. I have endeavoured for the manner of doing it , that it might be without all just exceptions in regard of hard words and better speeches , and I can truly say I have declined many words and phrases more proper , and taken other words which in some places have readred the style more rugged to avoid offensive phrases , and all along though I often disprove matters of fact , yet I never use so harsh a word ( to my remembrance ) as false , much less a lie , but untrue , and this is not so , whereas M. Sympson in his Pamphlet uses falsely and hath the word lie . 2. I desire the conscientious indisterent Reader to consider my book is not a Treatise or Tractate upon what subject I please to speak of , but and Answer , and so must follow where that leads me , & speak to that . 2. This and Answer to a book full of matter of fact , and stories of the Authors themselves , so that I cannot answer without particularising , the truth cannot be evidenced to the Reader without coming somewhat to particulars . 〈 ◊ 〉 . The Book contains matter of high praise of themselves and their party ( a few inconsiderable persons comparatively ) with many close , indirect , and dangerous insinuations against all the Reformed Churches , which cannot be answered particularly without some recrimination and charge . 4. There are many particulars in matters of fact , I prove and charge the Apologists with , and some too bad for untruth . 5. I forbear men • … oning the names of many particular persons which this Apology leads me unto , some wholly , others I speak of only under the 〈 ◊ 〉 letter of their names , and for the Apologists though I often particularly name them , yet in some places of my Book , and in some grosser things , I forbear particularizing them too . 6. I meddle not with personal things and matters of fact that are heterogeneal , to relate other kind of facts and practises which I have herd on known of any the Apologists ; but speak only of such as are proper to the matter occasioned from their Apology , or the effects and fruits of their Church way , the Apologists themselves give the occasion to the laying open so many particulars , which no other occasion but such and one as this could have drawn forth from me to have made their names and practices thus public . 7. In many passages of this Answer I do upon several occasions give the Apologists a just testimony of that worth for parts and piety which is in them , and speak to them , and of them as Brothers , so that let but all these things be laid : together , considering also the Rules of Scripture in such Cases , and that I intended a plain particular downright Answer , and this Answer will then be accounted candid , moderate , my pe • … dipped in oil , and not in vinegar . 3. I can truly speak it that this present Antapologia is so far from being written out of any malice or ill will to the Apologists , that I love their persons , and valve them as brothers , yea some of them above brothers , and beside that love I bear to them as Saints , I have a personal love , and a particular love of friendship to some of them , and I can truly speak it , that I writ not this book nor any part of it out of any personal quarrel , old grudge , or former difference ( for to this day there never was any such difference or unkindness passed between us ) but I have writ it with much sorrow , unwillingness and some kind of conflict , in respect of that old personal love and friendship still strong in me , and had not the truth constrained me , my call to this work been strong , and the cause of God and Reformation much in my eye , I had out of my personal love and respect to some of the Apologists given over the work : I can , and am ready to do them any service of love , even the meanest , to wash their feet , and should much rejoice in their happy union and growing into one body with us in this Reformation . And let not this Answer for the truth and plainness of it , be branded for a bitter , railing , malicious Answer , but let this also be added to the former premises , that the Apologists needed such and Answer as should not flatter nor extol them , but be free and plain ; for the truth is the Apologists have been too much flattered both in their persons and Churchway , and they are undone for want of being dealt with plainly and freely ; a candle hath been too much held to them , and I hope this Answer may do much good , even to abate their swellings and confidence , and if many of the Ministers would deal more plainly with them , it would be better both for them and us : I remember a passage of Calv. epist . 65. Melanct. Verum si in nobis omnibus esset is animus qul esse debet aliquod forsan remedium posset inveniti . Et certè foedum exemplum transmi • … imus ad posterot , etc. Calvin in and Epistle of his to Melancthon concerning Luther , which may be applied to the Ministers in reference to the Apologists , how that if there were that mind in all of us which ought to be , some remedy might be found : And certainly we transmit and unworthy example to posterity , while we cast away all liberty rather then we will offend one man , and will not his vehemency the more rise and grow while all bear with him and suffer all things , etc. 4. Answ. The writing of Books against the errors and opinions ( though of good men ) is not speaking against good men , or opposing godliness ; when the Apologists in their Apology writ against Authoritative Presbyterial Government , and in page 〈 ◊ 〉 and 24 of they • … Apologie do professedly declare they judge the Calvinian Reformed Churches to stand in need of a further Reformation themselves , and that the truth lies in the • … ddle way betwixt Authoritative Presbyterial government , etc. did they speak against the Saints and all the godly Ministers in those Churches : when Paul withstood Peter to the face , because he was to be blamed for his withdrawing and separating , did Paul speak against the Apostles of Christ , or speak evil of the Saints ? no more do , I in writing this Book . Good Reader , Not to de • … ine thee longer from en • … ing into the house it self , lay all things together , consider wisely of persons and things , and have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ the Lord of glory with respect of persons , Accept and take in good part what is now brought to thy hand , as intended for thy spiritual good , for the recovering or preserving thee from errors on the right hand , and let love cover any mistakes or faults thou mayest meet with in it . I am but one against five , as also in so many sheets there may well be Errata , and all things not so strong , in much writing a men pen may slip and mistake , and with long waking a watchful man may wink now and then ; consider also this Answer hath been made in the midst of much preaching and many other businesses , having been destitute also of some advantages and helps which at another time I might have had . Thy good acceptance of it ; thy profiting by it , and thy earnest prayers to God for me , will encourage me to go on in further writing , to which I have so deeply engaged my self in this Book ; and God sparing me life and health , I have taken up a fixed resolution , never to give over writing till this Church be settled , and these great schisms among us healed : But if it should so happen that this Antapologia should profit nothing at all many Christians whom I intend it most unto , yet I question not but it will profit some , even as August . Vincentio Epist. 48. Nunc vero etiam si tibi nihil profit , non puto nihil ijs profuturam qui eam legere cum Deitimore , & sine personarum acception curaverint . a Beza Epist. 1. And 1. Duditio , Dominus te totam que familiam ob omni malo , ac praesertim a Daemoniss meridianis istie obambulantibus custodiat . Augustine in his Epistle to Vincentius writes , even them who have a care to read it with the fear of God , and without respect of persons . Now the God of truth and peace reveal abundance of truth and peace , and give us truth and peace always by all means ; He fulfil that promise in Ieremie , to his people in this Kingdom , to give them one heart and one way to fear him , for the good of them and their children after them : And so commending thee deer Christian to God , and the word of his grace , and this work of mine to his blessing , I conclude this Epistle as Beza does his to Duditius , Farewell , The Lord keep thee and all thine from all evil , and especially from noonday Devils , which walk about in this place and in these times , that is , from the errors of Anabaptism , Brownism , Antinomianisme , Toleration of Sects and schisms under pretence of liberty of conscience . Amen . Yours in Christ , Tho. Edwards .