TO THE NOBILITIE AND GENTRY of ENGLAND . THis Piece ( being ſent me out of France , as a double rarity , both in reſpect of the ſubject and the quality of the Author ) I had no ſooner read , then ( taken with its ingenuity ) I was moved to cloth it in and Engliſh habit , partly out of envy , that other Nations ſhould glory to have out-knowne us in any Art , eſpecially ingenious , as is this of Deviſes , which being the proper badges of Gentlemen , Commanders , and perſons of Honour , may juſtly challenge their countenance and favour , whereunto this ſacred . My Author affirms himself to be the firſt hath written of this ſubject in his Mothertongue ; and I might ſay the like here , were it not that I find a ſmall parcel of it in Camdens Remains , under the title of Impreſes , which are in effect the ſame with Deviſes . Thence , you may gather , that the Kings of England , with the Nobility and Gentry , have for ſome hundreds of years ( though Deviſes are yet of far greater Antiquity ) both eſteemed and made uſe of them : only in former times they arrived not ( as now ) to that height of perfection ; for they sometime did ( as the unskilful ſtill do ) make uſe of Mottoes without figures , and figures without Mottoes . We read that Hen . the 3. ( as liking well of Remuneration ) commanded to be written ( by way of Deviſe ) in his Chamber at Woodſtock , Qui non that quod amat , non accipit ille quod optat . Edw. the 3. boar for his Deviſe the rays of the Sun ſtreaming from a cloud without any Motto . Edmond of Langley , Duke of York , boar a Falcon in a Fetterlock , implying , that he was locked up from all hope and poſsibility of the Kingdom . Hen . the 5. carried a burning Creſſet , sometime a Beacon , and for Motto ( but not appropriate thereunto ) UNE SANS PLUS , one and no more . Edw the 4. boar the Sun , after the Battle of Mortimers-Croſſe , where three Suns were seen immediately conjoining in one . Hen . the 7. in reſpect of the union of the two Houſes of York and Lancaſter , by his marriage , uſed the White Roſe united with the Read , sometime placed in the Sun . But in the reign of Hen . the 8. Deviſes grew more familiar , and ſomewhat more perfect , by adding Mottoes unto them , in imitation of the Italians and French ( amongſt whom there is hardly a private Gentleman , but hath his particular Deviſe ) For Hen . the 8. at the interview between him and King Francis the firſt , whereat Charles the fift was alſo preſent , uſed for his Deviſe and Engliſh Archer in a green Coat drawing his Arrow to the head , with this Motto , CUI ADHaeREO , PRaeEST ; when as at that time thoſe mighty Princes banding one againſt another , wrought him for their own particular . To the honour of Queen Iane , ( who died willingly to ſave her child King Edward ) a Phoenix Was repreſented in his Funeral fire with this Motto , NASCATUR UT ALTER . Queen Marry boar winged Time , drawing Truth out of a pit , with VERITAS TEMPORIS FILIA . Queen Elizabeth upon several occaſions uſed many Heroical Deviſes , sometime a Sive without a Motto , ( as Camden relates ) and at other times theſe words without figure , VIDEO , TACEO , and SEMPER EADEM . King Iames uſed a Thiſtle and a Roſe united , and a Crown over them , with this Motto , HENRICUS ROSAS , REGNA JACOBUS . Pr. Henry ( beside that Deviſe which is appropriate to the Princes of Wales ) made uſe of this Motto , without figure , FAS EST ALIORUM QUaeRERE REGNA . And His Majesty that now is , that other of CHRISTO AUSPICE REGNO . Our Prince bears ( as all the Princes of Wales have done ſince the black Prince ) for his Deviſe ( which we commonly , though corruptly call the Princes Arms ) a Coronet beautified with three Oſtrich feathers , and for Motto , A learned Brittan is of opinion that it ſhould be Eich dyn , i.e. your man , in the British tongue . ICH DIEN , i.e. I ſerve , in the Saxon tongue , alluding to that of the Apoſtle , The heir while he is a child , differeth nothing from a ſervant . The late Earl of Eſſex , when he was caſt down with ſorrow , and yet to be employed in Arms , boar a ſable Shield without any figure , but inſcribed , PAR NULLA FIGURA DOLORI . Sir Philip Sidney ( to trouble you with no more ) denoting that he perſiſted always one , depainted out the Caſpian Sea , ſurrounded with its shores , which neither ebbeth nor flows , and for Motto , SINE REFLUXU . Some may object , that in regard Tiltings , Tournaments , and Maſques , ( where Deviſes were much in requeſt ) are for the preſent laid aſide , therefore Deviſes are of less uſe . Whereto I anſwer , that as thoſe Juſting or jeſting Wars are diſuſed , ſo have we now and earneſt , though much to be lamented War , which renders them more useful then ever , I mean for Cornets and Ensigns ; And of theſe , let me alſo give you ſome examples out of the preſent times . On the Kings party , one bears for his Cornet-Deviſe Saint Michael killing the Dragon for the figure , and for Motto , QUIS UT DEUS ? Another is ſo bold as to bear the picture of a King Crowned and Armed , with his Sword drawn , and this Motto , MELIUS EST MORI IN BELLO , QUAM VIDERE MALA GENTIS NOSTRAE . A third bears only a Die , with UTCUNQUE QUADRATUS . A fourth figures the beaſt called anThe Naturaliſts ſay that this beaſt will rather chooſe to die , then defile her sum • e . Ermyne , with this Motto , MALLEM MORI QUAM FoeDARI . A fift repreſents five hands ſnatching at a Crown , defended by and armed hand and ſword from a Cloud , with this Motto , REDDITE CaeSARI . A ſixt figures a Landskip of a pleaſant Country , with houſes , corn , etc. invaded by beggarly people , and for Motto , BARBARUS HAS SEGETES ? etc. On the Parliaments party we find one bearing in his Cornet , the Sun breaking through a Cloud , with EXURGAT ET DISSIPABUNTUR . Another repreſents a Deaths-head , and a Lawrell-Crown , with MORS VEL VICTORIA . A third figures and armed man , preſenting a ſword to a Biſhops breaſt , with VISNE EPISCOPARE ? the Biſhop anſwering , NOLO , NOLO , NOLO . A fourth says only ( without any figure ) TANDEM BONA CAUSA TRIUMPHAT . A fift repreſents the Sun , diſsipating a cloudy storm , with POST NUBILA PHOEBUS . A ſixt , figures and armed man , hewing off the corners of and Univerſity Cap with his ſword , and this Motto , MUTO QUADRATA ROTUNDIS , & C. Now though theſe Deviſes for the moſt part argue wit in the Compoſers , yet many of them are either imperfect or defective , which may be attributed to the want of the preſcribed rules of this Art , which this Treatiſe does afford you , together with a Synopſis or ſhort view of Hieroglyphics , Emblems , Reverſes of Medals , and all other inventions of wit , which any ways relate thereunto . I might alſo show you here how many ſeveral ways Deviſes are uſeful ( eſpecially for Seals , being drawn from ſome essential part of the bearer Arms ) but that I hold it not fit to foreſtall the Reader in a Preface . I am only to beg pardon for my less polished ſtyle , ( which I shall the rather hope to obtain , ſince things of this nature require a plain delivery , rather them elegancy or affected phraſe ) not doubting but that the diſcovery of this Art will yield ſo great contentment to you , whoſe wits are elevate as far above the vulgar , as are your ranks and qualities that in ſome Academical Sesſion , you will decree the Author to be your Preſident , the Art your Exerciſe . Ex Aedib . Interioris Templi 27 , Mart. 1646. T. B.