To the High Court of PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND . To the Aſſembly of DIVINES . To the Chriſtian Magiſtrates , and Reformed Churches abroad . Honourable and Reverend , ALL that shall be prefaced unto you , is and humble suit for your prudent conſideration of the sequel . For if I have rightly collected ; the opinion contended with , repreſents you all guilty of Schism againſt the Catholic Church ; yea and of a higher crime , ſo many of you as have with hands lift up to Heaven ( of which number my self am one ) engaged your ſelves in material points of Reformation ; not only without the Authority or endeavouring to have the mind of the Catholic Church ; but have alſo concluded and eſtablished contrary to what it hath determined in all thoſe Aſſemblies which our Brothers style the Repreſentatives of it . General Counsels . From which tranſgreſſion the truth here pleaded does in that reſpect abſolve you : in the comfort whereof , I would here alſo leave you . But ſeeing there are thoſe , who would not only have the oppoſed Tenet embraced for a fundamental truth in Church Government , cap . 5. § . 3. and propound it as a ground thereof ; but that it should alſo be conſtituted and eſtablished and ARTICLE of FAITH and Confeſſion thereof ; I crave leave to add a ſupplication , and with all ſubmiſſion , do beſeech you , that the expedient of a great man about theſe affairs , in his advice for the reſtoring of peace in the Church may be diligently weighed : Era • m . in praef . ad Hilarium : The sum ( says he ) of our Religion is peace and unanimity ; Summa Religionis noſtri , pax eſt & unanimitas , ea vix conſtare poterit , niſi de quam poteſt pauciſſimis definiamus , & in multis literum relinquamus ſuum cuique judicium , propterea quod nigens fit rerum plurimarum obſcuritas , etc. of which there is little hope , unless thoſe things that shall be enjoined as matters of faith , be as few as may be ; and that we leave men's judgements free in many things ; by reaſon that the obſcurity in a number of them is exceeding great , etc. How much less then ſuch opinions , as are not only New ( in the sense now propounded ) and controverted , but moreover appugned conſtantly alſo , by the moſt eminent of our own party , ( and is as inconſiſtent with your Liberties , as Epiſcopacy , which you have condemned . ) Withal I preſume you will not disdain the wisdom and practice of the moſt ancient Churches after the Apoſtles times : we ſee all their confeſſion of faith in that brief called the APOSTLES CREED , and afterwards the Nicene Creed ; made by the firſt General Council , and for the explication of the former ; in how few words is it comprehended , yea and the confeſſions of the Reformed Churches , and our own 39. Articles are but brief and for the moſt part clear . Auſtin says The Rule of Faith is common to the weak and to the wiſe . Ep. 57. and Dardan . Which Ushers in the explication of one , Regulum fid • i puſillis magniſque command • nem , in Eccleſiam te •• nt . almoſt as great , upon it : inferring , that ( therefore ) The Rule of Faith muſt contain ſuch truths ONLY , • Ushers anſwer to the Ieſuite , page 418. as are GENERALLY agreed upon , by the conſent of all true Chriſtians , and without controversy . Many things should not be rendered of the ſubſtance of Faith ; for the denial of which the crime of Hereſy and Schism , and for the doubt whereof , the penalty of rejection from the family , and work of the Lord muſt be inflicted . Rom. 4. c . 15 , The great Apoſtle every where exhorts , with all thoſe who hold in the main the form of found words,1 Cor. 8. c . 10. and yet are in other things diversely minded ; Phil. 3. 15. to preſerve the unity of the ſpirit in the bound of peace . The Lord reſtore the Churches to their juſt freedoms and keep them from uſing their liberty as and occaſion to the flesh , but by love to ſerve one another : And the ſame God raiſe and uphold the ſpirit of all States and Magiſtrates to be Nu • ſing Father's to them : and continue to return this your work of Faith , and labour of love , ſeven fold into your bosom . So prays And unworthy Miniſter of Chriſt , Son of the Church , and ſervant of this State . JOHN ELLIS . Jun.