TO THE TRULY HONOURABLE , The Seed of Abraham , Isaac , and Iacob ▪ the Children and Heirs of God , and Ioynt-he •• es with Christ ; Of what People , Nation , or Tribe soever ; and in what degree of place , High or Low , Grace and Truth , and Peace , be multiplied . Honourable and beloved in the Lord . That the • e is a 〈 ◊ 〉 ▪ Country , and a City having Found • cion , and a Kingdom that cannot be moved , prepared for you ▪ he 〈 ◊ 〉 fully assused : For it is most certain , there being •• thing more abundantly spoken of 〈 ◊ 〉 more clearly promised in all the Scriptures , than the 〈 ◊ 〉 And that ye shall be delivered from all your 〈 ◊ 〉 and troubles in all places wheresoever ye are 〈 ◊ 〉 and from all your mournings , sorrow • es , pains 〈 ◊ 〉 tears , graves , dust ▪ and brought to inherit all those g • eat th • ngs promised , with all the holy Father's and their Changed • ldren , and children's children that have been before you ; and with Christ your Prince at his appearing and his Kingdom , which will be now very speedily , be you a so 〈 ◊ 〉 assured . And so look ye for him , and for it . And 〈 ◊ 〉 take heed , that in the little mean time ( which is to be between this present how • e and 〈 ◊ 〉 of his appe • ring ) no man deceive you by any way or means . For as there hath been false Prophets , and deceiving Spirit • in the world , that 〈 ◊ 〉 deceived many , as Christ foretold they should ▪ So there are still many , even 〈 ◊ 〉 with us 〈 ◊ 〉 would • worser , as well as else • here that sh • ll and do d • ce • we . And 〈 … 〉 Doctrine you 〈 ◊ 〉 hear of , or read tending to the taking your mind , off from 〈 ◊ 〉 hope and expectation of your eternal inheritance in the world to • ome , 〈 … 〉 same upon any thing that is or can be imagined to be here in this present 〈 … 〉 not unto it : For all such Doctrine is of the Spirit of Satan , and not of 〈 … 〉 glorious show soever it makes . And as touching the Doctrine of the • illinaries ; Although it be 〈 … 〉 very next ensuing age after the Apostles , the beloved Disciple of Christ having written the Revelation , and sent it to the seven Churches of Asia ( they being not yet disp • rsed by the persecution of the Dragon ) the same opinion of a resurrection from the dead , and glorious reign of Christ with his Saints on Earth for a thousand years before the general resurrection , and end of the world , was conceived , taught , and held up by many Christians then counted • owned in the faith , Orthodox , as they speak . Some of which being men of great note , Tertullian , Ereneus , Iustine , and others , all grounding their opinion chiefly on this place of Scripture , Rev. 20. 4 , 5 , 6. And that now the opinion ( • aving lain dead for many hundred years ) is again revived and maintained by men of great esteem also • or learning , etc. whose names for the credit of the opinion , that it may carry the greater countenance and authority with it , are ( by those that have published books of the same ) mentioned and described with high applause , insomuch as the Doctrine is almost generally entertained both by Ministers and people , and those especially that seem the most zealous , who embrace it with great affection , as a most excellent mystery of truth . Although all this be so , yet nevertheless it may possibly be , And if one so far inferior unto them in those great respects of learning and esteem , as there is no comparison , may be so bold , I then durst say , they are all deceived , and err , not understanding the Scriptures . And this I do not only say ; but by the grace of God , shall also make it plainly to appear , though not unto all men , yet unto you that are the children of Wisdom , whom the Kingdom does concern , and who can best discern and judge between truth and error . And this is all I do request of you , that you will be pleased to read , and duly to consider the things I here present unto you ; and if you shall find that I speak not the words of truth and soberness , let me then be reproved . And so I submit my self unto your censure , praying always unto the Lord , and desiring with my whole soul , that his truth may prosper in the world , and take place in the hearts of all his chosen people in these last days ; and that 〈 ◊ 〉 would give unto us all his holy Spirit of truth to teach us , and led us into all truth , and to enable us to walk worthy of the same truth , to the glory of his holy name , and our own comfort and peace of mind here , and salvation hereafter in that world to come , through Jes • s Christ our Prince and Saviour , unto whom with the Father and the holy Spirit , be all praise and thanks for ever and ever . Amen . Your most unworthy Christian Brother , I E.