To the right Honourable the High Court of Parliament . NOble Princes and Patriots , remember in all your Laws and Ordinances , that as Ieſus ChriſtRev . 1. 5. ( who is the faithful witness , and will be one day for his truth and People ) is the Prince of the Kings of the Earth , and hath ▪ made the Saints who are his Anointed ones ( 1 Iohn 2 ▪ 27. ) Kings and Prieſt to God and his Father , ſo is he the one only Law giver , who is ableRev 1. 6. Iam. 4 ▪ to • ee • and deſtroy , and hath commanded the Kings of the Earth , i 〈 … 〉 changed his Anointed , nor do his Prophets harm , for he reprovethPſal . 105. 14 ▪ 15. even Kings for their ſak •• ▪ If He have made them firſt and Prophets , who ſhall hinder them to offer up spiritual Sacrifices to God ▪ • Pet. 2. 5 ▪ And as good Stewards of the manifold Grace of God to miniſter the gift one to another ▪ as every w 〈 … 〉 e received it : 1 Pet. 4. 10. For every Scribe who is in 〈 … 〉 ted unto the Kingdom of Heaven , brings out of his treaſury things new and old , Matth. 13. 52. If the Saints as bottles be filled with new • ine of the Spirit , they cannot but pour it forth 〈 … 〉 e their friends , that which they have seen and herd , and in 〈 … 〉 ns souls have taſted of the word of life they cannot but declare and speak , 1 Iohn 1. 2. 3. compared with Acts 4. 20. Iohn 7. 38. Have and eye therefore I beſeech you , to the designs of ſuch men who would engage you to caſt up banks , that you might ſtop the 〈 … 〉 ng of theſe waters , for theſe floods will carry all before him , and who ever persuades you to it , I tell you even weeping ▪ 〈 … 〉 of the Lord 〈 … 〉 and 〈 … 〉 to give 〈 … 〉 to Antichriſt , and the Image of the 〈 … 〉 that as many as will not worſhip the Image of the Beaſt 〈 … 〉 killed notwithſtanding the dreadful do • m • 〈 … 〉 himſelf ▪ Revel . 14 9. 10 11. If any man do 〈 … 〉 Beaſt and his Image , and receive his mark in his for the 〈 … 〉 his hand , the ſame ſhall drink of the wrath of God , and they ſhall have • oh reſt day nor night etc. Be wiſe now therefore , Oy •• Princes , be inſtructed ye Iudes of our Earth , Kiss the Son leaſt he be angry and • ee periſh in the way , though ye have already ſteered our weather beaten ſhip , through many angry waves , and billows , and think you are come near to the fair Havens of peace and happineſſ as yet if inſtead of honouring Ieſus Chriſt , and ſubmitting to his Royal 〈 … 〉 you ſhall be either flattered or threatened to ſet your 〈 … 〉 under any • otin • or pretence whatſoever againſt the Saints , and to kick againſt the pricks , you will yet miſcarry and ſplit upon this Rock , and in all your debates and conſultations ſhall be dashed in p • ices like a Potters Veſſel , for whoſoever ſhall full on that Stone ſhall be broken Grave Senators , conſider the Holy Spirit . Zach. 12. 3. hath foretold that in the day of the Goſpel , the Lord will make Jeruſalem , ( viz. the Saints ) a burden ſome ſtone to all people , all that burden themſelves with it ſhall be out it pieces though all the people of the Earth be gathered together againſt it • : Thoſe men who ſtickle moſt againſt the Saints under the name of Heretics and Schismatics ſhall be diſcovered to be ſuch themſelves , but as our Saviour ſaid , they are wiſe in their Generations , and they dealt with you herein as the crafty and ingenious Horſe Courſer , with his untaimed and 〈 … 〉 lie pranſer , ſpeaks •• ire , ſtreak •• and ſcratches him , while he be mounted into the ſaddle , and then he ſtrikes , and ſpurs , and gallops , till he have broken him to his will : They be speak you as having a great power in the worſhip of God , over the conſciences , of men , but I beſeech you receive no honour from theſe men who thus cry up your power and authority that they may be honoured by you , and derive power and authority , from you again to be unrighteous Judges both • ver your ſelves and other men , as their Reverend Father's thee Biſhops were , they seek their own things and not the thing of Ieſus Chriſt , but it concern • their intereſt , by this craft they have their livings : and they know that if permiſſion be once given to the Saints freely to make known the 〈 … 〉 of the Spirit , which • ath wrought ſo mightily in them , their 〈 … 〉 of natural reaſon , though decked and and • rned with ſyſtems 〈 … 〉 Philoſophy , and School divinity , will not be able to 〈 … 〉 in completion with it , greater is he that is in the Saints , then 〈 … 〉 that is in the world , the teachings of the ſpirit , ſhall be more 〈 … 〉 full and effectual to take h • ld of the hearts of men , then all 〈 … 〉 works and writings of their ▪ Poſtillers and Commentators can •• theſe cannot speak ſo to the conſciences of poor Chriſtians as the Spirit 〈 … 〉 And the feet of ſuch as can bring glad tidings of 〈 … 〉 to ſuch poor souls are exceeding beautiful , and will be , 〈 … 〉 the oppoſition of theſe men . Moſt honoured worthies , pray obſerve with me , how Babylon the Mother of Harlots , Fornications , and Abominations of the 〈 … 〉 ( which are chiefly spiritual and do concern our worſhip ) 〈 … 〉 this name written in her before head MYSTERY , her workings are and have been ſtill MYSTERIOUS , hardly to •• found out and traced , But I have endeavoured as a blood ▪ hound to purſue her , for by thoſe Characters of bloodiness you ſhall be 〈 … 〉 to know her , the beaſt whereon she ſits is bloody coloured , her garments are died in blood , Revel . 17. 5. 3. 4 6. in her habitation is found the blood of Prophets and of Saints . cap . 18 24. her drink where with ſhe makes her self drunk , is blood of the Saints , and the Kings , and Inhabitants of the Earth , have been 〈 … 〉 drunks with her wine ; England , O England hath for ••• lie pl • id the beaſt with her , if not the beaſt under her on which hath ſitten , and for this cauſe we have had of late , blood given •• to drink , for we were worthy ; let it , o let it be ſo no more let not England again make war with the Lamb , for 〈 … 〉 the Lord of Lords , and King of Kings , Revel . 17 14. Suppoſe grave Senators thoſe men ſo much miſcalled were indeed ſuch as they are repreſented to be , and their Presbyterian adverſaries 〈 … 〉 their Churches without crime or Error ( which is moſt 〈 … 〉 ) and ſo might juſtly caſt them out tO • yet ſince our Saviour Chriſt hath commanded , that the tares and the wheat ſhould grow together till the barveſt , what cruelty is this towards ſuch men , 〈 … 〉 live peaceably among men , unblameable in their converſation , pay you tax and tribute , and in a word , do in all things which the Apoſtle Paul exerciſe themſelves to keep faith and a good conſcience towards God and men , what cruelty I ſay is it , that the Cit • … Magiſtrate ſhould be incenſed againſt them & ſhould by all ways be ſolicited , not to give them a toleration that it , not to ſuffer them when they have ſo faithfully engaged for them : The field in the Parable muſt have ſome interpretation , it muſt have reference to Church or State , Chriſt would have them ſuffered ſome where , but their adverſaries who pretend ſo much for Chriſt , are indeed in this particular as in many other things Antichriſt , i . e . againſt Chriſt , he says let them grow together , theſe men ſay nay , let them be pulled up , lamentable will the condition of many people in this Kingdom , and other places be , if many choice young men and others , who are ordained by Ieſus Chriſt to eternal life and glory , and have received a large portion of the ſpirit of Jeſus Chriſt ( the only teacher of his people ) whereby they may edify and built others up in the moſt holy faith , if the mouths of theſe muſt be ſtopped for want of that empty and fruitless ( as is conceived ) Ceremony of Ordination , which the doctrine ( peradventure ) of the Presbytery of Scotland hath taught , their conſciences to ſtartle at and deny : for in the I book of the Discipline of the Kirk of Scotland commanded to be practiſed in the ſame Kirks . Anno Dom. 1641. under the head of Admiſſion , this they teach . page . 31. Other Ceremony then the public Approbation of the people , and Declaration of the chief Miniſter , that the perſon there preſented is appointed to ſerve the Church . We cannot approve , ſon all be it , the Apoſtles uſed Impoſition of Hands , yet ſeeing the miracle is ceaſed , the uſing of the Ceremony , we judge not neceſſary . If any gift were conveyed who would deny , nay , who would not rejoice to be partaker of it but while men ſee that this is but a vain Imitation of that primitive Apoſtolical Presbytety , who had received from Ieſus Chriſt and could convey to others ſuch gifts of the Spirit for the Miniſtry of the Goſpel as have been loſt while we have been under the power of Antichriſt , and ſuch as none of the Sons of men have received at this day , and therefore cannot beſtow on others , they are exceedingly troubled in their Spirits , & can judge the ceremony at the leaſt but a taking of Gods name in vain : Let my counsel then ( wiſe Counſellors ) be acceptable touching theſe men , that as in all your Declarations while you had any need of them either in their Perſons or Eſtates , 〈 … 〉 have engaged to be tender towards them ; which Tenderness they could conceive to be no less then a continued liberty in 〈 … 〉 several ways of worſhip , which they then enjoyed , and not after the less of many of their lives , and a parting with a good part of their lively . hoods for your preſervation , and impriſoning of their perſons , and a waſting of the remainder , by Attendance , Suits , Fees , Fines , and ſuch other charges as neceſſarily attend ſuch a condition . And all this for the practice of thoſe very things you ſeemed then to allow in them , when you thus time after time declared Tenderness towards them , o do not , do not thus keep promiſe with them , let not this • e the recompense you give them for all the labour of love they have showed unto you , do not for the gratification of a few men , who from Sion College either vent their conſiderations contrary to your Ordinances , when they like them not , or ſend you Votes , Order and Ordinances ( though Sub • illy and mediately by the Aſſembly ) at their pleaſures , which you muſt confirm or be railed at in every Pulpit in the City , and have the 〈 … 〉 againſt you ▪ and see • tO crying 〈 … 〉 you for 〈 … 〉 ſuch things , as I dare ſay not one of a thouſand of them knows or underſtands , having a ſtrong influence alſo by their Emiſſaries upon the adjacent Counties that they may concur with them in their deſtructive ways and actions , if theſe men can 〈 … 〉 you thus already , before they have any power in their hands , conſider I pray what they would do , if power ſhould be given them according to their deſire , we have too lately bought repentance from their predecessors the Biſhops at too dear arate all which I lay before you , and if you pleaſe to peruſe this tract , you ſhall ſee theſe men proved the greateſt Heretics and Schismatics in the Kingdom at this day : And as touching theſe men who are ſo much reproached by them , you ſhall find them to be according to what they underſtand , pure in religion , having not the form , but the power of godliness in their public and private meetings , daily praying the Lord for you , innocent in their lives , inoffenſive in their converſations , peaceable in the places where they live , and obedient to your iuſt power . Our Lord Ieſus Chriſt in all his goings out with them in that • see few laſt years , not only opening their purſes , buts their very bowels and hearts , making them ready and willing to ſpend & to be ſpent for you , hath given both to your ſelves & all the world in all ages to come , a ſufficient demonſtration of their harmleſſeneſſe , integrity & faithfulness unto you , and if you will not believe theſe ſpeaking out on their behalf , neither would ye , if and Angel from heaven ſhould come and witneſs for them . Now the God of wisdom give you to diſ • yearn betwixt truth , and error betwixt good and evil , friends and enemies , Saints and Heretics : and to harken to the wiſe counsel of Gameliel , a great Statiſt concerning the Sectaries of thoſe times : Acts 5. 35. 38. 39. with which I ſhall conclude , take heed to your ſelves what you intend to do at touching theſe men , refrain from theſe men , and let them alone ; for if this counsel or work be of men it will come to nought , but if it be of God ; ye cannot overthrow it , leaſt happily ye be even found fighters againſt God . I verily thought I ought to do many things againſt the name ofActs 26. 9. 10. 11. Ieſus . And many of the Saints did I ſhut up in priſon , I punished them oft , and compelled them to blaſpheme , and I perſecuted them even to ſtrange Cities .