TO THE CHRISTIAN READER . WHen I read the Description of the Tumult in Ephesus , Acts 9. 32. ( wherein they would have their Diana to be Jure Divino , that it fell down from Iupiter ) it appears to me the too Methodical character of our present confusions . Some therefore cried one thing , and some another , for the assembly was confused and the more part knew not wherefore they were come together . O the distractions of our age ? And how many thousand know as li • tle why the sword was drawn , as when it will be sheathed . Indeed , ( thanks be to God ) we have no more house burnings but many heart burnings , and though outward bleeding be staunched , it is to be feared that the broken vain bleeds inwardswhich is more dangerous . This being our sad condition , I perceive controversial writing ( sounding somewhat of Drums & Trumpets , ) do but make the wound the wider , Meditations are like the Ministrel the Prophet called for , to pacify 〈 ◊ 〉 2 Kings . 3 15. his minda • liscomposed with passion , which moved me to adventure on this Treatise , as the most innocent and inoffensive manner of writing . I confess a Volumn of another Subject , and larger Size , is expected from me . But in London I have learned the difference , betwixt downright breaking , and craving time of their Creditors . Many sufficient Merchant's though not Solvable from the present make use of the latter , whose example I follow . And though I cannot pay the Principal , yet I desire such small Treatises may be accepted , from me as Interest or consideration money , until I shall God willing be enabled to discharge the whole Debt . 〈 ◊ 〉 : 3 If any wonder that this Treatise comes Patron-less into the World , let such know that Dedications begin now adays to grow out of fashion . His Policy was commended by many , ( and proved profitable unto himself ) who instead of Select Godfathers , made all the Congregation Witnesses to his Child , as I invite the World to this my Book , requesting each one would patronise therein such parts and passages thereof , as please them , so hoping that by several persons the whole will be protected . I have Christian Reader , ( so far I dare go , not inquiring into the Syre-name of thy Side or Sect ) nothing more to • urthen thy Patience with . Only I will add , that I find our Saviour in Turtullian and ancient Latin Father's , constantly styled a Seque • er . Sequestrator in the proper notion of the Word . For God and man being at ods , the difference was Sequestied or referred into Christs his hand to end and umpire it . How it fareth with thine estate on earth I know not , but I earnestly desire , that in heaven both thou and I may ever be under Sequestration in that Mediator for Gods glory and our good , to whose protection thou art committed By Thy Brother in all Christian Offices . THO . FULLER .