TO THE MOST NOBLE LORDS , WITH THE HONOURABLE KNIGHTS , CITIZENS and BURGESSES Now Assembled in PARLIAMENT . THe bright burning Taper of Geneva , Cal. praef . ad Reg. Gal. Est hic divini verb • quasi quidam genius , ut nun quam emerga quieto & dorm • ente Satana . as warm in his Devotions , as clear and lightsome in his Disputes , truly observeth , that the pure doctrine of the Gospel never appears as it were above the water , but Satans watchful eye is upon it , and he casts and envious gloat at it , and hath his Tobiases and Sanballats either to jeer or fright the sincere Professors out of the powerful preaching thereof . In which regard it is , that as the Jewes in their edifying the material Temple , so you in the repairing of the Spiritual , Neh. 4. 17. With • h one of his hands he wrought in the work , with the other he held a weapon , have a weapon in the one hand , and a tool in the other ; and you have hitherto more employed the Sword then the Mattock or Spade , by reason of the great opposition on all hands : and after you shall ( through Gods blessing ) have laid the roof on this sacred building , and grateful posterity put a garland of glory upon your heads for it , yet still there will be use of and arming sword , not of War , but of Justice , to cut off Superstition and Idolatry on the one side , and Profaneness and Sacrilege on the other : Heretics with one edge , and Schismatics with the other . For as in the beginning of the Reformation , so now in the endeavoured perfection thereof , the mortal enemy of our immortal souls sets on work all sorts of Heretics and Schismatics to hinder , disturb , and ( if it were possible ) destroy this excellent work . The Heretics he employeth to pervert the Catholic doctrine , the Schismatics to subvert the Apostolic discipline of the Church : the Heretics endeavour to shake the foundations , the Schismatics to make breaches in the walls : the Heretics to rot the main timber , the Schismatics to pull in sunder the rafters of this sacred structure . Now of all Heretics and Schismatics the Anabaptist in three regards ought to be most carefully looked unto , and severely punished , if not utterly exterminated and banished out of the Church and Kingdom . First , In regard of their affinity with many other damnable Heretics , both Ancient and Later ; for they are allied unto , and may claim kindred with , 1. The Millenarians in the first Age , proclaiming Christs Temporal Kingdom upon earth for a thousand years , before the day of Judgement . 2. With the Marcionites in the second Age , who denied the substance of Christs humane body made of a woman . Gal. 4. 4. 3. The Catharists or Novatians in the third Age , who denied Repentance and restitution to the Church thereupon , to those that fell in time of persecution . 4. With the Donatists in the fourth Age , who rebaptized all those that had received Baptism before in the Catholic Church . Lastly , with a rabble of Heretics in the latter Ages , namely , the Apostolici , the Adamites , the Enthusiasts , the Psycopannychists , the Polygamists , the Iesuits , the Arminians , and the Brownists ; of all which and their Errors , I have set down a particular Catalogue , Chap. 2. As it was said of Caius Caesar , In uno Caesare multi Marii ; and as Cicero says of the Family of the Bruti , that it had in it multorum insitam at que illuminatam virtutem : so in one Anabaptist you have many Heretics , and in this one Sect as it were one stock , many erroneous and schismatical positions , and practices ingraffed , and as it were inoculated . Secondly , in regard of their audacious attempts upon Church and State , and their insolent acts committed in the face of the Sun , and in the eye of the high Court of Parliament . Whereas other depravers of the Doctrine , or disturbers of the Peace of the Church , whither Papists , Socinians , or Arminians , who in the later times have braved it and set up their top and topgallant , yet since Argus with his hundred eyes hath pried into every corner of this Kingdom , and several rooms in the great Ship of the Church , have bestowed themselves under the hatches , and lain close in obscurity : these with the forwardest of the Brownists strut in the upper deck , and discover themselves with open face , 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , and upbraid the State with their merit in hazarding their estate and persons in this present War , and boast with swelling words of vanity that they expect somewhat more then a toleration . See The compassionate Samaritane , p. 75 , 76. that the Parl. will stop all proceedings against them , and for the future provide that as well particular and private congregations as public , may have public protection ; that all Statures against the Separatists be reviewed , and repealed ; that the Press may be free for any man that writes nothing scandalous or dangerous to the State ; that this Parliament prove themselves loving Father's to all sorts of good men , bearing respect unto all , and so inviting and equal assistance and affection from all . They preach , and print , and practise their Heretical impieties openly ; they hold their Conventicles weekly in our chief Cities , and Suburbs thereof , and there prophesy by turns ; and ( that I may use the phrase of Tertullian ) aedificantur in ruinam , they built one another in the faith of their Sect , to the ruin of their souls ; they flock in great multitudes to their Iordans , and both Sexes enter into the River , and are dipped after their manner with a kind of spell containing the heads of their erroneous tenets , and their engaging themselves in their schismatical Covenants , and ( if I may so speak ) combination of separation . And as they defile our Rivers with their impure washings , and our Pulpits with their false prophecies and phanaticall enthusiasms , so the Presses sweat and groan under the load of their blasphemies . For they print not only Anabaptism , from whence they take their name ; but many other most damnable doctrines , tending to carnal liberty , Familism , and a medley and hodg-podge of all Religions . Witness the Book printed 1644. Pref. p. 〈 ◊ 〉 called The Bloody Tenet , which the Author affirmeth he wrote in Milk ; and if he did so , he hath put much Rats bane into it , as namely , That it is the will and command of God , that since the coming of his Son the Lord Iesus , a permission of the most Paganish , Jewish , Turkish , or Antichristian Consciences and Worships be granted to all men in all Nations and Countries ; That Civil States with their Officers of Justice are not Governors or Defenders of the Spiritual and Christian state and worship ; That the doctrine of Persecution in case of Conscience ( maintained by Master Calvin , Beza , Cotton , and the Ministers of the New English Churches ) is guilty of all the blood of the souls crying for vengeance under the Altar : Witness a Tractate of Divorce , in which the bonds of marriage are let lose to inordinate lust , and putting away wives for many other causes beside that which our Saviour only approveth , namely , in case of Adultery . Witness a Pamphlet newly come forth , entitled , men Mortality , in which the soul is cast into and Endymion sleep , from the hour of death to the day of Judgement . Witness a bold Libel offered to hundreds , and to some at the door of the house of Commons , called The Vindication of the Royal Commission of King Iesus , wherein the brazen faced Author blusheth not to brand all the Reformed Churches , and the whole Christian world at this day , which christen their children , & sign them with the seal of the Covenant , with the odious name of and Antichristian faction . Thirdly , In regard of the peculiar malignity this heresy hath to Magistracy ; other heresies are stricken by Authority , this strikes at Authority it self , undermineth the powers that are ordained of God , and endeavoureth to wrest the sword out of the Magistrates hand , to whom God hath given it for the cutting off of all heresy , and impiety ; and if this Sect prevail , we shall have no Monarchy in the State , nor Hierarchy in the Church , but and Anarchy in both . It grieveth a Religious eye to see other vermin corrupting other Flowers of Paradise , as our sweet Violets , and fragrant Roses , and fairest Lilies , and various Iulyflowers , and blushing Emmenies , and beautiful Tulips : but most of all to see this heresy , like a venomous serpent , lying at the root of the Crown-imperial , which if it be not killed , will so poison it , that the leaves will fallen off by degrees , and the stalk it self shortly wither . We read in the Prophecy of Zacharie of two staves , the staff of beauty , and the staff of bonds , which supported the State and Church of Israel . By the staff of beauty or comeliness , the Laws of every Kingdom and Commonwealth may be understood , which bear up the State , and preserve decent order and comeliness among men ; By the staff of bonds the covenants and oaths whereby the members are firmly tied to their head , and one to another . If the staff of beauty be broken , there will be a downfall of all good order and government : if the staff of bonds be broken , all things will be at a lose end . Me thinks I see these two staves shining in the golden Maces born before you ; the staff of beauty in that born before the House of Commons , in which the Legislative power and the beautiful order of the several Estates of this Kingdom are conspicuous ; the staff of bonds in that which is carried before the House of Peers , in which the power of Judicature , even to bonds and death , principally resideth . Now because these heretics alone professedly teach the exautorating all Christian Magistrates , • Bloody • net , p. 2. and in express terms deny both the Legislative power in the Commons to propound or enact Laws in matter of Religion , and all coercive power in the house of Peers , or any other , to inflict civil punishment for the violation of them , and so as much as in them lies , they endeavour to break both these staves of the Prophet , they deserve the smartest stroke from both . • dec . 1. l. 10. • irius cum • ates Sam •• n galeas •• os que insig •• armorum tratus vi • tO , multa de • enti hosti • vana magis •• e quam ef • i ad even • disseruit : • nim cri • vulnera fa - • & per pi • & aurata • transire anum pi • & cando • tanicarum •• tem que a • ubi res geratur , • tari . With these Heretics I enter into Lists in the ensuing Tractate , and without any flourish of Rhetoric at all fallen upon them with Logical and Theological weapons , wielded after a Scholastical manner ; for it is most true which Papirius Cursor sometime spoke in the head of his Troops , advancing on in their march against the Army of the Samnites , more glorious in show then formidable , as consisting of men more sumptuously then strongly armed , encouraging his soldiers after this manner : Fear not this Pageant rather then Army ; their large feathers and embroidered scarves give no wounds ; their rich belts , and painted targets , and thin gilded breastplates will not endure the push of the Roman pike . It is not beauty , and gorgeous apparel , but strength , and valour , and Armour of proof makes a Warrior . And therefore that brave Commander of the Trojans , Hector , deservedly checked his brother Paris , a Paragon of beauty , and and excellent Carpet Knight , in the flower of his age , • er . Il. for undertaking a single combat with Menclaus , saying , 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , Picked phrases and witty conceits and ornaments of Rhetoric do well in Panegyrics , & Paraeneticks , but they are of little or no use in Polemics , in which thus Ennius informs us , Vi geritur res : Spernitur orator bonus , horridu ' miles amatur . But why do I trouble my self with these new upstart Sectaries ? There is a learned and reverend Assembly of Divines attending on you , who will take care nequid Ecclesia detrimenti capiat . Who pressed me for this service ? My Answer hereunto is as ready as true , That though I were not pressed , yet I was challenged to it . And if I had declined this Combat , as others did , the Adversary would have grown most insolent , Theod. hist . l. Gast . de Ana • l. 1. Quoties • we publice , s •• privatim congrederemur cu • Anabaptistis , semper vict • abibat verit • quae a nobis stat . and all the City and Borough rung of their vaunting brags , and confidence in their cause , and our diffidence in ours ; therefore I gave them a meeting at the time and place appointed . And though I were but one , and they many , yet they were not able to withstand 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , the irresistible and all-conquering force of truth : neither did they after that send any more challenges . And I had then pursued the combat with my pen , had not the more necessary functions of my Pastoral chargeSee Romarue •• hindered me . But now being discharged against my will , Solin . pol . his • c . 9. Fons est i • Sardin . qui con • tra venenum S • lifugae ( est eni • animantis ej • morsus mortifer ) a summo omnium opific in remedium conditus est ; u • oritur malum ibi quo que invenitur prompt •• remedium . of preaching at my Cures , and having lately published and Answer to a Popish Challenge : I could not think of any fitter employment for the present , then to perfect the notes taken long since in that Disputation , and to supply whatsoever might seem lacking to the fuller confutation of those erroneous tenets , & to commend both to the public view , that the Antidote might be there ready , where the infection first brake out . As Solinus writeth , that in Sardinia where there is a venomous Serpent called Solifuga , ( whose biting is present death ) there is also at hand a Fountain , in which they who wash themselves after they are bit , are presently cured . This venomous Serpent ( verè Solifuga ) flying from , and shunning the light of Gods Word , is the Anabaptist , who in these later times first showed his shining head , and speckled skin , and thrust out his sting near the place of my residence , for more then twenty years : And if these Disputations and Writings of mine may prove like the Waters of the Fountain in Sardinia , • etron . Arbit . • nde datum est • ulnus , contigit • de salus . sovereign against the sting and teeth of this Serpent , I shall account my pains well spent ; and while I endeavour to free others from spiritual thraldom , forget the tediousness of my corporal , and possess my soul in patience , till God shall send deliverance ; to whose gracious direction , and powerful protection , I commend you , beseeching God to crown your sincere intentions , and religious endeavours , for the Reformation of Church and State , with such success , that this your meeting may be like to that in the 25. year of Edw. 3. which is known to posterity by the name of Benedictum Parliamentum , the blessed Parliament . Yours in the Lord Iesus , DAN : FEATLEY . From Prison in the Lo : Peters house in Aldersgate-street , Ian. 10. 1644.