TO MY REVEREND , and much esteemed Friend , Mr. JOHN DOWNAM . Worthy Sir , I Have now finished my Polemical Tractate against the Anabaptists ; which had slept securely by me in a whole skin of Parchment , had not the clamours of the Adversaries awaked it , who cry down Paedobaptism , and cry up Anabaptism , not only in the Pulpit , but also from the See A. Bar • his Treatise Dipping : F • Cornwell his Pamphlet , entitled , The Commission of King Iesus : A. Ritter his Libel , call • The Vanity of Childish Baptism : Changed : Blockwood , The storming of Antichrist , and the Confess of the Anabap • ists , printed at London , 1644. Press , to the great offence of godly minds , and the scandal of the Church . You will peradventure return me and Answer in the words of the Poet , Ole quid ad te ? What does this concern me , whose Restraint is a necessary Supersedeas from proceeding agam • nst these presumptuous and daring Sectaries ? And the unfurnishing me of all Books , and helps of mine own Notes and Collections lately taken from me ) furnisheth me with too just and excuse for not writing . I confess to my grief it does , but what will you have me do , Situ & otio torpescere ? Such a rest would be most restless and tedious ; The less I do , the more I must needs suffer ; and the more I do , the less I suffer . And believe me , Sir , it is not and ambition to be seen in the Press , but a desire for the time to forget my unsufferable pressures , which hath now set me on work . As when we have the world at will , and can give our Mind her vagaries at pleasure , to fix or thoughts on any certain subject , is a kind of incarceration of the spirit ; so when our Estate is sequestered , and our person confined , and no theme is given us daily to enlarge upon , but the valuing of our unvaluable losses , and the present supplying of our importunate wants , to divert our minds from commenting upon our deplorate estate , and forcibly confining our meditations to a more pleasant subject , is a great ease and kind of liberty to immured thoughts . But this is not all , for as S. Jerome thought wheresoever he was , whatsoever he did , he herd the found of the last Trumpet , and the summons of the Archangel , Surgite mortui , & venite ad judicium : So me thinks wheresoever I am , and whatsoever my business is , I hear that Vae of the Apostle , Woe be unto me if I preach not the Gospel : And preach the Gospel I can now not otherwise then from the Press , for both my Pulpits are taken from me , and possessed by others , and I cannot obtain ( though by my self and friends I earnestly sough • it ) that liberty which S. Paul enjoyed when he was imprisoned at Room , to preach the Gospel to my fellow prisoners . Now therefore sith I cannot lingua , I must be content as I am able evangelizare calamo , to preach with my Pen ; which I can hardly dip into any other liquour , then the juice of Gall , in regard of the malignity of the times , and the insolences of the enemies of the truth . As Adders , Efts , and other venomous serpents breed in old broken walls : so all sorts of Heretics and Schismatics breed and are exceedingly multiplied by reason of the ruptu • es in State , and distraction of the time . Among all these the Papists and the Anabaptists are most dangerous and pestilent enemies , the one to the Church , the other to the State ; These above all others having bestirred themselves , since the waters were troubled ; and they boast in secret of their great draughts of fish , the Papists of 20000. Proselytes , the Anabaptists of 47. Churches . Si natura negate facit , indignatio versum . As well Indignation as Zeal hath stirred up my drooping spirit , See Romar • printed by Bourne at that • old Exchan • and encouraged me , though ( as I said before ) unarmed , to fallen upon both ; the former , in my Answer to a Popish Challenge ; the latter , in this my Catabaptistarum Catacrisis . Jerom comforting a young Hermit , bade him look up to heaven , & Paradisum mente deambulare , assuring him that so long as he had Paradise in his mind , and heaven in his thoughts , tamdiu in eremo no eris so long he was not in the wilderness . So verily it seems to me , so long as I can draw the sword of the spirit , and pursue freely the enemies of the doctrine and discipline of the Church of England , and beatrice them out of their trenches , so long me thinks I am not in bonds . The Lord in mercy look upon the Convul • ions in the State , and Distractions in the Church , and turn our Baptism of blood into a Baptism of tears : in which we may and ought all to be Anabaptists . This is the hearty wish of him , who loves the truth for it self , and you for the truths sake , Dan : Featley .