TO The Right Honourable ROBERT RICH Baron of Leez in Eſſex , and Earl of Warwick , abundance of spiritual bleſings in Jeſus Chriſt . PAul being upon a prophetical wing ( for the Lord had poured upon him , This know alſo ( says he ) there's the infallible certainly of it . not only and Apostolical but a Prophetical ſpirit ) does foretell in the 2 Tim. 3.1 . That in the laſt days perilous times ſhall come , Thoſe who are full of carnal selflove and unthankfulness will , much increaſe the danger of this laſt Age of the World . ( The Lord root up all ſuch weeds out of our hearts . ) God hath I hope given Your Honour ſuch a meaſure of love to the public , and ſo active a ſpirit to do good to others , as will help to leſſen the danger of theſe evil times . And I would be ſo thankful for favours received , that I might not be ranked among this diſhonourable Catalogue which here Paul ſums up of ſuch as make bad times worſe . It is your Honours happiness and advantage ( as it was once ſaid of the Duke of Guiſe in France , that he 〈 ◊ 〉 put obligations upon all ) that you can engage very many , and amongſt the reſt , I muſt ever acknowledge my self one , who in one of the greateſt turnings of my life , by the good hand of God upon me in your free conſent and noble bounty have had ſo much comfort in the neareſt and deareſt relation , Prov. 30.10 11 , 12 , etc. that I never envied any other , but find matter of everlaſting praiſes to God for his goodness to my self therein . And being under ſo great obligations , when I can produce nothing of my own worthy your acceptance ; I take leave to act the part of a Midwife to this happy Birth which may call your Honour Father , as will appear by the following Letter , that it was ultimately intended for your ſpirit • all advantage ; And it were 〈 ◊ 〉 a kind of sacrilege to keep • that holy iſſue from you that is ſo much your own . It joys the souls of me and many more of your praying ſervants that they have ſo much occaſion to praise their God on your behalf , for ſo many able and faithful Miniſters of the Gospel of the firſt , ſecond and third magnitude , that your prudent , fatherly care hath fixed , where you , as Patron , have been truſted . 2 Kings 13 14. O the many Chariots and horsemen of Iſrael , that your noble Father and you have brought triumphantly into Eſſex ( herein you did happily Patrizare ) the Lord continue the like care to built and repair his houſe in theſe who ſurvive you from Generation to Generation , that ſo your houſe may ſtill be honorably ſupported . Ecclesiastical ſtory speaks of one Henricus Auceps , Vid. Simpſon . Eccl. Hiſtor . l. 3. cent . 10. when he did fight againſt the Hungarians , made this vow to God , That if the Lord would give him victory againſt his enemies , he would purge his Country from Simony , which at this time mightily abounded therein . we want men of ſuch and heroical zealous diſpoſition in England . O that all Patrons were more mindful of their high truſt ; then they would not ſo often betray the souls of people by putting off a friend etc. with a living to ſome unworthy Chaplain . Doubtless there is many a damned creature roaring in Hell , curſing covetous Patrons as well as unfaithful Pastor's ; 1 Pet. 4.5 . For whoſe Blood ( in part at leaſt ) they muſt be accountable to the Father of ſpirits and Judge of the quick and the dead . A moſt heavy reckoning , Note . when the ſins of ſo many Congregations , to which Patrons are acceſſary by ſending ignorant and ſcandalous Miniſters amongſt them are made theirs ; whereas the leaſt of their own ſins unrepented of will suck them eternally . God who is faithful will not forget your labour and coſt of love to the truly Reverend man of God Maſter Hooker ( who is now ſinging Hallelujahs in Heavenly Manſions ) when he was perſecuted by the There are many of great reading , who will undertake to make it appear that as Heathiniſh feaſts Bacchanalia et Saturnalia & were turned into Chriſtmas & ſuch other Feaſts hoping thereby to to win heathens to Chriſt ; ſo were Archi flamines & Flamines changed • nged it to Archpraelates , & praelates oh • of a good intention . Archi flamen of Canterbury . He will pay abundantly for the protecting and nurſing his Children , Heb. 6.10 . I know not how better to express my deep sense of your moſt real favour ( the comfort whereof I daily enjoy ) then by taking the humble boldness , to beſeech your Honour to add one thing more , which indeed is , the • num neceſſarium , whereby you will gain that better part which ſhall not be taken from you ; Luk , 10.42 Namely ; Rev. 1.20 . & 2.1 . that you would ſtudy and pray that you may walk in the light , and heat of that glorious Gospel constellation ( for Miniſters are Stars and the So acknowledged by by the Tranſlators in the contents ▪ of the ſecond Cha. of the Revelation . They it seems did not think theſe Angels to be Praelates . Angels of the Churches ) which you have endeavoured to fix in your Orb . Your Honour hath been often at Sea , and there beholding the wonders of God in the deep , have been taught to wrestle with him for mercy . It is and old ſaying , he that would learn to pray let him go to Sea. Beſiege Heaven with your unwearied importunities , Qui neſcit or are diſcat navigare . Jonab . 1.5 . that the Ark of the Gospel , which you have provided for thouſands , may be your own everlasting Sanctuary . And that you feaſting upon their danties , may be fat and flouriſhing in your laſt days ▪ ſtanding steadfast in theſe ſhaking times , and immoveable , keeping Faith , Phil. 29.14 and a good conſcience , ( which too many having put away concerning Faith , 1 Tim. 1.19 . have made Shipwreck ) more and more abounding in the Work of the Lord , 1 Cor. 15. Laſt . foraſmuch as you know your labour is not in vain in the Lord , This through the grace of Chriſt ſhall be the earneſt Prayer , of him who is My LORD , Your Honours moſt obliged ſervant . THOMAS HILL .