The Epiſtle DEDICATORY TO NEWCASTLE upon Tyne . NEWCASTLE , though not the place of my birth , or much of my breeding ( for I have herein been more beholden to other parts of the world ) yet none may challenge from me more intereſt in this Dedication . Newcaſtle , famous for thy mocking and miſuſing of Chriſts Meſſengers , and ill entertainment of his Servants , ever ſince our Reformation , witness that famous Knox , great Reformer of Scotland , his Sermons preached there : witness learned Ʋdall , thy faithful Monitor , whoſe innocent blood cries yet from the ground , whom for writing againſt the Prelates , thou proſecuted as a Traitor to bonds , impriſonment , and ſentence of death , under which he died before execution ; witness Reverend Balmford , whom in like manner thou expulſed , though thou couldſt not touch his life , thou pricked his ſides ( as well as Chriſts ) in his hearers , with the reproach of Balmfordian Faction and Schism ; witness Alder , Jenniſon , Murton , all godly Miniſters , expulſed by thee : witness others of Chriſts ſervants , ill entertained of thee , yet alive to witness all that is alleged againſt thee , and much more ; and laſt of all , he that ſends theſe things unto thee , his wife and children , who have received their birth and breathing in thee , make up that long and black roll of bitter things writ againſt thee from heaven . O Newcaſtle ! how hath God dealt with thee , by his divine waterings of his Word many years ? how has God ſpoke aloud to thee by his judgements and forewarnings of ruin and deſolation after thou hadſt refuſed all inſtructions from his Word and Meſſengers ? haſt thou forgotten how loud God spoke to thee in that great plague , Anno , 1636. when there died in half a year about ſeven thouſand , which made thee almoſt deſolate , thy ſtreets grown green with grass , thy treasury waſted , thy trading departed , as thou never yet recovered it ; thy wounds increaſed thy madness ; thou wenteſt not to heaven for a perfect cure : What thinkest thou was the meaning of that ſtrange fire brake out Nota , This fire brake out in the evening of that day after their conſultations were ended wherein many ancient Records were burned up and conſumed . ( none ever knew how ) in thy ſecret chamber of thy Towns houſe , or Common hall , where the next year after that great plague , thy Rulers , like Wolves of the evening , were lurking all that day in plotting the new project about Coals & Salt , to devour thy poor inhabitants , and alſo new devices to suppress found preaching , and ſtrave your souls . How is it , after many more warnings , too large to recite , that thou art ſtill hardened , and the cry of thy sins like Sodome is come up to heaven : in thee is found the blood of the Prophets , the blood of the Saints oppreſſed & baniſhed , and hunted to death : in thee is found the blood of thy inhabitants oppreſſed and impoveriſhed , by unlimited authority , and arbytrarie government , ſo courtlike , as and Apple is like and Orange . In thee is found the uncleanness of Sodome , Adulteries , and Fornications in thy Rulers houſes : thy filthiness in thy skirts , tranſparent to ſtrangers round about thee ; in thee found drunkenness and excess , with melody , to ſee the Church laid deſolate : in thee is found the two grand ſins , that will sink a whole ſtate , a whole kingdom without repentance and reformation : ſuperſtition in worſhip , and oppreſſion in government , which has brought upon this Land that bloody ſword , which now threatens to devour thee ( I mean , thy wicked Magistracy and Rulers , who have wreſted all thy power into their own hands , and all that wicked crew of their confederacy ) Oh Newcaſtle ! when wilt thou learn the dialect of heaven , ſpeaking loud in thine ears ? O Newcaſtle , Newcaſtle ! wilt thou not be made clean , when ſhall it once be ? Jer. 13. 27. If thou wilt not harken to heavens counsel , hear thy ſentence , Thou art defiled with blood , and cannot be cleanſed , but by the blood of them that ſhed it , Numb . 35. 33. O Newcaſtle ! what ſhall I ſay to thee ? what hath enraged thee againſt him that writes this complaint againſt thee ? whom have I wronged of you ? bring forth your evidences , and plead your cauſe ; I hope ere long , we ſhall have a fair and free hearing and juſt proceedings , not at the bar of your Court Law of hanging , Excom . impriſonment and baniſhment ; but at a bar of right judgement . I have ever ſought thy good in spirituals and temperalls , even to my own hurt and loss ; I have seen sometime thy plagues a far off , and wept inſecret for thee , ( as the place of my habitation , though my Meſeck and Kedar , the place of my ſorrow , and never of my joy , how oft have I aſſayed to have left thee in thy rebellion againſt God , but heavens counſels did not favour mine ) when the great plague began , Anno 1636. Conſider what might be Gods mind , to make me one day weep bitterly over thee , riding alone about a mile from the town , with many ſad thoughts , and when I looked up , and ſee Newcaſtle before me , my heart burſt out with grief , with the ſame words bo •• ing within me , wherewith the Lord Jeſus wept over Jerualem : Oh Newcaſtle , Newcaſtle , would God thou in thy days had remembered the things belonging to thy peace , often revolving theſe thoughts with me : but when I came to the next words , with many reaſonings within me , ſhall they be hid from thine eyes , ſhall thy habitations be laid deſolate . My heart was like to burſt within me , for a good ſpace , aſſuring my self to hear ill news , ( for I had been in the Country ) and coming to town , I herd preſently of the increaſe of the plague , and that the night before ſome ſix and thirty died of it ; and from thence it daily increaſed to foure hundred a week , till it had ſwept away about ſeven thouſand at leaſt , in ſeven or eight months time . O Newcaſtle , before thou hadſt recovered this blow , which I mourned to ſee coming upon thee , what ailed thee to begin to plot the ruin of me and my wife and children . I had ſeen many habitations laid deſolate , though I returned ſafely to my own , with all my family , praiſe to my God , often ſtrangely preſerved from that deadly infection ; was it that thou grudged me thy corrupt air to breath in , that thou ſought my life , and purſued my wife and me both as traitors , till thou drove us out of the kingdom . God made me require thy malice with the like pity as before , that morning I eſcaped thy malicious design againſt me , as I paſſed the gates in the dark of the morning , and being a little paſſed from the walls , the town being ſtill in my sighed , God made me weep over thee , the ſecond time , in the ſame manner as before , and with ruminating and reaſonings within me upon the ſame words of Chriſt over Jeruſalem , and how soon after was the bloody ſword drawn , which has waſted thee not a little , and well if the worſt be not yet behind . What haſt thou god now by all thy diſcourteous and harſh dealings with me , who has ever ſought thy good ? I have ſerved thee diverse years in a public office , wherein , though I could do thee little good , ( the stream run ſo ſtrong againſt me ) yet I have sometime kept out ſome evils from overspreading thee , until thou began to ſtretch out thy neck againſt God , in the Scottiſh Cauſe , and then , ever ſince , how 〈 ◊ 〉 and inundation of all evils overwhelmed thee , and God , I fear , left thee to ſome fatal fallen . Repent , repent , Oh Newcaſtle , leſt the Lord depart from thee , and ſend a revenging ſword to avenge his quarrel againſt thee ; if ſo , take heed of what was threatened to a wicked City : Affliction ſhall not come the ſecond time , which the Lord avert , and give thee a heart to repent and turn to him , that has long ſmitten thee , that he may repent him of the evil which otherwiſe will befall thee ; For all the ſtrength and power of man wherein thou ſtill doſt boaſt and glory , I have thought it my duty , to preſent thee with a brief view of thy harſh uſage of me and mine , to ſee if at any time God may give thee and heart to repent , which ſhould be to me greater joy then to ſee thee laid deſolate , when theſe papers I now ſend thee , ſhall be as a flying roll through thy ſtreets and doleful habitations , filling your fainting hearts with errors and shriekings to think of all your wickedneſſes ; and amongſt the reſt , your bloody plots and practiſes againſt one that has ever ſought your good , John Fenwick .