TO THE HONOURABLE , Colonel John Downes ESQUIRE , One of the Members of the Honourable House of Commons in Parliament , Justice of Peace , and one of the Deputy Lieutenants of the County of Sussex , and Auditor to the Prince his Highness of the Duchy of Cornwall . E. F. wishes the true knowledge of God in JESUS CHRIST . Most Honoured , SIR : ALthough I do observe that new Editions , accompanied with new additions , are sometimes published with new dedications , yet so long as he who formerly owned the subject , does yet 〈 ◊ 〉 , and hath the same affectiou • towards it , I conceive there is no need of a new Patron , but of a new Epistle . Be pleased then , most honoured Sir , to give me leave to tell you , that your eminency of place did somewhat induce me , both now and before , to make choice of you for its Patron , but your endowments with grace did invite me to it , God having bestowed upon you special spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ : for it hath been declared unto me by them that knew you , when you were but a youth , how Christ met with you then , and by sending his spirit into your heart , first convinced you of since , as was manifest by those conflicts which your soul then had , both with Satan and it self , while you did not believe in Christ . Secondly , of righteousness , as was manifest by the peace and comfort which you afterwards had , by believing that Christ was gone to the Father and appeared in his presence as your Advocate and surety that had undertaken for you . Thirdly , of judgement , as hath been manifest ever since , in that you have been careful with the true godly man , Psal. 112.5 . to guide your affairs with judgement , in walking according to the mind of Christ . I have not forgotten what desires you have expressed to know the true difference betwixt the Covenant of Works , and the Covenant of Grace , and experimentally to be acquainted with the Doctrine of free grace , the mysteries of Christ , and the life of faith . Witness not only your highly approving of some heads of a Sermon which I once herd a godly Minister preach , and repeated in your hearing , of the life of Faith , but also your earnest request to me to write them out fair , and send them to you into the Country : Yea , witness , your highly approving of this Dialogue , when I first acquainted you with the Contents thereof , encouraging me to expedite it to the Press , and you • kind acceptance , together with your cordial thanks for my love manifested in dedicating it to your honoured name . Sith then , worthy Sir , it hath pleased the Lord to enable me , both to amend it , and to enlarge it , I hope your affections will also be enlarged towards the matter therein contained , considering that it tends to the clearing of those forenamed truths , and through the blessing of God may be a means to root them more deeply in your heart . And truly , Sir , I am confident , the more they grow & flourish in any men heart , the more will all heart corruptions wither and decay . Oh! Sir , If the truth contained in this Dialogue , were but as much in my heart , as they are in my head ; I were a happy man , for then should I be more free from pride , vain glory , wrath , anger , selflove , and love of the world then I am , and then should I have more humility , meekness , and love both to God and man then I have , o ! then should I be content with Christ alone , and live above all the things in the world , then should I experimentally know , both how to abound and how to want , and then shall I be fit for any condition , nothing could come amiss unto me , o ! that the Lord would be pleased to write it in our hearts by his blessed Spirit . And so most humbly beseeching you still to pardon my boldness , and to vouchsafe to take it into your patronage and protection , I humbly take my leave of you , and remain Your obliged Servant to be commanded , E. F.