To His Excellency Sr. THOMAS FAIRFAX Knight , Lord FAIRFAX OF CAMERON , CAPTAIN-GENERALL of the Parliaments Army ; And of all their Forces in ENGLAND , and the Dominion of WALES . May it please your EXCELLENCY , THe Divine Providence hath hitherto so ordered my life , that for the greatest part thereof , I have lived ( as it were ) in exile from my native Country : which happened , partly , by reason of my education in the Romish Religion , and that in foreign Universities ; and partly , by my entrance into Monastical order . For twelve years space of which time , I was wholly disposed of in that part of America called New-Spain , and the parts adjacent . My difficult going thither , being not permitted to any , but to those of the Spanish Nation ; my long stay there ; and lastly my returning home , not only to my Country , but to the true knowledge and free-profession of the Gospels purity , gave me reason to conceive , That these great mercies were not appointed me by the heavenly Powers , to the end I should bury my Talon in the earth , or hide my light under a bushel , but that I should impart what I there saw and knew to the use and benefit of my English Countrymen ; And which the rather • … held my self obliged unto , because in a manner nothing hath been written of these Parts for these hundred years last passed , which is almost ever since the first Conquest thereof by the Spaniards , who are contented to loose the honour of that wealth and felicity they have there since purchased by their great endeavours , so they may enjoy the safety of retaining what they have formerly got in peace and security . In doing whereof , I shall offer no Collections , but such as shall arise from mine own observations , which will as much differ from what formerly hath been hereupon written , as the picture of a person grown to men estate , from that which was taken of him when he was but a Child ; or the last hand of the Painter , to the first or rough draught of the picture . I am told by others , that this may prove a most acceptable work ; but I do tell my self , that it will prove both lame and imperfect , and therefore had need to shelter my self under the shadow of some high protection , which I humbly pray your Excellency to afford me ; nothing doubting , but as God hath lately made your Excellency the happy instrument , not only of saving my self , but of many numbers of godly and well affected people in this County of Kent , ( where now I reside by the favour of the Parliament ) from the imminent ruin and destruction plotted against them by their most implacable enemies ; so the same God who • … ath led your Excellency through so many difficulties towards the settlement of the peace of this Kingdom , and reduction of Ireland , will , after the perfecting thereof ( which God of his mercy hasten ) direct your Noble thoughts to employ the Soldiery of this Kingdom upon such just and honourable designs in those parts of America , as their want of actium at home may neither be a burden to themselves nor the Kingdom . To your Excellency therefore I offer a New-World , to be the subject of your future pains , valour , and piety , beseeching your acceptance of this plain but faithful relation of mine , wherein your Excellency , and by you the English Nation shall see what wealth and honour they have lost by one of their narrow hearted Princes , who living in peace and abounding in riches , did notwithstanding reject the offer of being first discoverer of America ▪ and left it unto Ferdinando of Arragon , who at the same time was wholly taken up by the Wars , in gaining of the City and Kingdom of Granada from the Moors ; being so impoverished thereby , that • … e was compelled to borrow with some difficulty a few Crowns of a very mean man , to set forth Columbus upon • … glorious and expedition . And yet , if time were closely followed at the heels , we are not so far behind , but we might yet take him by the foretop . To which purpose , our Plantations of the Barbadoes , St. Christophers , Mems , and the rest of the Caribe-Islands , have not only advanced our journey the better part of the way ; but so inured our people to the Climb of the Indies , as they are the more enabled thereby to undertake any enterprise upon the firm Land with greater facility . Neither is the difficulty of the attempt so great , as some may imagine ; for I dare be bold to affirm it knowingly , That with the same pains and charge which they have been at in planting one of those petty Islands , they might have conquered so many great Cities , and large Territories on the main Continent , as might very well merit the title of a Kingdom . Our Neighbours the Hollanders may be our example in this case ; who while we have been driving a private Trade from Port to Port , of which we are likely now to be deprived , have conquered so much Land in the East and West-Indies , that it may be said of them , as of the Spaniards , That the Sun's never sets upon their Dominions . And to meet with that objection by the way , That the Spaniard being entitled to those Countries , it were both unlawful and against all conscience to dispossess him thereof . I answer , that ( the Popes donation excepted ) I know no title he hath but force , which by the same title , and by a greater force may be repelled . And to bring in the title of First-discovery , to me it seems as little reason , that the sailing of a Spanish Ship upon the coast of India , should entitle the King of Spain to that Country , as the sailing of and Indian or English Ship upon the coast of Spain , should entitle either the Indians or English unto the Dominion thereof . No question but the just right or title to those Countries appertains to the Natives themselves ; who , if they shall willingly and freely invite the English to their protection , what title soever they have in them , no doubt but they may legally transfer it or communicate it to others . And to say , That the inhumane butchery which the Indians did formerly commit in sacrificing of so many reasonable Creatures to their wicked Idols , was a sufficient warrant for the Spaniards to divest them of their Country ; The same argument may by much better reason be enforced against the Spa • … 〈 … 〉 to the Idol of their barbarous cruelty , that many populous Islands and large Territorities upon the main Continent , are thereby at this day utterly uni • … habited , as Bartholomeo de las Casas , the Spanish Bishop of Guaxaca in New-Spain , hath by his Writings in Print sufficiently testified . But to end all disputes of this nature ; since that God hath given the earth to the sons of Men to inhabit ; and that there are many vast Countries in those parts , not yet inhabited either by Spaniard or Indian , why should my Countrymen the English be debarred from making use of that , which God from all beginning no question did ordain for the benefit of mankind ? But I will not molest your Excellency with any further argument hereupon ; rather offering my self , and all my weak endeavours ( such as they are ) to be employed herein for the good of my Country ; I beseech Almighty God to prosper your Excellency , Who am The most devoted and humblest of your Excellencies servants , THOUGH . GAGE .