〈1 page inserted from a different book〉 TO THE WORSHIPFUL AND MUCH HONOURED JOHN PYMME Eſquire , SIR , IT is no part of my design in this Dedication , by the reflection of ſmooth language , to show you yourself in your glory , or to take the work of admiring your worth , out of the hands of all the world , who are now very intent , and busy at it . If honour and approbation will pay debts , the Nation ( I conceive ) is not much behind with you , for all the ſervice you have done it : for ( as far as I underſtand ) you have ſcarce enemies enough , to deliver you out of the hand of that curſe of our Saviour , Woe be to you when all men speak well of you , Luk. 6. 26. I have no authority to queſtion the singleness , and uprightness of your heart , in thoſe notable and noble engagements , that are upon you : yet if you will plead your self to do it , the ſecurity attending thereon , will bear the charges . When credit and conſcience are yoked , and draw the Chariot together , Conſcience ( ofttimes ) proves dull , and heavy in the work , and if not sometime remembered with the goad , and put on , will ſuffer credit to draw all on the one ſide , and ſo lay her fellow on the wheel . It argues and high , and excellent frame of ſpirit where a man can follow with intenseness of mind , things that be of good report , and yet not be overacted with the goodness of the report ; but fetch the ſtrength of that inſpiration , by which he is carried on in his motion , from the goodness of him that hath commanded it . The more God is interested in our intentions , the more he is like to intereſt himself in our executions . If we make him a ſtranger in the propoſition of our ends , he takes no pleaſure to make himself known unto us in our proſecutions , except it be by way of oppoſition , and riſing up againſt us . The royal method in great actions , to break all difficulties , and bar off diſcouragements in ſunder , as with a rod of iron , is to dig out of our ſelves as much of our earth , that is , as much of our ſelves as we can come at , and fill up the pit , or empty place , with God and zeal for his glory . The conſecration of and enterpriſe is sovereign againſt abortion , whereas to work for a men self alone , is little less , being interpreted , than to betray his actium , and to give ſecurity to his enemies , that God ſhall not built with him , nor proſper him in his way : and conſequently , that his labour in building ſhall be in vain . The leaſt offenſive ( I am ſure ) and yet withal , ( with ſerious and inſide men ) as weighty a teſtimony ( as I conceive ) as can be given to your wisdom , is to speak thus in the plain dialect of the ancient ſimplicity unto you , and not to ſpare you , as far as the truth may do you good . Neither do I conceive , wherein any men worth or wisdom can do him better ſervice , than by ſtrengthening others to lay on himself to bear greater weights of this treaſure , than men of and under-ſufficiencie are able to ſtand under . The Diſciples themſelves , were great losers' ( for the time ) by their weakness , in this kind ; they wanted the sweet company , and converſe of many high and important apprehenſions , which ( doubtless ) had been equal too ( if not much better then ) the ſociety of ſo many Angels , becauſe in reſpect of the preſent infirmity of their ſpirits , they were as unable to bear the ſtrength of their influence and working , as the frailty of the fleſh and blood is , to abide the glory and preſence of thoſe Ambassadors of heaven . Their gracious , and great Lord and Maſter himself , plainly profeſſed this unto them : I have many things ( says he ) to ſay unto you , but you cannot bear them now , Joh. 16. 12. And had they not out grown this weakness afterwards , by means of that golden shower from heaven , wherein they were reigned upon with the Holy Ghoſt , and with power , they had been kept faſting from the feaſt of thoſe fat things ( whatſoever they were ) , all the days of their lives . The reaſon why the world ( ſo generally ) drinks old wine ( in our Saviours Metaphor ) which is of a lower and flatter taſte , is , becauſe their veſſels are not new , and ſtrong : and therefore not fit to have new wine ( which is of a ſtronger , and more lively , of a more ſtirring , working , and provoking ſpirit ) put into them for fear of breaking . we have but the light of the Moon inſtead of the light of the Sun , or at moſt , but the light of the Sun , inſtead of the ſevenfold light of ſeven days , promiſed Eſa . 30. 26. ſhining to us , becauſe we are tender eyed , and inconſiderately afraid , leſt and excellency of knowledge ſhould undo us . Not to wrong ( in the leaſt meaſure ) the rights of Heaven in point of thankfulness , due from us , nor to quench the leaſt spark of the joy of our congratulations : for the bleſſing of knowledge poured out unto us ſo abundantly , above the line and meaſure of former ages , certain it is , that truths of higheſt importance , and which ſhould join Heaven and Earth nearer together , and heal a great part of that deplorable diſtance , which yet lies between men and Angels , and ſo advance and quicken the spiritual intercourse , and commerce between the two world's , are little ſtirring in the world . One main reaſon whereof is , becauſe , as the Diſciples of Chriſt , when they ſaw their deareſt Lord & Maſter coming towards them upon the water , were soar afraid , and cried out , ſuppoſing he had been a ſpirit , that had appeared as and executioner of preſent death upon them , who yet was the glory and crown of their ſecurity : ſo many in the world ( no worſe affected neither , to the truth , in general , than they were to Chriſt ) cry out , as men out of meaſure troubled , at the firſt glimmering , and appearing of ſome truths unto them , as if they were the ſpirits of Devils coming upon the world , for the spoil and ruin of the precious souls of men ; whereas , were they capable of their inſpiration , and either did , or were but inwardly willing to know of what ſpirit they were , they could not but acknowledge and confess , that they were of the deareſt , and deepeſt , and ſweeteſt confederacy with Heaven . It was Auſtines complaint long ſince : Nonnulli intelligentes citius volunt exagitare , quod non intelligunt , quam quaerere , ut intelligant , & non fiunt humiles inquiſitores , said ſuperbi calumniatores , Aug. de Temp. Serm. 72. I forbear to make Engliſh of this Latin : becauſe the party chiefly interested , are ( for the moſt part ) men of the language . But Sir , I conſider the weight and importunity of your preſent employments , I know you are ( with your worthy Aſſiſtants ) about a great and laborious cure , ( the Lord proſper it under your hands ) and far be it from me to deſire , that this ſhould ſuffer in the leaſt , through any occaſion of mine . I had not preſumed thus far , but that this little piece had stuck in the birth ſome years together , and was well near ſtifled , found now a way into the world , by the providence of God , and by the benign aſpect , and influence of that happy conſtellation , wherein your self ſhine as a star , in much glory . And the ſubject of it being of that near affinity and ſympathy with the sovereign piece of that great work you have in hand , the reſcue , and advancement of the Gospel , I ſhould ( I conceive ) have turned my back upon that providence which looked me in the face , if I ſhould not have preſented it to ſome of thoſe Worthies , whom God hath anointed with wisdom , grace , and power , as for the bringing of many greater , and weightier things to pass , ſo ( the event bearing witness ) for the helping forth of it alſo into the world . In which great and honourable aſſembly , I knew not one , whom rather to caſt mine eye for this dedication , than on your self , who , as you are known to the whole Nation , by your worth and zeal , for the things both of God and Men , ſo have you been known to my self , heretofore , by ſome more particular acquaintance : the diſcontinuance and decreaſe whereof , I impute only to mine own unworthiness , and negligence in addreſſing my self unto you . I do not in theſe meditations put you upon any thing ( in the main ) but wherein you have prevented my motion , and are already home-engaged : I know you are in for the Gospel , with all your heart , and with all your soul , and if with all theſe , with all whatſoever beside . So that you might ( in that reſpect ) expoſtulate with me the impertinency of this my address unto you , in thoſe , or ſuch like terms , 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . What need you quicken him that makes haſte ? Yet make I no queſtion , but that of your self you know , how fairly to ſalve the seasonableness , and usefulness here of notwithſtanding : In which regard , and apology would prove the impertinency , not the Dedication . I verilly believe , that P ••• never met with Chriſtians ſo abundant in the work of the Lord , but ſtill he exhorted them to a bound ye more . Beside , though I cannot ſay with the confidence of and intuitive knowledge , that you meet with any ſecret fears , diſcouragements , conflicts of doubtful thoughts , and reaſonings with your self in the way of that contention for the truth , which now you sustain : yet can I hardly believe , but that sometime you feel the activeness of the powers of darkness againſt you , and find ſome inſinuations , and grudgings , ( if not ſtronger , and ſharper fits ) of fears touching the success , and iſſue of your great undertakings . In which reſpect , I conceive , it ſhould not be unſeaſonable altogether , to adminiſter unto you , of thoſe excellent comfortations and ſtrengthenings of heaven , which the Holy Ghoſt hath treaſured up in the Scriptures , for ſuch times , and occaſions ( eſpecially ) as theſe . The Lord Ieſus Chriſt himself , being in deep conflict , was refreſhed by the preſence of and Angel from Heaven comforting him , Luk. 23. 43. The conſolations of the ſpirit in the Word of God , administered by a hand conſecrated thereunto , have sometime been little inferior in the glory of their effects , to thoſe of Angelical diſpenſation . I dare not undertake for any sapiential advantage you are like to gain for the Faith , by the perusal of theſe few pages : I know if there be any to be got , you will not overlook it . Yet give me leave to ſay this : that the beſt and wiſeſt men's thoughts , apprehenſions , purpoſes , ends , intentions in their beſt actions , will never lie right , and ſtraight in their bowels , nor with that eaſe and intimate ſatisfaction to their own ſpirits , except they be marshaled , ranged , and compoſed by the hand of the ſpirit of God , ſtretched out from the Scriptures . The God of grace and glory , who in your self , together with that worthy Senate of joint conſultations with you , hath opened a door of hope to a Land and People , brought very low , and hath begun by your mouths to breath upon the dry bones , ſo that there is ſome noise and ſhaking herd already , bring them together , bone to his bone , and fleſh upon them alſo , in due time , and cover them with a skin , and put a ſpirit of life into them , that they may live : and recompense abundantly into their bosom , the labours and travels , and faithfulness of thoſe , whoſe hearts , and hands have been , and ſtill are lifted up to the work , that taſting the preſence , and mighty hand of God with them , they may rejoice as ſtrong men to run the remainder of their raze , and not faint or wax weary ; till the great breach be repaired , till the throne , and kingdom of Ieſus Chriſt be lifted up on high , above the rage , power , and contradictions of thoſe , that seek to lay the glory of it in the duſt ; till judgement run down like water , and righteousness as a mighty stream , to waſh ; and carry away all the filth ; and noisomeness of the Land , till the hearts , and mouths of all thoſe who love the peace , and prosperity of the Nation , be filled with joy , and gladness , and the faces of all that are enemies unto it , with ſhame , and confuſion . And for your self , your personal honour , peace , and ſafety , you have and interest in your self ( which ſleepeth not ) in the prayers of Coleman-street Decemb. the 4. 1640. Your Worſhips home-devoted in the things of Ieſus Chriſt L. G.