TO THE HONOURABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS , Aſſembled in PARLIAMENT . Such is the powerful , and universal influence , which the great and noble Conſtellation of your Houſe bath , under God and the King , over all that are members of this State , that none with modeſty may deny your deſires , or with ſafety ( at leaſt of their diſcretion ) diſobey your Commands ; So irreſiſtible a force muſt the intimation of that Will carry , which proceeds from ſomany wiſe and excellent judgements united together . This may ſufficiently justify my obedience , in preſenting this Sermon to your , and the public view : which not any ſelf-forwardneſſe , or overvaluing hath obtruded . It was enough , in the Authors opinion ( if not too much ) that ſo ſudden and abortive conceptions had once adventured the Hearing of ſo Learned , Pious , and Judicious and Aſſembly . Where obtaining ( through Gods bleſsing ) ſome approbation , ( by doing ſome good , I hope ) they were further , by the vote of your Honourable Houſe , required to be Printed : Which they now are ; and with all Humility preſented to your Acceptance . That at once I may , both caſt in a mite to Gods glory in the public good ( which ſhould be the end of all our actions ) and alſo testify a mind vehemently ſenſible of , and thankful for thoſe free and Noble expreſſions of favour generally from the whole Houſe , and particularly from ſome members of it , my special friends , conferred upon me . What good others may now get from theſe notions , I know not : I pray , and hope , they may not be wholly useless to candid , pious , and unprejudiced minds , ſince your cenſure hath allowed them as fit and neceſſary for our times . This I am ſure , your wisdom and piety are ( above all others ) by the publication of this Sermon , more ſtraightly obliged in conſcience , to justify before God and man , your deſires and opinion of it , by your proceedings anſwerable to the ſubject and intent of it ; which is the love of Truth and Peace . The splendour of ſo many clear minds , concentred in Truth , cannot but kindle to a public love of it . And from the ſacred light , and heat of ſo many wiſe and warm hearts , the life sweetness and abundance of our Peace cannot but grow and flouriſh . That this may be the happy success , wherewith with God will be pleaſed to crown your public endeavours ; as alſo theſe , which from my private Pen are now adopted unto your ſo great and Honourable protection , is the earneſt prayer of Your moſt humble Servant , GAUDEN .