To the Right HONOURABLE , ROBERT , Lord Bruce , Baron of Byfleet , and only Son to the Right Honourable Thomas , Earl of Elgin . Eleaſar Gilbert wishes all poſſible Happiness . Right Honourable , I Have placed you here in the Frontiſpiece of my Dedicatory , firſt becauſe you have a chief place in my affections as one whom God hath graced with a more than ordinary portion of his Image , for ( to ſpeak without Flattery ) what Grace ? what Virtue ? what endowment , either of body , mind , or fortune ? Finally , what Perfection or Excellency can make men truly Honourable on Earth , and eternally happy in Heaven , which does not ſhine in your Lordſhip , in the fulleſt lustre , ſo far as your condition and years can be capable of ? inſomuch that if it pleaſe the Lord , to addc years unto your life , as he hath gifts unto your perſon , a star more radiant then your self , I conceive , in our age will ſcarcely appear in our British Firmament : moreover , your Lordſhip may juſtly challenge the firſt fruit of my public labors , becauſe I had the firſt encouragement tomy miniſterial ſtudies in your Honourable Family , under your Right Honourable , moſt pious , & never without much Reverence to be mentioned , Grandmother , Magdalen , Lady Bruce , where I have been and eyewitness of your virtuous education ab imis , as I may ſay , incunabulis , from your very infancy , and where I have often obſerved , the moſt vigilant and religious care of your Right Honourable Parents , in your virtuous education , which to this day does moſt ſpectably appear , as a pattern of imitation to all the Nobles in the Land. Go on therefore moſt Noble and hopeful Lord , good luck have you with your Honour , continue that courſe , in theſe paths of Virtue , w • ich you have begun to tread , eſpecially ſeeing you have already made ſo good a progress , for Dimidium facti , qui bene coepit , habet . And you ſhall find , that although the way be thorny , yet the end ſhall be Honourable , that pains which you now take , and have taken to pleaſe and ſerve God , and your right Honourable Parents , ſhall produce unto you at length , not only the favour of God , the love of your Sovereign , • ommendation of your equals , & praiſe of all good men , but alſo contentment to your mind , peace unto your conſcience , protection to your perſon , a bleſſing unto your eſtate , and a ſweet reliſh to all the houours , wealth , and pleaſures which you ſhall afterwards enjoy . Which that you may do , I ſhall never be wanting in my beſt devotion , to implore the gracious aſſiſtance of that Father of lights , the Watchman of Iſrael , to double his ſpirit upon you , and whereſoever you go , for good to be preſent with you , to guard you by his Providence , guide you by his counsel , and when he hath here ſatiated your Lordſhip with honours and pleaſures temporal , bring you at length unto joys and happiness eternal . So prayeth he , who desires to be reputed as he is One of your Lordship's moſt ancient and affect onately devoted Servants , Eleazar Gilbert . From my Study in St. Mary-Axe , this 8. Decemb. 1641.