TO THE Reverend and Learned Assembly of DIVINES Convened at WESTMINSTER . Right Reverend , THough many faithful servants of God did long ago desire to see those things which we see , and to hear those things which we hear ; Yet it hath been one of the special mercies reserved for this Generation , and denied to the times of our Ancestors , that Divines of both Kingdoms within this Island , should be gathered and continued together , to consult peaceably and freely concerning a Reformation of Religion in Doctrine , Worship , Discipline , and Government . It's a mercy yet greater , that two Nations formerly at so great a distance in the from of public Worship and Churchgovernment , should ( to their mutual comfort and happiness , and to the further endearing of each to other ) through the good hand of God be now agreed upon one Directory of Worship , and with a good progress advanced , as in one Confession of Faith , so likewise in one form of Churchgovernment . For all which , as the other Reformed Churches , ( in regard of their common interest in the Truth and Ordinances of Christ ) so especially your Brothers in the Church of Scotland are your debtors : Your name is as precious Oynment among them , and they do esteem you very highly in love for your works sake . A work , which as it is extraordinary and unparalleled , requiring a double portion of the Spirit of your Master , so You have very many Hearts and Prayers going along with you in it , that the pleasure of the Lord may prosper in your hand . As for my Reverend Colleagues and my self , it hath been a good part of our happiness that we have been partakers of , and Assistants in your grave and learned Debates . Yet ( as we declared from our first coming among you , ) we came not hither presuming to prescribe any thing unto You , but willing to receive as well as to offer light , and to debate matters freely and fairly from the Word of God , the common Rule both to you and us . As herein You were pleased to give testimony unto us in one of your Letters to the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland , so the great respects which in other things and at other times you have expressed , both towards that Church from which we are entrusted , and particularly towards our selves , do call for a return of all possible and public testimonies of gratitude . For which purpose , I do for my part take hold of this opportunity . I know that I owe much more unto You , then I have either ability to pay , or Elocution to set forth . Yet although I cannot retaliate your Favours , nor render that which may be worthy of your selves ; I beseech you to accept this part of my retribution of respects . I do offer and entitle unto You this Enucleation of the Erastian Controversy , which is Dignus vindice nodus . I hope here is a word in season concerning it . Others might have done better , but such furniture as I had , I have brought to the work of the Tabernacle . I submit what is mine unto your greater learning and better judgement , and shall ever continue Yours to serve you , GEO . GILLESPIE .