To the KIRKE and KINGDOME of SCOTLAND , Grace to you , and Peace from God our Father and the Lord Iesus Christ . THree reasons have prevailed with me , to set your Honourable and Reverend name before this Sermon : One is , That having Preached it before the Honourable Houses of the Parliament of England , I conceived it more convenient to send it to you in Print , then to direct it to them the second time , and in so doing I cannot apprehend any danger of censure : Because the ground of my Calling to join in so solemn and actium , was rather a National concernment then any personal respect to me , or expectation of any thing that could proceed from my weakness , worthy of such and Auditory ; as is one of the greatest , and gravest on earth . In this therefore ( if I mistake not ) I do comply with their intentions , and still follow their respects . Another Reason is , that after so long absence not only from my personal charge , but from you my mother Church , and Native Country , I do willingly take hold of this opportunity to tO • stifie that we your servants for Christ , who have the honour to be in this employment , do bow our knees to the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ , of whom the whole family of heaven and earth is nam , that he would grant unto you , according to the riches of his glory , to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man ▪ that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith Ephes. 3. 14 , 15 , 16. : And that we cannot enough render thanks to God for you , for all the joy wherewith we joy , for your sakes before our God , night and day praying exceedingly , that we might see your face , and ( according to our calling and measure ) might perfect that which is lacking in your faith . Thes. 3. 9. 10. The opinion of the merit of prayer is abomination , but the principal Theam and matter of the solemnity of the day , we take for and answer of the prayers of the godly in the three Kingdoms , and in all the Reformed Kirks ; And the desire we have to see you , is not only that natural instinct , which is to be found in all of our Nation , whom the cause of God hath brought from their own homes and habitations ; but our longing to come unto you with rejoicing , bringing our sheaves with us , Psal. 126. 6. and to find you such as we would : for now we live if ye stand fast in the Lord 1. Thes. 3. 8. . The third reason is , that I may , upon this occasion which God hath put in my hand , communicate unto you my humble thoughts for your good , unto which 〈 ◊ 〉 thousands of your sons , worthier , then I can have any 〈 … 〉 think my self to be , have according to the commandment of 〈 ◊ 〉 and their manifold obligation , devoted and sacrificed themsel ••• and all that they have ; For my part , since I am not able to 〈 ◊ 〉 my duty to the full , I shall still acknowledge my Obligation , c •• fesse my debt , and what I have ( which is a small proportion to that which I owe ) I shall willingly offer . The Lord hath done great things for you ▪ and by you . His Spirit speaking in your faithful Pastors , and working in your own hearts , will teach you and give you grace in wisdom and humility , to compare your present estate under the light , purity , liberty , and blessings of the Gospel , with the darkness , corruptions , tyranny and misery's , which our forefathers were covered with under Paganism of old , and under Antichrist afterwards , and which our selves did endure under Antichristian Prelacy of late . It is true , the present times are full of sufferings , calamities , losses , and fears ; all the three Kingdoms have drunken , although by equal draughts , of a very bitter cup , such as the Lord propineth when he is angry with his people , and no man knoweth when the end shall be : Yet if we consider what our misery's might have been , if these our misery's had not been , that we ought to choose affliction , and not impiety or iniquity , and that all our troubles are but the travellings of childbirth , to bring forth a Reformation ; We will take the saying of Ecclesiastes to be spoken to every one of us : Say not thou , what is the cause that the former days were 〈 ◊ 〉 better then these ? for thou dost not inquire wisely concerning this Eccles. 7. 10. . I intend not to see forth the great power and merciful providence of God in the late seasonable Deliverance , and notable victory never to be forgotten , that being recent in your minds , and the intent of the following Sermon ; We ought to be thankful for the undeniable presence of God , to stir up our selves to take hold of him , lest he hide his face and depart from us , and to go on hereafter with confidence in his Name against the greatest difficulties . But when I call to mind what hath come to pass in these days , since the beginning of our troubles , and begin to consider the proceedings and results of Divine providence , contrary to the designs and devices of the Enemies , which they cannot worser • ny , and far beyond the first intentions and particular desires of such as the Lord hath used for instruments in his work , which they do reverently acknowledge , I may make use of the grave and serious warning of the Apostle : Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God : on them which f • ll , severity ; but towards thee , goodness , if thou continue in his goodness : otherwise thou also shalt be cut off Rom. 11. 22 ▪ . And that we may the more valve the goodness of God to our selves , we ought the more to behold the severity of God cutting off the pomp , the pride , the tyranny , and power of the Enemies . I may also with him ( although writing of a matter of another kind ) cry out : Oh the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God , how unsearchable are his judgements , and his ways passed finding out ! for who hath known the mind of the Lord or who hath been his Counselor Rom. 11. 33 , 34. ? Not only in the matter of salvation and damnation ; but in the administrations of his providence , the Lord uses his Sovereignty , and does what seems good unto his wisdom : and although we know not the particular reason of every thing , yet this we know , whatsoever be the weakness of men upon the one hand , or the wickedness of men oh • the other , that all things are done by him that ruleth the world , in great wisdom and Justice , to his own glory and the good of his Church . Again , when from my sense of my self , & of my own thoughts & ways ( which many thousands may observe , and no doubt do observe of themselves ) I begin to remember , how men who love to live obscurely and in the shadow , are brought forth to light , to the view and talking of the world , how men that love quietness are made to stir , and to have a hand in public business ; how men that love soliloquies and contemplations are brought upon debates and controversies , how men who love peace , are made to war and to shed blood ; and generally how m • n are brought to act the things , which they never determined , nor so much as dreamed of before ; The words of the Prophet Jeremie come to my remembrance : Oh Lord , I know that the way of man is not in himself : it is not in man that walks to direct his steps ( Ier. 10. 23. ) : which imply the positive part : That the way of man is in the hand of God , and that the Lord directeth his steps to his own appointed ends ; according to the saying of the wise Solomon ( whither speaking of the Decrees of God or of the word of God ) There are many devices in a men heart , nevertheless the Counsel of the Lord , that shall stand ( Pro. 19. 21. ) . Experiments of things past , are documents of things to come . Let no man think himself absolute master of his own actions or ways : When thou wast young thou girdedst thy self , and walkedst whither ▪ thou wouldst : but when thou shalt be old , thou shalt stretch forth thy hands , and another shall gird thee , and carry thee whither thou wouldst not ( Iohn 21. 18. ) . Let no man say ; I shall die in my nest , in mine own house with my children about me and under my wings ( Iob 29. 18. ) . We will learn I hope by time ( if we be not unteachable ) to distinguish betwixt our first and natural will , and our second , our Spiritual , and more deliberate will ; and to say : Not my will , but thy Will be done ( Mat. 26. 39. ) . The seven years of ensuing Providence , may carry us as far beyond the present intentions , whither of the enemies of Religion , or our own , as the seaven ye • s passed have done , beyond our former intentions and theirs . The pulling down of Popery in the Christian world , and the putting down of Prelacy , and the supporters thereof in Britaine , are equally feasible to the Almighty , who delights to turn our difficulties and impossibilities into the glorious demonstrations of his Divine Power , and who putteth motions into the hearts of men , which they turn into Petitions , and endeavours , and God by his Power , brings forth into reality and actium , the conception ; birth , and perfection is all from himself . When I speak of the future , and that which afterwards may come to pass , my meaning is , not that God will always , and throughout the whole work , use the same individual instruments , experience hath already proved the contrary : I speak of the Collective and successive body , which like a flood , runneth in a continual course , but the several parts pass by very quickly ; Joshua must succeed to Moses , and Eliazar to Aaron , before the people of God be brought into Canaan , and others must come after them , before the Temple be built ; each one whom the Lord calls , hath his own part . As the course of general Providence in the World , and of special Providence in the Kirk , goes on constantly , according to the Eternal Decrees of God , which men may oppose and clamour against , but can no more hinder then the rising of the Sun , and his ascending to his strength : So does the course of particular Providence in the lives of men , which he cutteth off , or continueth at his pleasure : Nor should any man , who hath seen the beginnings of this work , offend , or be displeased , that his days are ended , before it end ▪ more then others , who shall be honoured to be the witnesses of the glorious conclusion thereof , have cause to be grieved , that they have not seen , or had a hand in the beginnings of it : even as we have no more reason to be grieved , that our life lasteth not longer , then that it did not begin sooner . No man could know , but his life might have been as short in Peace , as it hath been in war ; nor was it in any men power in the time of Peace , to choose the manner of his death . It should be sufficient for us , that we follow the calling of God , that our life is not deer to us , when he , who spared not his life for us , calls for it , that we are ready to lay it down in his Cause , and that it shall add to our blessedness , if we die not only in the Lord , but for the Lord . Let us therefore observe the Lords Providence , admire his wisdom , & goodness , adore his Sovereignty and greatness , and cheerfully offer , and give up our selves to be disposed upon at his will , seeking his glory , and not our own , and to approve our selves to our own consciences , and not to the world : This will make us sincere and straight in our course , when others are seeking themselves , quiet and secure in the midst of dangers , when others , like Magor-Missabib , have fear round about , and contented in confidenceIer . 20. 3. of a recompense of reward from God , against the ingratitude of men , when Mercenaries have not the patience to bear it , because they served no other master , and had no other thing in their eye , but their wages : a poor compensation of their pains , and no proportion to the adventuring of their lives . It is a freq •••• observation in history , upon a world of examples , that such as have deserved best of the public , have met not only with priv •• i •• ingratitude , but have often been recompensed evil for good ▪ which hath given occasion to Politicians to enter upon the debate of two questions : One is : what can be the cause of this so universally known and confessed ingratitude , not only from particular persons , but from the public . The other is : how it comes to pass , that notwithstanding this known ingratitude , there be same found in every age and State , that are more stirred up to deserve well of the public , nor discouraged , or deterred , by what hath befallen others before them . Concerning the first , among other answer • taken from that corruption , malice , and envy , which poisoneth the nature of man they allege , that it proceedeth from covetousness , which makes the public to quarrel with them , that such may seem unworthy of reward , whose great merits they are either willing or unable to reward . The other they attribute to and heroic desire of immortal praise , and a divine disposition to do good to all . But our Profession can answer both in a word , that by a special providence , such as have deserved well , come short of their rewards from men , that they may learn in serving of men , to serve God , and by Faith and Hope to expect their reward from himself , and in end himself for their reward ; and that notwithstanding all the ingratitude of the world , the Lord gives generous spirits to his servants and stirs them up by his Spirit ( the motions whereof , they neither can , nor will resist ) to do valiantly in his Cause . God hath made you a fruitful Mother of many Sons , as England , France , and Ireland may this day bear witness . Never had your Sons more cause to rejoice in their Mother ; for God hath made you honourable : No • you the Mother more cause to rejoice in your Sons ; for God hath put it in their hearts , to offer themselves willingly in & for the cause of Christ . If some have proved sons of Beliall , void of grace and natural affection and have provoked you to pronounce a malidiction upon them , the Grace of God which hath made the difference , is the more to be magnified ; and they that stand , as they are the more to be honoured , so are they warned ; to take heed lest they fallen . Two things there be chiefly , which will give you peace for the present , and through the blessing of God , will bring your troubles to a comfortable end ; one is , that when ye hear of Separatists , Semi-separatists , Anabaptists , Antinomians , Libertines , Socinians , and of the many sects , which Satan the father of Heresies and Schisms , in opposition to the intended Uniformity in religion , hath raised in this Kingdom , and which no wisdom under heaven is able to cure , but by settling the true government of the Kirk by Presbyteries and Synods : Ye may call to mind , and apply to your selves the wholesome Counsel of the Prophet Micah , All people will walk , every one in the Name of his God , and we will walk in the Name of the Lord our God , for ever and ever ( Micah 4. 5. ) ; He will not have us to promise to our selves and universal consent in Religion through the whole earth ; nor to suffer our selves to be driven away by the example or sleight of men , and cunning craftiness , whereby they lie in wait to deceive ( Ephes. 4. 14. ) : But will have us to walk in the Name of our God , which is nothing else but to understand , believe , and obey his word , by which he is known as by his Name ; and this he will have us to do , not for some time , but for ever and ever ; and with the counsel of the Prophet join the example of the Kirk of God , All this is come upon us , yet have we not forgotten thee , neither have we dealt falsely in thy Covenant ; our heart is not turned back , neither have our steps declined from thy way , though thou hast soar broken us in the place of Dragons , and covered us with the shadow of death ( Psal. 44. 17 , 18 , 19. ) . This testimony of your uprightness and constancy , that no trouble could move you , so much as in heart , to turn away from the way of God , will be a well spring of comfort to you in all your troubles , and this comfort ( I speak it to the praise of the free grace of God ) belongeth unto you : for would you have dealt falsely in the Covenant , and forsaken the truth , ye might not only have escaped all the troubles which you have sustained at home and abroad , but also have enjoyed all the Peace and plenty that the world could promise ; This I speak as a natural man , and this indeed is the judgement of the natural man , looking no higher then this world , and the second causes : But as the Messenger of God , I may say , had ye dealt wickedly against his Covenant , and blessed your selves in your own heart , saying , I shall have peace , though I walk in the imagination of mine heart , the Lord would not have spared you , but the anger of the Lord , and his Jealousy would have smoked against you Deu • . 29. 20. . The other thing that I would to this purpose commend , is that you would remember , that beside Heresy , which opposeth the truth professed by the Kirk , and beside Schism , which destroyeth the Unity of the Kirk , Profaneness of heart and life , which is a third p • st , hath ever spoiled the holiness of the Kirk , and is a most high provocation against the most holy Lord God , which we are all to strive against , as well as against Heresy and Schism , by joining the power of Godliness with the Profession and form thereof 2. Tim. • . 5. , and by holding the mystery of the Faith in a pure Conscience 1. Tim. 3. • . , which some sometime among you , having put away ( and that with violence done to their conscience , as the Word dimporteth ) concerning Faith have made shipwreck 1. Tim. 1. 19. , and have endeavoured to bring others upon the Rocks , that they might perish with them . Spiritual judgements are to be observed no less then temporal , both because there is more wrath in them , and they are more hardly discerned . Pelagianisme of old , and Arminianism of late , is the just punishment of a formal Profession , Socinianisme , of the neglect of the Son of God , Antinomianisme , of turning the grace of God into wantonness , Anabaptism , of Baptizing of Infants in private , and of the slighting of the Baptism in public , as if it did not concern the whole Congregation ; and Separation , of the despising of the true Government of the Kirk ; so does the Lord send strong delusions upon them that receive not the love of the truth , and take pleasure in unrighteousness • . Thes. 2. 10 , 11 , 12. . I will not excuse the length of this Epistle , because I intended it . I am not bounded to a time in writing , as I behooved to be in Preaching . I am bold with you , because I know you . To save you from spiritual judgements , to deliver you comfortably from your present troubles , and to make you walk worthy of the grace wherein the Lord hath abourded towards you , that you fallen not , and that you may be presented faultless before Christ with joy , is and shall be the humble and earnest desire , and prayer of Your humble Servant , and obedient Son , in and for the Gospel of CHRIST .