TO THE RIGHT Honourable , the Knights , Citizens and Burgeſſes of the Commons Houſe of Parliament , now ASSEMBLED . VEſpatian the Emperor , ſent to ELVIDIUS PRISCUS , a Senator of ROME , charging him not to appear in the Senate ; If he did to speak no otherwiſe then what he would have him , to whom he returned ; As a Senator , it was fit he ſhould be there , and being there , he would freely ſpeak his conſcience ; The Emperor replied , if he did , he ſhould die for it : He anſwered , he never ſaid he was immortal ; do what you will , J will do what J ought . Jt is in your power unjustly to put me to death : It is in my power to die conſtantly . It is your Royal privilege , Your perſons are under his Majeſties ſacred protection , your liberty of ſpeaking , granted to be without interruption , Awake , Pſal . 108 1. your glory , do ye your ſelves awake right early ; Let your hearts be fixed , fixed in the Lord , as the Poles of Heaven , and the centre of the earth , Let Righteousness , be your Parliament Robes , let Judgement be your Crown and Diadem , Iob 29.14 . let cauſes at your great Tribunal he herd to speak , not perſons ; That the bleſſing of three periſhing Kingdoms may come upon you . I was but lately Removed into theſe parts , and one of special note forewarned me , I ſhould be Crucified , as CHRIST was betwixt two Thieves ; The Papiſt , the Puritan . The Papiſt , like the Railing and Blaſpheming Thief , soon diſcovered himself . They swarm , and are terrible , the show of their countenance witneſſeth againſt them ; Pſal . 91.6 . Like deſtruction , they show themſelves at Noone-Day : The Puritan ( if it be not only a name , without and exiſtence ) is worthy your wisdom , to tell us who he is ; It may be , for fear of crucifying , with the good Thief he is stolen into Paradiſe ; the name is of Vaſt , and amongſt many of Odious ſignification : Papiſts do charge the Church of England with the heresy of Puritaniſme : King Iames , by Bellarmine , metamorphoſed into his Chaplain , was ſaid to be a Puritan ; The Engliſh Parliament is called a Puritanical Parliament . The University of Oxford , the ſtrength of Puritaniſme . Briſtow speaks out . All Proteſtants in ENGLAND are Puritans , Proteſtants at large , ſuch as are Ambitious of the credit , not of the truth of their holy profeſsion ; Heathens in lives , Christians in faith ; They reproach civil moral Infidels with that name : They Pharisaical Profeſſors ; They powerful CHRISTIANS . Yea , of late I have alſo herd them much branded with the name , that would not yield up their Souls , and their Conſciences , to the Chair of Biſhops , with their eſtates , Liberties , and Lives , to the will of their Superiors . The name is very large and very reproachful : A Biſhop affirmed he could as eaſily fetch one off from the guilt of Felony , as from the imputation of Puritaniſme ; My humble motion is , make us all Puritans , or to leave no Puritan amongſt us . There are walls of partition , ( when thoſe that were of GODS Inſtitution , became enmity , Eph. 2.14 . CHRIST laid them as flat , as the Walls of Iericho , with Iericho's curſe upon them . ) Bee pleaſed to batter down theſe Walls , lay the Canons in the face of them , and JERƲ SALEMS curſe upon them ; Let not one ſtone be left upon another : At the first of the Reformation they were , though not neceſſary , yet , lawful , our Reformers were modeſt and moderate ; They would not unneceſſarily offend the weak Romanist , GOD had a People among them , the waters of BABYLON were ebbing : But now ſince the Sea of ROME , like the waters of JORDAN , begin to ſwell , and overflow the Banks , ſince the great River TIBER flows apace , ſince the Papiſts are emboldened , and hardened in their Idolatry and Superſtition , ſince the ſtrong , as well as the weak Proteſtant , are grieved and vexed with them , and there are indeed too many falſe Apoſtles , that earnestly contend for them , and with a ſtrong and mighty hand obtrude them upon us . Take unto your ſelves the Zeal of Our LORD and SAVIOUR ; The Evangeliſt records , he twice purged the Temple : The multitude of offenders , the might and malice of the obſervers , the danger of the actium , nor the peril of the conſequence stays his hand . The King of Scythia ſlew Anacharſis the Philoſopher , for the worſhipping the mother of the GODS , after the Athenian manner ; If the Plague of Leprosy could not be cleansed , by taking away a few ſtones out of the houſe , but the Leprosy would return again , then the houſe , the Timber , Lev. 14.43 , 45. the Mortar must down : when Ceremonies become ſcandalous , they are to be aboliſhed . Theſe Sermons suit well with two of the greatest works , the Kingdom expects from you ; They breath enmity to Room , Peace amongſt our ſelves , Preached when the times ran Counter to both ; The man of sin of late years hath revived amongſt us , ( it may be a lightning before death , ) Popery hath multiplied abundantly . In Lancaſhire it hath ſuperabounded above and Hyperbole : The Mass hath outfaced our Chriſtian meetings , Ieſuites have jeered our Miniſters , confronted and abuſed authority . MANCHESTER , the Goſhen ( accounted ) in this Egypt , is of late years , darkened with the blackness of it , ſome of our prime men in dignity , authority , power , have revolted to them ; Their example commands many , Great men have their followers , of their Vices , as of their perſons , and when they pleaſe to be Idolatrous , their children , ſervants , tenants , their poor kindred , and Jdolizing Neighbours , will to the Mass with them . One special cauſe of this increase of Popery , is the vastness , and the greatness of many Pariſhes , preferred to the truſt of ſuch , that add Church unto Church , themſelves reſiding at neither , or if they are with their people , they are non reſident in the amid of them , yea too often when they are in the Pulpit ; Theſe Mother-Churches have many daughters , ſeaven , eight , nine CHAPPELS , ſubject to them , to which belongs no certain , or no competent maintenance ; Hence ignorance and profaneness , deſolate places , full of doleful Creatures , Ziim and Ochim : Iſa . 13.21 King Iames in his piety and wiſdom , appointed 4. Lancaſhire Preachers , to perfect his work : Let every Golden Candleſtick have his Lamp burning and ſhining in it : devils could not ſtand before the Gospel ; therefore Popery ſhall be conſumed by it . 2 These . 2.8 . J had ſerved in theſe parts , the ſame time that PAUL did at Athens , and my ſpirit was troubled to hear and ſee , the ſuperſtition ; Hence , I ventured ( with danger enough ) to preach theſe Sermons ; may they ſtrengthen your hands in that great work you are about ; Ezra 6.14 . Jt would be the glory of this latter age , could there ſuch a sheet be let down to the Church , Acts 10.11 . as there was in viſion to Peter , that the difference of clean and unclean may be taken away , ſuch a golden Sceptre reached out that all may be ſubdued unto it , and embrace it ; Oh what and honour would it be to the preſent , and a bleſsing to the future age , that a conſent of Doctrine and diſcipline might be confirmed by you , that we that profess one Lord , one Faith , one Baptism , one GOD and Father of all under one King , may be one Church ; That a Trinity of Kingdoms , may be a Church in Ʋnity . Pardon my preſumption if my zeal for the public peace , points at the means ; A Royal Convocation , rightly conſtituted unto which all the Kingdoms may ſend their Clark's would facilitate the business , ( It would add much to the glory of it , and be a Crown unto his Crown who accounts it the moſt glorious in all his Crown to be worthy of that Title , Defender of the Faith , if from all the reformed CHƲRCHES , ſome may be invited , if not to vote , yet at leaſt to aſſiſt . The reaſon wherefore General , National , Provincial Counsels , have in this last Century been ſo fatal , and therefore by ſome of ſingular eminency been diſclaimed , as a meet means for the ſettling of peace , is becauſe the greateſt part have their ſtanding Votes , who will ever maintain a ſtrong party for themſelves ; Is it equal that Archbishop's , Biſhops , Deanes , Arch-Deacons , Chapter men , ſhould of courſe , and by reaſon of their dignities have their places & their ſuffrages , when but two Clerks are elected by the choice of the Clergy ; May the Election of the Clark's for the Convocation be as free as yours for the Parliament , and in ſome proportion unto it , J doubt not but we ſhould be as happy in our Canons , as we are in your Statutes . There hath been ſtrange batteries made upon our Religion , the thirty nine Articles are challenged by the Harlot , Papiſts and Arminians claim them as theirs , the Book of Homilies are diſclaimed , unheard of violation hath been offered to the ſecond , to the fourth Commandments , Preaching is cried down , Preachers diſcountenanced . The Sacraments have been defiled , the people of the Lord have been made to abhor the offering of the Lord , Press and Pulpit have vomited forth corrupt and undigested matters . Auguſtus made a Bonfire of all ſuch books , that corrupted the Roman Ethnic Religion , it would be your wisdom to make a diligent ſearch for all Apocryphal books , Heretical , Popiſh , Semi-pelagian Pamphlets , ſlanderous Libels , and impertinent writings , and to ſacrifice them to Vulcan . We pray for great things to be done by you , we have open our mouths wide to the Lord we have herd of great things of you : Pſ . 81.10 the Lord proſper you to and happy , and bleſſed concluſion , for a glorious reformation of Church and Common-Wealth ; The Counſellor , The mighty God , the everlaſting Father , the Prince of peace , he upon whoſe ſhoulder the government lies ; Iſa . 9.6 , 7 increaſe your government and peace , order you and establish you with judgement , and juſtice , henceforth for ever : the Zeal of the Lord of HOSTS , perform this . Your Honours in all ſincerity ſervice and duty , Richard Heyricke .