TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE HOVSE OF LORDS , AND THE HONOURABLE HOVSE OF COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT . I Never delighted in Pulpit Apologies , else I might have prefaced with and excuse from the extreme shortness of the warning to perform this solemn service . Your Christian attention in hearing , and candide acceptance of my mean endeavours , hath now likewise prevented my Apologizing Epistle . Let rather my pen second my tongue in provoking you and my self to bless the Lord , who invites poor sinners to seek to him in the day of trouble . Psal. 50.15 . Now ( will blasphemers say ) they are glad to run to their prayers , we are indeed ; desiring humbly to rejoice that we have such precious promises , sealed with the blood of such a Mediator , in whose Name we may boldly seek our heavenly Father's face , even when he hath a rod , a sword in his hand . We would shame our selves for our many sins , and justify God who is glorious in holiness , in all the judgements that lie upon us . If this be to be vile , we will with David ( when Gods hand calls for it ) be more vile then thus . 2 Sam. 6.22 . Let stupid Atheists take that portion , Isa. 26.11 . Lord when thy hand is lifted up , they will not see , but they shall see and be ashamed for their envy towards thy people . If God style himself a God hearing prayers , Psal. 65.2 . good reason we should run unto him as a people making prayers . Let us now therefore approve our selves Christians indeed , not multiply groundless jealousies , which are almost as troublesome in the State as unsound opinions in the Church , not quarrel discontentedly with the defects of second causes , but meekly improve the hand whereby the first cause disposes all events . Nothing comes to pass in time , but what was decreed from Eternity . Luke 12.6 , 7. If a few Sparrows cannot fallen to the ground , then surely Armies , Cities , Countries , cannot be lost without his providence . If he condescend to number his children's hairs , then certainly much more their heads . He who hath a bottle for their tears , a book of remembrance for their words and thoughts upon his Name , will not forget his own promises unto them : Mal. 3.16.18 . but when discriminating times come , then shall you return and discern between the righteous and the wicked , between him that serves God , and him that serves him not . There are now many veins opened in England , it is in the body Politic , as in the Natural , much bad blood cannot be let out , Isa. 23.9 . but we shall loose some good . The Lord of Hosts hath purposed to stain the pride of all our glory . Much honourable blood hath been shed among us since these sad troubles began . When the judgement comes by Famine or Pestilence , ordinarily most great persons escape , the vulgar sort of people fallen by such Arrows . God hath now sent a sword , which hath done execution upon diverse of our Nobles , and many of our Gentry . The good Lord help you ▪ and all whom it most concerns , to hear what this rod , this sword says , and who hath appointed it . Micah 6.9 . We all acknowledge it was drawn for the sins of this Nation ; and will it be sheathed again without repentance ? It was a strange prophesy of Robert Grosthead , that great Bishop of Lincolne in H. 3. time , who prying much into the abominations and spirit of Popery , said a little before his death , The Church shall not be delivered from the servitude of Egypt , but by violence and force , Nec liberabitur Ecclesia ab Egyptiaca servitute nisi in over gladii cruentandi , Matth. Paris . See Foxe Martyrolog . and with the bloody sword . We have found this too true as well as other Churches . Is there not a generation among us , who , rather then they will have Christ reign over them , rather then Doctrine , Worship , Government , and Discipline , should be reduced to the simplicity that is in Christ , will hazard King and Kingdoms , involving one after another in bloody troubles . Me thinks we may hear groaning England speaking the language of the woman of Tekoah , 2 Sam. 14.4 . Help Oh King , and upon her ground ; her two sons strove together in the field , and there was none to part them , but the one smote the other and slew him , v. 6. It will be your High Honour ( Oh Noble Worthies ) to be so faithful to your Saviour , and to your Sovereign , as to put hereunto your helping Heads and Hearts , Counsels and Prayers . When God suffered his Church to be brought very low , to be a flock of slaughter , Zach. 11.7 . yet then he took unto him two staves , the one he called Beauty , and the other he called Bans , and he fed the flock . Be pleased to improve your utmost now as good followers of the Lamb . Call for the help of the Reverend Assembly , who will study to advice you according to the Testimony of Jesus . Church-Reformation may prove a compendious way to compose State-commotions ; Hereby poor distracted England may yet find two supporting Staves , Beauty and Bans , a Beautiful union established in Church and State . The Lord delight to employ you to these happy purposes ; so shall our mourning be turned into Hallelujahs . Your Honours to serve You faithfully , for the honour of the Lamb . THOMAS HILL .