TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE House of LORDS , and THE Honourable House of COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT at WESTMINSTER . THE Lord Jesus Christ , whose name is wonderful , hath reserved for this last age of the World , wherein he intends to do great things for his Church and against his enemies , the accomplishment of many precious promises , and the discovery of most glorious providences . among all other your State observations , I hope you treasure up the experiences of his wonder-working hand for you since this happy Parliament began , that so you may grow eminent as well in Christian , as in state-wisdom . Never had any Assembly of Counsellors in England , greater reason then you , to say with the Psalmist , Psal. 139. 17. How precious are thy thoughts unto me , Oh God : how great is the sum of them ! It were well worthy your wise care , to take some course , what ever it cost , by a discreet and faithful pen , to preserve the story of Gods providence about you since these troubles began , that so his honour might live therein , when you are dead . Its true indeed , the Lords dispensations have been very various towards you , and the method of his counsels , passed finding out ; As the Israelites in the wilderness , were sometime not far from Canaan , and then cast back for a long time ; so you sometime begin to think your selves god near the shore , and to discover the Land , some hope's of a gracious issue , then a new storm arises and drives you into the main Sea again : witness your present straits , your renewed perplexities . among other reasons hereof , this may be one ; It may be God will not finish your state-affairs , till you are more vigorous in his Temple-work . Who knows how soon poor England , yea and all the three Kingdoms , might become gloriously happy , could you remove such obstructions , as interrupt the building of Gods house ? Your selves are not a little concerned in the expediting this great business of settling the Church ; opinions of most dangerous consequence begin now to spring up among us . The controversy is not now only betwixt congregational and classical Divines , ( who are called Independents , and Presbyterians ) in point of Church government ; ( There seems to be some good hope's of a fair accommodation betwixt them ) But with such others also who vehemently cry down not only the power of Ecclesiastical Synods , but likewise the Authority of the Civil Magistrate , in matters of Religion , See Bloody Tenent . thereby at once opening a door to all licentiousness in opinion & practice , even for Iewes , Turkes , and any whomsoever . The Good Lord stir up your hearts who have so great a share in the managing , and in the success of the great work in hand , to do what becomes you in such times as these are ; When so many of your own Rank ( the Lord humble them for their unfaithfulness ) have deserted their Trust , You have obtained this great mercy , this high Honour , to be employed in Temple-service . I hope you often consider , who hath made you to differ , 1. Cor. 4. 7. and what he at this time expects from you . You will please to allow me the boldness to put you in mind of Davids carriage , who , when the three mighty men brake through the Host of the Philistines , and drew water out of the well of Bethlehem , 2 Sam. 23. 16. He would not drink thereof , but poured it out unto the Lord : and he said , be it far from me Oh Lord , that I shall do this ? Is not this the blood of men that went in jeopardy of their lives ? therefore he would not drink it , ver . 17. The tranquillity and many sweet refreshings , the liberty and opportunity of doing Service to Church and State in the Parliament which you enjoy ; Is it not the blood of very many men ? How often have your Noble and courageous General with other Worthies of the first Magnitude , jeoparded their lives in the High places of the field to secure you in your Houses , in your employments ? How much trouble and hazard have our deer Brothers of Scotland undergone to themselves and Kingdom , to keep You from the danger of popery and slavery ? yea how many thousands , some of all ranks , ( it may make us bleed with sorrow to number them ) have already shed their dearest blood , that you may possess your lives and estates ? God forbid , be it far from any of you , that what is purchased at so deer a rate , should be prostituted to your own selvishnesse , or any ignoble service . Let all you have , rather be poured out to the Lord , and consecrated to his service in building him and House , Isa. 43. 4. who hath loved you so much and given so many men for your lives . It was and high strain of courageous Rhetoric , in one of the City Soldiers at Newbury sighed , ( as it is related from good hands ) who , when he lay bleeding under mort all wounds , breathed out this admirable expression : Oh that I had another life to lose for Jesus Christ ! O that I had another life to lose for Jesus Christ ! Let this speech live in you after his death . Bee willing at least to sacrifice the improvement of your Lives , which cost the precious blood of Christ , and many of his deer members , in lifting up his Name , and advancing his Temple . Nehemiah , when he would encourage them in building the wall of Ierusalem , notwithstanding all the scoffs of the adversaries , after he had armed the Labourers , Nehem. 4. 13. 14. He said unto the Nobles , and to the Rulers , and to the rest of the people , be not afraid of them , remember the Lord which is great and terrible , and fight for your brothers , your sons and your daughters , your wives and your houses . The Lord in mercy turn your fighting into building , and rebuke your enemies , that you may have more liberty to built his House . Herein I can rise higher then Nehemiah ; you built not only for your Sons and Daughters , but for the Lord , who is the Husband of his Church , the Prince of Peace , the King of Glory , that hath prepared and house eternal in the heavens , for all that sincerely built his house here on Earth . 1 Chr. 22. 16. Arise therefore and be doing , and the Lord be with you . Which is the hearty prayer of him , who , Though most unworthy , desires to serve you faithfully in the advancing Temple-work . THOMAS HILL .