To his very worthy Friend , JOHN BROWN Esq One of His Majesties Justices of Peace for Middlesex , and Clerk to the Right Honourable the House of Peers , More intimacy with Jesus Christ . Most worthy Gaius , AS there are some Capital Sins for which we must abase our selves all our days ; such as have broken our Consciences ▪ should often break our hearts : As there are some Cardinal Virtues ( to speak in the Moralists language ) which must be our everydays work , as being the Essentials of Christianity ; so are there some Providential Dispensations in the course of our lives , which must be acknowledged even to Eternity ; among which we may well reckon loving and faithful friends , constant men's affections being of themselves mere weathercocks , very mutable , which are Gods Vials by which he pours his favors upon us . And here , Sir , I must rank you with those , for whose acquaintance I have much cause to bless God , having received in few years more real love from you , then diverse do from some of their friends in many years : Your hearty kindness hath made so deep and impression upon me , that I cannot satisfy my self without some public Acknowledgement of that whereof so many have been witnesses . I can confidently ( and indeed have very much reason ) speak to you in the language of John , The Elder unto the well-beloved Gaius , 3 Epist. for . 1. whom I love in the Truth : far be it from be in a glorying way only to compliment with him who hath expressed so much affectionate reality unto me . And without flattery I do pray , Verse 2. That you may prosper and be in health , even as your soul prospers , through the rich mercy of God in Christ to you . Verse 3. Non vis errare ? ego sum via ; non vis falli ? ego sum veritas ; non vis mori ? ego sum vita ; non habes quā eas nisi per Christum ; non habes quò eas nisi ad Christum . Pray let me add this by way of thankfulness to God ( it being a return of weak Prayers ) I rejoice greatly to hear so many of the deserving Brothers testify of the truth that is in you ; and that not only in your tongue or outside profession only , but that you walk in the truth , making the truth your path , which leads to Christ , who is the Way , the Truth , and the life , Joh. 14.6 . And I trust ( through the goodness of your God ) I may have occasion in his time ( which is always the best ) to rejoice , as John also did , that yours walk in the truth . But your love to me , together with your dear and gracious Consorts , puts so much the stronger obligation upon me , it being not only personal , both in my former health and time of present sickness , but indeed to my dear Mother , the University of Cambridge ; which I must ever love and honour , whose welfare you have ( in your Sphere ) most happily promoted , and that with such laborious and bountiful respect , as stands upon Record with thankful Acknowledgement among us . Go on , beloved Sir , to love Jesus Christ , in and for himself ; love him in his Ordinances , and in his Saints ; valve all the outward comforts with reference to him and his glory : Ride on prosperously in your Zeal for Truth , and in the exercise of meekness and moderation of Spirit , which is a Scripture expression of the Spirit of Jesus Christ , and for want of which , many ( great pretenders to Reformation ) look too too much like as if they were acted by a Diabolical Spirit therein : The Lord multiply his Graces in you and yours , and his Blessings upon you all . Accept this from him , Who desires as a faithful friend to serve you in love , Thomas Hill. From your own house in Westminster , Apr. 28 , 1648.