To The Right Honourable the Lords , the Noble Knights , and other Honoured Gentlemen of the Committee for the Managing the Affairs at WESTMINSTER . E. Northumberl . E. Pembrook . E. Nottingham . E. Denbigh . E. Manchester , L. Visc , Say & Seal , L. North . L. Mountague . L. Roberts . L. Howard . S. Gilbert Gerard . S. Iohn Dreydon . S. Robert Harley . S. Wil. Strickland . S. Hen . Vane , jun . S. Walt. Earl . S. Wil. Massam . S. Robert Pie . S. Iohn Trevor . S. Anth. Irby . M. Sollicitor . M. Rous. M. Ashurst . M. Reynolds . Denis Bond. Bolstered Whitlock M. Guorden . M. Maynard . M. Lisle . M. Salwey . M. Wheeler . M. Hoyle All Fidelity and happy Success in your High and Honourable Trusts , and the discharge of your manifold Stewardships . WHen I read over in my thoughts the pleasing story of Divine Providence , in guiding the Honourable Houses of Parliament , in committing to you the Managing of Westminster Affairs , both in reference to the Abbey and School , and observe the happy fruits of your care ( by Gods good hand upon you therein ) in both which I ( though most unworthy ) have been employed and entrusted by the favour of those who had power ; I think it my duty to take the first opportunity publicly to acknowledge the mercy of God to many in your prudent Zeal for the good of those Places , and with all thankfulness your most respective acceptance of my poor endeavours therein . O how many do bless God for the sweet change they find in their Morning Exercises ; now they have rather the means of a heart and life Religion among them . Not Pompous Altars only to humour the Eyes , and taking Music to please their Ears . All such Let the Bishops take care quod in Divino servitionon tam onerosa prolixitas quam devota & integra brevitas servetur says Petrus the Alliaco consid . 3. v. Fast . Rerum 206. p. tedious Ecclesia non assumit Musica instrumenta , sicut Cytharas & Psalteria , indivinasliudes ne vidiatur I • dizar • . Aq. secunda secundae . 9 21. Art. 2. Chantings with Music and multiplied repetitions did little Edify the mind of Hearers ; had little saving influence upon their Hearts ; which many will tell you to the Praise of God in these Morning Exercises they have found . Neither hath your industrious Love of Westminster School been fruitless , which is and high point of Wisdom in seeking the regulating and furnishing Schools with able Master's ( which will never be done without more encouraging Salaries ) Good Ministers , good Magistrates , and good Schoole-Masters , are like to make that place happy where they meet . And what School calls for more vigilant superintendency than this of Westminster it being a most famous Nursery , subservient to Inns of Court where many Parliament men , Nobles and Gentry in their tender years , may be either seasoned with good , or desperately leavened with evil , and not only supplying other Colleges , but having a special subordinate reference to the two great Colleges of both Universities . ( if they come there with a Canker at the Root , they are not easily recovered . There is a sensible alteration Trinity Coll. in Cambridge . Christs Church in Oxford . which two Col. ordinarily receive more scholars yearly from Westmin . ni fallor , than are sent from Eaton and Winchester . Pueri Ingenui . Pueri Ingeniosi . ( blessed be God ) much more civility in the Schools than formerly : ( the care of Mr. Buzby in instructing the Scholars , he being both very able and industrious , deserves encouragement ) yet nonnulla desiderantur . I will confidently express my thoughts , were the Morals , and Spirituals in Westminster-Schoole answerable to the Intellectuals , it would be inferior ( to say no more ) to none in England . Any that knows it will acknowledge that there is a kind of hereditary raised genius , entailed upon them : and were the Scholars always as ingenuous , at they are ingenious , we should much more rejoice in their transplanting to us . Your Noble Candor will allow me a wonted 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 and encourage me to speak out , especially the Election being at hand Be pleased to accept of what plain hints follow from him who desires faithfully Humble Desires tendered to the Honourable Committee for Westmin . school . to serve you in your advancing the Public . In your Elections its good to beware of Error in the first Concoction , I mean in your choice of youths into Kings Scholars places ; it is expected then , that in time they should be elected to one of the Colleges ( for ordinarily the whole seventh From , have been by desert or favour removed ; if so , you will send some Droans among us , which will hinder the Bees , or if they stay in the School still , they will be there as Slugs and Pull-back examples to others ; they being habituated in After 18. years of age by Statute they should be turned out of the Schools . infectious courses : And if you omit to elect them , they must ( being superannuated ) be most disgracefully thrown off , unless you will please to raise Means to dispose of them in some other good callings ; which were honourable indeed . 2. That there may be a Godly able Catechist to instruct them in the Principles of Religion , ( such a one the Statutes of the College allowed and appointed and honourable yearly stipend for him ) frequently , And withal that they ( though but circularly by 3 , or 4 in a morning ) may have leave to come to the Morning Sermon in the Note . Abbey . I know one of the Scholars of singular hope's now in the University , who hath punctually discovered unto me , how God was pleased powerfully to open his eyes , and to turn him from darkness to light in one of those Morning Sermons . 3. I humbly conceive the Statutes of Westminster Coll. need reviewing ; there is such a form of Grace ( as it is vulgarly called ) before and after Meat prescribed therein , as at the first sighed you will conclude savours very much of the darkness of those Popish times wherein they were first penned . 4. If there were now and then and inspection , examination , and trial of their Scholars progress in Piety and Learning , with a visible encouragement of such as do well , it would be in stead of many Spurs , to such as are ingenious . Mr. Buzby hath often assured me , that any one coming in there , and putting them to versify , does incredibly whet up , and raise their Fancies , which would be much more prevailing if Persons of Quality would honour them with their presence . 5. There is I fear some corner in the School full of Leaven which spreals most unhappily : Your inquisition after , purgation of it , likewise Exod. 12. 7 Electors by Statute the Dean of Westminster and his Assistant : M. of Trin. Col. cam . & his Assistant ; Dean of Christs church . Oxf. with his Assistant , and the School Master . the removing it utterly , ( as the Iewes were wont to do all Leaven out of their honses , with burning and execration of it , would he of singular use . I take the boldness to tender this to all the other Electers , and would charge it conscientiously upon my self . I doubt there is much of this Leaven lurks among youths in the seventh Form , ( let the most vigilant Master do what he can . 1. When they are advanced thither , they are all ( I think ) Monitors , wherein diverse of them show most Tyranni ••• • ride , making inferiors fell their Books sometime to serve their Lustest , and humour their prodigality , ( which they will not forget at the University ) else they must expect to be in the Black Bill . 2. The aull slugs stay longest there , and they being radicated in Evil like rotten Apples upon and heap , too often make others putrid , remiss , negligent , learn to Swear . Lie , etc. 3. There are others , being improved in their Intellectuals , grow so full of Self-confidence , that they shamefully degenerate when they come to the University . Hence ( Monacho tepido Abbati calido Episcopo tepido Archiepiscopo pergidis as once the Pope wrote to Baldwin ) when at Westminster , Golden Scholars , afterwards when in the University , Leaden Sophisters , and most drossy Bachelors , unprofitable Burdens in the place suckirg the fatness of the soil etc. 4. Their long continuance at School , especially of after elected to Cambridge or Oxford , makes them grow headstreng too often and 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 rebellious against the Master , and steel others aswell as themselves , with impudence , which we find after by sad experience . In the lact place , unless there be much circumspection in the choice of their Tutors , especially in these times when they come to the Universities , all your former care may be lost . It is a lamentable spectacle to see goodly ships miscarry in the Haven for want of and able and vigilant Pilot. Many very hopeful youths miserably undone for want of learned , godly , grave , and prudent Tutors , and such as are hearty friends to a through Reformation , which makes many tender hearted Parents bleed with perpetual sorrow . I hope the Lord , who hath already done much by you , will make you yet more renowned Instruments of his service , as in many other things , so in your encouraging and promoting Piety and Learning in Westminster ; If he please to honour you to purge Schools and Universities , you may with more encouragement raise Feoffces to buy in Above 9000. Churches and Chapels in England and Wales . J wish half so many Godly , Learned Ministers for the present . impropriations , you will soon ( by Gods blessing ) have able men to send abroad as Evangelicall Preachers till you have enough to fix in all places , and good lustices of Peace , as also solid , able , Parliament men all which my Lords and Gentlemen , is the earnest Prayer of Your most unworthy and humble Servant THOMAS HILL . Westminster , May , 3. 164 •