To the Right Reverend , Doct Stanton , Mr. Marshal , Mr. Herles , Mr. Nie , Mr. Whitaker , and Mr. Strong . Morning Lecturers in Westminster Abby , by the appointment of the Honourable Houses of PARLIAMENT , Abundance of the Spirit of JESUS CHRIST . YOu may justly wonder ( and it may be will blameme ) that I should be so forward to appear ( especially at this time being weakened by a quartane Ague of above seven Months continuance ) in so Dedecus Medicorum . public a Dress , which , ( what ever little warmth of Spirit may ( by the good hand of God arise to my self in the preparation of it ) yet will have very little beauty in the eyes of others , when it comes abroad . But ( so far as I understand my own deceitful heart ) I can truly say , I have reckoned this one of the most smarting twigs in this Rod , They only live to the public who can act for the public . that by my long sickness , I have been so much dead to the public ; and therefore whereas I might have preached many Sermons ( had the Lord been pleased to continue my health , to one Congregation , I may now in this way communicate one plain Sermon to many Congregations . And withal I can ingeniously say , I have watched for and opportunity publicly to congratulate your most advantageous improvement for the Churches service , in the continuance of your peaceable Gospel employment so happily begun in these Morning Exercises in Westminster Alii dolant lapides vos verò Architectos . Acts 19. 23 , 26. Abbey where you preach to Builders of Church and State , and the rather because I believe at first we all thought who were designed to that service , there would be no small stir about this way , as Paul said in the Acts , being Demetrius and his Company were like to have their Trade marred in preparing for their great Diana , by the light and power of Gospel Truth . But I hope we shall all the more confidently trust God whilst we live for the subduing of opposite Spirits , in the midst of any threatening Difficulties , when he leads us forth into his work , b • y the experience of his good hand upon us here . And I conceive I have as much reason with humble thankfulness to the God of Peace to congratulate that sweet , harmonious ( I had almost From March 1643. till Febr. 1645 , when I left it being sent down to Cambridge . 3 Iohn 9. said unparalleled ) Union among you , of which I was a joyful witness for well nigh two years together , whereas so many other Lectures have been shattered by Envy , and the spirit of Diotrephes some one among them affecting the pre-eminence . As also that visible success in the fruit of your pains , and the general acceptance you have , manifested by the numerous and almost uniform frequency of the Auditors in Winter as well as Summer , whereas the Peoples coming with respect of persons hath broken the neck of many other good Lectures . Only herein my joy is somewhat damped , that I was not more useful a 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 when I was engaged in that honourable service with you : blessed be the Lord of the Harvest , who hath in mercy thrust forth such a faithful Labourer into this large Field , who may supply Mr. Strong . my defects in being more helpful unto you . The Lord Iesus who hath promised not only to drop but pour out his Spirit as a precious fruit of his ascension , give you as able a Teacher in the place of that Man of God , Mr. Palmer , who now in Heaven inherits the sweet fruit of his sincere and indefatigable pains in the work of the Lord , whose Name will ( I hope ) be precious in Westminster for ever . The mighty Spirit of the Lord Iesus work in you , for you , and by you powerfully , and grant you may go forth conquering to conquer , rescuing many poor captive souls from under the power of the Devil : Be faithful in his service unto the death , and he will give you the Crown of life . Rev. 2. 10. Farewell in Him . Entertain this with your wonted candor from your weak Fellow Soldier , for Christ , and most unworthy Brother in Him . Thomas Hill. From my lodging in Westminster , May . 1. 1648.