TO The Right Honourable , Alderman Warner , Lord Major of the Famous City of LONDON ; The worthy Sheriffs , Aldermen and Common-Councel , All the sweet fruits of Truth and Love through CHRIST JESUS . AS when King Solomon built his Temple , which was Typical to Christ and his Church , 1 King . 7. 21. there were two Pillars which did both adorn and strengthen it : Jachin and Boaz. When Zachary speaks Prophetically of the Government of that Church , he tells you of two Staves , Beauty and Bans : Zach. 11. 10 , 14. And when Paul writes Apostolically of the building up , and beautifying the Churches of Christ , he commends to you Truth and Love . And if and Apocryphal Book may be herd ( as why not , in the instruction of manners , and things of this nature ) among three things of strength , Wine , Women and Truth , Truth carries it away as most potent . And as for the power of Love , Cant. 8. 6. Solomon will tell you it is as strong as death ; the powerful workings whereof , are most emphatically represented by Paul to the Corinthians , 1 Cor. 13. 4 , 5 , 6 , 7. Charity suffers long , and is kind ; charity envieth not ; charity vaunteth not it self , is not puffed up ; does not behave her self unseemly , seeks not her own , is not easily provoked , thinketh no evil , rejoiceth not in iniquity , but rejoiceth in the truth ; 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 omnia tegit . Beza . covereth all ( so I am bold to render the Greek word , rather then bears , because you have even the same in the end of that verse , endureth all things . And surely never was there more need of such and union in England , as Truth and Love would make up among Saints , then now , when the disaffected in all the Three Kingdoms are like to make a Prey upon the people , by reason of their unkind and most unbrotherly Divisions . This is like to be our sad Motto , Whilst we dash one against another , Dum collidimur frangimur . we are both like to be broken in pieces . If these differences were about Fundamentals , or any matters of Faith , God forbid but we should zealously , and resolutely appear in it : even they who are most moderate in their Opinions about externals and circumstantials ( I speak knowingly , for my self and many of my moderate Brothers ) when it comes to Subsatials of Faith and Worship , will answer as B. Andrews did , being asked at the first coming over of the Archbishop of Spalato , Whither he though the were a Protestant , or no ? he answered , Truly , Fr. L. Verulam . Apotheg . 241. I know not ; but he is a detestant of diverse Opinions of Room : So I am confident doe we abhor , not only Romish , Arminian , and Socinian Opinions , and whatever is unsound , and contrary to the Doctrine according unto godliness ; 1 Tim. 6. 3. Only we believe about all matters of Church-Government , which are neither so clear in Scripture , nor of such concernment to salvation , there had need be some Melancthons as well as Luthers ; there must be mortar to bind the bricks together , some soft Spirits ; if all be rugged , we shall have no Spiritual building . This is the scope of this plain Sermon , which now you have been pleased to make more yours , by your order for the publishing of it , intending ( I hope ) by your desires to have it repeated to your eyes , that you may the better repeat it in your practices . Durandus tells us Paul was pictured with a Sword , Paulus eum ense & libro pingitur , mucro furor Pauli , liber est conversio Sauli . Dur. l. 1. C. 3. and with a Book ; intimating by the sword , what he was before his Conversion ; by the Book , what after , when he so much minded the edification of the Churches of Christ . O that we Ministers and Brothers who differ , Potest mibi atiquid videri alteri aliud , sed neq ego quod dixero praescribo alteri , nee ille mihi . Aug. in Psal. 16. might lay aside our swords , and seriously try what faith and love will do to compose our unhappy and most unseasonable Controversies , which doubtless need not so divide us , neither should we in things of this nature , prescribe or impose one upon another . There were three Fellows of Merton College in Oxford , the one a Thomist , the other a Scotist , the third and Occamist , This learned Bishop Morton applies to the Papists , who all concur in having Transubstantiation , but whither per productionem or per eductionem , etc. cannot agree . that going to Woodstock to petition the King that they might have a door out of Merton College for their conveniency ; they all agreed to desire to have a door , but could not agree upon the manner of the Petition ; one was for Habeamus ostium , the other thought that too general , and therefore would have it Ostium fieri , but then the question was , Who should make it , or where ; the third Vt ostium factum sit , yet that pleased not . We all would have a Government , but cannot agree upon the manner , diverse forms being in view : Oh that Truth and Love might be the Umpire ! This I have for diverse years endeavoured , according to my measure , and still shall , what ever others say of me , as being confident , Moderate Counsels conduce much more to and happy settlement , then such as are high and rigid ; And I rest assured , that sober moderate Spirits are much better friends to Presbyterial Government ( which I desire may besettled here ) then they who drive so furiously . Its true , I believe the abounding of Heretical Opinions , and Schismatical Practices , have begotten many Malignants among us , but withal I fear , the severity of some Presbyterians gives too much advantage to Heterodox and Schismatical spirits . I cannot believe it , though I have often herd , That some of my Brothers were angry at this Discourse , because so moderate ; surely , it is either because they are guilty , and too much engaged in a party , whereas I being unengaged , can with freedom of spirit ( which liberty , I highly valve ) unpartially oppose what is amiss in any , and embrace what is good where ever I find it . Solomon says , A man of understanding is of a cool spirit : Prov. 17. 27. The Lord make us such , which will express a more full conformity to Christ , and a sweet resemblance of his spirit , which will be the beauty of Ministers and other Saints . My Lord , Be pleased with my humble and hearty acknowledgement of the many Respects of this Renowned City to me , to accept my Desires and Endeavors , to approve my self , From my Lodging in Westminster , May 8. 1648. Your most faithful Servant for your Salvation , Thomas Hill.