AA To the Worshipful his worthy Friend Richard Foxton Esquire , one of his Majesty's Justice of Peace for the Town of Cambridg , and others my ingenuous and candid Hearers therein . SIR ! IOW you much respect as and ancient Imanuël-Colledg man , where ( by the good hand of God upon me ) I had both my first University being , and well-being ; and likewise , as and old Disciple , a great friend to the most reverend and learned Mr Perkins ; yea , and as and Instrument of advancing Justice in the Commonwealth , of encouraging Religion in the Church , and Learning in the University ( according to your sphere ) as also my attentive and candid hearer for some years formerly in Cambridg : And I know not how better ( for the present ) to make any reciprocal return , then by tendering this Sermon ( such as it is ) to your acceptance ; and hoping that by you it may with the more advantage be transmitted to others in Cambridg , who are prepared to receive the love of the truth , 2 Thes. 2. 1 • . though delivered by me ; as also for your Soul-improvement , by raising your thoughts in your declining years to mind Eternity . It was the greatest part of it preached by me at Trinitie-Church in Cambridg , Febr. 13. 1647. and I can truly say , it was both framed at first upon a sick bed , ( when such thoughts are very seasonable ) and preached when I was under sad symptoms of wellnigh six months Quartane Ague . So desirous was I to promote the intended Combination for morning Sermons there , which depended upon me for the beginning of it , that with apparent hazard to my own health , ( being not only weakened by my disease , but having , upon and occasion of a Communion , preached three times within a few days before in Trinitie-Colledg Chappel ) I adventured upon the work out of and honest intention , though I had neither consent of Friends or Physicians . Admit I were not able to carry on or finish my discourse , as I desired , should I not rather have been pitied then bespattered , then grossly disparaged by son , and the present prevailing of my disease most shamefully misinterpreted by others , as if this were a Judgement of God upon me , for defending the University against the Town ; wherein they show as little Christianity as Wisdom . As for them , I earnestly desire they would seriously consider what our Saviour says , Mat. 12. 36. Every idle word that men shall speak , they shall give account thereof in the day of Judgement . Note . And if of every idle word , then undoubtedly of every uncharitable , censorious , lying , and blasphemous word . And likewise often remember that of the Prophet Zacharie , Zach. 1. 15. I am very soar displeased with the Heathen that are at ease : for I was but a little displeased , and they helped forward the affliction . When God whippe's his children , it is most unbecoming brothers to add to their stripes . He is no ingenuous servant that triumph's over his fellow ( unless he be guilty of some offence ) when he is brought low before his Master . And as for me , I am not ashamed to be made conformable to my head Jesus Christ , who was accounted Beelzebub , the prince of devils ; Mat. 12. 24. and to be reproached as one that was mad , which was the portion of the most wise and holy Apostle Paul . Neither shall I deny that this was and humbling Providence , that such and indisposition should surprise me then , Act. 26. 24. ( though it might well be so after a longer and stronger intention of spirits in prayer then my condition would bear ) to let splenetic fumes more prevailingly surprise me in preaching at that time , then in any other employment since my ague began ; wherein I desire to sanctify God's Name , by abasing my self , and exalting Him without whom we can do nothing . I wish all may make a right interpretation of his actions which are infinitely wise , and consider that Ministers , being public persons , as they have consolations that they may comfort others , 2 Cor. 1. 3 , 4. so have they many times afflictions for the edification and salvation of others : 2 Tim. 2. 10. Paul is and instance of both . And they must make account they may possibly inherit the same Apostle's portion ; one while possibly to be adored , and almost sacrificed unto , Act. 14 , 11 , 12 , 13. and yet soon after to be stoned , vers . 19. I were very stupid , did I not observe the various aspect of diverse in Cambridg-Town towards me in some bypast years , wherein I have , and I hope still shall unchangeably endeavour to approve my self a true friend to their best good ( in defiance to all unkindness ) and a faithful servant to their souls . Psal. 24. 6. Yet , by the good hand of God upon me , there have been withal a generation of Seekers which have cleaved unto , and with some fruitful acceptance , attended upon my Ministry . I would not valve personal respects , in comparison of that acceptance which hath reference unto the glory of Christ in Gospel-success . I remember , not without thankfulness to my good God , with what welcome entertainment many entertained my weak and plain preaching here in former years , An. Dem. 1628. 1629. when I was your preacher at Andrew's . I hope I shall never forget how much of God's goodness I found among you both in his assistance and your acceptance in the great plague ; 1630. ( he can make by his presence a Wilderness prove a Paradise ) neither must I pass by with what readiness of mind you attended upon my occasional ministry in 1643 , when Providence cast me for some time among you , the sons of violence having forced me from the place I then had in North-Hampton-shire . Tychmersh . But whence is this Eclipse ? whence this black cloud ? ( God and some men's conscience know ) which I doubt not but it will soon vanish , as Athanasius said of Arrius . Nubecula cit • transitura . Shall I trust God for my soul , and not for my reputation , for a crown , and not for a crust ? It was indeed my portion to be involved in those unhappy differences between the University and Town of Cambridg , about their Privileges , when I had the honour to serve them as Vice-Chancellor . Is that a sufficient ground of such and unkind alteration , that they calumniate and traduce the Innocent thereupon ? Alas ! poor University , how hast thou offended the Town of Cambridg which live's so much upon thee ? ( as by woeful complaints appear's when a great plague scatter's the scholars ) that as of old it was in Tertullian's time , a crime to be a Christian : so it's now little less ( among some for want of Christian charity ) to be and engaged Universitie-man , and to stand for that , though he be obliged thereunto by the Rules of Ingenuity and Conscience . I do heartily wish , where our privileges are not subservient to the public good , they were regulated and bounded by those who have power as our competent Judges ; but neither University nor Town must be Judges in their own case . we cannot give them away , they must not take them away , till the Parliament ( to whom we have appealed ) do determine the controversy . In the mean while , till they can have leisure to mind it , why should it be offensive for us to act soberly , according to that which the University hath been so long invested with , by the donation of Princes , confirmation of Parliaments , or by a voluntary composition betwixt both Corporations . Certainly , this is no sufficient ground for such passionate unchristian invectives , whereby they fret themselves to do evil , Psal. 37. 8. gratify him who is the Accuser of the Brothers , Rev. 12. 10. and the father of lies . Were it my portion only to be thus injured , John 8. 44. I should suspect my self ; but my reverend Brothers , who deserve much better then I can , fare as ill from some , when one of them lately was forced by a violet fit of and ague , being preaching at the Universitie-Church , to break off not long after he began ; it would make one tremble to hear what language was spoken thereupon aaginst him , for the holy hand of God upon him , which might have befallen and Apostle ; and against others of us engaged as Master's of Colleges with him . O that I knew what language to speak , to win them to terms of amity with the University : Surely the Devil get's much advantage by these differences ; they are most unhappy Instruments who ever do inflame them , whither University or Townsmen . Is God's Word the worse because delivered by men they now dislike ? Is not this sad , that men , whose ministry they have valued , that they can scarce bring off your spirits to hear them preach . This is the devil's plot , in fomenting those prejudices to hinder the good of their souls , and the spreading of the Gospel . Herein mistake me not , I do not complain for want of Auditors . Yet it grieve's me to see some of more eminent abilities , whose gifts were formerly highly valued , now to be sleighted , because engaged in Universitie-employment , as Master's of Colleges . Yet , what ever some think of me , and how unkindly soever they have dealt with me , I will apply my self to you ( whose Christian candor , and Gospel-ingenuitie , I have had some years experience of ) not without respect to their good , who wish me none . I doubt not but you will bear my wonted plainness I can give you no more real testimony of my cordial love unto you , then by suggesting some few things , which , by God's blessing , may advance the good of your souls . I will begin with your duty towards God , Directions . who is our Alpha , and Omega ; our first cause , and last end : as all the good we receive is derived from him , Rev. 1. 8. so all the good we receive must be resolved unto him . Prov. 3. 5 , 6. Trust in the Lord with all your hearts , and lean not to your understanding : In all your ways acknowledge him , and he will direct your paths . Acquaint your selves more and more with worshipping him purely , according to his will . I doubt Cambridg hath been too patient ( I mean the Saints there ) of sinful mixtures , not minding sufficiently the simplicity that is in Christ . 2 Cor. 11. 3. If you would have much of the presence of Christ , love purity , he walks in the midst of the golden candlesticks ; Revel . 2. 2. expect much of the presence of his Spirit , where there are pure golden Ordinances . Let the Ministry of the Gospel be more precious unto you , receive the love of the truth , and attend upon preaching without respect of persons . Do not ye blush to remember , that when the truly Noble Earl of Manchester had picked a choice combination of most able Ministers out of the Country , that they should ride a dozen or twentie miles to preach a Sermon to you , and sometimes so few hearers that they were discouraged to preach ? What ever you say or think of Scholars , did not they help to fill up Assemblies , there would be thin Auditories at week days Lectures . Remember ( I pray ) our Savior's words , He that hears you , Lycia 10 , 16. hears me , and he that despises you , despises me , and he that despises me , despises him that sent me . Maintain Christian Communion , whereby you may join your gifts , experiences and prayers . O the amiable beauty of the spirits of primitive saints , who did so sweetly close , Act. 2 ▪ 4 • ▪ as , They continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine , and fellowship , and in breaking of bred , and prayers . I can remember , when , in the most corrupt and dangerous times , some of you would adventure even your all , ( so destructive was then the high Commission Court ) to enjoy a praying-day together ; what hath now deadened your spirits , that now these things are so much neglected ? Is there not as much need as ever ? Does not the Churches exigents bespeak your wrestling importunities at the throne of grace . Chide your selves , and one another out of this dullness , or disjointing , and labour to remove the obstructions what ever they are . Often remember their practice , when one Apostle was in prison ( we have many in persecution ) instant prayer was made for him by the Church , Act. 12. 5. they prayed earnestly , and sped successfully . Yet , in your Christian communion , act soberly , and with a godly prudence . There are that admit young Scholars into fellowship with them in private duties , or rather into public : I dislike it not , that any Saints join to provoke one another to love and good works . Rom. 12. 3. But do not encourage them to do any thing beyond the proportion of their gifts , and without a call from God . Far be it from me to snib the movings of God's Spirit in the weakest and meanest of his Saints . I desire to live no longer then I cherish the least good in any , if indeed it be good duly circumstantiated . I know the direction Peter give's,1 Pet. 4. 9 , 11. Use hospitality one to another without grudging . As every man hath received the gift , even so minister the same one to another , as good stewards of the manifold grace of God , ( which is a place they allege for that purpose . ) But , 1. It may be this grace here mentioned , is chiefly the grace of Bounty . 2. If it be meant of spiritual gifts and graces , and their exercise in prophesying , I grant , in Ecclesiâ constituendâ , in a Church to be constituted , occasionally , especially when upon trial by competent Judges of their abilities for the ministry , ( with learned Dr Ames ) something may be dONE that way , Case . Consc. lib . 4. cap 25. de Voc. ad Minister . sine singulari vocation , without a singular call . But that the admiration of some few ignorant ( though honest ) women , who judge much by quick expressions ; ( which are often beyond the experience and judgement of the speaker himself , being borrowed rather from others ) or that one young scholar applauding of another , should be the call of Christ , I am not yet satisfied ; but shall welcome any light that shall clear up any truth of Christ , though never so much against my present opinion . I do not lay the strength of a Minister's call upon a Prelate's blessing of him ; nor upon a concurrence of all external circumstances and formality ; Note ▪ ( though I heartily love and desire order in the Churches ) neither must any judge of their call by their assistance . Many dear Saints call that a spiritual desertion of God in prayer , which is rather some darkness by the clouding of Melancholy . Other Novices account that assistance from God in preaching oftentimes , which is rather heat of fancy , some warmth by applause , mixed indeed with some stirring affections . Bee whetstones to sharpen one another to raise some monument of your thanksgiving and thanksdoing , for God's distinguishing goodness to Cambridg . When other parts of the Kingdom were steeped in blood , you were dry ; when destroying Angels swept away many in other places , you were but scratched . O never let it be forgotten how God snatched Cambridge out of the fire , in staying the plague these two last years ; should not you now provoke your Magistrates more to mind the sanctifying the Lord's day , to restrain by their power those profane pollutions which cry for another more sweeping plague ? Because they may not do all , but the University must share in power , therefore will they do nothing ? This , I doubt will be no satisfying answer , when the Lord shall say to a Magistrate , Give and account of thy stewardship . Luke 16. 2. I could likewise wish there were a greater harmony of Judgments among you ; however let not difference of opinions breed difference of affections . Love the meanest Saints more for that of God you see in them , then you neglect them for what they differ from you that is not sinful . Convers meekly together , ( distance increases difference ) you may possibly satisfy one another . As long as we nourish prejudices , and take it for granted , there is no possibility of reconciliation , the devil blow's the coal more , and exasperate's the flame , till ( it may be ) men bite and devour one another's names and reputations ; at least , do not suddenly excommunicate all you account carnal ; Gal. 5. 1 • . for Reprobates , though you cannot embrace them with a love of Complacency , yet must you with a love of Pity ; there is not only Brotherly kindness , 2 Pet. 1. 7. but Charity : so will you commend Religion to them who judge more of it by what they see , then by what they hear . Finally , as for my self , when they speak evil of me , Photii Epist. 10. I will satisfy my self with that of the ancient Writer , If the things thou producest bee true , thou hast not hurt but advantaged me , whilst thou by reproving faults , mayest procure reformation : if they be falls , thou dost more advantage me ; for thou makest me more watchful to abstain , not only from such actions , but even from such thoughts ; only , the more vigilant others are over me , pray the more for me , Isid. Hispal . because of my observers . I must say with the Father , I thank as well God for the cruelty of my Adversaries , as the love of Friends . It hath been my portion to suffer much by tongues among you , since my being Vice-Chancellor , and to receive more unkind and unjust censures from some of Cambridg , then ever in all my life before ; ( my comfort is they are but few , and men whose interest was crossed , and therefore Self will be angry , and revenge often , though never so injuriously ) yet nothing shall it discourage me from serving your and their souls . Let them misinterpret the hand of God upon me in my sickness , and the effects thereof ; yet when ever God please's to restore my bodily health , by preaching to promote the health of their souls : I will beg by prayer the best good from God for them , who cannot speak a good word of me before men . I had enemies enough because I appeared for Reformation , which I would not decline ( if I know my heart ) out of love to my God , though I had not been ( as I am ) under the bound of a solemn Covenant obliging me thereunto . When the competition comes between God's will and man's , Peter hath taught how to resolve , Act. 4. 19. yea , that heroical Heathen Socrates , 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 Vide Plat. Apol. Socrat. ( which may make us blush ) being accused , said , If upon such conditions ( they being dishonourable ) you Athenians will absolve me , I embrance you , I love you well , yet I will rather obey God then you . None need ( especially not such as I think fear God ) express more passion , because I would not , contrary to my oath betray ( which it may be they expected from me , having been their preacher , with more acceptance formerly then it is fit for me to mention ) privileges with which I was betrusted as Vice-Chancellor , lifting up my hand to the most high , that I would maintain the statutes ( which include's them ) so far as they were agreeable to the Statutes and Ordinances of the Kingdom which are or shall be extant . If the Parliament had altered them , or when they shall please to bound them any way , the matter of my oath being taken away , I am at liberty . In the mean while , why may not the Vice-Chancellor act for the University , as well as Mr Major for the Town of Cambridg , in pursuance of his Oath ? The Mighty God of Peace , dry up the spring of these most unhappy and unseasonable differences , when there are so many dissensions abroad ; which shall be my prayer and endeavour till the Lord please to accomplish it . If I must still suffer under the uncharitableness of any , I shall desire to kiss the rod of my Heavenly Father , Mic. 6. 9. who hath appointed it in this place where he hath been good unto me ; and earnestly labour , that overcoming my self , Rom , 12. 20 , •• I may overcome evil with good , and not suffer my self to be overcome of evil , that in so doing , I may heap coals of fire upon their head , not to destroy them by burning , Igniculi Charitatis . but coals of charity to melt them , and so mould them into and unfeigned love of all the Brothers who love the Lord Jesus Christ sincerely . If this prevail not , I will make use of Paul's sovereign cordial , Rejoicing in the Testimony of my conscience , that in simplicity and godly sincerity , and not in fleshly wisdom , but by the grace of God I have had my conversation in the world , and more abundantly to youwards . Trin. Col. Camb. June the 7th 1648. Yours in the Gospel of Christ Jesus , Thomas Hill.