TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE The HOUSE of PEERS Assembled in PARLIAMENT . Thrice Noble Worthies : IF any thing were presented in this subsequent Sermon , meriting your Honours acceptance ; it must be that despised Jewel of plain-dealing . The truth is ; Considering on the one hand , the Auditors dignity to whom I spoke , my desire was to avoid rudeness of Expression ; Remembering , on the other , JEHOVAH'S Majesty in whose Name I spoke , my endeavour was to use faithfulness in Admonition . I well know , Reprehension to Great men must be wrapped up ( as we do Pills ) in Sugar , Obiurgationi semper aliquid blandi commisce ; sacilius penetrant verba quae mollia vadunt quam quae aspera . Sen. that it may more easily be swallowed , and work before they think on it . We must come to your Lordship's byssinis verbis with soft and silken Phrases , as the Mother of Cyrus charged him who was to speak to the King . But yet withal , the Great GOD who hath advanced you to Nobility , hath engaged us to Fidelity : it is no time for Ministers to be cold or silent , when sins are bold , and sinners impudent . That commission given to the Prophet Isaiah , Isa. 40.1 . Praedicator veritatis tacens confumitur ; flagellate con s • ientia usque ad consumptionem illum qui homines quando opus est vetatis verbere non fl • gellat . Lyr. Interveteres Philosophos verbum non vulgariter celebratum , tres deform • s filias à tribus sormosis matribus oriri , à p • ce otium , familiaritat • contemptum à veritate odium . and in him to all Gods Messengers , was never yet revoked : Cry aloud , spare not , lift up thy voice like a trumpet , to tell Judah of her sins , and Israel of her transgressions . It is true , Preachers by their faithful boldness will find enemies as Moths to their persons , and Worms to eat up their credits ; but by their treacherous silence they shall procure a worse Moth to their souls , and Worm to gnaw their consciences . Freeness in speaking truth , may occasion hatred from men without ; but it will certainly procure love from a gracious God above , and peace from a serene breast within . My Lords ; It was the unhappy lot of this Discourse , when preached , to meet with many Auditors whose ears were hedged about with thorns , and tongues have since been sharp as swords : These have branded both it : and the Author , ( probably in your Honours hearing ) with the scandalous reproach of Malignancy , and what else might render the one fruitless , and the other odious : For what reason I know not , except ( that for which St. Paul was accounted and enemy by the Galathians ) telling the truth : Gal. 4.16 . As if flattery were the badge of amity ; and they who are faithful to your Souls , Haec est conditio ve • itatis , •• eam semper inimicitie consequuntur , sicut per adulationem pernicious • e amiciti • e conquiruntur ; l • bent • r quod d •• ect •• auditur , & offendit omn • quod nolumus . Hier. Infoelix amicitia quae illum quem diligit , ta cendo trad • tO diabolo . Carthus . Magis amat obiurgator sana • s , quàm • dulator dissimulans . Aug. must therefore be reckoned as false to your Cause . But sure I am , in the end , these seeming Friends will appear your worst Enemies , who would tickle your Honours with flatteries to the death ; while your seeming reputed Enemies will approve themselves your best Friends , who by gentle blows of Reproof on the ears , endeavour to rouse you out of the swoon of Security . For my own part , I hope I shall ever abhor as well verbal , as real Simony ; and rather choose , proveritate convitium , quàm pro adulation beneficium ; To expose my self to biting Detractors , than incur the just censure of a fawning Flatterer . For these envious Whisperers , I shall become and hearty petitioner in my Saviours words , Father , forgive them : And if by my removal , yea , ruin , ( though too unworthy ) any thing may be contributed to the settling of Zions bound , I shall thank them for doing me such a favour against their wills ; and my hope is , their wrathful calumny poured out like mud to defile my Name , shall prove like water to cleanse my ways the more . For your HONOURS , I bless God that you were the Ear-witnesses and Judges of my doctrine ; neither doubt I but your Wisdoms will discern malice to be the spring of those slanders cast upon my self . As for these Labours , ( which if weighed in the balance of a severe judgement , I confess are too light ) it hath pleased your Lordship's to allow them some grains of your charity , in a favourable construction ; and find them weight , to set the stamp of your Authority upon them , and make them currant Coin for the Press . Them , together with my self , I lay at your Honours feet , and in submission to your command have committed to the World's eye . Some illustrations of the Text , which I then omitted , lest I should tyre your patience , I have now inserted , lest I should injure the Sermon . Give me leave ( my honoured Lords ) to end with one request to You , for GOD ; to GOD , for You. To you : That however I may deservedly be cast out of your memories , yet the sacred Truths herein contained may be imprinted on your breasts . For you . That the LORD of Lords would strengthen your Honours hearts and hands , to the preservation of Purity and restauration of Unity : That so in your Noble Persons and Families , you may be the happy Subject's ; to the Church and Kingdom , honourable Instruments , of many choice and precious Blessings . To which he shall ever say Amen , Who is , Your HONOURS Unworthy , yet Faithful Servant , NATH . HARDY .