To the right Honourable , HENRY Earl of Mancheſter , Lord Privy Seal , and one of his Majesties moſt Honourable Privy Council . My moſt honoured Lord , SEeing it is a Maxim of divine and humane Law , moſt infallibly true , Suum cuiq . reddere , I hold my self obliged in Obedience to it , to dedicate unto your honourable Patronage the enſuing Tract , moſt truly and humbly acknowledging Tam me , quam omne meum , to be your Lordship's Creature , made fortunate by the Rays of thoſe ſweet Influences which have iſſued from your Lordships ever Candide Aſpect , which Bounty ( my inability wanting means of any Requital or other Retribution ) does claim this my poor Infant-worke , together with all other Services , both as a duty of Tribute unto your Lordship's high Merit , and as a signal or testimonial Badge of that ever bounden Gratitude and Recognition which my Heart and Tongue rendereth unto your Lordship's goodness . Your honourable Greatness [ as able ] and your gracious Benignity ( as willing ) to protect it , hath Encourag • worser my humble Boldness , to beſeech your noble acceptance of it . I neither will nor can preſume it worthy your Lordship's Perusal , not daring to arrogate ſo high as to invite ſo great a Judgement to descend beneath it's proper Sphere , to behold A thing ſo mean and low : It's ſufficient that your Lordſhip vouchſafe the loan of your honourable name , to give it credit unto others of the leſſer Orb . For though this Tract ( as I am ſomewhat confident ) contains in it nothing but what is juſtifiable by the evidence of Truth ; yet it is likely to meet with oppoſition , Quia veritas odium parit ; but it being quit from harms by ſuch as are Friends to the virtue of truth ( ſplendent as light radiated from the Sun ) it may ſerve ut fragmentum in Cophinis Chriſti , Mat. 14.20 . Marc. 12.42 . or otherwiſe , ut minutumi : Gazophylacio Eccleſiae : how ever your Lordſhip and the world may find , that Inter res ſeculares , I have ſpared ſome time for ſacred designs , taught to do ſo well by the rare Preſident of your Lordship's divine Enchyridion de contemplation mortis et immortalitatis , a piece of ſuch admirable excellence , as would exſe ( without your honourable name or dignity ) protect it self . But my Modicum ( leſſer than a mere ſhadow to that perfect ſubſtance ) implores both your honourable regard to the Author and work , and alſo Front ſerena to entertain this humble duty of him , whoſe perpetual ſuit unto the Supremeſt is , for all successful bleſſings on the Perſon and ſtate of your honourable Lordſhip , and noble Poſterity both in stock and branches , as well for health and life , to be happily lengthened here , as for Eternity , to be enjoyed hereafter ; & for ſome manifeſtation of his Cordial meaning ( the soul of verbal expreſſions ) he really wiſhes for ſuch Employment as may testify him to be Your Lordship's moſt faithful and humble Servant ; PEDAELL HARLOWE .