To my Right Worthy FRIEND , Mr. JOHN RVSHOVT Of LONDON Merchant , and Inhabitant in the Parish of Dionis Back-Church , the blessings of the throne and footstool . Honoured SIR , IT was a sorrowful loss occasioned the delivery of this Sermon in your ears , and the seasonable comfort you then found , caused those desires which ( being to me commands ) occasion the presenting of it to your eyes . The trial wherewith God hath been pleased to exercise you , cannot but be grievous , yet a patient sufferance and sanctified use will make it precious : no better means of support under , and benefit by this trial then faith , which is both a powerful Antidote against the cross , and a skilful Alchemist to extract spiritual advantage out of temporal losses . It is true you have lost a hopeful son , but faith will eye God , as a wise and gracious Father . Charity comforts you in the hope that he hath gained , the enjoyment of glory by his dissolution : Faith will instruct you in the Christian art , how to gain increase of grace by this affliction . It is the justice of God that he never punisheth without a cause , it is his mercy that he ordereth all to a good end , let repentance find out and bewail since deserving , and faith will apprehend the benefit intended . O divine grace of faith , many daughters have done worthily , but thou surmountest them all ; thou regulatest our actions , and moderatest our passion , thou teachest us how to enjoy , and suppliest us in what we want ; by thee we find the sweetness of a God in the creature-comforts we have , and the sweetness of those comforts we loose in a God . And now worthy Sir , what bitter counsel could I prescribe you then this of Faith ? what fuller example of faiths energie could I set before you then that of Abraham , who by faith gave up that Isaac to God , whom God had conferred on him in love . The picture of this believing Patriarch , offering up his obedient Isaac , you have delineated in the following Sermon . Let Abrahams steps be your walk , and his bosom shall be your rest ; imitate him as a son in the grace of Faith , and you shall be and heir together with him in the grace of life , whech is the prayer of him who is Your devoted servant in all Christian and Ministerial offices , NATH . HARDY .