TO THE RIGHT Honourable Sir RICHARD GURNY Knight and Baronet , Lord Major of the City of London , together with the Right Worshipful the Sheriffs and Aldermen of the same City , The continual feast of a good Conscience be ever multiplied . SIRS , MAy it please you , The Scottish King being imprisoned in Mortimers hold , comforted himself and deceived the sorrows of his bondage , by scraping the Story of Christ crucified upon the walls , with his nails : Even so God writeth the laws , and dictates of Conscience upon a wall , the wall of Conscience , Murus aheneus ; so as all the rules of Divinity , of nature , of nations , and of positive laws , as they relate to Conscience , are like the handwriting , Dan. 5. herbae Parietariae , wallflowers . And they are written and sculptured with a nail too ; but a more stiff and potent nail then that of the Scottish King . Judge not ex ungue , etc. but by a retrograde crisis , judge the nail by the finger , which is expressly called digitus Dei , Exod. 31. 18. and what can the nail of such a finger be , but unguis adamantinus , as it is adjuncted , Jer. 17. 1 ? and need it hath to be no less , unless the pen be more soft then the paper : for if our hearts be hearts of adamant , Zech. 7. 12. then the style that writes characters upon them had needs be a pen of iron , and the nail of and Adamant . I present here your Worthinesses with a book ; a book , as St Bernard ingeniously , for the rectifying whereof , all other books are written ; I except not the very Book of books it self . For there are foure Books written by God , for the sons of men , which are thus to be classed and ordered . They are either the Books of Grace , or of Nature . The Books of Grace are either outwar • or inward . The outward Book of Grace is the holy Bible . The inward Book of Grace is the holy Spirit , the great Doctor of the Church . The outward book of nature is the world , or book of the Creatures , which is God unfolded . The inward Book of nature is this very book , whose seals I have , in the ensuing Tra •• a • e , broke open , the Book of Conscience , so called Apoc. 20. 12. That which one likes another will dislike ; some have been such gross flatterers as to commend Nero , and some again such detractors as to dispraise Trajan ; one men pottage will be another's coloquintida ; the same son was Rachels Ben-oni & Jacob's Benjamin . The same in scription on the plaster which made Belshazzar quiver for fear , made Darius , his successor quav • r for joy . The very same faculty of Conscience which entertains and feasts one , starves or chokes another . And the Commentary must not look for a better lot then the Text , nor the Sermon then the Theme . I know too well the ways of this town , to expect other : but for the publishing hereof , I have this excuse , which must prevail with and ingenuous nature , that I have been mastered by entreaties thereunto , so as if there be any error , in that regard , their burden must be my case . Now I pray God keep your Honour , and Worships , in grace , unto glory , and that as the best means ▪ conducing to that end , you here exercise your selves to keep a good Conscience in all things , both towards God , and towards man . Your Hon. and Wor. humble , and faithful Servant , in the things of God , and Christ , JOHN JACKSON .