TO HIS RESCPECTED FRIEND AND CHRISTIAN SISTER , Mris MARRY WIGHT , widow , in Lawrence Pountney in London . HOnoured Sister , I salute you in our Lord Iesus . To this Relation following touching your beloved Daughter , [ the most whereof your self , and a good part whereof , your Son , ( by a special Providence of God , bringing him from Oxford hither , at that time of love , ) have been both Eye-and Ear-witnesses , ] as you have the nearest interest of any : so it cannot but be acceptable to you , to retain such a Monument of the Exceeding Riches of GODS GRACE manifested to her , and uttered by her ; that until April 6. for foure years together , had been so deeply afflicted in Spirit , tossed with Tempest , and not comforted . Whereby both your self , and all your Christian friends in London , Daintrie , in and about Shrewsbury , and elsewhere , that have known your Sisters sad condition ; and have prayed and mourned for her ; now that God hath restored comforts to her , and to her mourners , ( Isa. 57 , 18. ) they may the more be stirred up to praise and magnify the Name of the God of Pardon , the God that hears Prayer . And if the Lord please to move in the reading hereof , it may administer some door of hope , to some other poor souls , that are in as sad a condition , in as woeful and doleful a plighted , as your Daughter lately was in , and had so continued , especially since she was about eleven or twelve years of age , till now of late , that she is towards sixteen , as you more fully know . I do acknowledge the LORDS goodness , and bless his holy Name for his gracious dispensation towards me , that by means of Mris Sarah Jones ( then of Lambeth ) he brought me to sympathise with you , when ( about ten or eleven years ago ) your soul was ( as it had been for some years together , ) in sad despair : and that soon after he refreshed me with the refreshings that he gave in to your soul . And that hereby the most wise God , made such way for acquainting me so fully also , first with your beloved Daughter Sarah her sorrowful , and then with her so joyful estate : and that gave me so many opportunities of being frequently with her , that I also with your self , might be a witness of both ; and might be and instrument of Publishing to the world , THE EXCEEDING RICHES OF HIS GRACE , EXALTED towards her ; and by her to many sad despairing souls , and to others : So as I hope the Lord will make it instrumental for the great refreshing of many poor , sinful , sorrowful , weary souls ; that thus may be partakers of the same . When some shall hear that when your Daughter was struck both Deaf and Blind , and so could neither hear the Word , nor read it ; that then should be the time of love . And when they shall read such unfoldings of Gospel-Mysteries by a child , newly comforted , before she could hear any Creature speak to her ; ( page . 16. ) such descantings on several choice Scriptures , discovering the Gospels pith and marrow , that was folded up therein : so amplifying them by illustrations , and making such application : some will be ready to reject all , as incredible : some will gaze on you , or say ; Blessed is the womb that bore such a child ; instead of exalting God alone . Then have you need to remember what answer Jesus Christ gave to such and expression , ( Luk. 11. 27 , 28. ) and what he said , Rejoice not in this , — but rather rejoice that your Name is written in Heaven . When some shall read , how her eyes and ears were opened , first for a time , when was greatest need , and shut again for a season ; and how when in humane reason , she was unlike to live two days more : that then , and not till then the Lord should raise her up by Faith , to EÀTE and ARISE ; and then to WALK , ( page . 133-138-141 . ) they will wonder . And some will come , or send to you , to your son , and to your daughter , to inquire about it ; as some came to Hezekijah , to inquire of that wonder , that was occasioned by him , ( 2 Chron. 32. 24-31 . ) The lifting up of his heart thereupon , and his not rendering according to the benefit done unto him : [ which you herd sweetly opened and applied , on the day of Thanksgiving , for your daughters restoring ; page . 144. ] and his humbling himself for that lifting up of his heart ; are all writ for our instruction and benefit : as also Herods taking Glory to himself , Act. 12.22 , 23. and Christs warning against this , Joh. 5.44 . All this showing what we are subject unto ; and what cause there is to look up to Jesus Christ our strength , our all in all ; that he would not leave us to our selves ; but make us like himself , humble , ( Phil. 2 . 3-9 . ) and like his Apostles , that rend their garments when they were admired ; and led such out to the alone exalting of the God of Heaven himself in his Son , ( Act. 14. 14. Act. 3. 12 , 13. ) Who shortly will bring down every high thing , and he alone will be exalted in the Earth : When great voices shall say , THE KINGDOMES OF THIS WORLD , ARE BECOME OUR LORDS , AND HIS CHRISTS ; AND HE SHALL REIGN TO THE AGES OF AGES , Rev. 11. 13-15 . Even so , Come Lord Jesus ; Amen . The joy hereof frequently refresheth with the refreshings of God : London ( Postscript . Months according to Holy Scriptures , begin at New Moons , ( Phasis , or first appearing time , ) Num. 10. 10 Num. 28. 11. Greek : Psal. 81. 3. Heb. ( called Months , from Moons . Thus in this year 1648. the first Month Nisan ( Ester 3.7 . ) begins March 14. vulgar : 2d Month Ziu , ( 1 King . 6. 1. ) begins April 13th : 3d Month Sivan ( Ester 8. 2. ) began May 12. etc. The rest , ( with their significations , etc. ) being published in the Scripture-Almanack ; the Relator thinking to make use of , with the Vulgar Calendar , in the ensuing Relation ; was led as yet to forbear it , till thereby people be furthered to understand the Scripture Language therein ; lest he might seem to many Readers , a Barbarian , 1 Cor. 14. 9. 11. 2d Month Ziu , 2d day . Vulg. April 27. Revised AEthanim 3. Vulg. Septemb. 21. 1647. Your fellow-servant and Brother , having & holding the witness of Iesus ; HENRIE JESSE , alias HENRIE JACIE . MAy 24. 1647. Mris SARAH WIGHT , being then still very weak in body , ( and keeping bed since April 6. ) said thus to the Relator : I would others might hear how graciously the Lord hath dealt with me , the chiefest of sinners , that none might DESPAIR and murmur , as I have done : Though I murmured as they in the Wilderness , as much as those that fell , yet he hath brought me into the land of Canaan : and hath brought Legion to her right mind , and set her at his feet . I was strongly persuaded that what I did eat or drink , it was as the unworthy eating the Sacrament , I still did cat and drink my own damnation : every thing I did , or saw , was terror to me . So it remained , and might have remained for ever , had not his loving kindness prevented me , and drawn me to himself . O that all creatures , reasonable and unreasonable , might praise the Name of the Lord | And I would others might hear of this , that none might PRESUME : For if they knew the terrors that I have felt , the terrors of Hell , for sinning against light , against God , and against a Parent , for murmuring , lying , revolting ; ( judging I had committed that impardonable since , ) if they knew what it is to have God hide his face , and be as and enemy , they would not presume .