To my well ▪ beloved friends and neighbours of my charge in WOOD STREET LONDON . Right dearly beloved in the Lord , THis poor work of mine , the firstfruits of my labours in this kind , muſt needs pass through your hands to the public view , not only in regard of the special intereſt you have in me , whom your ſelves were pleaſed many years ſince to choose to be your Paſtor to feed your ſouls , but alſo in regard the work it ſelf was at firſt collected , and compoſed purpoſely for your ſervice and uſe . It is now above twenty years ſince the Lord was pleaſed to open a door unto me for the preaching of the Goſpelof Chriſt amongſt you , wherein , though with much weakness , I have endeavoured to the utmoſt of my power , I bless God , to built you up in the knowledge of God and of Chriſt ▪ and need no other witneſſes then yourſelves , that I have not ſought yours but you , as having indeed from my firſt entrance amongſt you reſolved with the Apoſtle , very gladly to ſpend , and to be spent for you , though the more abundantly I loved you the less I were loved by you . Amongſt other ways wherein I have ſtudied to be ſerviceable to your ſouls , it pleaſed God to put into my heart that I would undertake the unfolding of ſuch paſſages of the holy Scripture as were ſomewhat more difficult and obſcure to ſuch as would come in and partake of my labours therein ; and the end I propounded to my ſelf in this was , both that I my ſelf might hereby be the better enabled in public alſo to declare unto you the whole counsel of God , as occaſion was offered ; and that you likewiſe might with the more advantage and comfort exerciſe your ſelves in your private reading of thoſe ſacred volumes . Now having for several years ſpent ſome time every Lords day in this employment , I was at length importuned by ſome friends , that were partakers of my labours therein , to prepare thoſe Annotations for the Press , which were the chief ſubſtance of that which I had collected for that ſervice . They alleged what ſatisfaction and comfort themſelves had received in the hearing of them , and what and advantage it might be both to them and others , if they might have them ready at hand at all times to inform them in any thing they ſcrupled in their private reading ; and ſo far I was ſwayed with what they ſaid , that I reſolved in the publiſhing of one part of them to make trial whither they would find that approbation and welcome abroad , that might give encouragement to ſend • orth the reſt after them . Theſe indeed come forth in a ſad time , when arms are in far more requeſt then books ; but we muſt herein ſubmit to the good will of God . It hath fared with this Book in this , as with many a traveller that hath prepared for a journey when the sun ſhined fair , and yet was conſtrained at laſt to go forth in a ſtorm . When I began firſt to tranſcribe theſe Notes for the Press the sky was clear and ſhined upon us , and yet now when they ſhould go forth , the whole kingdom is overſpread with a cloud , that is like to pour down showers of blood upon the whole land : the Lord give us grace to turn to him , who hath promiſed to be a refuge from the storm . Well , but yet the book being paſſed the Press , and being withal to go upon Gods business , I was unwilling to forbear the publiſhing of it , eſpecially when I began to conſider , that the drift of it was to help men to read the Scripture with profit , and that there is never more need for men to be much in ſtudying Gods word then in troubleſome and ſad times , God having there ſtored up thoſe cordials for us which in ſuch times muſt cheer up the ſick fainting ſpirits of his poor afflicted ſervants : unless thy Law had been my delight , says David , Pſal . 119. 92. I then had periſhed in my afflictions . Having therefore reſolved to publiſh it , and to leave the success to the good providence of God , I here preſent it to you in the firſt place , to whom it does of right belong . If it may prove a means to bring you , whoſe ſouls God hath committed to my charge , to be in love with the Scripture , or add any thing to your ſtock of knowledge and grace , I have if not all , yet my chief deſire . Now our Lord Jeſus Chriſt himſelf , and God even our father , which hath loved us , and hath given us everlasting conſolation and good hope through grace , comfort your hearts and establish you in every good word and work . And ſo I commend you to Gods grace , and deſire likewiſe your prayers unto God for him who is Yours in the ſurest band of Christian affection ARTHUR JACKSON .