To the Right Worshipful , and his much honoured friend John Savile of Methley Eſquire , and High-Sheriffe of the County of York . SIR , ONe being friendly chidden , that he did not write Books , made this anſwer , ut libet non licet , ut licet non libet ; As he would he could not , and as he could he would not . I confess I have been often expoſtulated withal by ſome particular friends & relations , ( who uſually over rate whom they love , ) 〈 … 〉 hy in this ſcribbling age , wherein the Pen is ſo Rheumatic , I have never appeared in Print • but my anſwer is made before ; I atteſt the ſearcher of hearts , never thought any light that ſhone from my darkness , worthy to be ſet on ſo public a Stage , eſpecially in this cenſorious age , which like Auguſt • Caeſar , Taxes all the World wherein ( by reaſon of the contrariety of men's judgements and affections ) Sermons are made b •• the Whetſtones for men to ſharpen their tongues upon . The cauſes which move me a • this time to be more public beside the importunity 〈 ◊ 〉 friends , ( the ordinary Midwif • of the Press ) are theſe , firſt that I might once in my life beſtow a ſmall Token on the Spou 〈 … 〉 of Chriſt ; and ſecondly , that might in a ſlender gift , give a teſtimony of a not ſlender affection towards you , not having wherewithal further to honour you . The State hath put the white Rod in your right hand , let me take the boldness to put a Role in your left . It was the custom of the subject's of Artaxerxes King of the Perſians , to preſent him ſomething in his travel ; a poor labouring man having nothing elſe , brought him a little water from the River that ran by , and preſented it with both his hands ; which the King did with a cheerful countenance accept , eſteeming it as honourable to receive ſmall things , from a large heart , as to impart great . If my abililitie were as large as my heart , I would do more to honour you ; be pleaſed therefore to accept what I can , ſince I cannot do what I would . Theſe poor thoughts of mine muſt needs redound upon your self , for every thing muſt acknowledge its firſt Spring and riſe ; they were yours in ſervice to your deſire , be pleaſed to let them be yours in acceptance and Patronage . The God of truth and peace give you to be famous in Ephrata , and do worthily in Bethlehem , that you may lay out all your power and affections in a flaming zeal of the glory of Gods truth and the Kingdoms peace , which is the conſtant prayer of him , who is , Your Worſhips affectionate ſervant , John Johnſon .