TO The Right Honourable THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT . Right Honourable , I Intended the Dedication of this Treatise to the Parliament before I had the happiness to be a Member of so Honourable a Society . Who are so fit to Patronise a work concerning God , his word and works , as the Parliament of England , and such a Parliaments , who have herd more of God and his will , and seen more of his ways in less then a lustre of years , then many precedent Parliaments have in several Ages ▪ Arduous and important matters concerning ChurchQuia de advisamento & • ssensu consilij nostri pro quibusdam or dui • s & urgentibus negotijs , nos , Statum & worser • fensionem Regni nostri Angliae & Ecclesiae concernentibus , • uoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Civitatem Westmonasterium tertio die Novemb • is proximo teneri ordinavimus . or State have been the daily Theme of your serious debates . Queen Elizabeth once in her progress visiting the County of Suffolke , all the Justices of Peace in that County met her Majesty , having every one his Minister next to his body , which the Queen took special notice of , and thereupon uttered this Speech , that She had often demanded of her privy Council , why her County of Suffolke was better governed than any other County , and could never understand the reason thereof , but now She her self perceived the reason ; it must needs be so ( said She ) where the word and the sword go together . You did Honourable worthies ) near the beginning of the Parliament , cause a Synode of Reverend and Able Divines to be called to advice you in Church-affairs . God hath sent unto you ( as Jeremie speaks ) all his servants the Prophets , Jer. 7. 25. and 35. 15. choice men out of every County , ( as you your selves were elected out of many ) to be serviceable to you in the great work of Reformation . You have had the benefit of their faithful advice , of their fervent Prayers , and diligent labours . When did any Parliament enter into so solemn a League and Covenant to reform themselves and Kingdom ? when were there so many days of Humiliation kept so generally in England ? when was there such a constant daily LectureThose Gentlemen of the House , and others that live near Westminster may hear 500 Sermons yearly at least , one every Morning , and foure every Sabbath . of worthy men in Westminster-Abbie before ? In the Parliament held 5. E. 3. so many excellent laws were made , as it was called bonum Parliamentum I hope as you are now in Prayers and Print styled the Repairers of the breach , and restorers of paths to dwell in , so future Ages will honour you with the title of Optimum Parliamentum . When in the Council of Constance , talk was Ministered touching the reformation of the Spiritualty , and some said quòd oporteat incipere à Minoritis , the reformation must begin at the Friars , no said the Emperor Sigismond , Fox in his Book of Martyrs . Non à minoritis said a Majoritis incipienda est reformatio , meaning the reformation ought first to begin with the Pope and Cardinals and Bishops , and so descend after to the inferiors . Some Emperors were called Great for their goodness ; religion makes a Nation or person honourable Rom. 9. 4. compared with 3. 2. That was a worthy Speech of a Germane divine writing to Oecolampadius , Veniat verbum domini , & submittemus , etiamsi nobis essent sexcenta colla : As Queen Elizabeth passed in Triumphal State through the Streets of London after her Coronation , when the Bible was presented unto her at the little-Conduit in Cheape-side , Speeds Chronicle Chap. 24. p. 858. she received the same , with both her hands , and kissing it laid it to her breast , saying , that the same had ever been her chiefest delight , and should be the rule by which She meant to frame her Government . You have likewise covenanted to reform the Church according to the word of God , the best Rule both for a Personal and Ecclesiastical Reformation . There is a double general subject of reformation . 1. Corrupt persons , 2. Corrupt things . You have cast out a scandalous Ministry ; labour to settle ( I beseech you ) in all the three kingdoms Pious & able Preachers . Christ ( the great Reformer of his Church Mal. 3. 2 Matth. 3. 12. ) specially purgeth the Sons of Levi Mal. 3. 1. because he hath appointed them the office of purging others . secondly the ordinances of God must be both Pure and Perfect in a complete Reformation . You have cast out a great deal of rubbish ; Oh that the House of God might be built . It was a blemish upon some of those reformations mentioned in Scripture , that the high places were not taken away , and that their reformation needed a further reformation . God did much honour King Edward a Child , and Queen Elizabeth a woman in making them the beginners of a blessed reformation . O that the Lord would be pleased by you to perfect what they begun , that Christs government , worship , and discipline might be set up in the three Kingdoms . In the times of our troubles , peace and truth have been joined together in our Prayers and Capitulations ; Oh let them never be separated , I will reveal unto them the abundance of peace and truth Jer. 33. 6. and the same Prophet Jer. 9. 3 . complains , that there were none valiant for truth in the earth . Buy the truth and fell it not says Salomon , contend earnestly for the faith which was once delivered to the Saints . Jude . 3. v. Amicus Socrates , Amicus Plato , sed magis amica veritas . You have covenanted to extirpate heresies and whatsoever is contrary to found doctrine . In your first Declaration , there is this memorable passage , It is far from our purpose or desire , to let lose the golden reins of Discipline and government in the Church , to leave private persons or particular congregations , to take up what form of divine service they please ; for we hold it requisite that there should be throughout the whole Realm a conformity to that order which the Laws enjoin according to the word of God . God hath done great things for you and by you , and therefore he expects great things from you . It was a noble resolution in our Josiah , Edward the 6th , when he was pressed by Bishop Ridly and others to tolerate his Sister Mass in her own Chapel , he would not ( though importuned ) yield thereto , saying , He should dishonour God in it ; but being much pressed by them he burst into tears , and they thence concluded , that he had more divinity in his little finger then they in all their bodies ; Oh that you would study to premote Gods glory , and be zealous for his truth , since you have had such experience of his mercy , and likewise could not but perceive the evil of those dangerous errors , which were too much indulged by some of those whom you have cast out . I shall now speak of the threefold Subject I handle in my Book . 1. The Scripture , 2. God , 3. The Works of God . It is reported of Charles the Great , that he set his Crown on the Bible , Ego ipse odi meos libros , & sape • pi • e • s interire , quòd • etuo ne morentur lectores , & abducanta l • ctioneipsius scripturae , quae sola omnis sapientiae fon • est . Lutherus in • 9 c . Genes . and Luther was so zealous to have the Scriptures read , that he professed , if he thought the reading of his Books would hinder the reading of the Scripture he would burn them all before he died . Alphonsus King of Spaine and Naples , read the Bible with Lira's gloss foureteen times over . The Emperor Theodosius the second , wrote the New Testament out with his own hand ; many speak much of new light , but the Prophet Esay Esay 8. 20. says To the Law , and to the Testimony : if they speak not according to this word , it is because there is no light in them . Take heed of too much of that new light , which the world is now gazing upon ; Jer. 6. 16. and 18. 15. so much new light is breaking forth , that the old zeal is almost extinct by it , says a MinisterMaster Buckley of the Gospel Covenant on Zach. 9. 11 , p. 14. and 104. of New-England . The Familists say they are above Ordinances ; when the body hath no need of nourishment , then ( and not afore ) will the soul have no need of Ordinances ; we about Westminster have been better instructed out of the 20. of Exodus 24. Some talk of Revelations and the Testimony of the Spirit . But now the Scripture is completed , I must not expect any immediate Testimony of the Spirit . Luther says , if any Spirit should come and speak any thing to him that he brought not Scripture for , he would spit in his face . The Scripture is the best Cynosure to follow , it was Davids Counseller , The Schoolmen a • fi • me that tO • ree things cannot be • efined . it is a perfect rule of a Perfect Reformation . Secondly , all Christian States and Persons should labour for and experimental practical knowledge of God and Christ,1 God ob summam formositatem . Phil. 3. 8. 10. the vision of God in Heaven shall make us perfectly Happy . 2 . Materia prima ab summam informitatem . Quid Deus sit ipse tantum novit , 3. Sin obsummam deformitatem . what God is , God himself does only perfectly know . But he hath revealed himself to us in his word and works . That place in 34 of Exodus , 6. 7. verses is as full a description of Gods Attributes , as any in all the Scripture , The Lord , the Lord God , merciful , and gracious , long-suffering and abundant in goodness & truth ; keeping mercy for thousands , forgiving iniquity , transgression & since , & that will by no means clear the guilty , visiting the iniquity of the Father's upon the children , and upon the children's Children , unto the third and fourth generation . If God were more known , he would be more loved , Psal. 9 9. honou • ed , feared , trusted . The Heathens extolled the knowledge of a men self , but Christians must chiefly study to know God . This is a Noble Subject for a Christian Parliament and a Christian Kingdom to exercise themselves in ; Oh that you would all labour to know Gods excellencies , and to propagate the knowledge of him to the many dark Corners of the Land. Thirdly , the works of God are to be diligently observed by a Christian State . One observes that there is a five fold Declaration of the works of God . Mr Carill on Psal. 1 18. 17. And Arthnieticall Declaration Psal. 40. 5. Secondly , a Logical Declaration of the works of God , when we show the several kinds of them ; as the works of Creation , the work of Redemption , the work of Providence ; and distribute those into works of mercy , or works of Justice . Thirdly , and Historical Declaration , when we declare the persons acting , the places , the times the Counsels , the managing of the several actions , the events and successes . Fourthly , a Rhetorical Declaration . Fifthly , a Declaration purely Theological , or a practical Declaration of the works of God . 104 . Psal. 24. We should be lifted up by Gods manifold works to the Consideration of his unlimited greatness that is the first cause and author of them all ; we can turn our eyes no way , but exceeding great multitudes of works wrought by God do offer themselves to our view . If we look upward , downward , on the right hand , on the left , into our selves and other things ; our minds shall be encountered with diversity of rare Works of Almighty God . These works are all made with much wisdom Psal. 136. 5. and the serious considering of Gods works is a great part of the sanctifying of his name . Never had any Parliament more reason to magnify Gods goodness for his singular mercies . O that as many of your deliverances were god with supplication , so they might be worn with thankfulness ; and as you have been a Parliament of many Prayers , so may you be a Parliament of many praises , which is the earnest desire of Your Honours Devoted Servant , EDW . LEIGH .