To the Christian Reader . REader , The number of books is without number , the Presses are daily oppressed with them . Yet ( though the world abound with unprofitable , may perniciousI may say of some writers in these days as Tully of the Philosophers , that there is nothing so absurd which is not m • intained by some of them . Pamphlets ) there are many excellent subject's which are either not handled , or not sufficiently . There is a great variety in men's fancies as well as in their faces ; and bookesLibri quasi liberi . ( the fruit of men's brains ) are as various as men themselves . Some books are to be tasted only , Sir Francis Bacon in his Essays . some chewed , and some swallowed . That saying of Stanchar the HeretickeRainoldus de lib . Apoc. tomo primo praelect . 4th . does exceedingly please the Papists , Plus apud se valere unum Lombardum , quam centum Lutheros , ducentos Melancthones , trecentos Bullingeros , quadringentos Martyrs , quingentos Calvinos . That onePetrus Lombardus propter eminentem int • r Pontificios authoritarem magister sententiarum nuncupatus est . Rainoldus de lib . Apoc. Petrus Lombardus , quem omnes The • l • gorum schola singulari quadam venerationis excellentia magistium sententiarum appellant , & in cujus Theologiae compendium innumerabilia disputationum volumina eruditissimi clariss • marum tot • Christiano orbe Academiarum Theologi celebrarunt . Sixtus Senensis Bibl. Sanct. lib . 4 ▪ Lumbard was more esteemed by him , then 100 Luthers , 200 Melancthons , 300 Bullingers , 400 Martyrs , 500 Calvin's . Focanus contrarily , says thus of the Schoolmen , that one Austin among the Ancients , and one Calvin ( in his Institutions of Christian Religion ) among the modern Divines , will afford thee more solid Divinity , then all the School-Doctors of the Popish Church , with all their vain disputations , jejune distinctions , quodlibetical questions , and foolish speculations , with which ( says he ) Thomas , Scotus , Lombard , Bonaventure , Molina , Vasquez , Suarez , à Soto , Bellarmine , and other Doctors of the Roman Church are full , even and nauseam . But the Bible is indeed the Book of Books , it signifies in the Greek Tongue , A Book in general ; and was sometime taken so largely , So Scripture signifies writing in general , but by and excellency the Word of God . yet by and Antinomasie or excellency it is now taken for the Book of the Holy Scripture , and is all one with Gods Book . We told you before how much the Papists magnified Peter Lumbard the father of the Schoolmen , calling him the Master of the sentences , and preferring him before hundreds of ours . The next Schoolman after him Alexander of Ales is called Doctor Irrefragabilis Thomas Aquinas after him , Doctor Angelicus . John Scot the last , Doctor Subtilis . Yet a learned Doctor De Prideaux Hinc Sementiariorum , Quaestionistarum , Quodlibetistatum ingens turba , qui pro solida Theologia spinosas & rixosas disputationes in Christianorum scholas invexerunt . of our own says of the Schoolmen , Scholastici vel hoc nomine non tanti sunt à nobis faciendi , quia in Justificationis articulo vix quicquam tradiderunt solidi . The Papists themselves note twenty Articles , in which their great Master Lombard erred ; so that that is ascribed to them , hic magister non tenetur . But now Paul ( the great Doctor of the Gentiles ) of whom Chrysostome writes several Homilies , is indeed and Angelical , Subtle , Irrefragable Doctor . Austin desired three things : Revetendissimus Episcopus Vsserius De Christianarum Ecclesiarum succession & statu . c . 9. to have seen Christ in the flesh , Room in its glory , and to have herd Paul preach . What he speaks is true as Gospel , and we can not apply to him what the Papists do frequently to Peter Lumbard , hic magister non tenetur . We may exercise our judgement Solis Canonicis debetur fides , coeteris amnibus Judicium . Lutherus . upon the writings of men ( there being few that write much and contradict not themselves ) but we must believe the Divinely inspired Writings . Lambert in his perambulation of Kent . Se ▪ Speed in William the Conqueror . p. 42. There is a Book in the Law called Liber Judiciarius , or Doomesday-Booke , because ( as Matthew Paris says ) it spared no man , but judged all men indifferently as the Lord in that great day will do . The Bible is the true Liber judiciarius , or Doomsday Book . John 12 , 48. The word that I have spoken , the same shall judge him in the last day . I shall now in a few words discover the usefulness of this threefold Treatise . Having been in these times of spoil unhappily plundered of my Books and Manuscripts , ( which I esteemed as a precious treasure ) recovering this twice with some others , I did resolve ( for preventing any future damages in that kind ) to transcribe it fair for the Press , which was the work of a whole year . I know first the subject is very necessary for all Christians to search into , and I have perused all the best writers I could find , that I might handle it fully commonplace wise , according to the excellency of the Theme . I have made use also of some Manuscripts of threeM . Pemble my learned Tutor , Master Wheattly my Reverend Pastor , M. Ball my worthy friend . worthy men , now with God , ( whose memory I shall ever honour ) for the completing of the work . I have gleaned a few observations from some of the worthy Lecturers in Westminster , from M. Ley of Budworth in his Lectures in the City , and from diverse others of the Assembly , in their printed Sermons . This work I conceive may be beneficial for these purposes : Chiefly for settling and establishing of Christians in some main principles of Divinity , viz. that there is a God , against the Atheists of these times ; that the Scripture is the Word of God , against the Anti-Scripturists ; that Christ is God , against all Arrians , Socinians , and other Heretics ejusdem farinae , vel potius furfuris ; that the so ▪ 〈 ◊ 〉 of man is immortal , against such who in these day •• deny the same . 2. For enabling a Christian to all worser •• ties , prayer , meditation , holy conference , catechizing his family . For example , suppose a Christian desire to instruct his family in the principles of Religion , and would make use of M. Bals Catechism for that purpose ( for I know not a better yet extant ) he may by the help of this work open the heads of Religion , from the beginning of that Book to the Fallen of man . I would there were the like out on the whole body of Divinity . But lest I trangresse the bounds of and Epistle , I commend the work to Gods blessing , and desire thy benign interpretation of my labours , still resting Thy faithful friend and hearty wellwisher , EDWARD LEIGH