TO THE CHRISTIAN READER . READER , THe Church even in her Infancy , the Christian Church was under the Cross , Stephanus lapidatus , Jacobus trucidatus , says Austin , Stephen was stoned , and James beheaded . The Church hath had two kind of persecutions , When any common calamity befell the people or State , as famine , dearth , pestilence , they straightway imputed it to the Christians , saying , that they and their wicked religion were the cause thereof . Christianos ad Leonem . Tertul. Away with them to the Lion , to the stake . one from Room ethnical , the other from Room Papal . After the Apostles what a continual storm arose against Christians , which lasted three hundred years under the ten monsters of men those bloody Emperors , Nero , Domitian , Trajane , Antoninus , Severus , Maximinus , Decius , Valerianus , Aurelianus , Dioclesianus , whose rage was such as a man could not set his foot in Room , but tread on the graves of Martyrs ▪ Nero was the AuthourConsule Commentarios vestros , illic reperietis primum Neronem in hanc sectam • tum maxim Romae orientem Caesariano gladio ferocisse : said tali dedicatore damnationis nostrae gloriamur . Qui enim scit illum , intelligere potest non nisi grande aliquod bonum à Nerone damnatum . Tertul. Apol. cap . 5. of the first grand persecution , wherein Saint Peter ( as it is said ) and Saint Paul were martyred at Rome , with others innumerable , and Jacobus Iustus at Jerusalem , whence Tertullian inferred , That the Gospel must needs be a precious thing , because Nero hated it . Dioclesian raised the tenth and extremest persecutionVide Euseb. lib . 8. , wherein Churches were overthrown , Bibles burned , whole Cities razed , women hanged upon trees naked with their heads downwards . The Christians yet in that time under the Heathen Emperors had many lucida intervalla , many breathing spaces under Princes not altogether so bloody . But the Popes have persecuted the Protestants for six hundred years together , and that without any intermission . I might exemplify in many of their cruel practices ▪ 1. In their wars against the Waldenses and Albigenses . 2. In the Massacre of France , in which the rivers were died with blood . 3. In our tempora Mariana Queen Maries days ; Who hath not herd of bloody Bonner and Gardiner ? 4. In the rebellious insurrection in Ireland , and the cruel butchery of above 200 thousand Protestants there . Platina writes of seventeen thousand martyred by Dioclesian ; but Meterane writes of 50 thousand slaughtered by the Pope only in the Low-countries , and that in the time of Charles the 5th ▪ Natalis Comes of sixty thousand in France only in one year . Iulius the second in seven years shed the blood of above two hundred though • sand Christians . Antichrist is drunk with the blood of the Saints , Revel . 17. 6. and 18. 24. In her , that is , Babylon , now Room , was found the blood of Prophets , that is , of all those that preached the Word of God , and of Saints , and of all that were slave upon the earth ; They were put to death by the authority of the Pope . Some hold that the bitterest persecutions of the Church of God are yet to come , but two considerations may much support the spirits of Gods people . 1. The shortness of the Persecutors lives , and their miserable ends for the most part . 2. The good that comes to the Church of God by affiction and persecution . I will not speak of the short lives of many Popes , and the short reign of Queen Marry Of all since the conquest her reign was the shortest , only excepting that of Richard the tyrant , but much more bloody then was his . Speeds Chro. in Q. Marry . , nor of the miserable end of many persecuting Emperors , but shall out of Foxes Martyrology , instance in the exemplary punishments of some of the persecutors of our Martyrs . George Eagles ( alias , Foxes Acts and Monum . 3d vol. page . 1023. Trudge over the world ) hid himself in a Cornfield , and by the benefit of the height of the Corn , and breadth of the field he had escaped , had not Ralph Lurdane one of his persecutors with more malicious craft , climbed a high tree to view over the place , and so descried him . This persecutor a lewd fellow of life for theft and whoredom , within a few years after he had apprehended the foresaid George Eagles for gain of money , he himself was attached of felony for stealing a horse , condemned and hanged in the same place and Town of Chelmesford , where George Eagles before suffered martyrdom . A Bishop coming to Stephen Gardiner ( Bishop of Winchester ) on his deathbed , put him in remembrance of Peters denying his Master ; Foxes 3d vol. p. 95. he answering again : said , That he had denied with Peter , but never repented with Peter , and so both stinkingly and unrepentantly died . See also in Fox a notable story of the death of Dr Whittington a persecutor . Doctor Story was a great enemy to the Protestants in Queen Maries days , but in Queen Elizabeths reign he being beyond sea was by a handsome wile brought over into England , Fox ubi supra and suffered as a Traitor , on whom the boys sung these verses , D. Story for You I am sorry , The hangman must have Your gown : Your father the Pope , could not save You from the rope ; For all his triple crown . Secondly , The people of God like Commomile , the more they were trod on the more they did spread , and ( like Rabbets in frosty weather ) did thrive under persecution . One Mr Manton on Rev. 2. 3. says , Martyrology and catechizing were the great engines by which the reformers battered down Popery . Jerome compares the state of the Changed • rch under Constantine and some Christian Emperors with that under Dioclesian and some persecuting Emperors : under the former the Church increased much Potentia & divitiis , in power and wealth , but diminished virtutibus , in virtue ▪ How strangely was that promise accomplished in England and France , Mat. 25. Whosoever will save his life shall loose it ; and whosoever will loose his life for my sake , shall find it . William Wolsey Martyr being in prison sent by another a noble to Richard Denton with this commendation , That he marveled he tarried so long behind him , seeing he was the first that delivered him the book of Scripture into his hand , and told him that it was the truth , desiring him to make haste after as fast as he could . Foxes Acts and Monum . 3d vol. p. 433 This money and message being delivered to Denton almost a year after Wolsey was burned , his answer was this . I confess it is true , but alas I cannot burn . But he that would not burn in the cause of Christ , was afterwards burned against his will ; for his house was set on fire , and while he went in to save his goods he lost his life . On the contrary , some that were in prison , and purposed to suffer for the truth , were • y the death of Queen Marry happily preserved , that being a true observation whichDr Hall . one hath , As good husbands do not put all their corn to the oven , but save some for seed , so does God ever in the worst of persecutions . When Henry the fourth of France had conquered his enemies , he turned Papist , and gave this reason of it , That he might settle himself in peace and safety . Ravilliak who slew him , confessed that the reason why he stabbed him , was , because he was of two religions . It is well noted by a Reverend DivineDr Gouge on Exod. 13. 13. , That the book of martyrs was in high esteem all the days of Queen Elizabeth : All Churches by authority were enjoined to have it , so as all that would might read it . There was scarce a family of note that had it not , it was usual to spend the long winter evenings in reading it . By the constancy of Martyrs therein set out , people were much encouraged to stand to that faith which was sealed by their blood . Whither the killing of the two Witnesses be near at hand or no , I determine not , but sure there is likelihood enough of troubles and persecutions to Gods people , therefore I conceive these several Tracts , Of the Martyrs in general , and Concerning our English Martyrs , Of Martin Luther a courageous Reformer , Of the Covenant and Promises , Of living and dying by faith may be very suitable to our times . But some may urge , that for the first subject concerning the Martyrs , there was a book long since published , styled , The Mirror of Martyrs , useful that way . I deny not but that book might be profitable to diverse Christians , who either wanted money to purchase or leisure to read the large book of Martyrs : But my drift in this work is to excerp only ( among the many dicta facta of the Martyrs ) those speeches and acts of theirs , which were specially observable . Master Co • ton ( who composed the book before mentioned ) hath confusedly jumbled diverse things together : some of which are ordinary , though others may be remarkable , and I believe he mistakes in that which he hath of Voes , it being not consonant to the original whence he took it . He hath also the same thing twice of Iohn & Christopher Waid . I hope therefore ( though I have many things the same with Cotton , that this work will be of special use to those , who would not be ignorant of the living speeches of dying Christians . The Saints are best towards their end ; so it was with Jacob and Moses , as appears in his excellent song made a little before his death , Deut. 32. so David , Solomon , what and excellent Sermon and prayer did our Saviour make a little before his death . John 14. 15. 16. and 17. chap. I have likewise long since put forth a Treatise of the Covenant and Promises , yet having collected diverse new Observations of that excellent subject , ( for some of which I was beholding to two of our worthy LecturersMr Marshal and Mr Strong . at Westminster ) I thought good to add this Tract to the rest , it being of special use always for Christians , especially in evil times . Thus hoping God will bless these my endeavours for the good of his people , I rest Thy true Christian Friend EDWARD LEIGH ▪