To the right worshipful , his highly honoured Father , Sr. HAMON l' ESTRANGE knight , of Hunstanton in Norfolk . Most honoured Sr. TO this worthless Tract , having meditated a double dedication ( not then purposing to prefix both , or that I thought one not enough ) which of these two should preponderate my equal inclination to either , I could not though with long debate determine ; at length therefore that I might dwell no longer in this suspense , I resolved to issue out both , and the rather because their errands were so difform , so diverse : for This Treatise is the first fruits of my studies , therefore of common right sacred to God ; and the rather because the main subject thereof is His Day : His , by institution ; His , by denomination , and ( it being the first fruits of days , Hexam . as Saint Basill elegantly calls it ) of right his . Now seeing all offerings were according to Gods prescript ; First , to be brought to the high Priest , who was to examine them whither they were such as God would accept , and then to present them before the Lord . To whom sooner then to your self , Sir , should I bring this my petty oblation ? It is said that Cain and Abel brought their offerings , that is , ( as most learned men conceive ) to Adam their Father , that he might present them ; why then may not I mine to you ? If he was their Priest , why may not you be mine ? Father's of Families ( you know ) were anciently all such : And though Consecration and Ordination hath somewhat dimmed their wonted splendour , yet I hold for certain that their Priestly office neither is , nor shall be utterly extinguished . To you therefore , Sir , I hope not impertinently , I bring this my poor oblation ; I know too well how strong frailty is in me , to say it is without blemish , or not lame ; yet if your judgement shall conceive it a work acceptable to God , and beneficial to his Church , I most humbly crave you would be pleased to present it to him for me . And this is the first cause of this address to you ; The other , this : Phocylides . Sir , you are my Parent , second in honour to God ; so the wisdom of the Ancients styleth you : and certainly if any Parent may challenge honour from a Son , you may from me . To which honour you have a double title : One , wherein all Father's intercommon by Generation ; the other , almost peculiar to your self by Education , I had almost said , Regeneration ; perhaps not altogether unfitly , for good nurture is a kind of moral Regeneration , and usually a preparative to the Spiritual . I call the Education you have bestowed upon me almost peculiar to your self , because that whereas most Parents are either sordid in their allowance , or negligent in instructing , or become lewd patterns to their children ; you have in breeding me failed neither in purse , nor in precept , nor in example . I write not this to flatter you , but to manifest that I set a due and just valve upon this your Fatherly care , and that though there were no Divine Law to constrain me to it , yet this alone were sufficient reason for me to honour you . And if every the meanest part of my education obliges me to this acknowledgement , sure your training me up to letters much more , especially in this age , when to know even Fundamentals and necessary Truths , is accounted at least pedantical , if not as ( Saint Paul said of preaching ) foolishness . I do not hereby arrogate to my self the name of a Scholar ; for my delight in learning hath been more then my proficiency , which God knoweth is very slender , so slender as these my simple labours dare not approach you from any assurance of their own worth , but because they are the products of those studies , which derive their original from your extraordinary both charge and care , they think themselves of right to belong to you , and so their motion towards you is not more voluntary then natural . Be pleased , Sir , to entertain them as testimonials of my filial gratitude , which is the chief end of this their second resort to you ; for they exceed their Commission , if they speak so much what they are themselves ( though that is mere weakness ) as what I am , that is , Sir , Your most honouring and Most obedient son , HAMON L'ESTRANGE .