To the most Honourable The Court Paramount within this Realm , The High Court of Parliament , or Assembly of the three Estates . August Senate , Mighty Sovereign of Courts , WHen I call to mind that of Aristides , That the Gods are to be honoured with the consecration of Temples , but eminent men with the dedication of Books ; I could not represent to my consideration a fitter Patron for these my weak labours , then the glorious Assembly and bright Constellation of the chief and prime lights of the kingdom . I invoke not your aid to bolster out mischievous doctrine ( the main scope of too many late Dedications ) but to vindicate the Truth , to maintain that Truth , which contrary to the Proverb hath fled to corners , hath lived in blind recess , ( and like a needy bankrupt ) dareth not yet walk confidently abroad without a Parliament Protection . But you being now ( the Lord be praised ) upon the great work of Reformation , your wisdoms will ( I doubt not ) make narrow inquiry not only into State but Church-Monopolists , those Gnostics I mean , which seemed to have engrossed all knowledge to themselves , and under that pretence have in stead of Truth obtruded upon us their own pernicious errors . among those truths which these Projectors have laboured to suppress , none have been more furiously pursued then those which relate to the Lords Day ; and ( which makes the prodigy ) none have stickled therein more then they who have with so much clamour cried up Tithes and the Episcopacy ( things innocent , yea , commendable enough : only I wish with the Athenian in Gellius they had been defended by other men . Lib. 18. c . 3. ) Whence we may collect that if this unhappy day could any thing have promoved their greedy or ambitious desires , it had surely escaped the late indignities which these men's liberal malice hath profusely shed upon it ; it had still continued in the esteem of a day Divinely instituted , immutable , and totally to be sanctified ; three essential properties thereof , which they have much endeavoured to evert , I in this my work as much to uphold . At the first instant of its manumission , it hath a strong ambition , ( great Council ) to live under the influence of your favour ; a boldness on which it durst never have adventured had it not been assured , the Truth which it professes will gain it some measure of acceptance with so professed a Patriot of Truth . The God of Truth prosper you , and in you , us ; he direct all your consultations , that their issue may be his glory , in the peace and safety both of this Church and State : with all true English Christians so fervently prayeth , Illustrious Assembly , In the highest degree of the lowest obedience Your L' ESTRANGE .