TO My DEARE and DEARLY Honoured and beloved native Country the County of STAFFORD . My deer Mother , THese following collections came out from you , and they return unto you : they were made when I lay in your lap , with your other children , you then prosperous , and we happy in your prosperity . Woe is me my mother , that your condition is so far altered from those times , and that our happiness is so far perished in your condition . How hath the Lord clouded the mother of my people in the day of his fierce anger ! and how does she now fit in midnight , that once was clothed with the very Sunshine of the noonday ! Ah my deer Country , I have much bitterness for thy sake that the hand of the Lord is so gone out against thee . How is thy plenty turned to pining , and thy flower to witheredness ! How is thy gold become dim , thy candle darkness , and thy viol the voice of those that weep ! Dear mother , how are you become not your self ! And Staffordshire to be sought in Staffordshire it self , and not to be found ! Her children either fled , or destroyed , or become her destroyers ; Her towns desolate though full of inhabitants and people , her people perished though alive and healthy , her peace gone , her joy vanished , her comforts none , her hope's as little : Shee a mother forsaken , a woman forgotten , left of friends , tortured by enemies , helpless in her self , hopeless in her helpers . Woe is me my mother , that thou hast born me a man of these sorrows , that I have seen thee a woman of these misery's ! It is the Lord , we have sinned against him , we have sinned and he hath not spared . I need say no more , I can say no more : tears take up , and prayers , and patience must make up the rest : I have spoke thus much that my dearest native country may have a testimony , that no distance , no condition can make me forget her . Forget my country ? let my tongue forget her art and my pen her profession , if Staffordshire be not ever in my chiefest thoughts . Put up these tears into that bottle where are the heartiest drops that are wept for you in those your sorrows , and lay up this volume among those records , that shall speak of the duty , remembrance and observance of your faithful children to you to future ages ; And own deer mother , among that number that most sincerely and entirely love you , honour you , and moan after you , the heart and affections , prayers and groanings , Ah poor Staffordshire , poor Staffordshire , Of Thy most mournful but most faithful son and servant , John Lightfoote . London , Decemb. 1 ▪ 1645.