To His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax , General of the Army raised by the Parliament , in defence of the true Protestant Religion , etc. May it please your Excellency : IT was ordered by a Divine hand , that I should Preach before you in Windsor Castle , at your very first marching forth with this successful Army , at which time I treated ( from Psal. 60.10 ) of Gods marching forth with Israels Army , the footsteps of whose presence hath been seen within your Camp : By the same hand it was likewise ordered , that I should preach in your presence , the very first Fast day after your return to London as a Conqueror ; at which time I had a fair occasion to press , That such who had been serviceable to the Church of God in its necessitous condition , ought from those they do assist to have a requital , in which I know none deserves a greater share then your Excellency . Great General , I have presumed to make my humble and particular address , in dedicating these few lines to your Excellency upon a double ground : 1. To take off a malicious misconstruction , which some made of what I delivered , laying my words on the rack of a tortured misinterpretation , forcing them to speak what I never meant , as if in some passages of my Sermon , I had some reflections on your Excellent Self ; whereas I can appeal to Heaven , I had rather my tongue should cleave to the roof of my mouth , then that a thought should be in my heart , or a word drop from between my lips , to darken that glory which God hath cast upon you . It's true in handling this Doctrine , That such who are serviceable to the people of God in their necessitous condition , ought from those they do assist , to have a requital , and to be sharers with them in their mercies , Lest there should be and ill use made thereof , as if the requital of men for their service should be so far extended , as that they must be indulged in their evils , I was forced , to prevent this mistake , to lay down this caution , viz. That the requital of men for their good service , must not extend so far as to tolerate them in their evils . Gainas being addicted to the Arian Heresy , petitioned Arcadius the Emperor , that he might have favour , within his Territories , to have a Church for the public exercise of Arianisme , making this the ground of his request , That he had done him great service , and got great victories for the Roman ; yet Arcadius the Emperor denied his request ( upon the advice of Chrysostome , ) and although Gain • s had done serve •• e in the Wars , yet would he not give him a Toleration for the public Exercise of the Arian Heresy in the Church ; see Theod. Hist. lib . 5. c . 32. In exemplifying which caution , I gave this supposition , Suppose a Commander , ( who hath been valiant and faithful in your most successful and serviceable Army ) should run into damnable Heresies , to deny the Divinity of Christ , the Immortality of the soul , the authority of the Scriptures , though his valour and fidelity pleads for a requital for his Service , yet not for a toleration in these opinions . Now they who wrest these words as if they reflected on your Excellency , do you infinitely more wrong , then they do to so mean and one as I am that spoke those words ; such who apply those words to your Excellency , what do they bat lay you under cond • mnation , as if you denied the Divinity of Christ , the Immortality of the Soul , or Authority of the Scriptures , which thoughts are far from your Noble breast ; your moderation is known to all men , and the soundness of your judgement touching this matter ; yea , which is your glory , that notwithstanding the cl • shing controversies of the times , you have still pursued your duty , and not cleaved unto Parties . There was another passage in the Sermon which some wrested , as if I aimed at your Excellency . In the close of the caution I made use of a Story out of Plutarchs Morals , of one Manlius , who being to wage War with the Samnites , he being to withdraw from the Army for a while , left his Son to command in chief , with this charge , that he should not give the Samnites battle , without special Order from him ; his Son seeing a fair opportunity against the Enemy , gave them battle , fought valiantly , and god the victory : returning to his Father a Conqueror , told him what he had done ; his Father did commend him for his valour , yet told him he should loose his head for his disobedience . I only intended the Story to this end , To show that Heathens observed this rule , to gratify men for their services , yet were so just they would punish them for their evils : Now they that apply this Story to your Excellency , what do they less then charge you of disobedience to the State you serve ? which malice it self cannot fasten upon you . There is one thing more I would clear my self in your thoughts , viz. from and unjust aspersion that Master Dell casts upon me in his Epistle Dedicatory , as if I preached against the Articles at Oxford ; I had thought I did so clearly express my self in that matter , that none would have been so shameless as to lay such a thing to my charge , when I desired the Honourable Worthies of Parliament to cast their eyes on the University of Oxford to reform it your Excellency very well knows , I did premise this clause , that in what I should say , I would no ways reflect on the Articles at Oxford , which being made , stands with the Honour and Justice of the Parliament to have them kept ; how unjustly then does Master Dell censure me ? This is the first ground of my humble address to your Excellency , that I might be rectus in curia , clear in your noble thoughts . The second ground is this , To leave it to your Excellencies thoughts , whither so dangerously and opinionated a man as Master Dell is , is fit to be a Chaplain in your Army , who says , That if the Assembly should condemn the Doctrines he preached , they were the enemies of the truth of Christ , and the last prop of Antichrist in the Kingdom : Yea , he says further that the work of Reformation so much desired by the Orthodox and godly Presbyterian Ministers and people , Is the last and subtlest work of Antichrist that is now in hand ; Mr. Dells Epistle • fifth leaf . Mr. Dells Epistle to the Reader . and he that prevails in this encounter , hath Antichrist under his feet for ever . Although what is desired is no more then is practised in all Reformed Churches , as most agreeable to the Word , and is in part confirmed by the Authority of Parliament ; surely such Doctrines as these would not only blemish , but disturb your Army ; and though God hath clothed them with strength to conquer Men , yet if such Doctrines should spread among them , Errors will conquer them in the end . Most Noble General , however some men ( whose Tongues are their own ) are so lavish of their expressions , not caring what they lay to their charge who are for Presbyterian Government , as if against Parliament , the Gospel , the Army , and your Excellent Self , and what not ? though all these things be most precious in their eyes : As for your Self , the people bless God that you were born , and brought forth for such a time as this ; as God raised up a Moses first to begin our deliverances : He hath made you a Joshua to accomplish our hope's , and to bring us into the promised Land. I dare say , what Metellus thought the Roman should do ( viz. thank the gods that so brave a Warrior as Scipio was born in Room , ) that the people of England have done , bless their God that he hath taught your hands to fight , and your fingers to war , and laid the necks of your enemies under your feet ; the Lord remember you according to the greatness of his mercy ; and the memorable deeds that you have done for this Nation , which is the earnest prayer of Your Excellencies most humbly devoted in all Service and Duty CHRISTOPHER LOVE .