To the Right Worshipful and Generous Gentlemen , the Colonels , Captains , Lieutenants , and Ensigns of the Honourable City of London . Sir Edward Broomefield Col. Cap. Martin Bond. Cap. Marmaduke Rawdon . Cap. George Langham . Cap. Thomas Covell . Cap. Robert Davies . Thomas Soame Col. Cap. John Venn . Cap. William Gear . Cap. John Bradley . Cap. Rowland Wilson . Cap. Thomas Buckstone . John Gear Col. Cap. Edward Dichfield . Cap. Randall Manwaring . Cap. Henry Sanders . Cap. Matthew Forster . Cap. Thomas Chamberlaine . Cap. Edmund Forster . Cap. Samuell Carleton . Cap. Tobias Massy . Cap. Nicholas Beale . Cap. James Bunce . Right worshipful and worthy Commanders : THIS Tract of war cannot ( I hope ) be unwelcome to your Hands , whose Bodies are daily employed in Martial affairs . Nor let it seem strange that one of my Profession should produce a subject of this Nature ; seeing there are seldom any Leaguers without men of our Quality : The Ministering Levites were not only in the Camps of Israell , but also had their special Offices and Charges allotted to them . Such grace the Helmet , animate the Soldier , and fit him at all goings Out for his happier dissolution . When I was abroad with our Armies ( I speak it to their honour ) I found large maintenance , and fair respect , though with a great deal of hazard both of fortune and life , in regard of the Enemies too great forces , and our long and hasty Marchings , together with tedious Beleaguerings : yet ( by the all-ruling Providence of God ) I came off enriched with some knowledge , and Military experience ; which I account a rich prize , though purchased at and high price . I will not relate unto you the fearful and horrid issues and effects of war ; such as are poverty and decay of Trading , famine , violence , depredation , destruction of Justice and Civility , slighting of Magistracy , firing and plundering of Countries , death of famous Commanders , the vast slaughtering of men , women , and children , profanation of Churches with the violation of Virgins and Matrons ; For — Quis talia fando Temperet à lachrimis ? But yet I hold it conducing to my Countrymen's advantage and profit , to show unto them some Conclusions concerning Soldiers weapons which I have experimentally seen tried ; and specially of that ancient weapon the Pike ; which ( though in former times and services hath been of excellency and usefulness ) yet in these latter of small or no consequence . As also a short and compendious Discourse of the excellency of the Musquet and Halfe-Pike above other weapons , practised now with Ease and Activity by many ingenuous and Martial spirits ; and in times of needful trial would be as full of Advantage . What I have here with pains and experience thus composed and digested , I present to your Loyal hands , whose Judgments ( I know ) can well determine of Military affairs , being so constantly employed in that Noble and Heroic profession of Arms . Not doubting , but that you who so love the practice , will also favour and encourage such who shall to their utmost advance and maintain that noble and valorous Calling . So praying for the increase of your Fame's , as well as of your Numbers , I commend you all , and all your weighty occasions to the protection of the Lord of all Victory : being Yours , in all fair and honourable respects , DONALD LUPTON .