TO THE HONOURABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS , now assembled in Parliament . YOur reverend attention during the length of this service , together with a deportment suitable to the duty of the day , and matter in hand , gave me to conceive that your hearts were kindly warmed by a better spirit then yours or mine ; and because you command a farther impression of this work , I •• amfther instructed to conceive ; 1. that beside the hearing ear , Prov. 20. 12. there is ( you know ) to be employed A seeing eye , both which are the gift of the Lord ; 2. that having bought the truth as tried gold , the filings are not to be be lost ; 3. that upon your trial ( what ever some say ) you are willing the wise should judge whither you are taken with sounding brass , or any thing rather then Crown gold . These reasons ( beside your command ) are pressing arguments with me to make this Sermon public to the whole ( as well as to the representative ) body of our Commonalty , and now I leave it to Gods blessing and your patronage , which I may the rather expect , because I have prayed for the former , and the latter is employed in your command , to which I owe ( and will yield ) this kind of obedience though I were sure to be made a Sacrifice . Upon your summons ( Noble Senators ) I appeared , knowing that God and his Vicegerents can make use of mean Instruments for high employments , whereof had I not been convinced , I should have fled ( with Jonah to my Country goord , Amos 7. 14. with the hazard of a storm ; or ( with Amos ) disavowed my function , rather then speak ( so freely as I did ) in the herdsmans language , and tell this ( my ) mother City , that for three great oversights , and for four , ( to say no worse nor more ) God hath a few things against her , which I complained of in this sad message . As first , though she professes to hate the works of the Malignants , yet there are those ( if not in her bosom , yet ) on her skirts , that say they are true to Church and State , but are indeed of another Synagogue , and by their blasphemy proclaim it loud enough , that either they went out from us , or were never of us ; and when the wine hath lightened their brains , they make light of our Parents nakedness , discover it without shame or sorrow in the streets at noonday ; where the sad spoils and robberies of our Nation , are made matter either of sporting Pamphlets , or merry discourse ; to meet with these , I made it my first work to tell you in sadness , that the plundering and spoiling of a people was a sad and shameful penalty . Secondly , ( though she own not the doctrine of Baal ) yet she harbours such Doctors as Baalam , that peep , and mutter , and would amuse the Land with tales from the stars , and old-wives-fables , Esay 8. 19. as if the Planets had met in a Counsel of war , and ( by and Arbitrary power of their own ) condemned our present State to a fatal desolation ; to meet with these , I was to give you Information from the Judge of all the world ( speaking to the case , and concluding ) that what was done he did it , and did us but right in it . Thirdly , though she have many golden heads , that appear active in subtle contrivances , she hath more leaden hearts , and ( setting aside the great Council ) hath too few of those that consider her case aright , and lay it to heart : to meet with these , the last part of my message was to put home Christs counsel to that Church of Sardis that had a foot in the grave , yet a step there was betwixt death and us , if we timely took her cordial ( viz. ) to remember what we have herd and received . This ( if any thing ) would quicken us to give the Lord a meeting , and thereby prevent the wrath to come . These things ( worthy Patriots ) you have herd , and that you might the better reform them , and know how to behave your selves in Gods method , beginning with his own house , you have chosen and Assembly of such Counsellors as you and all may conside in : ( To whom I should have thought it honour enough for me to have been a doorkeeper ) their peaceable conflicts and pious debates want nothing but his Majesties ears to make them hear well throughout the Land , being indeed a precious reserve , ( such as the Lord promises to leave for hight service in the most conflicting times , Zeph. 3. 12. who doubtless will come up in the Rear , and do worthily in Ephrata . Former times have made a great noise about the Church or place of Gods worship , but these later ( with Gods blessing upon your endeavours ) may produce the power and purity of it . I shall pray that our Dread Sovereign may live to see and say of Gods house ( as that Emperor did of Room , Invenit lateritiam & reliquit marmoream ) he found it thacht and overtopped with Lauds , Wrens , Cousin's , etc. but will leave it adorned and paved with Whitakers , Prestons , and Sibses , cum multis aliis — The work is great indeed , but there is a great God that hath a great hand in it , and ( as you have been told by a good providence more then once ) will send Auxiliaries from heaven , proportionable , at least , to the strongest oppositions . To this purpose the God of the heaven return and answer to your prayers , for the peaceable return of our Sovereign , which is or should be the daily suit of those that wish well to our public welfare , and resolve to live or die in the pursuit of this blessing ; among whom you have to command , the end avours , and prayers of Chancery-Lane this 19. of Decemb. 1643. Your humble servant in Christs work , WILLIAM MEVVE .