To the degenerate Nobility , and new found Gentry . YOu that are truly Noble , and the best Deserving Gentry , who are always blessed With honoured virtues : that do ever stand For peace and truth , the freedom of the Land ; I do not aim at you , nor shall my lays Found ought of you , except it be your praise . But unto you , who are the ushers in Of fowl abuses , whose accursed since Draws fools to sale , each from example cry , If Gentlemen may do so , why not I ? Your learning fits you fored , your poisoned wit And beastly Logic , from the infernal pit Prescribe you rules , to find a neater way To Pluto's Court : your bloods , bound to convey Your lustest on freely , and your means you make To bear your charges to the boiling lake . A yeoman fool goes slily , with one whore , You rush on boldly , carrying half a score : Your ' state will bear it , and your noble birth Attones the ill , being higher stuff then earth . Rich fare provokes you , and you drench your dust With costly liquours , which do gender lust . Your idleness invites you to receive Temptations gratis , never to bereave The flesh of pleasures . And your rich attire Does tempt allurements , your express desire Not Bungler-like : and your attendants go Along with you , can low-borne fools do so ? You dive for new delights and make a trench , To bury jurdice , like the baser French , Who from their full-mouth pride and arms of steel , ( Being pockified ) to prove themselves gentile ; Despising chastity , you love such weeds That harbour snakes , and praise him that exceeds In choicer evils . You perhaps had rise From Brokers , Jailors , Tapsters , or the dice Might help your grand father's , you might be screwed From usury , extortion , or be brewed In 〈 ◊ 〉 liqaor ; or some misers wheat Saved from his mow ( till mouldy ) made you great : You vainly spend what they with curses god , Raised quickly with your names , so soon you rot . To tax the females here , or draw their shapes That keep their dogs , their monkeys , and their apes , To make them sport , or those that swell with pride , And are too good for all the world beside To look upon , Religion is too base For flaming furies , is not now the case . You should have lived from such corruptions free , And proved sweet patterns of humility ; Preferring goodness , loving purer theames To stop the tide of baseness in the streams . Do good with your estates , your wit , your art Should make you careful , to prevent the smart Which follies buy . I doubt what I rehearse , Will make you slight my subject , or my verse . Yet read the book , and pay fored , if you fret , They will not give you trust to run in debt .