TO THE HONOURABLE House of Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT . THe mercies which God hath showed to these two Nations of England and Scotland , giving us such great cause and matter of Thanksgiving , causing our sheaf to arise and stand upright , making us with Saul higher by the shoulders then all our brothers ; these mercies ( I say ) deserve so to be recorded , that posterity should be compelled to read and admire them : but who is sufficient for this thing ? It was said of Claudian , that he wanted matter suitable to the excellency of his wit : but where is the head or heart suitable to this matter ? Psal. 106. 2. Who can utter these mighty works of the Lord , who can show forth all his praise ? For my own part had I put my self upon this work to utter these mean conceptions upon this great subject before so great and honourable Audience , I might justly have been condemned for abusing both the one and the other . But you were pleased to command my service in preaching on the day of your public and solemn Thanksgiving , it may be because I was then near at hand , and after your Reverend attention had testified that you received them as the counsel of God , you were further pleased expressly to desire me forthwith to print and publish what in my weakness I then delivered , I suppose for the better memorial of these great deliverances ; I could have pleaded much , why these poor notes should not be exposed to public view ; Treatises to be read by all , should be long meditated , often reviewed : Excellent pictures should be engraven in brass , and not cast in clay : the setting forth these mercies , and quickening up answerable Thankfulness are above the Abilities of any man , much more beyond the capacity of my self , the weakest and unworthiest of many thousands ; But your Order left me not at liberty to do what I desired , you have thus made them your own , the more facile I shall hope to find you , and all Ingenuous Readers towards my weaknesses , which not presumption but my obedience hath made thus public . This further encouragement I have , little things have been accepted with God and man in testimonial of Thankfulness ; a female , a Turtle , a handful of wheat-flower by God himself ; a handful of water , a bunch of grapes , etc. by great Kings and Emperors . And even under this Notion also I humbly present you with this ensuing discourse . I have no more to say for my self , but much I have to beg of God , that you ( Noble Senators ) and the Right Honourable Lords , who joined with you in this peace-offering , may wholly consecrate your selves to advance his glory who hath done these great things for us all , that your faithful endeavours to do what is behind , joining with your Thankfulness for what is past , the event may be answerable to your desires , even the glory of God , and the good and safety both of Church , and Commonwealth , which is the daily prayer of Your devoted servant STEPHEN MARSHALL .