Preludium to the first Verses . Madam , IN ancient offerings to Deity , Turtles , Incense , and Flowers have been acceptable for the zeal of obedience , though of little worth , or advantage ; let my respect to your command make the more excusable the worthless following lines , which otherwise in my knowledge of the sleightnesse of their stuff and making should never have presumed to undergo the weight of your censure : True Turtles you shall find them , full of simple love , and unfurnished of all Serpentine climbing art of subtlety and knowledge : Incense and Smoke , they are but of the gentlest nature , not far fetched Aromatiques , troublesome and intoxicating to the brain , but mild as flowers unmedicinal for morality , mere Posies or Nosegays , gay to the first sense ; which if happily you prove them , favour them so far as to give them their pass without further examination , I promise not my self that they shall please , for they please not my self ; ( especially in a serious humour ) I know them full of faults , but think them not worth the mending . And if to be and Author of such toys be a fault , it is surely doubled to make them too great a business . Idleness was their mother , which though I pleased my self to avoid by their destroying her in their birth , yet to good judgements they may well be as ill pleasing , as ill natured : If time were misspent in them , yet there was not much cast away ; for the idle hours of three months brought them forth , except some few , the children of little more then my childhood . As they are far from deserving good opinion , so am I far from the humour of some so well conceited of such their works ( like Peacocks proud of their feathers ) that they are never at and end of their labour , but still with child to utter them : my travel ended with their first birth , and so I hope or with the readers may at the first reading ; for if they be not plain and easy , it is against my will , which as it wants strength to imitate , so cannot approve the riddling humour lately affected by many , who think nothing good that is easy , nor any thing becoming passion that is not expressed with and hyperbole above reason . These tormentors of their own and their Readers brains I leave to be admired in their high obscure flight , ( while my self will be happy , if I can procure but a familiar delight to a superficial reading ) they affect to show more wit then love , and in truth so much , that while they commend beyond reason , they show that either they want reason to commend , or their subject to be commended ; like ill ranging Spaniels they spring figures , and ravished with their extravagant fancies , pursue them in long excursions , neglecting their true game and pretended affection : be the matter , or the discoursers capacity never so poor and mean , I ever affect a man that makes right conclusions . And for my self , I would rather be thought to want invention and knowledge , then judgement and good consequence in what I utter . The Poetry of these times abounds in wit , high conceit , figure , and proportions ; thin , light , and empty in matter and substance ; like fine coloured ayery bubbles or Quelque-chooses , much o •• entation and little food ; conceits , similes , and allegories are good , so the matter be carried along in them , and not interrupted by them . Venus is here drawn by her Doves , not Serpents ; and as I profess my self to want art in all things , so in matters or love I think it may be best spared , as being and affection merely natural , and where Art is seldom comely , but authorised with a native disposition ; beside , Verses of love are commonly made for women , whose chiefest beauty consists in being unsophisticated by Art , and are the more pleasing in conversation by possessing a free purity of unadulterated wit . And as we often see that those women that have bestowed on themselves the most Art and costly dressing , nay many times that have the best proportion , are not yet the most winning : So in Verses there is to be expressed a natural spirit and moving air ( or accent ) more alluring and charming the affection , then others of a far more rich , fair and curious composition . The world in all things is full of Critiques , that are sharp sighted to reprehend , and will approve nothing but according to their own rule ; ( many times out of square ) But for my part I hold the same opinion of Verses as of Airs in Music , or Houses , that let them be delightful and pleasant to the first appearance with conveniency to the design , and for the fantasticated rules of Art , Architecture , and proportion , let them observe them that list : and commonly who most affects them , most fails in the general delightfulness and use . Poetry is in truth a kind of Music , the fable of Orpheus expressed as much ; Music hath its Anthems , Pavens , Fantesies , Galliards , Courantoes , Airs , Sarabands , Toys , Cromatiques , etc. And Verses have their Hymns , Tragedies , Satires , Heroiques , Sonnets , Odes , Songs , Epigrams , Distiques , and Strong lines , which are their Cromatiques , and of themselves may be excellent in their Art ; but long dwelled upon grow harsh and distasteful . The commandments and preceptives are none of the poetical parts of Scripture . Though I am no part of a Scholar , yet thus much by casual opening of books I know , that Horace in matter of love hates difficulty : and though I believe it and imitation of his abrupt and harsh vein in his more serious pieces , that upon the worthiness of his name and matter , hath debauched many from the formerly used , more open , familiar and pleasing manner of versifying ; yet I find that even himself ( howsoever either naturally or affectedly rugged , except his Lyric vein ) when he utters his judgement , or prescribeth to others concerning measured compositions , no man is more frequent in recommendation of a round , current , clear and graceful delivery : but what his moral , solid and satyric matter dispensed with , is in slighter stuff intolerable : there shall you find the rough hands , but not the voice and substance ; let them rather imitate his best , then his worst . It cannot be good in limited lines , which are a purposed pause to the voice , to carry with a counter-time the perjod of the sense to the body of the next line , much less to dismember and innocent word , that every child according to nature , and use , in spelling would put together ; and words have a natural air , accent , and quantity , whence to strain them is to rack both them and the reader : Who will set himself to dance , or his horse to manage , let him seek to observe good time , air , and fashion : no man is fit for all things ; whose Genius was born for prose , let him write prose , rather then affecting Verse to make such unnatural stuff , as shall be good neither . I pity both in my self and others to see the best of our matter in one place so extremely pressed , that it is a labour to discover it , and yet in another part of the same piece slight and superfluous stuff dilated at large . A Poet should raise light from smoke , not blow that which is light with him to carry but smoke to another . King Iames. I am of his Majesties mind , that the best eloquence is to make our selves clearly understood , and that to him who hath leisure , there need no abbreviations : I had rather pay for a little more paper then to be put to the cost of my brain . Sir Philip Sidney . The admirable inventions and matter of your unimitable Uncles extant works flourish in applause of all , by a happy and familiar display of their beauty's to the meanest , including withal such generosity of truly and profoundly extracted conceit to the most inward life of whatsoever he expresses , that the strongest and clearest seeing judgements may rest satisfied , yea transported in contemplation of the most lively and pleasing touches that a soul can apprehend , or a pen distil . Yet somewhat more to authorise my self , Lipsius upon perspicuity holds it the greatest misery in writing , not only not to be understood , but to be understood with difficulty : and the sharp-witted Hunc vol • qui fiat non sine pane s • tur . Martial in contempt of the more formal and severe censurers and Writers , professes that he would have his verses need neither and Apollo , nor Grammarian ; and howsoever some may deny him to be exact , himself in his entertainments affects rather to please his Guests then Cooks . Verses of love should be verses of pleasure , & to please in love , the smoother faced the better . I may be crabbed and rugged , but will never affect to be so , especially in verses , whose true nature and use is to work a kind of a Charm upon the mind , even with slightness of matter , by the well wrought and exquisite harmony of their Cadence , and found : There being to be transfused into verse sometime such a natural spirit of magnanimity , sometime such a soft , wanton , and melting air of passion , that the one shall never fail to affect a generous and heroic mind , nor the other to work a kind of tender and relenting disposition in a sensible and well-natured constitution ; neither of which shall easily be seen effected from a harsh and rude ( though never so witty ) and expression : for as in persons , so in Verses ; some , let them mean never so lovingly , shall yet by their natural verjuice be ever out of the way of Bacchus and Venus . But in point of obscurity , in some sort to excuse my self with others , I fear we all often unwillingly incur the error of it by thinking our meaning as open to others , as to our selves , when indeed the Characters of our expression are fully supplied by our own understanding to our selves , while to others they are lamely contracted and imperfect . Thus much I have been bold to write , not only to excuse a poor Mother wit , but somewhat to give a pass upon their strange and uneasy habit , who I doubt not but they will have many a gird at my easy and natural nakedness ; I mean those lofty dim shooting Archers , whom I wish to remember , that he who shoots highest , shoots not ever nearest the mark ; and he that may walk in the light , is to be suspected for choosing the dark . Now ( Madam ) I grant that all I can write ( especially what these lines contain ) is but vanity and a most idle vanity ; yet thus far I will excuse both the writing and the reading , that all the world is little better : we often condemn vain pleasures , and remember not that the most things the best of us most seriously do , have indeed no other end . For God being served and nature sustained , what fruit proceeds from our authority , learning , wealth , policy , and earnest intent to profit , but to satisfy our impulsive affections , which either propound to themselves a felicity whereof they fail in the possession , or seek to divert by such employments the dulness and otherwise obtruding misery's of their condition ? which if you please to consider , you will the more excuse many pursuers of lawful and natural delights , and valve those pleasures at the better rate which are most perdurable and communicable . May the following wanton ( but as modest Babes as their Mother Venus could produce ) though they cannot profit , yet afford some delight light to that your Worthy well furnished mind , to which I wish all happiness that ever Noble nature possessed , or can possess . I must yet be so much longer , as to crave pardon for my unintended and I fear unpleasant length , it is the vice of writing to be endless ; thus hath my enmity to obscurity brought forth tediousness , yet not so much , but that all this may be sooner read , then some one passage of our Night pieces understood : they had need afford profitable stuff , who utter it at so hard a rate . I wish your Ladyships authority would so abate the price that our poorer abilities might hold trade without straining . And seeing I am upon the Theme of verses , whither I mean not shortly to return , I humbly crave your favour after my fashion , disorderly to say thus much more , that howsoever some of the stricter sort approve only of verses so close , useful , and substantially woven , that there must be neither list , looseness , nor the least superfluity of words : for my part , I am not of that strict order , nor ever yet saw it observed in any Author . Nature hath mingled stalks with flowers , and Husks with Corn , and hath raised ornament from our excrementiciall hairs : conceits and matter over-crushed , afford commonly as little grace as pleasure ; and to write all in abbreviations , would take indeed les • e room , but much more time and trouble . A Geneva print weakens the sighed , nor is it good to hold your bow ever bent , or your horse straight reigned . Sometime among pithy and tough lines I think it not amiss to interpose one of and easy • train , like resting places in lofty stairs , to ease the Reader . Some fluency of weak water helps the better in nourishment to convey what is more solid . Lamp-oile yields no good savour nor in salad nor verse . Difficilia quae pulchra , is to be understood of the attaining , and not the exercising of faculties . You know how it is said of Poems , that they should be such , ut sibi quivis speret , idem sudet frustraque laboret ausus idem • . Strong lines may be drawn on with Cartropes , but the fairest have generally and easy birth . It is rare for anything to be well and hardly performed . The French expression , A Deliure , implies as well perfectness , as facility and dexterity . There may be employed such and extraordinary ( yet gentle ) fineness of conceit , and Conclusions so designed , wrought , limned and coloured , touches so bold , covert allegories and subtleties so neat , Epithets so material , Metaphors and ambiguities so doubly fine , as shall be more masterlike then more sententious , sublime , abstruse , and strong appearing lines . Worth of matter and conception supposed , nothing more commends a piece then terms well chosen , proper , lively , and significant , with a free coming on , and as free a close and conclusion . Also a fair , clear and even through carriage with well wrought joints and connexions gives credit to the workman . I love as much a great deal of force and depth couched in one word , as I hate little in many . We ordinarily write and speak the same things and notions , and to the same purpose , but infinitely differ in the delivery and expression ; some proceed in a stuttering confused obliquity , groping as in a missed or darkness ; some go more directly and exhibit their Idea's and conceptions with so clear and distinct a light , illustrations , instances , demonstrations , enforcements , and arguments so pertinent , perspicuous and concluding , that the understanding and assent are captivate beyond evasion or subterfuge . Sophistry and figures may appear fine and witty , but prevail little upon the best judgements : Reason must convince the intellectual soul . May I write clearly and strongly , rather then finely and artificially ; hence is the difference of elocution , hence of persuasion , the one is light and aery , the other weighty and solid ; most lovely and commanding is the beauty of a fair ingenuous and rich soul fairly mounted , and armed upon well shaped and unanimously received virtue , goodness and reason . Verses are then good , when turned to prose they hold a fair and currant sense , and when translated into another language , there is such mastery found in their conception by the advantage of what is genuine unto them , that there will be either more words or less conceit and matter . The privilege they have over common phrase , consists in the warranted becoming ornament of a lofty well ordered spirit , and wantonness , such as shall make toys pass for Jewels , and give to what of it self is precious , and acquisite lustre of workmanship beyond what prose can bear , and that in little room ; Their voice is more constrained , and consequently more shrill and piercing . Nor is it in writing the least perfection ( howsoever it hath found little observation ) so to order and contract our expressions , that one well adopted word may run into , and govern many of diverse and strong sense ) for nothing gives more pleasure and satisfaction to a diligent inquisitive and judicious Reader , then much matter and conceit compendiously digested with sufficiency of perspicuity . To conclude , lines of a far fetched and laboured fancy with allusions and curiosity , and in similes of little more fruit or consequence , then to ravish the Reader into the writers fine Chamaeleon colours , and feed him with air , I approve not so much , as height and force of spirit sententiously and weightily exhibited ; wit needs not rack it self where matter flows ; embroideries become not a rich stuff ; and art is best expressed where it least appears . A strong wing is to be preferred before a painted , and good • ense and matter elegantly delivered before extravagancy of fancy and conceit ; such unnatural impertinency serves rather to shadow then illustrate , to overwhelm then set forth the subject : as well apposite as accurate writing is the Authorsglory .