To the Right Honourable Thomas Atkin , Lord Major of the City of London , and to the Right Worshipful , Sir Nicholas Raynton . Isaac Penington , Lieutenant of the Tower , Sir lo : Woollaston , Iohn Glyn Recorder , Sir Iohn Cordell , Sir Thomas Soame , Sir Iohn Gayr , Sir Iacob Garrat , Thomas Adams , Io : warner , Iohn Tous • , Abraham Reynardson , Sir George Garra • , Sir George Clerke , Iohn Langham , That • mass Andrewes , Iohn Foulke , Iames Bunce , William Gibbs , and Richard Chambers Sheriffs : Samuel Warner , W • lliam Barkely , Thomas Foot , Iohn Kendricke , Thomas Culh • m , Simon Edmonds , Aldermen of the said City . RIght Honourable , and Right Worshipful , whereas I have lately published a Christianography , or a description of many great Churches of Christians in the world : some of which are for extent , larger then the Church of Rome in Europe , for time more ancient , for succession as continual , for faith more found : who believe with us the church of God to be Catholic , as it is in the Apostles Creed , and not as it is set down in the new Trent Creed confined to Room , who renounce the Popes Supremacy , some of them excommunicating him for a Schismatic and Heretic . Who receive the holy Communion in both kinds , they all drink of Christs cup , and abhor the Romish decree , made contrary to Christs Institution . Who make no Images to be worshipped . Who do not acknowledge the figment of Purgatory , nor use any Prayers to be delivered from the feigned pains thereof . Who have their Prayers in their own tongue , and mutter them not in latin as the Romists do . Who forbid not Marriage ( the prohibiting of which is called by St. Paul , the Doctrine of Devils . ) Their Priests may and do marry . Who hold not popish Transubstantiation . Who prohibit not Laymen the reading of the holy Scriptures commanded by Christ himself . Who do not join with Christs Intercession the suffrages of Saints : nor with his Justification the merit of works : nor with the Satisfaction Papal Indulgences . These points with some others , which the ambition and avarice of the Romists hath lately hatched , they renounce with us . This work I purposing to perfect and consummate to the glory of God , the great profit of the Church , & establishing of men's consciences , they seeing the unity and agreement of the holy Churches in the world with us : Behold suddenly a numerous company of other Heretics stole in upon us like the locusts , Rev. 9. As the unpure Familists who blasphemously pretend to be Godified like God , whereas indeed they are divellified like their Father the Devil . The illuminated Anabaptists who blasphemously affirm the baptism of children to be the mark of the Beast , and to come from Anti-christ . The Donatisticall Brownists , who in times past hid themselves in holes ; now lift up their heads , and vent openly their errors , infecting our people . The Antinomians , who teach as I find , such a fair and easy way to heaven , viz. That a man need not be troubled by the law before faith , and that faith is not a going out of himself to take hold of Christ , but only a discerning that Christ is his , and that after this , such a man must see nothing in himself , have nothing , do nothing , need no sorrow nor repentance , nor be pressed to duties , need never pray unless moved by the Spirit : If he fallen into since , never the more disliked of God , nor his condition the worse : and that he must abide in the height of comfort , though he fallen into gross since . The novelty of this doctrine takes so well , or rather ill that multitudes of simple men and women dance after their Pipes , they run after these men as if they were mad , crowding the Churches , filling their doors and windows . The Independents trouble also our poor Church , who pretend that they have a perfect model of Church • government , which Almighty God hath revealed to them , which many like better then the government of the Reformed Churches , being persuaded that in Independency they may have liberty to do what they list , having no government , hoging to be as free as their Teachers , who will have none at all . The Arminians also and after-brood of the Pellagiant , broach their erroneous opinions . The Sabbatarians affirm the old Jewish Sabbath to be kept , and not the Lords day . The Antisabbatarians would have no particular Sabbath at all , but every day to be a sabbath to a Christian man . The Traskites , who would have us observe many Jewish ceremonies . We have also Millenaries who affirm that before the day of judgement Christ shall come down from heaven , and reign with the Saints upon earth 1000. years , in which time they shall destroy all the wicked , binding their Kings in chains , and Nobles in links of iron . We have Hetheringtonians , who hold a hodg-podg of many heresies , troubling our peoples brains . We have also Socinians , who teach that Christ died not to satisfy for our sins : and also his Incasnation to be repugnant to reason , & not to be sufficiently proved by Scrip • ture , with many other abominable errors . we have Arians , who deny the Deity of Christ . We have and Atheistical Sect , who affirm that men's souls sleep with their bodies until the day of Judgement . we have Atheists too many , as among others , one was committed by a Justice of Peace , who mocked and jeered at Christs Incarnation . His Father was burned at Thoelouze in France ; he escapes unpunished among us : too many others we have . They preach , print , and practise their heretical opinions openly : for books , vide the bloody Tenet , witness a tractate of divorce in which the bonds are let lose to inordinate lust : a pamphlet also , in which the soul is laid asleep from the hour of death unto the hour of judgement , with many others . Yea , since the suspension of our Churchgovernment , every one that lists turns Preacher , as Shoemakers , Cobblers , Button-makers , Ostler's and such like , take upon them to expound the holy Scriptures , intrude into our Pulpits , and vent strange doctrine , tending to faction , sedition , and blasphemy . What mischief these Sectaries have already done , we that have cure of souls in London find and see with great grief of heart : viz. Our Congregations forsaking their Pastor's ; our people becoming of the Tribe of Gad , running after seducers as if they were mad ; Infants not to be brought to the Sacrament of Baptism ; men refusing to receive the holy Communion , and the Lords Prayer accounted abominable , etc. A Volume will hardly contain the hurt that these Sectaries have in a very short time done to this poor Church ; and does not the Commonwealth suffer with the Church ? Whence are all these distractions ? Who are the Incendiaries that have kindled & blown this fire among us but these ? Considering with my self the former happiness of this Kingdom , and the sudden change that is betide it , it being fallen from the height of prosperity to the lowest ebb of misery , and this not by the incursion of a Foreign Nation , but by its own children , who imbrue their hands in the blood one of another with no less inhumanity then Cannibals or Men-eaters , without any reluctation at all ; the Son against the Father , and the Father against the Son , being involved in a most cruel War without any hope's of Peace . And moreover ( which is worst of all ) when I consider that some of our Clergymen ( who should like Moses stand in the gap to appease Gods anger ) do increase the same , not only by blowing the fire , but by their Errors and Schisms which they broach and foment among us ; by which they do as much as in them lies to put men's souls in as great danger as their bodies . And considering again how we are involved in a most cruel War without any hope's of peace , may not I cry out with the Prophet ; Oh that my head were full of water , and my eyes a fountain of tears , that I might weep for the slain of my people ! But all this being Gods permitting , let us with patience possess our souls ; let us trust in him , depend upon him , and in his good time he will deliver his Church , and turn all to the best ; and in the mean season every man do his best to quench this fire . For my own part , these sad considerations made me leave my Christianography , and write and He •• siography to describe the Heretics and Schismatics of this time , in which I set down their beginning among us ; their heretical opinions and errors , confuting them ; and also relate how other Princes and Common • wealths have suppressed them , and how severely some of them have been punished among us . I know my reverend Brothers have not been wanting to oppose these Heretics in writing and preaching , in season and out of season , using all means to suppress these Heresies , having to that end chosen special men to preach several Lectures in several places ; But without your help and the assistance of our Religious Patriots assembled in Parliament , they do , and will increase upon us do what we can . This Treatise I present to your Lordship , and to this Honourable Senate . What can be more suitable or fitter for you , Servants of the most high God , then that which tendeth to the glory of God , Edification of his Church , and vindication of the truth against the illusion of Sectaries and Heretics ? What is more correspondent with the duty of Christian Magistrates then to assist Gods cause with your political Authority ? A question may be asked whither it be lawful for the Magistrates to use the sword against Heretics ? To this I answer ; such whose Heresies are blasphemous in doctrine , or dangerous to the State , deserve death , the reason is , because they corrupt the faith . If such as poison waters and fountains at which men and beasts drink , deserve Capital punishment , how much more they that as much as in them lies go about to poison men's souls ? Yea , St. Augustine says in his fifth Tractat upon Iohn ; Quantum in ipsis est Christum in homine occidunt . The forenamed St. Augustine indeed wavered concerning this point for a time , as he confesses in one of his Epistles : but when he saw the City wherein he dwelled was reclaimed from Donatism by the Magistrates sword , he retracted his opinion . And expecting the like success in this honourable City , I do implore your helps , & that for Iesus Christs sake : and I pray you give me leave to put you in mind of the Covenant we made in the presence of Almighty God the searcher of all hearts , with a true intent to perform the same , as we should answer at that great day , when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed , viz. That we should in like manner without respect of persons endeavour the extirpation of Popery , Prelacy , Superstition , Heresy , Schism , Propha • enesse , and whatsoever shall be found to be contrary to found Doctrine and the power of godliness , lest we partake in other men's sins , and thereby be in danger to receive of their plagues ; and that the Lord may be one , and his Name one in the three Kingdoms . And this I beseech you in the name of God to take in hand , laying aside all humane reasons . Let not Gods cause go to rack , nor by worldly policies and humane reason be protracted or retarded . The Turke will not suffer Mahomet to be blasphemed : as we are Christians let us stand for Christ . How dangerous the fostering of Heretics hath been , histories declare , viz. Almighty God sent down fire from Heaven and consumed Antioch , Paulus Diacon . Lib. 15. being a Nursery of Heretics : And also how the earth opened & swallowed Nicomedia , the meeting place of the blasphemous Arrians : also in the Commentaries of Sleidan , Theodo • . lib . • . cap . • 6. how the Anabaptists meeting first in Conventicles , surprised Munster : and how hardly Amsterdam escaped them , Lambertus Hortensius writeth . The plague is of all diseases most infectious : I have lived among you almost a Jubilee , and seen your great care and provision to keep the City from infection , in the shutting up the sick , and in carrying them to your Pest-houses , in setting Warders to keep the whole from the sick , in making of fires and perfuming the streets , in resorting to your Churches , in powering out your prayers to Almighty God with fasting and alms to be propitious to you . The plague of heresy is greater , and you are now in more danger then when you buried five thousand a week : You have power to keep these Heretics and Sectaries from Conventickling and sholing together to infect one another . Fire is dangerous , many great Cities in Europe have been almost ruinated by it : I have seen your diligence and dexterety in quenching it in the beginning : your breaking open your Pipes for water making floods in your streets : your Engines to cast the water upon the houses : your industry and pains is admirable . Heresy is as dangerous as fire , use your best endeavours to quench it before it consume us . Thus not doubting Right Honourable , & Right Worshipful , of your best endeavours to suppress these Heretics and Sectaries , by whom not only many poor souls are infected , but also the holy name of God is blasphemed . I cease , most humbly entreating Almighty God to bless this City , and to give unto you the fruition of all temporal felicities in this life , and the neverfailing fullness of blessedness in the life to come