TO THE HONOURABLE the Houſe of Commons , now Aſſembled in PARLIAMENT . THe God of Heaven hath called you to a work of the greateſt Honour , and greateſt Difficulty , that lies upon any number of men , throughout the whole world at this day : Obad. ver . laſt . To heal the wounds of Zion , and be her instrumental Saviours ; the Repairers of the breach , Eſay 58. 12. and the Reſtorers of paths to dwell in ; and to built up the old waſts , and lay the foundations , even of many generations ; To ſave and reſcue two Kingdoms , ( as you have helped to do a third already ) from moſt desperately-endangering ruin ; and make way , Revel . 11. 15. in them , for that bleſſed Proclamation of the ſeventh Trumpet , Now are the Kingdoms of this world , become the Kingdoms of our Lord , and of his Chriſt ! To ſtrengthen your hearts , and hands in this ſacred employment , as this Sermon , by your call , firſt preſented it ſelf to your attentive ears , ſo by a ſecond command of yours , it is now tendered to your favourable eye ; and withal expoſed to the public view of all , whither friends , or foes to the Peace and welfare of our Ieruſalem , or Neuters . In it I have laboured ſo to speak to every ones conſcience , that did hear it , or ſhall read it , as to make them 1. Senſible of what they ſhould have done , and what they have done ; and then 2 Apprehenſive of what God hath done , and means to do with the general , and with them in particular , according to both his threatenings , and promiſes ; and 3. by all , Zealous for God and his Church , and confident of his grace to his Church , and all her faithful helpers . In the mean time , ſince it hath pleaſed him , who is the only wiſe God , and the ruler of all things ; All whoſe paths are mercy and truth , to ſuch as keep his Covenant , and his Teſtimonies ; to exerciſe your humility , fidelity , faith , and patience , by tidings unexpected from diverse parts of the Kingdom ; And you have ſo far apprehended his purpoſes in it , as to call us all , in and about the City , with your ſelves , to a ſolemn and extraordinary public Humiliation , before the Monthly day comes about : I truſt , there is , and will for ever , be written upon your hearts , that holy care which I was bold to recommend unto you , to inquire where the cauſe is , why God at any time expreſſes his diſpleaſure ; and that not only in reference to the Nation generally , or any particular perſons in it , but even to your own ſelves , and that as a Body ; that ſo you may thereby be both directed , and excited to fulfil the will of God , according to whatſoever you do , or ſhall find amiss in any . In all which , give me leave once more , to beſeech you , in the Name of God , and his Churches , to make us and your ſelves at once happy . You are our Healers , and while you ſubſiſt , as we ſhall not be altogether miſerable , ſo neither without your special faithfulness , and zeal , can we attain to any settled proſperity . I ſhall not now inſtance in any other particulars , having touched upon diverse in this diſcourſe , which you are now pleaſed to make one of your spiritual Remembrancers . In it , I have taken the freedom of others , to inſert a few things , which either ſtraits of time , or shortness of memory , forced and omiſſion of in the delivery . Whereof the chief are ſome enlargement , of our dangers in the firſt Uſes , and of the Uſe of examination , about our helping the Church , and the inſertion of the Catalogue of ſins againſt the several Commandments in the Uſe of Humiliation . The God , whoſe truth it is , sanctify You and us all by it , as by all the reſt of his Word of truth • , So ſhall the Truth make us and you free from all our dangers and fears , of all kinds , temporal , and spiritual , and finally , glorify us all , in and with him , who is the eternal Truth , and eternal Life , the Lord Jeſus Chriſt ; In whom I am ever Your moſt humble , and Devoted Servant HERBERT PALMER .