TO HIS EXCELLENCIE ROBRT Earl of ESSEX , etc. Lord General of the Forces raised by the Parliament • for the defence of the Kingdom , King , Religion , Laws , Liberties , against the Popish and Malignant Party , who by force of Arms invade them , and intend their utter ruin . Right Honourable , THeAlberius Gentiles , & Hug • . Grotius de Jure belli . lib . 1. Hen . Bocerus de Jure pugnae , l. 1. c . 5. Georgius Obrectus de Belli Principiis theses 50. to 82. Hen . Ranzo . Bellici . Commentarii , l. 1. c . 4. goodness of the Cause for which Arms are taken up , is the Generals , Soldiers , greatest encouragement : where Religion and Justice are the real Causes , Victory and Success will certainly be the effects of War. That these are the true unfeigned grounds of the Parliaments and your Excellencies defensive Arms , is sufficiently manifested to the world by sundry late Printed Discourses ; but by none more perspicuously cleared then by these Collections , which upon this consideration especially I humbly recommend to your Honourable Patronage . The extraordinary presence and admirable Protection of God , with that victorious success , which hath accompanied your Excellency in two Signal Battles , at Edge hill and Newbery , wherein the Enemy ( by reason of their many advantages ) assured themselves of a full and total Conquest , are and undubitable evidence , that you are the General of the Lord of Hosts , and the Cause you fight for His. ThereforeIsa . 54. 17. No Weapon that is formed against your Excellency in this quarrel shall prosper ; and every malicious tongue that shall rise against you in judgement ( for fighting in this just cause ) you shall condemn . Acts 5. 38 , 39. This work is not of men , but of God ; therefore the very gates of hell , the Antichristian adverse power of the Romish Malignant Party , Mat. 16. 18. shall never prevail against it , can never overthrow it . Your Lordship and our Reformed Church ( now really Militant ) resting upon this Rock of assurance , may , in expectation of future successes , confidently take up these triumphant speeches of the Heroic Psalmist : Thou artPsal . 44. 4 , 5. our King , Oh God , Command deliverances for Jacob : Psal. 46 • 11. through thee we will push down our Enemies , through thy Name shall we tread them under that rise up against us . The Lord of Hosts is with us , the God of Jacob is our refuge . Psal. 37. 20. But the wicked shall perish , and the enemies of the Lord ( now in Arms against our Church , Parliament , Religion , Laws , Liberties , Properties , Lives , Estates ) shall be as the fat of lambs , they shall consume , into smoke shall they consume away . Yea 〈 ◊ 〉 83 • . 3. 〈 ◊ 〉 though they have taken crafty counsel together against Gods people , and consulted against his hidden ones : and have said , Come and let us cut them off from being a Nation , that the Name of Israel ( of Puritans and Protestants ) may be no more in remembrance : through the tabernacles of Edom and Ishmaelites , Moa • and the Hagarens , Gebal , Ammon , Amaleck , the Philistines , Tyre and Assur , be now all confederated and joined together to destroy them ; yet God shall do unto them as to Sisera and Iabin at the brook of • ison , which perished at Endor , and became as dung for the earth : he shall make them like a wheel , as the stubble before the wind : he shall persecute them with his tempest , and make them afraid with his storm . They shall be troubled and confounded for ever ; yea they shall be put to shame and perish , that men may know , that he whose Name alone is JEHOVAH , is the most High over all the earth . And in regard of the former Victories achieved by your Excellencies incomparable valour and prowess , we may all sing this gratulatory Song of Moses and the Israelies , after the overthrow of Pharaoh and his host at the read Sea. Exod. • 5. 6 , 7 , 9 , 10 , 11. Thy right hand , Oh Lord , is become glorious in power , thy right hand , Oh Lord , hath dashed in pieces the enemy . And in the greatness of thy excellency thou hast overthrown them that rose up against thee ; thou sentest forth thy wrath , which consumed them as stubble . The enemy said , I will pursue , I will overtake , I will divide the spoil , my lust shall be satisfied upon them ; I will draw my sword , my hand shall destroy them . Thou didst blow with thy wind , the sea covered them , they sank as led in the mighty waters . Who is like unto thee , Oh Lord , among the gods ? who is like the • , glorious in holiness , fearful in praises , doing wonders ! To this great Lord of hosts , and Exod. 15. 3. man of war ( of whose omnipotent Protection Our present Parliament and your Excellency have had many adorable experiments ) I shall in my daily Prayers recommend your Honours Person , Forces , and Military proceedings , till through his blessing on them , Isa. 2. 2 , 3 , 4. the house of the Lord shall be established in the top of the mountains , and exalted above the hills ; the Kingdom and power of Romish Babylon ( notwithstanding all the confederated domestic , foreign , Popish Forces now united to support it ) utterly subverting throughout our Dominions ; and thereupon our swords be beaten into ploughshares , our spears into pruning • ooks : And one part of our Nation , Kingdom , shall not have any cause to lift up a sword against the other , nor to learn nor exercise a civil destructive war any more , but Rom. 16. 16. 1 Pet. 5. 14. mutually embrace each other with and holy kiss of Charity and Peace . Which that your Excellency , by your successful Arms , may speedily accomplish to your eternal Honour , shall be the prayer , Of Your Excellencies devoted servant , W. PRYNNE .