TO THE HIGH AND HONOURABLE COVRT OF PARLIAMENT . HAVING not long since presented your Honourable Assembly with A Breviate of the Archbishop of Canterburie's Life , extracted out of his own Diary and Writings : I have been since much importuned by diverse Members of both Houses , to set forth a complete History of his Crimes and Trial , with all needful Ingredients thereunto . Whereupon , I deemed it very expedient ( by way of Prologue , or necessary Introduction to that Work ) first , to compile and publish this following Piece ( which here I humbly tender to your honourable Patronage ) the materials whereof could not be conveniently inserted into the Passages of his Trial , though much conducing to the clearing of your Exemplary Justice in your equitable Proceedings and righteous Judgement against him , newly executed on his person . Your Honours , in these my rude Collections ( faithfully extracted out of many thousand scattered papers , the perusal and digesting whereof into order hath cost me no little pains ) may behold as in a Mirror , many hidden , or forgotten Romish Plots of darkness brought to Public Light and Memory ( from the first Marriage Treaty with Spaine , in the year 1617. till this present ) to undermine our Protestant Religion , reduce both us and all our Dominions back to Room by insensible degrees ; together with the several Policy , A •• ifices , Negotiations , Conspiracies used , and Instruments employed between the Pope , his Confederates and Us , to accomplish this long-agitated Design ; and hereby clearly discover the true Originals , the Principal Contrivers of all the late unhappy Commotions , Wars , Massacres , Desolations within our three distracted Kingdoms , now weltering in their own blood ; with those mutual Negotiations we have held with Rome , not only of late years , but continued till this very instant even for Cardinals Cap • and such like Pontifician Wares . His Majesty and your Honourable Assembly are ( blessed be God ) now at last ( after three years bloody intestine Wars ) upon a desirable Treaty of Peace , which I shall cordially implore theHeb . 13. 20. God of Peace effectually to crown with a most happy issue : towards the real achievement whereof , I humbly conceive these seasonable Collections may contribute some assistance ; One of the nearest ways to procure a settled , lasting Peace on Earth , being first ( by sincere Repentance and Reformation ) to make our peace with Heaven , and then to provide effectual Remedies against the various Treacheries , Conspiracies , Policies of the common Enemies of our Peace on Earth , and principal Contrivers of all our present Combustions ; ( to wit , the Pope and his Confederates ) which I have here apparently detected , to the end they may with more facility be prevented by your honourable Vigilancy for the future . As we must haveSee Bishop Hals , No peace with Room . no peace with Room , so we cannot possibly expect any peace from her : Yea , the more we endeavour Reconciliation with this Babylonish S • rumpet ( the grand Design of many late past years , and now ) the remoter shall we be from any real Peace and Unity among our selves , as we have seen by dear-bought experience : and it must necessarily be so , since 2 Cor. 6. 14 15 , 16. Light and Darkness , Truth and Error , Christ and Antichrist , the Sons of God and Children of Belial , can never be cordially reconciled by all the Policies or Contrivements of men ; Gen. 3. 15. Gal. 4. 29. Prov. 29. 27. God himself having put and everlasting irreconcileable Enmity , Antipathy between them . If therefore your Honours ever hope to enjoy a sincere , solid , durable Peace in our Churches or Realms , you must now use all extraordinary Care and Vigilancy to provide sufficient remedies against all the Popes and his Confsederates Devices , stratagems , Engines , Instruments , who else will perpetually embroil us with fresh Conspiracies , Treasons , Rebellions , Powderplors , Wars , till they have wrought their own or our utter ruin , as many late Experiments ( under which our whole three Kingdoms now bleed and languish ) abundantly demonstrate . It therefore much concerns your Honours and our Realms in your intended Treaty , as much as in You lies , to provide the surest and most effectual Remedies against this viperous Generation of Romish Incendiaries , without which we can neither expect any substantial Peace for the present , nor en • oy any lasting Tranquillity for the future ; and , blessed be God , who hath long since put it into your zealous , pious hearts , to endeavour to effect it . It may be some Court-Sycophants , Object may deem these Discoveries very unseasonable , yea perchance dishonourable ( in some particulars ) to his Majesty in his forepast Proceedings , and suggest so much to his Highness , or your Honours . To which I answer ; Answer that the Discovery of all Plots , Dangers is then most seasonable , most advantageous , when we are by special Laws or Treaties to establish future Remedies against them . It is over b • st searching festered wounds to the very bottom , and letting out all their corruption , when we are ready to incarne or glutinate them ; else , if we citatrize before we found them to the bottom , they will soon fester or break out again with greater pain and danger then before : As for the pretended wounding of his Majesties honour , or his former proceedings by this Discovery , as it was most remote from my loyal heart and intentions in its Collection and Publication , so I hope his gracious Majesty and all faithful Counsellors about him ( who bear any real affection to his Highness , Religion , our bleeding Kingdoms , or really intend to close up their wounds by the approaching Treaty ) will be so far from resenting these Detections to be any real eclipse of his Majesties honour ( purposely compiled to discover bona fide to his Highness and others , by what Romish Stratagems , Policies , Counsels , Instruments they have been for sundry bypast years seduced , circumvented , abused , miscounselled , to the Kingdoms , Churches , Religions almost utter desolation , and ingul • ed in those bloody Civil Wars , Massacres , which have turned most of our pleasant Fields into Acheldama's and Golgotha's ) that they will interpret these timely Discoveries of them ( of which , perchance they have been hitherto ignorant or unobservant ) the See here p. 91. highest expression both of my Duty , Loyalty to his Majesty , and my dearest Country , or at least a faithful impartial discharge of that solemn Covenant & Protestation We all have taken by your Honours Injunctions , which oblige me in point of Conscience , of Fidelity to bring them unto public knowledge ; yea , I should in truth have violated both my Allegiance and Covenant , had I concealed them at such a time as this , when Gods admirable Providence had unexpectedly brought them to my hands : Since therefore the wisest King that ever reigned , yea , the King of Kings himself hath assured me , Pro. 16. 13. That righteous lips are the delight of Kings , and they love him that speaks right ; I doubt not but his Majesty and all truehearted Protestants about him , together with your Honours , will deem this Publication a special Act of my Loyalest , Sincerest Service to his Majesty and all his Realms , which through Gods effectual bssileng on them , may much conduce to their future Tranquillity , Felicity , the things here principally aimed at . I shall therefore become and humble Suitor to your Honours , to accept of these Collections ( which I have with no small labour extracted , digested into method , while others have been taking their natural rests ) as a pledge of my realest Affection to my Country , his Majesty , Religion , Parliaments : yea , as a seasonable Preparative ( not to be slightly read over as matter of mere News , but seriously perused , as a Discovery of highest consequence ) to your intended much efflagitated Treaty of Peace : and as a necessary Introduction to the History of your Patient , upright , unparalleled Trial of , and righteous Judgement against that Arch-Incendiary and Enemy of our Peace , Religion , Laws , Parliaments ( some of whose Seditious Popish practises are here lightly glanced at , others more fully detected , the rest reserved for their proper Place ) who hath received with much Mercy and Moderation the due reward of his treasonable , violent , bloody , Romish Counsels and Actions . I shall daily supplicate the God of Recompense that the effusion of his most Nocent blood by the AXE of Justice may put a speedy perjod to the spilling of any more Protestant blood by that sword of civil War , which his Counsels , Innovations , Oppressions first unsheathed , and his seconds , the Romanists , have since kept drawn and brandished among us , almost to the depopulation of our whole three Kingdoms . Heb. 13 20 , 21. Now the God of Peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus , that great Shepherd of the Sheep , through the blood of the everlasting Covenant , make you perfect in every good work , to do his will , working in you that which is wellpleasing in his sighed , through Jesus Christ , and Luk. 1. 79. guide all your feet aright in the way of Peace , you are now entering into ; that the end of it may be Peace indeed , and Isa. 32. 17 , 18. the effect of it , quietness and assurance for ever , that so we may henceforth dwell in sure dwellings , and rest in quiet and peaceable Habitations ; which is , and shall be the Prayer , Of your Honours daily Orator and Servant WILLIAM PRYNNE .