To the Right Honourable Lords and COMMONS now Aſſembled IN PARLIAMENT . HAving formerly preſented Your Honourable Aſſembly with a large Historical Collection of the several Execrable Treaſons , Conſpiracies , Rebellions , Seditions , Oppreſsions , Antimonarchical practiſes of our Lordly Prelates , in all former and late ages , in my Antipathy of the Engliſh Lordly Prelacy , both to Regal Monarchy , and Civil Unity ( which gave a fatal blow to the Prelatical party ; ) I thereupon conjectured my Domestical Collections of that nature , had arrived at a Non ultra : But the Death of ſome eminent Members of the Commons Houſe ( principally interested in the Archbishop's proſecution ) inevitably engaging me at a dead lift ( through the Committees requeſt ) to make good the grand Charge againſt this Arch-Prelate , and bring him to his long expected Trial , ( a trouble which I gladly would have declined : ) thereupon the Importunity of diverſe Honourable Friends in both Houſes , whom I could not deny , hath ( beyond expectation ) in the amid of many other diſtracting occaſions , impoſed on me this further Trouble , of collecting the enſuing Breviate of his Life , abstracted ( for the moſt part word for word ) out of his own Diary and Papers : which being a neceſſary Prologue to the much deſired Hiſtory of his Trial ( wherein his Crimes here pretermitted , will appear in their proper Colours ) was conceived to be a fitter Forerunner , then Concomitant of it . There was one special conſideration which for a time did ſomewhat dissuade me from this ſervice , to wit a miſconſtruction which ſome no doubt will make of my publications in this kind , as if they proceeded merely , or principally from malice , or revenge of former Injuries and Cruelties inflicted on me by this Archbishop's means . But my own Conſcience and forbearance to meddle with his Proſecution , till publicly called and neceſsitated thereunto , acquitting me from any ſuch imputation ; and the never ſufficiently admired Providence of my ever-Gracious God in preſerving me ſafe in the amid of all former troubles , impriſonments , ſufferings , reducing me in safety by and Omnipotent hand ( beyond all expectation of Friends , and Enemies ) even with honour and triumph , from my long cloſe impriſonment and exile in foreign parts ( to which this Arch-Prelate had eternally deſigned me , without hope's of Redemption , ) and ſince , that in ſelecting me above all others , by public authority , ( contrary to my inclination and deſire ) to be both the ſeizer and peruſer of his papers , & prosecutor of his long delayed Trial ; ( the protraction whereof by many adorable providences , was one principal means of making good his charge , though at firſt it ſeemed to diſable its proof ; ) I could not ( in purſuance of this moſt remarkable work of Providence ) but moſt cheerfully proceed in this impoſed Employment , notwithſtanding all other Diſcouragements , Impediments : which being brought to this perfection , I humbly commend to the public view of the world under your Honours moſt Noble Patronage , to whom I moſt humbly preſent it , only with this one moſt Just and Equitable Requeſt , which I beſeech You ſeriouſly to lay to heart . It was once a Proverb , but now a ſad Complaint , that great bodies , have very ſlow motions , & ( alas ) many experimentally feel its verity . There are to my knowledge ſome hundreds of pious Chriſtians quite ruined , or much impaired in their fortune's , by the Tyranny and Injuſtice of this oppreſsing Arch-Prelate and his Confederates ; who at the beginning of this Parliament became humble Suitors to it , for Relief and Reparation of their Damages . Their cauſes thereupon were then , to their great expense , fully herd , and voted at several Committees ; many of them reported in the Houſes , their unjuſt ſentences there ordered to be vacated ; yea ſpeedy Recompenses of their loſſes , Damages , then promiſed , expected . But yet now at laſt ( after two or three years tedious expectation , and solicitation ) their ſufferings , Pſal . 31.12 , Pſal . 88.5 , 6. cauſes , loſſes , are almoſt quite forgotten , themſelves ( like dead men out of mind whom we remember no more ) farther from any hope's of relief then ever , being ſo remote from receiving ſatisfaction for their wrongs , that they ſtill lie under the power of their former illegal Sentences , Breſſures : And if times ſhould altar , their Witneſſes or Oppressors' die or miſcarry ( as many of them have done ) or themſelves depart this life before their Cauſes fully determined , they and theirs ſhould be left altogether remediless , and utterly ruined , without redress . Now I humbly beſeech Your Honours , ſadly to conſider on the one ſide , what and heart-breaking , and grand Diſcouragement it will be , not only to theſe preſent Sufferers , but to all others in future times to become public Martyrs for their Country or Religion : and on the other ſide , what a great Encouragement it will prove to Tyrants , Oppressors' in preſent and future times to exerciſe all manner of Cruelties , and Injustice , if the remedy ſhall prove almoſt as bad as the diſeaſe , and poor oppreſſed Suppliants in the higheſt degree , find either no relief at all , or ſuch ſlow redress of their grievances , as ſhall quite wear out their patience , and remainder of their decayed eſtates , and that even in Parliaments ( where remedies in former times were moſt ſpeedy , certain ) and their Oppressors' , ſuch Dilatory proceedings againſt them , as shall be equivalent to Impunity , and exempt both them , their heirs , and Executors from rendering Competent damages , to thoſe they have oppreſſed . I confess the great public preſsing Occaſions , Wars and Diſtractions in all our Realms have been the chieſe Remora to Your deſired ſpeedy relief of oppreſſed Suitors , Your puniſhment of Delinquents , and may plead your juſt excuſe ; But yet I humbly ſupplicate You ( moſt Noble Senators ) ſo far to commiſerate the long unredreſſed Grievances of theſe afflicted ones , as now at laſt to allot ſome vacant days each week , for the final determination of their diſcontinued & almoſt forgotten Complaints ; that they and theirs , may not have cauſe hereafter to lament , A failer of Justice even in the ſupremeſt Court of Justice : the undelayed execution whereof both in point of Relief and Puniſhment , hath been the chief ſupport of Our Parliaments Honour , and of the peoples love and aſsiſtance to Parliaments . It is one of the principal clauſes in Chap. 29. Magna Charta , which Our Anceſtors , and your Honours have ſo much contended for , and we all have lately Covenanted to maintain , Eccl. 4.1.2 . viz. We ſhall deny , NOR DEFER TO NO MAN IVSTICE OR RIGHT . Let it therefore be put in preſent real execution , that ſo none may have cauſe to take up this mournful complaint of Solomon ; I returned and conſidered all the Oppreſſions that are done under the Sun : and beheld the tears of ſuch as were Oppreſſed , and they had no Comforter : Wherefore I praiſed he dead , that are already dead , more than the living that are yet alive , etc. And this through Gods bleſsing will be the ſpeedieſt way to put a perjod to our Wars , Diſtractions , Grievances , and gain Your Honours higheſt Reputation , Grace Favour with God , and all good men . Now the good God ſtrengthen both Your hearts and hands to execute ſpeedy Pſa . 103.6 . Pſal . 10.18 . Justice , and Judgement for all that are oppreſſed , that the man of the earth may no more oppress ; and Crown all your public Counsels , Enterpriſes with ſuch happy success , as may occaſion all ſucceeding Generations , to bless God for You , as the beſt-deſerving Parliament ever yet Aſſembled : which is the Cordial Prayer of Your Honours moſt devoted SERVANT , William Prynne .