TO The Right Honourable , the Lords and Commons In PARLIAMENT Aſſembled . YOUR HONOURS earneſt deſires expreſſed in the premiſed Order , inevitably engaging me to compile and publiſh to the World , A complete Hiſtory of the famous Trial , of the late decapitated Archbiſhop of Canterbury ; I have , without other motives , in Obedience thereunto ( with as much Expedition as my many other distracting Occaſions , and the Vastness of the Work would permit ) finiſhed the First Part thereof ; ( which I here humbly tender to Your Honourable Patronage and Acceptance ) compriſing , The several Order , Articles , and Parliamentary Proceedings againſt him , from his Original Impeachment till his Trial ; together with , the Commons Various Evidence ; his several Anſwers to it ; and their Replies upon them , in maintenance of the Firſt General Branch of their Charge of High Treaſon againſt him : to wit ; His Traitorous Endeavours to altar , & ſubvert Gods true Religion by Law eſtabliſhed among us ; to introduce Popiſh Superſtition and Idolatry in lieu thereof ; and to reconcile the Church of England to the Church of Rome , by ſundry Jesuitical Stratagems : The guilt of which black Execrable Charge ( wherein he moſt of all proteſted , and endeavoured to clear his pretended Innocency , both during his Trial at the Bar , and at his Death on the Scaffold , as that which did moſt nearly concern him in his function as and Arch-Prelate , and in his Religion as a Proteſtant , ) was ſo abundantly evidenced , ſo firmly fixed upon his White Rochet by a various multiplicity of unavoidable proofs , impregnable Demonſtrations , ( which all his Sophistry , Oratory , Subtlety , Protestations , could no ways enervate or evade , ) that it will ſtick faſt upon him for Eternity , maugre all his own verbal Apologies , during his life , or the Malignant Panegyrics , the ſcandalous Relations of any Anti-parliamental , or Prelatical Sycophants ſince his death : Who in open affront of Your moſt memorable Exemplary Juſtice , upon this Arch-Traytor , ( the very Source and Compendium of all our late misery's ) have proclaimed him to Poſterity , in their late lying Legends of his death , A most Glorious Martyr , ( as the Papists did his moſt Traitorous Predeceſsor , Joannis de Aton . Conſtit . fol 149. 150. Antiquicates Eccleſiae Brit. and Godwin in his life , M. Fox Act , & Monuments , p 2. 205. Becket ) and already canonized him for A SAINT : perchance , becauſe beheaded on Jan. 10. Les plus Grands du Berray rapporterent au Roy , qu'il troubloit le repoſe du publie , & qu'il S'emparoit contre toute la Juſtice de ſon domaine , etc. Il depublia la Bulledecernee par le Pape pour fair la guerre aux Albegiois auec tant de zeal & the fruit , que pluſieurs a ſa parole S'y cro • ſerent courageuſement . La gum • rre eut une iſſue houreuſe , car les Heretics furent tellement deconfits qu'ils ne purrent depuis ſeremetter on campagne , etc. Ribadeniera Flures des Vies des Saints p. 124. Saint Williams day , the Popiſh Archbiſhop of Bourges in France ; as great a diſturber in his time , of that Kingdoms public peace , and courſe of Justice ; yea , as grand and Incendiary of the bloody Wars againſt the Albigenſes & French Proteſtants , as this Archbiſhop was of our Kingdoms tranquillity , its public Juſtice ; and ſtirrer up of the War againſt the Scots ; yet for all this enrolled in the Read Calendar of Romiſh Saints . There have lately come unto my hands two Oxford Pamphlets ; the one entitled : A true Relation of the Death of the moſt Reverend Father in God , William Lord Archbiſhop of Canterbury , upon Tower hill , January , 10. 1644. ( Firſt Printed at Oxford , and ſince at Bristol , Anno 1644. ) Which begins thus : On Fryday , Jan. 10. THE REBELS MARTYRED thee moſt Reverend Father in God , William Lord Archbiſhop of Canterbury upon Tower hill , after they had kept him priſoner above four years : And then relating his ſpeech and Prayer on the Scaffold , it concludes in theſe words : Thus died the KINGS , and the CHURCHES Note . MARTYR ; a man of ſuch Integrity , Learning , Devotion , and Courage , as had he lived in the Primitive times , they would have given him another name : whom though the cheated multitude were taught to miſconceive , ( for theſe honoured him ) yet impartial posterity will know how to valve him , when they hear the Rebels ſentenced him the very ſame hour that they voted down the Liturgy of the Church of England ; whoſe innocency cries to heaven for Vengeance , upon the heads of theſe deſtroyers , who pile MURTHER upon Murder to fortify their Covenant , that upon this generation may come all the RIGHTEOUS BLOOD , from him whoſe blood was first ſhed , to the pulling down this great Pillar of our Church ; which if you conſider , is THE MOST GROUNDLESS , MALICIOUS , SOLEMN STUDIED MURTHER THAT EVER WAS COMMITTED IN THIS WRETCHED Note . ISLAND . The later Pamphlet Imprinted at Oxford , of the ſame Subject , dated as the former , ( inſcribed ; A brief Relation of the Death , and Sufferings of the most Reverend and Renowned Prelate , the Lord Archbiſhop of Canterbury , with a more perfect Copy of his Speech and other paſſages • n the Scaffold , than hath been hitherto Imprinted ; ) thus blazons this Archtraytors Innocency , merits , ſufferings . Page 14. 15. 25. He that had ſo long lived a Confeſſer ( a Popiſh Confeſſor if he pleaſe to the Duke of Buckingham and others ) could not but think it releaſe of miſery to be made a MARTYR . He aſcended the Scaffold with ſo brave a courage , ſuch a cheerful countenance , as if he had mounted rather to behold a Triumph than to be made a Sacrifice , and came not there to die , but to be tranſlated ; and to ſay truth , it was no Scaffold but a Throne ; a Throne whereon he was ſhortly to receive a Crown , even the most glorious Crown of MARTYRDOME : After which he stile him , A glorious Martyr ; his blood , Innocent blood ; yea , thou extols his Innocency , and Canonizeth him for a Saint in a Poetical Elegy , eſpecially in theſe enſuing lines . — Through the hand Of baſe detraction practice to defame Thy spotless Virtues , yet impartial fame Shall do thee all just honour , and ſet forth To all ſucceeding times thy matchless worth ; No Annals ſhall be writ , but what relate Thy happy influence , both on Church and State ; Thy zeal to public Order , thy great parts For all affairs of weight ; thy love to Arts ; And to our ſhame and his great glory tell , For whoſe dear ſake , by whoſe vile hands he fell . A death ſo full of Merits , of ſuch price , To God and man ſo ſweet a ſacrifice , As by good Church-Law may his name prefer , To a fixed Rubric in the Calendar . And let this ſilence the pure Sects complaint , Note . If they make Martyrs , we may make a SAINT , etc. And not only theſe Anonymous Pamphleteers , but King Charles himſelf , who not long before had given him and ample Pardon , as a Traitor , under his great Seal of England , forgetting what he had done herein , does in his own See the Kings Cabinet opened . Letter to the Queen , dated Jan. 14. 1644. cry up this headless Archbishop for a Martyr ; yea , deems his blood ſo meritorious , ſo Innocent ; that being totally the Parliaments , he believes it no preſumption , hereafter to hope that Gods hand of Justice , ( for the Parliaments juſt effuſion of his blood ) must be ( thenceforth ) heavier upon them and lighter upon him and his Antiparliamentary Party , looking now upon their cauſe having paſſed by their faults . If his blood ſo lately ſhed by the axe of Juſtice be already become ſo meritorious , as to balance the ſcales of Gods Juſtice in this manner ; we may juſtly fear it will in few years more grow into as great eſteem at Court , as Thomas of Beckets his Trayterly predeceſſors blood , did in former times among the Prelatical Popiſh party ; who attributed more efficacy to it then to Chriſts , and therefore preſumed moſt blaſphemouſly to pray to Chriſt himself to ſave them , by his own , but this Arch-Traytors blood , in this distich . Officium Beatae Mariae ſecundum Vſum Sarum , Pariſtis 1919. p. 12. Biſhop Jewels Defence of the Apology , part 2. c . 18. Diviſ . 1. p. 295. 296. Tu per Thomae Sanguinem quem prote impendit Fac nos Chriſte ſcandere quo Thomas aſcendit . But as the manifold glorious Victories , miraculous Succeſſes of the Parliaments Forces ſince his Execution , have experimentally fruſtrated this his Majeſties groundless Hope and Preſumption , that Gods hand of Justice would be heavier upon the Parliaments Party , but lighter upon him and his , by reaſon of his crying blood , it being never lifted up ſo extraordinarily , ſo viſibly for the Parliament before , nor falling ſo heavily upon the King and his Partisans ; as ſince his beheading , and the Kings overconfident relying on the Merits of the Blood of ſuch a Traytot for success in his wars againſt the Parliament ; So , I preſume , the ſetting forth of this Hiſtory of his Trial , will ſoon Un-Martyr , Un-Saint , Uncrown this Arch-Impoſter , by preſenting him in his Proper Colours , stripped of all Diſguiſes , and render him ſo deſperately criminal , ſo tranſcendently Traitorous in all reſpects , eſpecially in point of undermining the Proteſtant Religion , wherein himſelf and his Paraſites have endeavoured moſt of all to vindicate his Innocency , that all Generations will unaminouſly pronounce him , the Archeſt Enemy to , the moſt active universal Underminer of the Protestant Religion eſtabliſhed among us , that ever breathed in Engliſh air ; and readily acknowledge , that no Ecclesiastical Annals ever recorded his Parallel , for multiplicity of deſperate cunning Jesuitical Stratagems ſecretly to ſubvert that Orthodox Reformed Religion which himself pretended to profess ; nay , propagate and patronise . It is far below the Magnanimity of my Spirit in the leaſt meaſure maliciouſly to blaſt the Fame , or revengefully to triumph over , to trample upon the Aſhes of a Vanquiſhed Enemy , whom I never dreaded , or ſlandered all his life , forgave and pitied both before and at his death ; the Memory of whoſe Capital crimes ſhould have expired with his breath , and been eternally buried in oblivion with his Corpse , by me , had not Your Honours superior Commânds neceſſitated me to revive , record them to Poſterity ſince his death ( as well as to give them in evidence at his Trial , ) for Vindication of Your untainted Justice , and the Common Good , to deter all others in future Ages from the like Traitorous Practiſes . If any therefore deem my Expreſsions , concerning him or his actions , overlavish , malicious , or revengeful , let them impartially compare them with his Criminal Offences here recorded , ( which they hardly equalise , or fallen far ſhort of ) and then if they warrant not the harſheſt Epithets , the blackeſt Characters here beſtowed on him , let me eternally bear the blame and ſhame : but if they be ſcarce proportionate to his Treaſons , his grand Miſdemeanors , ( which muſt be blazoned and ſet forth in language ſuitable to their tranſcendent Heinousness , not minced , not extenuated by over-diminutive expreſſions ) I hope none will or can be ſo injurious , as to charge me with Calumny , much less Scurrility or Revenge , who never yet particularly demanded , received the leaſt farthing Recompense from him or any of his , for all the barbarous Cruelties , Oppreſsions , Impriſonments great Loſſes , Damages I ſuſtained , eight years ſpace together , only for diſcovering , oppoſing , countermining ( to the utmoſt of my skill and power ) all Popiſh Plots , Innovations , Proceedings of this Arch-Prelate and his confederates to undermine our Religion , re-eſtabliſh Popery among us by degrees , and ſet up and arbitrary Papal power , the better to effect the ſame : the only real cauſe of all my former ſufferings . Yet three things there are , I foreſee may poſſibly be objected againſt me by his accomplices , which need ſome Anſwer to prevent their causeless Calumnies . The firſt is , That in this Hiſtory of his Trial , I have at large inſerted ſome particular papers , paſſages , ( eſpecially in the Catalogue of the Arminian , Object . 1. Popiſh Errors , vented in , and of the clauſes againſt them purged out of late new Printed Books ) which were not actually , or at leaſt fully read at the Lords Bar ; Therefore I am guilty of partiality and unfaithfulness in relating the Evidence given in againſt him at the Bar , by theſe additions to it . To which I anſwer . Firſt , that all the Evidence , Paſſages here at large recited ( with many more ) were prepared and ready by me at the Bar ; yea Anſw . 1. the effect of every Paper , paſſage here recorded , was in general terms opened , preſſed at the trial , though not all fully read and particularly urged for want of time : which I have here more largely inſerted for clearing the truth , and ſatisfying the Reader , the moſt material paſſages being only read at large , the reſt of like nature but briefly referred to in general to avoid prolixity , and husband time . Secondly , that I have largely recorded none of theſe Paſſages here by way of New Additionall Evidence , requiring anſwer , but only for illuſtration or corroboration of the old , fully given in and read . Thirdly , the Catalogue of new licenſed Popiſh Doctrines , and of the Purgations of Paſſages againſt Popery , Arminianism , arbytrary government , Profaneness , etc. wherein moſt of the new Additions , not fully read , are inſerted , make but one entire charge , not diverse ; and had but one general Anſwer , defence given to them by the Archbishop ; to wit , that they were not licenſed nor purged out by himſelf , but only by his and the Biſhop of Londons Chaplains , who muſt anſwer for them , and that they concerned not him : therefore theſe Additions making no new charge , and receiving all the self ſame Anſwer & defence , no indifferent perſons can juſtly tax me with partiality or injuſtice for inſerting them into this Hiſtory , for the fuller diſcovery of his Popiſh intentions in this kind , ( which want of time prevented us to diſplay ſo fully at the Bar , as was deſired , where we had each particular ready in writing proved upon oath ) it being not only excuſable , but juſtifiable , yea neceſſary in a Hiſtory of this nature , which ſo much concerns Religion and the public . The ſecond thing , which perchance will be alleged againſt me , is ; Object . 2. That I have not ſo fully , ſo punctually related the Archbishop's several Anſwers and Replies to all the particulars of his charge as he uttered them viva voce at the Bar in his particular and general Defences ( who spoke as much for himself as the wit of man could invent , in ſo bad a cauſe ) and that I have made ſome few Additions to the Commons sudden Replications to his Anſwers . To this I anſwer : Firſt , that I uſed all poſſible diligence , both by friendly Anſw . 1. entreaty and the power of Authory , to procure the Archbishop's own Notes of his Anſwers and Defences to the Commons charge , or authentic Copies of them , from Mr. Dell his Secretary and others ; that ſo I might Print them verbatim to avoid all calumnies ; but I could obtain neither from them ; M Dell proteſting , that neither he , nor any other to his knowledge , had the originals nor any coppyes of them ; and that he believed , his Lord did burn all the Notes of his anſwers and defence before his death , of purpoſe to prevent their publication after it . So that if I have caſually omitted or miſtaken any part of his Anſwers or Defence , himſelf or his own creatures muſt bear the blame , not I ; who have as faithfully , as exactly as I could supplied this defect of his own Papers , out of the Notes of others and mind own fragile memory , relating all his Anſwers , Defences , as near as poſſible in his own terms , and preſſing them fully for his beſt advantage , without the leaſt wilful omiſſion or diminution of any one particular of moment . Secondly , For the Commons ſubitane Replies to his Anſwers , I have rehearſed them as near as I could in their own terms ; and made no Additions thereunto , but only of ſome Authors teſtimonies concerning the unlawfulneſs of Images , Crucifixes , Altars , the placing and railing in Altars and Lords Ta • l • s altarwiſe againſt the Eaſtwall , & the conſecration of Churches and Chapples ; wherein the Archbiſhop much abuſed his Auditory with empty flaſhes and confident pretences of antiquity , which Mr Sergeant Wild at large refuted by the Teſtimony of Father's & other orthodox Writers , and Mr Nicholus too , as far as the shortness of time permitted ; to the ſubſtance of whoſe replies in theſe particulars I have added very little , but only for learning ſake and the fuller clearing of the truth . If any ſhall further object , that J have related his Charge entirely together in one continued Diſcourſe , but his Anſwers & the Commons Replies Object . 3. thereto in fractions ; not in one continued Diſcourſe , as they were delivered each day ſeverally at the Bar , and ſummed up at laſt in the Lords and Commons Houſe . I anſwer , it is truth : and I did it for theſe Reaſons . Firſt , to avoid Prolixity , & tedious Repetitions of the ſelf-ſamethings : For had I recited Anſw . his several Anſwers , Defences & the Commons Replies to them as they were made at the Bar each day by themſelves ; and then repeated his general Anſwers , Defences in the Lords and Commons Houſe , and Mr Brownes Reply thereto diſtinctly by themſelves , I ſhould have repeated the ſelfe-ſamethings , with very little variation , three or four times over to no purpoſe ; whereas now I have contracted the sum of all his Anſwers , Defences to each particular Charge & Proof with the Commons Replies thereto into one , to eſchew Prolixity and Tautologies : 2ly , I did it to prevent confuſion ; and for clearer Diſcovery of the truth , the pertinency of the evidence given in againſt him in each Particular : For had I contracted all his Anſwers , Defences into one , and repreſented them in one entire continued Diſcourſe by themſelves ; and then have subjoined the Commons Replies unto them entirely together , the Reader could never have clearly diſcovered the frivilouſnes , falseness , or impertinency of his several Anſwers to each particular charge , or the ſtrength of the Commons Replies thereto ; nor yet ſo well have obſerved , to what particulars he gave anſwer , to what not ; whereas now by this Perſpicuous Method I have followed , in reciting his Particular Anſwers and Defence diſtinctly to each Branch of his Charge and the Evidence brought to prove it , and then annexing the Commons Replies thereunto ; the Readers may with eaſe and delight ( by comparing the Charge , Proofs , Anſwers , Defence and Replies together ) moſt clearly diſcover the truth , weight of each Charge and Proof ; the weakness , falseness , defects , and inſufficiency of all his Anſwers ; the ſatisfactorines of the Commons Replies , and his undoubted Guiltiness of all the particulars charged on him . Thirdly , the Archbiſhop alleged ſundry things in his particular Anſwers and Defences each day , which he omitted in his general Defences in both Houſes ; and added ſome things in his General Defences , which he omitted in his particular ; by reaſon whereof I was neceſſitated to collect all his ſcattered Anſwers , Defences to each particular Charge into one , for his better advantage , and the Commons Replies thereto . Which being thus compacted together , without interpoſition of any heterogenius matter in their proper places , for the premiſed reaſons neceſſitating me to this method ; no rational man can juſtly tax me for it , as being no ways injurious to the Archbishop's cauſe , nor tending to his diſadvantage . Theſe Objections from the Archbishop's Prelatical party being removed , there are two things more , wherein Your Honours and the World may juſtly demand ſome ſatisfaction , to exempt me from all causeless cenſures . Firſt , you may juſtly inquire the Reaſons ; why this Hiſtory of the Archbishop's Trial , hath ſtuck ſo long in my hands before its publication , ſeeing it was expected many months ſince ? Secondly , why it comes forth by parcels only , not complete and entire , after ſo long and expectation of the whole trial and proceedings ? To the former demand , I anſwer : Firſt , that this task was by special Order , originally impoſed upon thoſe Members of the Commons Houſe , that managed the Evidence , not on me : who totally declining it , ſome four Months after the Trial and above 2 Months after the Execution , this work was delegated by the Commons unto me ; at which time moſt of the Papers , Notes , Books , Evidences , uſed at his trial , were laid aſide and diſperſed into several men's hands : whereby much time was ſpent before I could recollect and marshal them into Order , to digeſt this Hiſtory out of them . Secondly , ſince the aſſignment of this task unto my care , I have been almoſt every day taken up with public employments for the State , at the Committee of Accounts , and elſewhere , beside the daily avocations of my particular calling ( my only ſupport ſince our unhappy Wars ) ſo as I have had few vacant hours to compile it , but thoſe I have borrowed from my natural reſt , while others have been ſleeping . Thirdly , I have ſince this undertaking , been neceſſitated to write & publiſh ſundry other Impreſſions ( uncapable of delay ) in defence of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of Parliaments , Civil Magiſtrates ; and concerning Ecclesiastical Cenſures and Church-Government , againſt Independents , Anabaptiſts , others ; yea to Vindicate the Parliaments juſt Proceedings , with mine own Innocency , againſt the ſeditious Antiparliamentary Libels , of that notorious impudent Libeler and Lyat , L. Col. Lilburn , who ſtill See his late Libel entitled , Innocency and Truth Juſtified . perſevers in his treſpaſſes , to the diſhonour and scandal of public juſtice . All which conſidered , I ſuppoſe Your Honours and others will eaſily believe , I wanted no diligence , but leiſure only for the ſpeedier accompliſhment of this work : wherein notwithſtanding I have not been negligent , witness my publication of the Breviate of the Archbishop's life , and of A neceſſary Introduction of his Trial , ( amounting to a large Volume ) ſufficient to assoil me from the leaſt imputation of idleness or negligence in this very ſubject . Fourthly , Add hereunto the voluminousness of this Firſt Part of the Archbishop's Trial only , with the variety of the matter , charges therein contained ; the trouble I had in digeſting , the Labour in compiling , writing , reviewing , fitting it for and Correcting , Reviſing it at the Press , with the coldness of this laſt winter's Vacation , when neither pen , nor Press could work , for ſundry weeks together : and compare this with the former reaſons ( and the Printers slackness which hath delayed it very much ) and then I doubt not but your Honours and all others will rather wonder , how I could poſſibly complete this Voluminous Part ſo ſpeedily , then queſtion or quarrel with me , why it comes forth ſo ſlowly ? it being work enough to have ſwallowed up all my time ſince the Order , had I had no other employments to divert me . To the ſecond demand , I muſt return this Anſwer : Firſt , that I Anſw . 2. publiſhed this Hiſtory thus in parcels , for want of time to complete and print it all together in due ſeaſon . Secondly , that the long expectation of this Trial , and men's calling for it every day , induced me to satisfy their longing appetites , with theſe Firstfruits of it , concerning Religion ; ( the thing moſt looked , moſt inquired after , both at home and abroad ) till the full crop be ripened for the harveſt , which will require ſome warmer months to concoct it , ere it can attain to maturity . Thirdly , The great Charge of the Stationer in Printing this firſt Part , ( the voluminousness and price whereof hath , I fear , out-ſwelled moſt Chapments purſes in theſe Indegent times ) with the ſerious conſideration of the incertainty of my life and future opportunity , in theſe days of War and mortality , to finiſh the remainder of this Work ( which God willing I intend to complete and publiſh with all convenient ſpeed ) have induced me , rather to gratify your Honours and the World with theſe Firſt fruits for the preſent , then to hazard the depriving you of it , or the whole Hiſtory , if deferred till all were completed . Having anſwered theſe demands , I ſhall now crave liberty and your Noble Patience to raiſe ſome profitable Obſervations from the Subject matter of this Hiſtory , not unworthy your Honours ſaddeſt thoughts . If you conſider the mean obſcure Parentage of this Arch-Prelate , his grand Preferments , the great mischiefs he did in Church , State , and his Execution after all ; it may ſuggeſt theſe profitable contemplations to your minds . Firſt , That God by his power and all-diſpoſing providence can raiſe up Perſons of the loweſt place or Parentage , to the higheſt Pinnacles of worldly Honour : according to that in the 1 Sam. 2. 8. and Pſal . 118. 7 , 8. He raiſeth up the Poor out of the duſt , and lifts up the Beggar from the dunghill , to ſet them among the Princes , and make them inherit the Throne of glory . 2. That God can make the moſt vile and deſpicable perſons in the world , grand Peſts or Puniſhments to whole Kingdoms , Nations , when he pleases ; Dan. 11. 21 , 22. 1 Kings 11. 26. c . 12. 2. etc. c . 13. & 14. ( even as he made Frogs , Lice , Caterpillars ( the vileſt creatures ) a very soar plague to King Pharaoh and the whole Kingdom of Egypt , Exod. c . 7. 8. and 9. 3. That perſons suddenly advanced from the loweſt degree of men , to the higheſt pitch of honour , prove commonly the moſt inſolent , violent , domineering , imperious , tyrannical , and miſchievous of all ſuch preferments , being unable to wielded or manage the greatness of their fortune . See Mat. 24. 48. to the end , 2 Chro. 10. 8. to 16. Eccleſ . 10. 1. 6 , 7. Pſal . 73. 6. to 13. Iob. 21. 7. to 20. Fourthly , That grand preferments without great grace to manage , improve them to Gods glory , and the common good , are greater judgements than bleſſings , and for the moſt part , the immediate occaſions of men's greateſt ruin by their evil Counsels , or ill managing of their greatness to the public prejudice , Psalm . 73. 3. to 21. Iob 21. 7. etc. Pſal . 37. 1. 2. Eſter c . 3. to 8. Fifthly , That miſchievous Counsellors and wicked Inſtruments in Church , State ; though never ſo great in power or Favour with their Princes for a ſeaſon , seldom eſcape condign exemplary puniſhment at the laſt : and that no greatness whatſoever is able finally to protect mischievous Grandees , from the hand of public juſtice : Eſter 7. 1 Kings 2. 28. to 35. Let all great ones then ſeriouſly conſider this , and remember Canterbury , leſt they die and fallen like him . If we again obſerve his Preferments , Actions , Proceedings and miſerable end as a Clergy man , we may raiſe theſe profitable obſervations from this Hiſtory of his Trial , which all Prelates , Clergy men may do well to conſider , is oft as they think of Canterbury . Firſt , that when Clergy men caſt aſide or neglect their callings , and turn mere Stateſmen , they commonly prove the very worſt and moſt oppreſſive Perſons of all others . Matth. 5. 13. 2. Theſſ . 2. 3. Secondly , That one over potent Prelate backed with a Kings Royal power and favour , is able to unſetleReligion where it is beſt eſtabliſhed , and embroil , ruin the moſt flouriſhing Churches , Kingdoms in few years ſpace . 2 Theſſ . 2. 4. 9 , 10 , 11 , 12. Revel . 13. 2. to 18. Thirdly , That there are no ſuch deſperate underminers , perſecutors , ſuppreſſors of Gods true Religion , Saints , people , as over potent wicked Prelates : And that diſſembling Potent Proteſtant Prelates , Clergymen are greater Enemies to the Proteſtant Religion for the moſt part , then profeſſed Papiſts : 2 Theſſ . 2. 4. 9 , 10 , 11 , 12. Revel . 13. Matth. 24. 5. 11. 24. Acts 20. 22. 30. Iohn 6. 70 , 71. Fourthly , That the fouleſt Practiſes , Conſpiracies againſt the Proteſtant Religion may be and uſually are guilded over with the moſt ſpecious pretences for its Advancement . And therefore it concerns us always to weigh and judge of men by their Actions , not their Proteſtations : Matth. 7. 15. Rev. 13. 2. to 18. Fifthly , That the moſt hopeful designs , the moſt successful Plots , Proceedings againſt the true Religion and Saints of God , do always prove abortive in concluſion ; and that the prevailing contrivances , ſucceſſes of many years travel in this kind are uſually , by a divine overruling providence , oft times , like ſo many Cobwebs , ſwept down , daſhed in pieces , and wholly diſappointed in a moment , when they are neareſt accompliſhment in all humane probability Psalm . 73. 18 , 19 , 20. Pſal . 21. 11 , 12. Gen. 11. 3. etc. Exod. 14. 19 to 31. Eſay . 8. 9. 10. Sixtly , That God in his infinite wisdom and juſtice can turn all the Plots , Coutrivances of wicked men to ruin his truth , Church , people , to be the proper immediate inſtruments of their contrivers ruin . ( He takes the wiſe in their own craftiness , etc. Job . 5. 12 , 13 , 14. ) and to the advancement of his Goſpel , Cauſe , people , as he did in the caſes of Ioſeph , and Mordecay . Seventhly , That great Ecclesiastical or temporal Preferments and Court Favours , seldom make men better but worse then before : Deut. 6. 10 , 11 , 12. c . 8. 10. 19. 2 Chron. 26. 16. c . 31. 25 , 26. Eightly , That thoſe who are Superſtitious or Preſumptuous in their life time , are seldom penitent , but for the moſt part obſtinate , senseless or deſperate at their death's ; and have commonly a greater care to ſupport their cracked credits , by juſtifying or denying their evil actions , then to ſave their ſouls , by confeſſing or bewailing their guilt . This was the condition of this Arch-Prelate who lived to ſurvive and behold the downfall of all his Popiſh Plots , Innovations , Superſtitions , Canons , the High Commiſſion and Prelacy it self , the grand Idols he endeavoured to ſet up and perpetuate among us ; Yet all the Superſtitions , Idolatries , Romiſh Errors , Tyrannous oppreſſions he had maintained , practiſed in his life , he moſt obſtinately juſtified , without the leaſt remorſe , or acknowledgment of guilt , of error , both at his Trial and Death . Yea though he were ſo conſcious to himself of all the crimes wherewith he was charged , that he procured a Pardon from Oxford under the Kings own hand and great Seal , ſoon after the beginning of his Trial ( which made him ſo bold , ſo peremptory at the Bar ; ) yet leſt it ſhould imply or argue a guiltiness in him , he chosen rather to conceal this Pardon , and ſtand upon his plenary juſtification , till after his condemnation , then produce or plead it ; not ſending it to your Honours till he was ordered to be hanged at Tyburne : upon which occaſion he acquainted both Houſes with it , to deprecate and exchange that puniſhment for a more Honourable kind of execution on the Scaffold at Tower hill , where his head was chopped off , inſtead of a Hanging at Tyburne . And although all ingenious men would have imagined , that the blood of the many Souls he had ſtarved , ſeduced , deſtroyed all his time by ſuppreſſing preaching , ſuſpending , ſilencing , cenſuring , baniſhing godly Miniſters , Lecturers without any real Cauſe , preſſing the Book of Sports , introducing Popiſh , Arminian Soul-deſtroying Errors , Superſtitions , Innovations , Profanations ; with the blood of the bodies of diverse thouſands ſhed in England , Scotland , Ireland , by our unhappy Wars ( originally occaſioned and ſtirred up by him ) might have been prevalent enough to relent his Adamantine heart , and draw forth tears of repentance , of compunction from his eyes and soul , yet ſuch was his deſperate Obſtinacy & Impenitency on the ſcaffold , that he never ſo much as confeſſed or bewailed at his death theſe bloody crimes , nor any of thoſe Traitorous Offences for which he was juſtly condemned ; but with a brow of brass and heart of ſtone , impudently juſtified his Innocency , nay Crimes to the utmoſt , without demanding Pardon of them from God or Man , though he took this enſuing Pardon from the King ( a ſufficient evidence of his guilt ) which I have Verbatim tranſcribed out of the Original paſſed under the Great Seal at Oxford . CHARLES R. CAROLVS dei gratia Angliae , Scotiae , Franciae & Hiberniae Rex fidei Defenſor , etc. Omnibus ad quos praeſentes Literae pervenerint ſalutem . Sciatis quod Nos pietate moti , de gratia Noſtra ſpeciali ac ex certa ſcientia & mero motu Noſtris , Pardonavimus , remiſimus & relaxavimus , ac per praeſentes Nobis , Haeredibus & Succeſſoribus Noſtris pardonamus , remittimus & relaxamus Willielmo Laud , Clerico , Archiepiſcopo Cantuarienſi , ſeu quocunque alio nomine , cognomine , titulo , cognition ſive addition nominis , artis , loci , vel locorum praefatus Williamus Laud cenſetur , vocetur , nuncupetur , ſive cognoſcatur , aut nuper aut ante hac cenſebatur , nuncupabatur , ſive cognitus fuit , Omnes & omnimodas PRODITIONES , tam majores quam minores , & Note . crimina leſae Majeſtatis quaecunque ; & omnes & omnimodas Miſpriſiones et concelamenta Proditionum quarumcunque , per praefatum Willielmum Laud ſolum , vel cum aliquo alio , ſive aliquibus aliis , qualicunque aut vbicunque , aut in aliquo modo vel in tempore factus , perpetratas vel commiſſas , nec non omnes & omnimodas Felonias quaſcunque , tam per vel contra Communem Legem Regni Noſtri , quam per vel contra quaecunque Statuta , Actus , Ordinationes ſive Proviſiones ejuſdem Regni Noſtri , et acceſſaria quarumcunque Feloniarum , & fugam & fugas ſuperinde factas , nec non omnes & omnimodias Subvertiones & enervationes Legum , et omnes & omnimodas Conſpirationes , Confederationes , Conſilia , Auiſamenta , Note . Offenſas & alia malefacta quecunque per praefatum Willielmum Laud ſolum , vel cum aliquo alio , ſive aliquibus aliis in Subuertione aut enervatione Legum , aut aſſumendo Regalem Poteſtatem aut Authoritatē aliqualiter aut vbicunque ; aut in aliquo modo aut tempore habita , facta , da • a , commiſſa aut perpetrata : nec non omnes & omnimodas Offenſas , Crimina , Tranſgreſsiones & alia malefacta quaecunque de Praemunire , aut communiter vocatam aut cognita per nomen de Praemunire , aut pro quo vel pro quibus judicium , executio , paena aut foriſtactura in caſu de Praemunire , ſive per aliquod Statutum de Proviſoribus factum & editum , reddenda , exequenda , infligenda aut incurrenda ſunt aut eſſent , aut fuerint per praefatum Willielmum Laud ſolum , vel cum aliquo alio ſive aliquibus aliis , vbicunque aut in aliquo modo aut tempore perpetrata , facta aut commiſſa , et acceſſaria praedictarum Offenſarum , Criminum , Tranſgreſſionum et Malefactorum , & eorum alicujus & aliquorum ; Nec non omnes & omnimodas Confederationes , Conſpirationes illicitas , Convocationes & Aſſemblationes illicitas , verborum prolationes , miſpriſiones , Juriſdictionum uſurpationes & exercitia illicita , legum fractiones , illicitas Juramentorum impoſitiones , & miniſtrationes , contemptus , negligentias , legum violationes , mala & illicita Conſilia & aduiſamenta , & omnes alias offenſas , crimina , malefacta & tranſgreſsiones quaecunque per quodcunque nomen aut per quaecunque nomina idem vel eadem appellata , vocatam & nuncupata ſunt , eſſent aut fuerint per praefatum Willielmum Laud ſolum , vel cum aliquo alio aut cum aliquibus aliis , qualicunque aut vbicunque , aut in aliquo modo aut in aliquo tempore habita , facta , perpetrata aut commiſſa ; et omnia et ſingula eadem aut eorum aliquod vel aliqua tangentia vel concernentia , licet idem Willielmus Laud , de , aut pro praemiſſis , aut eorum aliquo vel aliquibus in Curia noſtra Parliamenti , aut in aliqua alia Curia , ſive aliquibus Note . Curiis , aut coram aliquo judice vel perſona , aut aliquibus judicibus aut perſonis , aut in aliquo modo aut aliqua via quibuſcunque impetitus , judicatus , rectatus , appellatus , adjudicatus , condemnatus , vtlagatus , convictus vel attinctus exiſtet aut non exiſtet , aut impetiri , judicari , rectari , appellari , adjudicari , condemnari , vtlagari , convinci , aut attingi contigerit in futuro . Et omnes & ſingulas utlagarias in aut verſus praefatum Willielmum Laud ratione vel occatione praemiſſorum vel eorum alicujus & aliquorum promulgatas aut promulgandas ; Ac etiam omnia & ſingula judicia , executiones , paenas mortis , paenas corporales , impriſonamenta , paenalitates , foriſfacturas , infamias , irregularitates , defectus ſeu inhabilitates quaecunque in aut verſus praefatum Willielmum Laud ratione vel occatione praemiſſorum aut eorum aliquorum vel alicujus reddita , facta , habita , adjudicata , aut impoſita , aut impoſterum reddenda , fiend , habenda , adjudicanda , imponenda aut exequenda ; Nec non omnes et omnimodas ſectas , querelas , impetitiones & demandas quaſcunque quae Nos verſus praefatum Willielmum Laud pro praemiſſis , ſive aliquo praemiſſorum habemus , habuimus , ſeu in futuro habere poterimus , aut Haeredes vel Succeſſores Noſtri verſus ipſum pro praemiſsis vel aliquo praemiſſorum habere poſſint in futuro ; Ac Sectam pacis Noſtrae , quae ad Nos verſus praefatum Willielmum Laud ſpectat vel pertinet , ſive pertinere poterit , ratione praemiſſorum ſive eorum alicujus vel aliquorum , Et firmam Pacem eidem Willielmo Laud inde concedimus per praeſentes . Pardonamus etiam , remittimus & relaxamus per praeſentes pro Nobis Heredibus & Succeſſoribus noſtris praefato Willielmo Laud , omnia et ſingula deperdita & forisfacturas quorumcunque bonorum et catallorum , terrarum , poſſeſsionum tenementorum & hereditamentorum ſuorum Nobis occasion praemiſſorum aut eorum alicujus qualicunque forisfacta , ſive deperdita , in quorumcunque ſive cujuscunque manibus aut poſſeſsionibus jam existent aut existere debent . Et eadem bona , catalla , terras , poſſeſſiones tenementa , et hereditamenta praefato Willielmo Laud damus & reſtituimus per praeſentes pro Nobis , Haeredibus et Succeſſoribus Noſtris ; Habendum , tenendum , gaudendum & poſſidendum eidem Willielmo de dono Noſtro abſque Compoto , ſive aliquo alio inde Nobis , Haeredibus ſive Succeſſoribus Noſtris reddendo , ſolvendo , vel faciendo . Nolentes , quod idem Willielmus Laud per Nos , Juſticiarios , Eſcheatores , Vicecomites aut alios Ballivos , ſeu Miniſtros noſtros ratione vel occatione praemiſſorum ſive eorum alicujus moleſtetur , vexetur , perturbetur , in aliquo ſeu gravetur . Et ulterius de vberiori gratia Noſtra , ac ex certa ſcientia & mero motu Noſtris volumus , et per praeſentes pro Nobis , Haeredibus & Succeſſoribus Noſtris , concedimus , quod hae Literae nostrae Patentes , ac omnia & ſingula in eiſdem contenta , bonae , firmae , validae et in Lege effectuales ſtabunt et exiſtent , et abhinc nullo modo vacuae devenerint : Et quod allocabuntur omnibus Curiis Nostris , et alibi infra Regnum Noſtrum Angliae , abſque aliquo brevi ſeu vlteriori mandato ſeu warranto , licet idem Willielmus Laud bonam & ſufficientem ſecuritatem de see bene gerendo , juxta formam & effectum cujuſdam Actus in Parliamento Domini Edwardi tertii quondam Regis Angliae , Progenitoris Noſtri , anno Regni ſui decimo tertio editi , non invenerit ; dicto Actu de Anno decimo tertio regni dicti Edwardi tertii in aliquo Nonobſtante . Et Non obſtante Statutes in annis ſecundo , quarto , decimoquarto & Viceſimo ſeptimo dicti Regis Edwardi tertii , & Statuto in anno decimo tertio Regis Ricardi ſecundi Praedeceſſoris Noſtri edito , aut aliquo alio Statuto , Actu , provision aut restriction in contrarium praemiſſorum , aut eorum alicui quouiſmodo Nonobſtante . In cujus rei teſtimonium has literas Noſtras fieri fecimus Patentes . Teſte meipſo APUD OXON , duodecimo die Aprilis , Anno Regni Noſtri decimo nono . By this Arch-Prelates embracing and the Kings granting of this large Univerſal Pardon , of all Treaſons etc. himſelf his Prelatical Party , together with his Majesty and his Adherents of all ſorts , are eternally concluded to plead his Innocency , proclaim him a Martyr , or Canonise him for a meritorious Saint , as they have done . Yea , his Majeſties Royal care and ſerious endeavour to reſcue ſuch and Arch Traitor as He ( impeached of High Treaſon and other grand Crimes by two whole Kingdoms ) from the hands of common Juſtice , and the Supremeſt Judicatory in Parliament , by this Regal Charter of Pardon , when as he could not effect it by his Army Royal and force of Arms , diſcovers both His own unhappiness and our Kingdoms too in this , that he hath hitherto affected not only Treaſon , but Traitors to our Church and State , more then his faithfullest Parliament , or most loyal Subject's : which dangerous Error , I pray God his Majeſty after all his various miſcarriages , diſappointments , loſſes , by ſuch mischievous perſons , may now at laſt diſcern , reject , and never henceforth favourany ſuch Traitors , ill Councillors , Prelates , or Archbishop's more , whoſe extirpation root and branch , your Honours have already voted . And that no doubt upon juſt reaſons , ſince the very beſt and learnedeſt in all the whole pack of Prelates , even the Primate of Armagh , Biſhop Uſher , ( of whom moſt men have hitherto had a very honourable opinion , though a great ſervant and Inſtrument of Canterburies in Ireland , as appears by ſundry original Letters to him under his hand ) hath extremely degenerated in his Chriſtian zeal for the Proteſtant Religion , even in his own bleeding Country ſince he turned Royaliſt and Cavalier ; as appears by this teſtimony under the handwriting of that valiant Noble Knight Sir Charles Coote ; which for Poor dying Irelands ſake ( See the Iriſh Cabinet . to corroborate the late admirable diſcoveries from thence by the Popiſh Archbiſhop of Tuams Papers and others , ſurpriſed by this Sir Charles ) I dare not conceal . I SIR Charles Coote do hereby testify , that being at Oxford the laſt Summer as one of the Agents for the Proteſtants of Ireland , and finding the Iriſh Popiſh Agents then to be very prevalent there , and the Archbiſhop of Armagh to be often preſent at the Debates concerning the business of Ireland , and conceiving him to have ſome power with his Majesty , I addreſſed my self to the ſaid Archbiſhop , and beſought him , that he would interpoſe his power with his Majeſty in the behalf of the Proteſtants ; for if the Iriſh Agents obtained their deſires , the Proteſtants in Ireland were deſtroyed and Popery would be introduced : to which the Archbishop replied ; That was the intention , which he knew better then I did , and ſaid , Note . WE MUST SUBMIT : Dated this 14. of Aprill . 1645. CHARLES COOTE . A very ſtrange ſpeech of a Saint-ſeeming Proteſtant Arch-Prelate . What ? muſt we ſubmit to the destruction of the Protestants in Ireland , and the introduction of Popery there , and not once oppoſe it ? and will ſuch and Arch-Prelate as he refuſe to uſe his utmoſt intereſt in the Kings favour to withſtand it , when deſired ? If this be the Doctrine of the zealous Lord Primate of Ireland , that we muſt ſubmit to the introducing of Popery there , ( the projected deſign of the Primate and Metropolitan of all England and Ireland too , the better to accompliſh it in England , as we have here and elsewhere manifeſted ) the God of heaven for ever deliver us from ſuch and hypocritical falſe Archiepiſcopall generation of Vipers , whoſe heads and hope's of ſucceſſion in both Kingdoms , we truſt Your Honours have for ever cut off in the decapitation of this Archbiſhop of Canterbury , the very worſt of all his Traitorous Predeceſsors , their crimes being all concentred in him ; whoſe famous Trial , Judgement , Execution , ſhall eternise Your memorable Juſtice to poſterity , and deter all other ambitious pragmatical Clergy men , from treading in his fatal footsteps : the ſign of the Archbishop's head , when ſeriouſly beheld , being as good , a Memento for wicked Prelates , Councillors , to ſcare them from his traitorous practiſes , as the sighed of a corrupt Judges skin in Herodotus , nailed to the Tribunal , was to his ſucceſſors , to deter them from bribery and injuſtice . If I have done any acceptable ſervice for Your Honourable Aſſembly and the Church of God , in pubilſhing theſe first Fruits of my Obedience to Your juſt Deſires , the favourable Acceptance of what I have already compoſed with much difficulty and less exactness then I deſired , will be and encouragement to me ( if God ſend life and leiſure ) to preſent Your Honours in due ſeaſon with the remainder of this History . In the mean time I ſhall become a daily Orator to the Throne of Grace , to make and continue Your Honourable Houſes and Committees , a Jer. 31. 23. c . 50. 7. mountain of holiness , and habitation of Justice ; to Deut. 33. 21. execute the Juſtice of the Lord , Pſal . 82. 3. to doe Juſtice to the afflicted and needy , in ridding them out of the hands of the wicked ; and to diſtribute equal ſpeedy judgement to all oppreſſed ones who complain unto , and on all Delinquents juſtly convicted before Your Honours , without any reſpect of perſons , or bias of intereſt or affections , according to the old inflexible rules of Law and Justice ; that ſo no perſon whatſoever may have any occaſion to take up the Prophets complaint againſt You , ( as Iohn Lilburn in his late Libels ; Englands Birthright , with others . ſome have causelessly done ) That Iſa . 59. 4. 9. 14 Judgement is turned away backward , justice stands a far off , and equity cannot enter , there is no judgement in their goings . I ſay 5. 7. We looked for judgement but behold oppreſſion ; for righteousness but behold a cry : Eccl 3. 16. Moreover we ſaw under the ſun the place of judgement , that wickedness was there ; and the place of righteousness , that iniquity was there : Iſa . 1 21. It was full of Judgement , righteousness lodged in it heretofore , but now murderers and oppresses : Ier. 9. 22. Is there no Balm in Gilead ? is there no Physician there ? why then is not the health of the daughter of our people recovered ? But that all ſuch falls clamours being wholly ſilenced by Your care and juſtice , our whole Nation may unanimouſly trumpet forth theſe worthy praises of your Houſes , Committees , that Justice and Judgement are the Habitation of Your Throne ( as they are of Ier. 9. 22. Gods ) and that , like good King David , you all 2 Sam. 8. 15. do execute juſtice and judgement to all the people ; judging them with juſt judgement , without wreſting , perverting juſtice or reſpect of perſons , and that which is altogether juſt do you ( r ) Deut. 16. 18. 19. 20. follow , Which will be Your Honours brighteſt Crown of glory , our Kingdoms greateſt ſecurity , our peoples moſt desirable Felicity ; yea , is and ſhall be the Vote , the Prayer of Your Honours moſt devoted Servant , WILLIAM PRYNNE . Lincolns Inn , Aprill 20 , 1646.