TO The Right Honourable ROBERT Earl of WARWICK , Baron of LEEZE , AND LORD ADMIRALL of all the Parliaments Sea Forces . Right Honourable , YOur eminent zealous Sincerity , and incomparable Activity both by Sea and Land in defence of our undermined , endangered Protestant Religion , Laws , Liberties , Parliament , Nation , against the many late secret Plots , and open Hostilities of Antichristian Romish Vipers , who for sundry years together , have desperately conspired , and most vigorously prosecuted their utter extirpation , and now almost accomplished this their infernal Design , unless Gods infinite mercy ( which hath never hitherto been wanting to us in times of greatest extremity ) miraculously disappoint it ; hath induced me to dedicate this Master-p • ece of the Romanists , and Jesuites Iniquity , to your most Noble Patronage . Wherein your Lordship may summarily behold the most horrid conspiracy against our Reformed Religion , and the very life of the King our Sovereign in case he comply not with them ( as now alas He does overmuch in all things ) that ever was discovered to the world : and clearly descry , who have been the real original Contrivers , Fomenters of all those late bloody civil wars , which have suddenly transformed our peaceable , pleasant delectable Edens of England , Ireland , Scotland , into most desolate rueful Acheldama's , yea Golgothaes , to the just amazement of our selves , and astonishme • tO of all our Neighbour Nations : who now more lament our present Infelicity , then ever their envied our pristine Tranquillity . It was and admirable act of Divine Providence , that a principal Actor in this Conspiracy , sent from Room to promote it , should out of remorse of conscience prove the first Revealer of it to Sir William Boswell : But it was a far more wonderful hand of God ; that after this Plot had been long concealed from public knowledge by Canterbury , who smothered it ; he should unexpectedly raise Me up from my foreign Close Prison of Mount-Orgueil Castle in Jersey , ( where Canterbury and his Confederates had entombed me sundry years , asPsal . 31. 12. Psal. 88. 4 , 5. a dead man out of mind , whom they remembered no more , reputing me among the number of those that go down into the pit , and as one quite cut off by their hands , never likely to rise up again till the general Resurrection ; ) and not only reduce me with Honour and Triumph to my Native Country , restore me to my former liberty , and Profession by the Parliaments impartial Justice ; and make my former and my fellow Sufferers unjust Censures , the ruin of the S • archamber , Highcommission , and Prelates , who censured us ; but likewise , beyond all expectation , send this Archprelate ( though the Kings chief Favourite ) a Prisoner to the Tower of London , to which I was first of all committed by his malice ; and employ me to search his Papers there , where he had formerly twice searched mine by his Instruments , and therehy make Me both the Discoverer and Publisher of this second Gunpowder Plot to the world , after a long concealment of it , ( and that in a time most seasonable ; ) which otherwise , in all probability , had never come to light . Rom. 11. 33. O the depth of the Riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his Judgments , and his ways passed finding out ! This adorable strange Providence of the Dan. 2. 22 , 23. God of Heaven , ( who revealeth the deep and secret things , and knoweth what is in the darkness , and makes known unto us the Kings matter , ) as it should ascertain us , of his future Protection of our Church and State against these Romish Conspirators , whose traitorous Designs he hath formerly most admirably discovered , and frustrated from time to time ; So it should add much dignity and acceptation to this Discovory , and enlarge our gratulations to God for it . To his Blessing I shall in my Prayers recommend this Master-Piece , together with your Lordship's Person , and all your Heroic Endeavours for our Religions , our Republics security , and for ever remain Your Lordship's most affectionate Servant William Prynne .