TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE HIGH COVRT OF PARLIAMENT , NOW ( Through Gods sweet Providence ) MOST HAPPILY ASSEMBLED . Right Honourable Senators , IT is a received principle in Law , H. 3. H. 7.10 C • r • ne . 55. S •• nford . Pl ••• del Coro •• , f . 3. • .40.44 that there are no Accessories in Treason ; whence to conceal a Notorious Traitor , is really to be one . The consideration of the Capitalnesse of such a Concealment in these proditorious times , and the discharge of my bounden Duty to my Sovereign Lord the King , this Church and Kingdom , ( of which I am a true , though unworthy member ; ) and to this Honourable Court ( to whose impartial Justice , next under God I owe the fruition of my present Liberty , my Native Soil , and Quondam Profession of the Law ) hath induced me by way of Gratitude , to present your Honours with this large Discovery , not of one or two , but of and whole Tribe and succession of nota • le Arch-Traytors , Rebels , Conspirators , and des • erate Enemies to our Kings , Kingdoms , Laws , Liberties , ( to say nothing of our Church and Religion ) masked under the innocent disguise of and Episcopall whi • e Rotchet , and the specious much abused Title of , The Church ; which our Prelates have monopolized to themselves , the better to palliate their mischievous designs , and bolster out their vil • anies ; when as ( if we believe either our learned Martyr , And answer to sir TO • omas Moores Dialogue , what the Church is in his works . p. 250. Master William Tyndall , or The true difference between Christian Subjection & unchristian Rebellion . p. 124. Bishop Bilson himself ) The Church is ne • e • taken in the new nor old Testament , for the Bishops or Priests alone , but generally for the whole Congregation of the faithful ; and oft times for the Acts 14.23 . c . 20 28. 1 Cor. 14.4.5.12 . 1 Tim. 3.5 . • 5. Said & ubitres Ecclesa • st licet laici . Te • tul . Exhort , ad Cast. p. 179 • people alone , without the Priest or Minister ; which is worthy your observation , and will utterly subvert one principal Pillar of our Prelates suppo • tO . I could not but conjecture , that this Antipathy , would be very distasteful to our Lordly Prelates ; ( the Malefactors ) whose long-concealed Treasons , Conspiracies & seditious practises it lays open to your public view and justice ; so that I can expect nothing but such extreme Malignity , opposition and Calumnies from them and their confederates , as might in some sort have deterred me from divulging it . Yet , when I considered that the detection of gross Traitors & Conspirators , hath been ever reputed , not only and inoffensive , but acceptable and meritorious service both to Kings and States in all other persons , and that I have no cause to doubt , but that it will receive the selfsame benign interpretation in me , especially from your Honours , ( by some of whose earn • st desires , and • peciall approbations I committed these Historical Collections to the Press ) I could not but with all alacrity proceed on in this service , for the Common good , to the which I have been the more encouraged by a Divine Providence . For being a Prisoner in the Tower of London , stripped of my Profession and all other employments by some Prelates undemerited malice , considering with my self , how I might there pass my solitary hours in the usefullest manner , for the public benefit of this Church and Kingdom ; it pleased God among other subject's , to pitch my thoughts upon a Collection of the several Treasons , Rebellions , Wars , Seditions , and Antimonarchical Practises of Lordly Prelates of all Countries and ages ( especially of our own English Bishops ) which I found scattered in Histories : whereupon ( taking my hint from the Title of a now-non-extant Book , written by one Thomas Gybson a Physician in King Edward the 6. his days , styled Proditiones Praelatorum a Conquestu , seen by our laborious Iohn Bale and mentioned in his C • nt • r . 9. Scr • pt . Brit. p. 719. Centuries ( which book it seems the Prelates since suppressed ) I gathered with no facil labour , the most of those Materials I here present unto your Honours , and Marshaled them into distinct files , with and intention to make them public , so soon as a seasonable opportunity should present it self . But the See a new Discovery of the Prela • es Tyranny . Arch Prelate of Canterbury not long after , persecuting me afresh in the Starcham • er without any just occasion , procured me there , not only to be most inhumanely censured , but likewise to be sent thence close prisoner , first to Carnarvan , then to Mount-Orguile Castle in the Isle of Iersie , and there cloistered up so narrowly that I could neither have the use of pen , ink , paper , writings nor Books to benefit my self or others ; and withal searching both my Chamber and friends houses sundry times by his Pursuivants , seized on all my books and Papers he could meet with . But these Collections escaping his clutches , fell into the hands of another persecuted Gentleman , who without my privity carried them beyond the Seas , where they were preserved till after my late return from Exile ( by the justice of this Honourable House , ) and not many months since , ( when I gave them over as lost ) were unexpectedly returned to my hands in safety , while the business of Episcopacy was in agitation before your Eminencies ; which special Providence , put me in mind of that speech of Morde • ay to Ester , Est • r . 4.14 . Who knoweth whither thou art come to the Kingdom for such a time as this ? and made me strongly apprehend , that God had restored me to Liberty , and these Collections to my hands , for such a time as this , ( which blessed be our good God we now live to see , ) wherein our domineering Prelates lewd practises and Conspiracies against our Religion , Laws , Liberties , Lives , Souls , and Estates , are not only detected , but questioned ; and some of the Potentest and pestilentest of them , charged with no less than High Treason , and other most gross Misdemeanors , in , and by your Honourable Assembly ; which have rendered them so generally detestable to the whole Kingdom , that diverse Petitions have been presented to your Honours , both by Ministers and People out of many entire Countries , for their utter extirpation ; which long efflagitated difficult work , ( which your Honours have now set upon ) I conceive the publishing of this Antipathy , will much facilitate and advance , being thus specially preserved , and reserved by Gods Providence , for such a time as this . The principal motives which originally induced me to undertake this work , were the very same which have now persuaded me to publish it . First , and unfeigned desire to dispossess the seduced and misinformed judgements of Princes , Nobles , and others , of that overweening opinion they have hitherto generally embraced of Lordly Prelates extraordinary fidelity , sincerity , Piety to Kings & Kingdoms in Chur • h and State affairs ; and of the necessity of their Supportation & continuan • e , both for the Security , Tranquillity and felicity of all Christian Kings States , Churches ; to all which , in verity , they have been the greatest Plagues and Opposites . This notable mistake , proceeding , either out of a mere nescience or inadvertency of the Prelates treacherous plots and turbulent Actions in all Climes and times ; or , from the deception of this false Paradox , No Bishop , no King ; or , from the immoderate panegyrical applauses of their Parasites , ( who almost deify them in Press , in Pulpit , especially in Court Sermons ) and their own self-commendations , which are now most frequent in their writings and discourses ; or , from their own outward Pomp , Splendour , and Superficial shows of Sanctity and Piety ; backed with their sordid flattery of , and temporizing with the greatest men , the better to effect their own designs ; will soonest and best be rectified by this bore Historical discovery of their Treacheries and villainies in all ages ; the very knowledge whereof ( as the Prophet Malachy and Christ inform us ) Mal • 2 , • . will make them contemptible and base before all the people , and like Mat. 5.13 . L • k . 14.35 . unsavoury salt , fit neither for the Land nor for the Dunghill , cause them to be cast out and trod • n under foot of men , as good for nothing . Secondly , a sincere endeavour , to the uttermost of my power , to prevent those black imminent storms of war , sedition , schism , oppression , with s • ndry other misery's , which the desperate • proceedings , practises , and counsels of our all-swaying Prelates , in my weak apprehension , then threatened suddenly to bring down upon us , to the apparent danger , if not ruin and desolation to our Religion , Laws , Liberties , King , Kingdoms , of which we have since had most visible real experiments , to the insupportable charge , and infinite disturbance of his Majesty and the whole Realm ; who have cause eternally to detest our Lordly Prelacy , as the very Heb. 12 • 15. root of bitterness whence all our ancient and present calamities have issued . To anticipate and redress which sad events then , and secure us against the like effects of Prelacy both now and hereafter , I could not ( in my poor Judgement ) find out any readier course within the narrow sphere of my Activity , than the publication of this History , of our Prelates practises and disloyal • y , Quorum perfidiam exposuisse , supera • se est , as Saint • pi • tO . 54. Hierom witnesseth in a like case . Thirdly , to • ase our Church , State , with all conscientious godly Ministers and people , from the importable heavy yokes of our Prelates tyranny , under which they have miserably groaned , and against which they have lamentably declaimed for many hundred years , ( and could never yet be thoroughly eased thereof ) as I have manifested by the Testimonies of our own writers and Martyrs in the See C • ap . • . latter part of this Antipathy ; to accomplish which long desired and now expected work , I presume nothing can be more effectual than such and Anatomy as this , of our Prelates villainies of this nature . Fourthly , to further the propagation of religion , the frequent and sincere preaching of the Gospel , the powerful practice of true piety , the salvation of men's souls , and tranquillity of our Church and State : to all which , I dare confidently aver , our Lordly Bishops have been greater enemies and obstacles in all ages , • hen all other professions of men whatsoever . Fiftly , to s • cure our long enjoyed , oft confirmed fundamental Laws , and the hereditary Liberty • both of our persons , States , Lives , from small loss and utter subversion : to all which our Prelates have commonly showed themselves Arch-enemies , endeavouring e • there secretly to undermine them by treachery , or openly to trample them under their po • tificall feet by violence , of which our present time • have had large experience , especially in Canterbury • who hath oft times publicly protested in a most insolent manner ; that he woe • ld break both the Neck and back of Prohibitions & so of the Common Law , or else they should break his , which now he finds they are like to do . And to defend our laws and liberties against Prelatical incroachments , is one principal part of a Lawyers Profession ; so that in this regard this Antipathy is neither without , nor beside my calling . Sixtly , to vindicate the since • ere professors of Religion ( for I will be no Patron of Frantic Enthusiasts , or dissembling Hypocrites ) in general , and my self in particular from the Calumnies of the Prelates and their Instruments . There is nothing more frequent in late Prelatical Factious discourses , See Bishop • Whites Preface before the Book of the Sabbath . Dr. H • ylin • Antid • tum , Linc • linensi . And his modera • e answer to Henry Burton , Lysimacus Nican • r and others . Sermons , Fox Acts and Monuments . passim . 5. R. 2 , c . 5.2 , H. 4. c . 15.2 . H. 5. c . 7. Writings , then to accuse the true servants of God , and most zealous Christians , of Sedition , Treason , Rebellion , Faction , and Conspiracy against their Sovereigns and Superiors . In this sort have they slandered our Sermon . 3.4 . and 5. Before King Edward . Martyrs , Haddon and Fox Contr. Osorium . l. 2. f . 212. Latymer , Haddon and Fox Contr. Osorium . l. 2. f . 212. Luther , and others heretofore , and many poor Christians now : and this practice hath been so common that the Century-writers observe . Cent. Magd. 2. Col. 420. Solemn est ut Christianis crimina seditionis , & laesae Majestatis a persecutoribus affingantur , quibus tamen non sunt obnoxii . And for my own particular , though conscious to my self of no seditious or disloyal Act , it hath been my unhappiness , to be not only slandered , but Censured by our Prelates , as a See A New Discovery of that • Prelates Tyranny . Seditious Person , for Books authorized by their own Chaplain • s approbations , and to be accused to his Majesty and proclaimed both in Print and Pulpit , by Cant • rburi • s speech in Star-Chamber the Epist. Dedicat. H • ylin And • id . Lin • . And a Moderate answer to Henry Burt • n . Du • k • rs Sermon See a new Discovery of the Prelates Tyranny • p. 9 • . Canterbury and his Agents , for a Malevolent against State and Church , a Traitor , Rebel , Factious Spirit , Monster , worse than any Priest or Iesuite , one deserving to be forfeited to the Gallows , and as • ad as Corah , Dathan , and Abiram ; only for opugning their Arminian and Popish Innovations , their desperate See A breviate of the Prelates intolerable usurpations both upon the Kings prerogative Royal and the Subject's Liberties . incroachments upon his Majesties Royal Prerogative , the Laws and Subject's Liberties , according to my Oath and Duty . I could do no less therefore for the vindication of my own personal Innocence ( which your Honours by your unanimous Votes have now abundantly cleared ( with the ruins of that Court which censured me ) the justification of all sincere Professors from these Prelatical black Calumnies , and the perpetual silencing of our Prelates slanderous Tongues & Quils in this kind , then present your Honours and the world with and irrefragable Catalogue of their most horrid Treasons , Rebellions , and Seditions in all ages , which alone outvie all other men's whatsoever , both for quality and numerosity , and so return these malicious defamations with infinite disadvantage upon their own guilty Pates ; Optatus adver . Parmin . l. r . p. 23. Qui ut crimina in silentium mitterent sua , vitam infamare conati sunt alienam , & cum possent ipsi ab innocentibus argui , innocentes arguere studuerint , mittentes ubi que liter as livore dictante conscriptas , as some delinquents did of old , whose steps our Prelates trace . These were the special reasons both of my compiling and publishing this Antipathy ; wherein your Excellencies may clearly discern ; that these Exorbitances of our Prelates , are not so much the vices of their Persons , as of their Function ; which though their many late published Pamphlets , would prove to be of Divine Right , yet the pernicious evil fruits thereof infallibly proclaim , to be of mere humane wrong . And in my weak judgement , there can be no such safe , short , and infallible way to decide this controversy , Whither Episcopacy be of Divine institution or not ? then to consider the fruits thereof in all ages : that of our Saviour being of eternal verity , Mat. 7.16.20 . You shall know them by their fruits . Since then the fruits of our Lordly Prelates , in this ( and in other kinds too as I could abundantly manifest ) have been so desperately evil , and they generally the greatest See • alaeus de vitis Pontificum . Monsters of impiety , that ever pestered the world , ( as appears by the lives of sundry foreign and Domestic Pontiffs ; ) I may infallibly conclude , their calling not to be Divine , but Antichristian , or merely humane at the best , and inconsistent with the safety , both of our Prince , Church , State ; and by this unanswerable reason dissipate into smoke all those specious flourishes and shadows of arguments made in their defence , which I have Cap. 8.9 . See the unbishopping of Timothy and Titus . And a Catalogue , etc. elsewhere fully answered . There are but This is the sum of the Remonstrance newly set out by Sir Thomas Aston , though written by some other Divines and Lawyers , who have contributed their best assistance to it . two chief arguments of moment , for the continuance of Episcopacy , which stick with any judicious men . The first in point of State Polity ; No Lord Bishop , no King . The second in point of Church Polity ; No Bishops , no peace , no government , and nothing but Schisms in the Church : The first , I trust , I have abundantly cleared by this Antipathy ; The second ( God willing ) I intend to dissipate in and Historical Treatise of the Schisms of our English Lordly Prelates among themselves , enough to make a volume ; and then by a larger Remonstrance , experimentally evidencing out of Ecclesiastical Histories That Bishops have been , if not the sole , yet at least the chief Authors of all the Schisms that ever infested and rend the Church of God . And if this be made good ( as it easily may be against all the world ) the proud Hierarchy of our Lordly Prelates will fallen to ground of it self without help of hands to pull it down . If any further allege ; If See Sir Tho. A • tons Remonstrance . you remove away Bishops , you take away government , and introduce and Anarchy into the Church . The answer is very easy . First , we shall still be under the government of our Christian Kings , 1 Eliz. c . 1. the Supreme governors of our Church upon earth . Secondly , under the Government of our Parliaments , Laws , and inferior Magistrates ; who do , and will take special care for our Churches good reglement . Thirdly , under the regiment of our grave and painful Ministers ; whom our Laws style Fitz. N. Br. f . 36. Register . f . 289. b . 30 • . 306. Rectors of their several Parishes , and Rectories . Fourthly , under the government of and Ordinary or Extraordinary Provincial or National Synode , as there is occasion . Fifthly , under such a religious orderly Government , as your Wisdoms , upon the abolishing of Episcopacy , shall please to erect among us , as most consonant to the Law of God , and Civil Government of our State . And can any then justly complain of a want of Government in the Church , when it is but altered for the better ? Sixthly , the primitive Church in the purest times before Bishops were instituted , See h • z • . Chap. • . was governed by a common Council of Presbyters ; and the reformed Churches beyond the Seas which want Bishops , are so regulated at this day , without any worser • nger of and Anarchy ; and so may we as well as they . There is nothing then remaining to uphold our Lordly Prelacy , but two of their own principal vices , ambition and Qui • obs • ero Laicorum , avidius Clericis quaerit temporalia , & in • ptius utitur acquisitis ? Bernard . ad Clerum , & and Pastors Sermon • . covetousness : the one arising from their Lordship's , or Session in Parliament ; the other from their Lordly Seats and Revenues ; neither of which are of Divine Institution , as Archbishop Lauds speech in Starchamber , Bishop Hals Remonstrance , and his defence thereof ; and Whitgift . themselves acknowledge . If your Honourable Assembly then will but take away the Temporal Honours and Lands annexed to their Bishoprics , I dare swear , not one of all our Prelates will plead or write for Episcopacy any more . Saint Paul saith,1 Tim. 3.1 . He that desires the office of a Bishop , desires a good work : and the Father's generally make this observation on the place , Hieron . Com. in Soph. c . • . & in 1 Tim. 3. S • dulius , Primasius , Theodoret , B • da , Rabanne Maurus , Haymo , Anselmus Cantuariensis , Oh • cumenius , Theophylactus ; and others ; in 1 Tim. 3. Origen . in Mat. Hom. 31. Augustinus de civitate WORSER • i , l. 19. c . 19. & Enar. in Psal. 126. Chrys. lib . 3. the Sace • worser • • io . in Epist. ad Eph • s . Hom. 11. Opus imperf . in Matt. Hom. 25. Isiodor . Hispal • nsis de • ff • ciis Ecclesiast . lib . 2. c . 5. Gratian . Caus. 8. quast . 1. Council . Aquisgr . sub Lud. pi • . • . 9.10.13 •• & Parisi • ns . sub Lord & Loath • ri • l. 1. c . 23. Episcopatus nomen est operis , non honoris ; non Dominium , sed Officium ; non Honos , sed Onus ; Opus dixit , non Honorem , non Dignitatem ; Laborem , non Delicias ; Opus , per quod per humilitatem crescat , non intumescat fastidio , etc. If then your Wisdoms will make our Bishoprics now a Work , not and honour , or gain , out lazy Prelates will of their own accords forgo them , without any more dispute . To make this most apparent , I shall instance only in one particular : it is the general resolution of Council . Par • siens . sub Lud. & L • th • ri • , l. 1 c . 5. & 23. Surtus . Council . Tom. 3. p. 364.374 . Counsels , Father's , and Divines , yea of the lewd Conventicle of Praedicationis munus , quod Episcoporum praecipuum est . etc. Council . Trident. Sess. 24. De Reform . c . 4. p. 976 , 977. Trent it self : that the first and principle part of a Bishops office , is diligently to preach Gods Word to the people : and therefore this very Council enjoins all Bishops to preach the Scripture and Gods Law every Lordsday , and Holiday , and moreover in the Lent , Advent , and other Fasts ; quotidie , vel saltem tribus in hebdomade diebus Sacras Scripturas Divinamque legem annuncient , to preach every day , or at least three times a week . Now our Lordly Prelates have been so far from executing this principle part of their office and work , that some of them ( as Canterbury , York • , London , and Oxford ) did not so much as preach one Sermon in sundry years : others of them have preached very rarely ; yea , most of them have by themselves and their instruments See Sh • lford and others . written and preached against frequent preaching ; suppressed all weekday Lectures , and Sermons , on Lordsday afternoons throughout their Dioceses ; and Dr Pierce Bishop of Bath and Wells , by name , in a Letter to Canterbury , thanked God that he had not left one Lecture , nor afternoon Sermon in his Diocese : and suspended the Minister of Bridgwater only for preaching a Lecture in his own parish Church , which had continued 50. years ; & when this Bishop , after much solicitation upon this Ministers promise , never to preach • the Lecture more , absolved him from his suspension , he then most blasphemously applied Iob. 5.14 . Christs words used to the sick man , to this good Minister . Behold thou art made whole : Go away , sin no more : ( that is , preach no more ) lest a worse thing come unto thee : he convented another Minister , only for expounding the Catechism on the Lordsday afternoon , saying , it was AS BAD as Preaching . So that preaching now in this and other our Prelates judgement , is both a Sin , and a bad thing , carefully to be suppressed . And this we may generally observe , that those who were diligent Preachers before they became Bishops , being once made such , became usually either See M. Latim • rs 4. Sermon of the Plough to this purpose . Nonpreaching , or rare-preaching Prelates ; doing so much the less work , by how much they receive the greater wages : Whence Queen Elizabeth used to say , when she made preaching Ministers Bishops ; that she had made a Bishop , but marred a preacher : it being true that the Bishop of Dunkelde once answered Deane Thomas Farret , when he wished him to preach , Fox Act and Monum . p. 1266. I tell thee we Bishops were not ordained to preach : it being too mean and office for them , unless it be sometime at the Court , or at some such solemn meeting , to gain either more honour or preferment thereby , or for some such private ends ; not out of any great zeal of converting souls to God : Since then our Bishops thus neglect , nay hate , condemn , suppress and persecute , the good work of Preaching , wherein their Mat. 28.19 , 20. c . 11.1 . Mar. 1.38 . c . 3.14 c . 16.15 . Luk 4.18 , 19 , 31.43 , 44. Act. 4.19 , 20. c . 5.25.28.29.42 . c . 10.42 . Rom. 10 , 15. c . 11.20 . 1 Cor. 1.17 . c . 9.16 . Ga. 7.16 . Eph. 3.8 . 2 Tim. 4.1 , 2. Act. 20.28 . Ioh. 21.16 , 17. office principally consists ; it is most apparent , that the only thing they now so zealously write & stickle for , is , only the temporal means , & honour , not the Divine spiritual work , or office of Episcopacy ; & since these thus avocate and hinder them from preaching , I presume your excellent wisdoms will deem it necessary , to strip them naked of these two obstacles , which cause them thus to neglect their proper work and duty . Neither would I have your Honours , or any else here misconceive me : as if I advised you , to deprive Ministers of all Honour and Maintenance : God forbid . No , my hearts desire and prayer to God and your Honours shall be , that every painful preaching Minister may have all due Honourable respect , and such a competent allowance , as the greatness of his pains and charge demerit . But that Archbishop's , Bishops , Deanes , and others who have no particular flocks to feed : & either preach not at all , or very seldom , should have such temporal dignities , offices , and See Prov. 30.8 , 9. excessive revenues , as make them either proud , luxurious , ambitious , idle , or negligent in preaching , and to forget that good work of a Bishops office , which Saint Paul speaks of , I humbly conceive is See Chapter 8. where this is largely proved by sundry testimonies . neither lawful nor expedient , but such and irregularity as will be thought fit to be redressed by your Honours , not only in point of Policy , but of piety too . In a word ; when I seriously consider , that Christ himself did Matt. 18.3 • 4. c . 20.20 . to 29. c . 23.8 . to 13. Mar. 9.33 . to 38. c . 10.35 . to 46. Luk. 9.46 , 47 , 48. c . 22.23 . to 28. Iob. 18.36 . frequently condemn and prohibit the ambitious desire of superiority and praeheminencie in his Apost • es . That the Apostles themselves do the like , in • heir 1 Pet. 5.1 . to 6. 1 Ioh. 2.15 • 16.3 Iob. 9 , 10. 2 Cor. 1.24 . Epistles to others . That Quic undqu • de • ideraverit Prim • tum in terra , inveniet in coelo con • usionem ; ut jam inrer servos Christi , non sit worser • Primatu certamen . Opus imper • . in Matt. Hom. 35. See more to this purpose there . Saint Chrysostome clearly determines ; That whosoever desires primacy in Earth , shall find confusion in Heaven , that now among Christs servants and ministers , there may be not contest for primacy , or superiority . That Saint Bernard when he was offered to be made Bishop of Genoa , and Millaine See Vita Bernardi before his works . Cl. Espencaus Digres . in 1 Tim. l. 3. c . 6 • p. 330. peremptorily refused this dignity , saying upon that occasion : Erubesce Oh superb cinis , Deus se humiliat , tu tO • exaltas ? Deus se hominibus subdit , tu dominari gestiens tuo te praeponis authori , Vtinam tale me quid cogitantem Deus , uti suum olim Apostolum increpare dignaretur , Vade post me satanam , non sapis quae Dei sunt . Quotiens hominibus praeesse defidero , totiens Deum meum praeire contendo , & tunc quae verè Dei sunt , non sapio Bernard . Homil. 1. de laudibus Mariae Virginis . p. 18. Blush Oh proud dust and ashes ; God humbles himself , dost thou exalt thy self ? God made himself inferior to men , thou desirimg to domineer preferrest thy self before thy maker . Would to God when I think any such thing , God would vouchsafe to rebuke me , as he did his Apostle in times past , Get thee behind me Sathan , thou savourest not the things that are of God : as often as I desire to rule over men , so oft I contend to go before my God , and then I savour not the things which are truly of God . That the eminent Father Augustin . de gestis cum Emerita Donatist . Epis. lib . Tom. 7. pars • . p. 782. And vero Redemptor noster de coelis in humana man • bram des • endit , ut membra ejus essemus , & nos ne ipsa ejus membra crudeli division lanientur , de Cathedris descendere formidamus ? Episcopi propter Christianos populos ordinamur . Quod ergo Christianis populis ad Christianam pacem prodest , hoc de nostro Episcopatu fac • amus . Quod sum propter te sum , si tibi prodest ; non sum , si tibi obest , si servi utiles sumus , cur Domini aeternis lucris pro nostris tem • poralibus • ublimitatibus invidemus : Episcopalis dignitas f • uc • vosior nobis erit , si gregem Christi deposita magis collegerit , quam retenta disperserit ; fratres mei , si Dominum cogitamus , locus ille altior specula vinitoris est , non fastigium superbientis ; si cum volo retinere Episcopatum meum dispergo gregem Christi ; quom • do est damnum gregis honour Passed • ris • N •• qua front in futuro seculo promissum à Christo sperabimus hono • em , si Christianam in hoc seculo noster honour impedit unitatem ? Saint Augustine Bishop of Hippo , and almost 300. African Bishops more in the great schism of the Donatists , were content to lay down all their Bishoprics for the peace and unity of the Church : thinking thereby not to loose them , but to commit them more safely to Gods custody : and used this most golden speech , And vero Redemptor , etc. What verily did our Redeemer descend from Heaven into humane members , that we should be his members , and shall we , lest his very members should be rend in pieces with a cruel division , fear to descend out of our chairs ? We are ordained Bishops for Christian people : What therefore may profit Christian people for Christian peace , that let us do with our Bishoprics . What I am , I am for thee , if it profit thee ; I am not so , if it hurt thee . If we be profitable servants , why do we envy the eternal gains of our Lord for our temporal sublimities ? Our Episcopall dignity will be more fruitful to us ; if being laid down , it shall more unite the flock of Christ , then disperse it if retained . My brothers ; if we mind the Lord , thy • higher place is the wat • h Tower of a vin • dresser ; not the Pinnacle of a proud Person . If when I will retain my Bishopric I disperse the flock of Christ , how is the damage of the flock , the honour of the shepherd ? For with what face shall we expect the honour promised by Christ in the world to come , if our honour hinder Christian unity in this present world ? And finally , that Bishops themselves did in their very See the Book of Com • mon prayer in Public Baptism . Baptism seriously vow and promise to God : To forsake the Devil and all his works , the vain pomp and glory of this world , with all the covetous desires of the same , so that they would not follow , nor be led by them : and that Saint Bernard hereupon gives this Item to them Ad Cl • ru • & and Pastors Sermon • in Council . Rh • m • ns . Simundum praedicas contemnendum , contemn tu prius , & ad ipsum efficacius alios invitabis : If thou preachest the World is to be contemned , do thou contemn it first , and then thou shalt more effectually invite others thereto . I cannot but presume our Lordly Prelates , if they have any sparks of piety , or humility in them , will now at last for our Churches our Kingdoms future peace , security and felicity , lay down their Bishoprics at your Honours feet ; or else that your Eminences will enforce them thereunto , it being more equal and expedient , that a few Lord Bishops should meritoriously loose their pernicious honours , than our King , Church , State , Religion , Laws , Liberties , Peace , be perpetually endangered , and embroiled by their continuance . Now the great Moderator of the Universe , who hath miraculously congregated , preserved , directed , assisted your Honourable Assembly hitherto , and and wrought wondrous things by your Indefatigable industries , and most prudent consultations , for the honour and safety of his Majesty , and his Realms ; the Reformation of our Church and State ; the Establishment of our undermined Religion , Laws , and Liberties ; the pacification , and prevention , of our much feared Wars and Invasions ; the relieving of our grievously oppressed ones , and the exemplary punishment of our Arch-oppressors , to the inef • able joy of all true English , Scottish , Irish hearts , and of true Christians ; continue his blessed assisting presence with , his Almighty protection over you ; multiply all his saving graces in , pour forth all his blessings , spiritual , temporal , and eternal abundantly on you , and Crown all your religious Consultations with such a successful issue , that the present times , and all succeeding ages may deservedly call your Honours , Esay . 58.12 the raisers up of the foundations of many generations , the repairers of our breaches , the restorers of paths to dwell in , and the Saviours ( next under God and our Sovereign ) of our almost ruined Church and State . So prayeth your Honours redeemed Captive , and eternally devoted servant WILLIAM PRYNNE .