To the most Reverend and Gracious Father in God , my Lord Primate of IRELAND . MY LORD , IN a discourse lately written concerning Puritans , I had occasion offered me to declare my opinion against the Divine right of Episcopacy . Those reasons which I then urged , seemed weak to your Grace , as I have herd , which was a great discouragement to me : but I thought it not fit to desert so well a seeming cause , and to resign my judgement presently upon a mere discouragement . I have since summoned up some more deep and retired thoughts , that I might gain a more just cause to retract my error , or to clear the truth , and persist in my assurance . The question of Episcopacy , I think , I have now rightly stated , and if I am not deceived , I have let in such light upon it , that judicious men will now more easily ransack the profundity of it . Certainly the matter of it self is of great difficulty , and of great moment in these times , and it was not any confidence in my own wit that first engaged me in it , but the knowledge of my candor , and freedom from private respects . No man living , I conceive , can be more dispassionate , or more disinteressed in this case then I am , The heat of my own mind could never yet thrust me into any faction , or make me turbulent in the world , neither has any impression from without either by hope of gain , or fear of damage stirred up sleeping passion in me . Of my self I rather wish well then ill to Episcopacy , because it is so ancient a government ; and for my own interest I have found more friendship then enmity from Bishops , so that I am certain , there is nothing but the simple love of truth , as it is truth , is the bias of my actions at this time . As for the Presbyterial discipline also , I have so laid open my opinion concerning that , that if I have erred therein , I am sure the world can charge me of nothing else but error . Had all men which have formerly treated of this subject , been as unswayde by private interests as I am , this controversy had not been so long protracted as it is ; but your Grace knows well , that scarce any but Bishops have maintained Bishops hitherto ; nor scarce any opposed them , but such as have found some opposition from them ; My Lord , I now beg your gracious favour to lay aside your Pall , and to put on the same impartial man in perusing these papers , as I now am while my pen is upon them : for I know there is none has a more clear Spirit , and less liable to the gross damp of worldly respects then your self . Let this my humble address be a testimony at this time that I am not a prejudging , factious enemy to all Bishops , and let your gracious acceptance of the same be as strong a crisis that your Grace is not a prejudging factious enemy to all which maintain not Bishops . Your Graces in all observance most humbly devoted , H. P.