TO THE HONOURABLE House of COMMONS assembled in PARLIAMENT . IN obedience to your Commands , I here humble present to your view what you were pleased with patience and readiness of affection lately to attend unto . I considered , that though the Choiceness of the Auditory might require the exactest preparation ; yet both the condition of the Times , and the nature of the Duty did call upon us to lay aside our Ornaments . And therefore I speak with such plainness , as might commend the matter delivered rather to the Conscience of a Penitent , then to the fancy of a delicate hearer . The King of Nineveh was a King as well in his Sackcloth , as in his Robes : And the truth of God is indeed fuller of Majesty when it is naked , then when adorned with the dress of any humane contribution , which many times takes from it , but never adds any valve unto it . I looked upon you in your double Relation , both Common as Christians , and Special , as men entrusted with the managing of those arduous and most pressing difficulties under which this distempered Kingdom is now groaning . And for the quickening of those endeavours which belong to you in both those Relations , I presented you both with the bottom of a Nations unhappiness , which is since ; and with the top of their felicity , which is Gods free grace and favour : That by your serious cares to purge out the one , and to procure the other , you might , by Gods blessing on your Consultations , dispel that black tempest which hangs over this Kingdom , and reduce the face of things unto calmness and serenity again . When the Children struggled together in the womb of Rebekah , she was thereupon inquisitive , If it be , Why am I thus ? Gen : 35 , 22. and she addressed her self to God for a resolution . Surely this Nation is become like the womb of Rebekah , the children thereof struggling in their mother's belly together , and when God hath mercifully freed us from foreign Enemies , Brothers are become enemies to brothers , and by their enmities likely to tear and torment the bowels of their mother , and to ruin themselves . And what have we now to do , but to inquire the Cause of these sad commotions , Why are we thus ? And surely the Cause is chiefly where the Disease is , within our selves . We have been like the womb of Rebekah , a barren Nation , not bringing forth fruits of so many mercies as God hath filled us withal . So that now it is no wonder , if God cause us to be in pain within our own Bowels , and to feel the throws and strugglings of a Traveling woman , Hos. 13.13 . ready to bring forth her own Confusion , a Benoni , or and Ichabod , a son of Sorrow , and of Shame , to this hitherto so peaceable and flourishing a Kingdom . All that we can comfort our selves with in these pangs and qualms of distemper is , that there are some Iacobs among us . Gen. 32.24 . Hos. 12.3 , 4. who instead of supplanting their brothers , will wrestle , and have power with God . The people have often Petitioned , sometime his sacred Majesty , sometime this Honourable House , which are his great Council , many overtures , & endeavour of Accommodation have been tendered , Isa. 26.17 , 18. & yet we cry out in our pangs , & have , as it were , brought forth wind , neither have we wrought any deliverance in the earth . I have here therefore presented a new Petition , dictated & drawn up to our hands by Gods own Spirit , unto which both King and Parliament , Peers and Prophets and People , must all subscribe , and offer it with prostrate & penitent hearts unto him who stands in the congregation of the mighty , Psal. 82.1 . & judgeth among the gods , that he would take away all our iniquity , and receive us into favour again , and accept of a Covenant of new obedience . And this Petition God is pleased to anticipate with and answer of grace in the consequent parts of the chapter whence the Text is taken , and that particularly to every branch of the Petition . He will take away iniquity . His Anger shall not punish , His Love shall heal our backslidings , the greatness of our sins shall not hinder the freeness of his Grace . He will do us good , and give us life , by the due of his grace reviving us : and Glory clothing us like the Lily of the field , with the beauty of holiness : and stability , fixing us by his grace , as the Cedars of Lebanon are fastened upon their Roots : and growth or enlargement as the branches spread forth themselves , and continual vigor & plenty , as the Olive tree , which is always green and fruitful , and glorious comforts by the sweet savour of the knowledge of God,2 Cor. 2.14 . which like the spice trees of Lebanon shall diffuse a spiritual perfume upon the names , and into the consciences of penitent converts . He will prevent us with the blessings of Safety , as well as of Sanctity and Comfort , we shall under his shadow find shelter and protection from all our fears . Though like Corn , we be harrowed under the Clods , though like a lopped vine we seem naked , and reduced to lowness , though like crushed grapes we lie under heavy pressures : yet he will receive , and enlarge , and comfort us again , and when we are in our own eyes as fatherless children , He will set his eyes upon us as a Tutor and Guardian , He will hear and observe , and answer , and pity us , enabling us to make good our Covenant by his grace , and causing the fruits of his loving kindness to be found upon us . Thus God is pleased to borrow the various perfection of other things to adumbrate the united and calumniated mercies which he promises unto a converting and petitioning people . You have the Petition sent you from God , and his Answer preventing you in all the members of it with the blessings of goodness . I have nothing else to do , but to beg of you , and of all this great people whom you represent , the Subscription of your hearts and lives unto this Petition : and to beg of God that he would graciously incline the hearts of this whole Kingdom , rather to wrestle with him for a blessing , then to struggle and conflict among themselves for a Curse . With which prayer I humbly conclude . Commending your persons and your weighty affairs to his grace ; and rest , Your most humble Servant in Christ , ED : REYNOLDS . From my Study in Braunston August the 8. 1642.