To the Right Honourable , Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX , Captain general of all the Parliaments Forces in ENGLAND ; and Oliver Cromwell , Eſquire , Lieutenant general to the ſaid Forces , ſuch honour as is promiſed to all that honour the Lord Chriſt . Right Honourable ; YOu two are ſo joined , as it were in one , that it may be ſaid of you , which was ſaid of Jonathan and David , 1 Sam. 18. 1. 3. & 20. 42. ( two mighty warriors ) that their hearts were ſo knit , that they loved each other as their own souls ; they had ſuch ſweet experience of each others faithfulness , that it was not in the power of Saul ( though a King ) to break it , Prov. 12. 26. or cut it aſunder ; and although many have attempted to do the like to you , yet their labour hath been fruitless ; it hath been a joy to many to ſee the effects of love ſo freely flow forth from each to other interchangeably , which is amiable , ſweet , and lovely . Moreover , God hath raiſed you up , and ſet you in high places , where opportunities flow of doing good ; and which is more , God hath given you hearts to improve theſe opportunities to his glory , and the good of his people . You have alſo had many and great experiences of his protection , preſence , & bleſſing , even to admiration ; it is the Lord alone , who hath wrought all your works for you : ſurely you may well ſtand aſtoniſhed at his dealings with you ; all you can do , is too little for him who hath done ſo much for you ; you know the ſorrows , ſufferings , and ſighings of the people of God in this Kingdom , have been many and great , by reaſon of the Prelates Lording it over them in matters of Religion ; and their ſorrows and ſufferings are like to be greater , if the plots and ſnares laid againſt them take place , therefore now is the time for the righteous in authority to show themſelves for the people of God ; and ſuch as sleep and ſlumber had need quickly to be awaked , that they might rouse up themſelves , & ſhake off that fear and faintness which possesses their hearts , & arm themſelves with reſolution & courage , to hazard all , even life it self , upon a poſſibility of doing the leaſt good , Prov. 29. 2. ( for to do good we live ) we rejoice that God hath choſen you , ( with many others ) whom God hath kept waking for ſuch a time as this . Next under God our eyes are upon the houſe of Commons of England , to deliver us from temporal ſlavery , to free us from the oppreſſion of men in matters of Religion ; we truſt they will effect this work fully,2 Epiſ . Joh. 8. Job 29 ( and God ſhall give them a full reward ) as good Job , who was a father to the poor , and the cauſe he knew not he ſearched out , and brake the jaws of the wicked , and plucked the spoil out of his teeth . It is a great honour unto you,1 Sam. 16. 18. that you have done valiantly , & ſo have been special inſtruments to ſave this Kingdom from deſtruction , & that God hath made you and your Armies ſo victorious ; but it is a greater honour unto you , that you are of the number of thoſe that love the truth and people of God , and endeavour to reſcue them from the hands of cruel and unreaſonable men : the people of God are in the love of God , Joh 2 and ( which is more ) they are one with God , therefore God takes the good done to them as done to himself , Prov. 10. 30. abide by them , and you ſhall be in ſafety ; hold together , for they that ſeek their lives , ſeek the ••• alſo : And as you have pleaded their cauſe , ( with many other Worthies with you ) ſo ſtill go on & proſper , Judg. 6. 12. the Lord is with you , you valiant men , the Saints love you , they pray & praiſe God for you ; England fareth the better for you , children unborn ſhall praiſe you , & bless God for you , & the memorial of your names shall be for ever precious . Moſt noble Worthies , Luk. 1. 3. I may seem to pass the bounds of modeſty , ſo to press into your preſence , but ſuch is your humility and love , that you can pass by any defect in that kind , and accept of that which is preſented in love . And ſeeing God does not deſpiſe the day of ſmall things , Zach. 4. 10. I truſt you will not ; the great reſpect you have showed to the truth , and people of God , hath emboldened me to preſent you with the beſt I have , in love , out of a deep reſpect unto you ; the perusal and acceptance of which , I ſubmit to your wisdoms , and humbly take my leave , and remain Your Honours much obliged , SAMUEL RICHARDSON .