To the Right Honourable , and his very good Lord , ROBERT Earl of Warwicke , Baron of Leez , etc. The AUTHOUR of this TREATISE wishes all Health , Honour , and Happiness . Right Honourable : WHen I was firſt intended this Diſcourſe ( being ſome years ſi • ce ) me thought I felt in my self a deſire of ſome intermiſsion from former Arguments of deeper exerciſe , and more spiritual nature : as conceiving that a Moral Theme might , another while , both revive my wearied ſpirits , and perhaps delight the Reader with variety . Hereupon I conſidered wh • tO Object in this kind might moſt fitly ſort with my thoughts ; and • fter ſome inquiry , both the many complaints of the married , and daily queſtions moved unto me by ſuch as inte • dead marriage • as alſo ſecondly thoſe notorious errors and corruptions which ( through ſin and Satan ) have inſinuated , nay pierced the very entrails of this State ; and laſtly ( which is worſt of all ) thoſe infinite pollutions of body and mind , in all degrees of men both natural and unnatural , moved me with reſolution to faſten upon this Argument . But notwithſtanding the pregnancy of theſe inducements , the Theme ſeemed ſo weighty , that I was forced to ſearch what furniture I had ſtored up for ſuch a work . And at laſt I found the caſe to ſtand with me , as it does with two friends , who through diſcontinuance , or abſence , have waxed ſtrange each to other ; until by ſome fair occaſion of meeting they h • p to renew their acquaintance . So ſtood the caſe between my self and theſe Meditations , which gave the firſt draught of the Treatiſe enſuing ; which ſince my firſt preaching thereof lay long by me , as half forgotten ; but now ſeemed to preſent themſelves to my view with double appetite and ſavour , as promiſing to be material and useful for the bettering of public manners , and helping to redress the corruptions of the time . Accordingly therefore ſhaking off the duſt and soil of my Papers , I have beſtowed ſome pains to contrive them into ſome ſuch order and expreſsion , as might ( if not satisfy the curious , yet ) profit the deſirous of cou • fell and reſolution in caſes of this nature . You ſee ( Right Honourable ) how bold I am to draw you from your deeper occaſions , to liſten a while to theſe private notions of mine : which I preſume ( out of your facility to give beſt conſtruction to things ) you will not disdain to do . To proceed then : Alas ! How evident is it , by men's practice , that although all confess they ought to be religious ( and who now adays is otherwiſe ? ) yet few will admit the yoke of God upon their neck , in the wiſe undergoing of thoſe relations wherein they ſtand obliged ? Among which this of marriage is a rooted and fundamental one , as being in order before the reſt ; and ſuch and one as either affords influence and ſap to them ( both Family , Polity , and Church ) or elſe infers a blemiſh and aſperſion upon them all . So that , if men would derive the ſavour and power of godliness into this eſtate of life , ſeaſoning it with the graces of self-denial , and faith , and holiness ; they ſhould ( doubtless ) enjoy it in a far more ſweet and contentful ſort then now they do , while they detain this truth in unrighteousness , ſeparating the thing : which God hath united . Men tell us , they will hear Preachers ( while they keep their bounds ) while they teach them only faith and repentance ; but if they will • eeds meddle with a more cloſe and near ſearch of their l • ves and relations their callings , companies , tradings , liberties ; or if they will pry into their more retired ways , their cloſets , chambers and marriages , then , as he who raged againſt Eliſha for the diſcovering and defeating of his plots to the King of Iſrael : 2 King 6. 13. ſo theſe recoil at the Miniſter , and threaten they will give him over . They tell him they can teach him as good paſſages and rules of experience as himself can . So far are they from ſtanding to Gods Bar in theſe points ▪ and ſay , They knew them ere he knew what his Books meant ; they are near a kin to that laſcivious Poet , Catull . Epigr. Caſtum eſſe decet , & pium Poetam , Ipſum : verſic • los nihil neceſſe eſt . who being told of his unchaſte Epigrams , anſwered thus , Its true indeed , its meet that the Poet him self be chaſte , but as for his verſes , let them have their courſe , to show the Authors wit and skill , it matters not what they be . So ſay theſe , We grant all , that we muſt be honeſt folk , but that our marriage actions ſhould run in the ſtream of Religion we deem it nice , and more then needs . Subtle men ( we ſay float a oft and dwell in univerſals , but bring them to the particular , Camerar . fab . 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . show them Rhodes , and the ſtage whereon they ſhould dance , and then they are at a ſet , their great skill ſuddenly fails them . Howbeit , if we look into the Scriptures ▪ we ſhall meeet with ſome whoſe very marriages have been caſt into the mould of obedience . Not to urge the rules which Paul gives to husbands and wives , both for their entrance upon , and cohabitation in that condition ; Luc. 1. 6. we read of Z • chary and Elizabet , both which were juſt , walking before God in all his commands without reproof : that is , they practiſed piety , righteousness , and soberness , in the ſtate of marriage . How could they walk in all Commands , b • lking the fifth , which urges Religion in our particular ſtate of life ? But what ſay men to this ? Surely as the Papiſts tell us , • ſſurance of ſalvation belongs to Peter a • worser Paul , and ſuch as had special revelations , but its no ordinary men caſe . So ſay theſe , ſuch as Zachary and Elizabet were eminent perſons ▪ masterpieces , above the common ſize : objects of admiration , rather then imitation . But alas ! This miſt is not that • cke enough to eſcape in : all of us under the Gospel are under the ſome law which they were , we are a royal Prieſthood tied to as ſtr • ct a rule as ever they were , of chaſtity and holiness . I doubt not • Right Honourable ) if the queſtion might be decided by your voice but you are of this mind ; and deſire to be of the ſame practice Now yet why I devote this Treatiſe to your name , many may wonder , as deeming many other subject's more worthy and proper to preſent your Lordſhip withal . But ( my good Lord ) ſuch is the eſtate of from • le fleſh in this veil or miſery that there is no condition of l • fe , whither Ministry , Magiſtracy , ſingle or married ſtate wherein counsel may not do well for the rectifying of ſuch errors as through humane infirmity break into all . Each ſtate hath his several temptations , and a well ordered courſe in marriage ( as long experience of a double marriage can te • changed you ) is no easy Theme . • gain that ſweet and mutual accord which God hath vouchſafed betwixt your Honour and your worthy Conſort , may ſerve to turn my Dead • cation into a Gratulation . 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . And indeed , though the Book be much under the valve of ſuch a perſonage as your self ( a m • n not only of Noble deſcent but of great and deſerving acts both for our Church and Commonwealth both formerly and of late ) yet I preſume , Act. 24. 2. that if a draught of muddy w • ter preſented in the crown of a hat , Nunquam bibi • sum vio em , etc. was ſo welcome to a potent Monarch : then doubtless your honourable ſpirit will not reject a Scholars Mite , offered with as deep reſpect unto you , as that was : you will not deſpiſe ſmall things , ſince there may be a bleſsing therein . Scal. de art Poetic . Not always in a great thing there is good , but in a good there is ever great , and that which may agree with greatness , 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . as one tells us out of a Greek Poet . All helps ſhall one day ceaſe , yet every book of uſe may ſerve as a little walking-staff to further us in our travel home . Moreover it may become the beſt Scholar of us all to learn that leſſon which Paul , 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . and from him my Book urges ; The time is ſhort ( wrapped and folded up,1 Cor. 7. 29 , 30 Eccleſ . 3. 1. etc. 5. as the Text is ) Let them that possess , be as if they poſſeſſed not , ſuch as weep , as if they wept not , ſuch as rejoice , as if they rejoiced not , ſuch as marry , as if they married not , ſuch as uſe the world , as if not uſing it : for the faſhion of it passes away . Matth. 22. 30. A time for all things , and ſo a time for the married to embrace , and a time to be far from embracing . Seek therefore that place where all theſe relations ſhall ceaſe , ( for ſo I think , though ſome think otherwiſe : ) where there ſhall be no marrying , nor giving in marriage , for the Spouſe ſhall be wholly spiritual , like her husband , at leaſt like the Angels of God . In which deſire I reſt , craving a bleſsing from heaven upon your Honour , your virtuous and Noble Lady , and poſterity : as alſo upon the perusal of this your Book : and ſo humbly take my leave , reſting At your Honours command in the LORD , DANIEL ROGERS .