TO THE HONOURABLE And truly Noble Lord , Earl of Lindsey , Lord JOHN PARBROTH , etc. one of his Majesties Honourable Privy Council . Grace , Mercy and Peace , etc. COnsidering ( my Lord ) your Lordship's good mind and constant fidelity and care in advancing this blessed Reformation , and fending both your shoulders to hold up the Kingdom of our LORD JESUS , and also your singular respect and real affection to this famous University , and the faculty of Divinity in this Society , I thought it rather a matter of debtful necessity , then of arbitrary election and choice , that this little piece that pleads for the Government of the Church of Scotland , should thrust it self through the thick and throng of many worthier monuments of Learning , under the honourable Patrociny of your Lordship's name . I am not ignorant that two blocks closeth the passage to many of greater parts and ability then I am , to add ( I may have leave to borrow the word ) to the Presses childbirth • traveling with no end of making many books , Eccles. 12. 12. and these be the opinions of men , and the event of Printing : I may say of the former , that Opinion is a Witch and a great Enchantress , while men call for Books , as nice banqueters call for dishes to the Table , for they make such wide odds betwixt taste-pleasant and goodness of meat , as if they were sworn to the roof of their mouth , rather then to health and life ; so that it is much more obvious to please few , and gratify none , then to satisfy all . And for the event , it is not unlike dicing , for it is doubtsome if Fame be not a lost prize in writing , and if the game go not cross the Authors hair . And such is our corruption , that the air or figures of a printed name is a piece of our self , and as our skin wherein our flesh and bones are kindly inchalmbered , and so were most tender of one penny breadth of this hide , or of letting one drop of blood of this kind fallen to the Earth . Notwithstanding of these prejudices , I have , howbeit most unable , dared to appear also in the Press , to say somewhat in way of a peaceable defence of our Churchgovernment in Scotland . The pens of the worthy Reformers of the Christian Churches have been so blessed in the conscience , if not in the evil eye of envy it self , that they have cleared the Scripture way of the Government of CHRISTS Kingdom to lie in a midline betwixt the Popes and Prelates lawless Church Monarchy , and the unorderly confusion of Democracie . It is not unknown , the savoury perfume and honourable name that this poor Church hath gained , partly by the whole host of Protestant Writers and ancient Father's , who have unanimously put down in print , what we have done in practice , according to our National Oath , partly by the testimony of the blessed Lights , Beza epist . 79. and faithful Witnesses of IESUS . Brightman . I might name Reverend Beza , Revelat. of Apoc. changed . 3. 7. learned Brightman , that manly and stout Witness of CHRIST M. George Wishart , History of the Church of Scotland p. 108 , 109 the body of the Confessions of Faith . And it is as well manifest to the world ( Sun and Moon being Witnesses ) what Prelates have attempted against Presbyterial Government , but one said well , Corpus Confess fide • , p. 6. I believe IESUS to be a good man , and the Evangell blessed , because Satan , malice and Persecutors have done so much against them both with fire and tortures . What dust of late have they raised against it ? in Church , State , Court , Parliament , three Kingdoms , in Room , in the heart of King and many others , in Campo Martio , Esa. 23. 24. in open field , yea in the Sea , that the Sea should speak contrary to that style of the Prophet , Cant. 6. 10. I travel in birth , I bring up children , and nothing could be the reason , but they saw the Woman looking forth as the morning , Ps. 48. 4. fair as the Moon , clear as the Sun , terrible as and Army with banners , and when they saw Mount Zion beautiful in situation , they marveled , they were troubled and hasted away . 3 Ioh. v. 9. And what daring insolency is this ? when the Prelate could not find his Father , and thought shame of his native Father Diotrephes , Halls Remonstr • nce to the Parliament , and . 1641. that one D. Hall and others have put him in the line of the blood royal , and printed him and office , jure divino , by divine right ; Their Predecessors were content of the good old , jus humanum . Yet I hope , put the Prelate in the Calendar of wellborn officers , bastard as he is , Senec. sent . yet many must die ere he be here . This boldness putteth me in mind of the saying , Laus nova nisi oritur , vetus amittitur , except Prelates grow in new honour they lose their old honour . But why may we not hope that both they , their godfather the Pope , and their god-Mother Room shall lose both new and old . God hath fetched as broken a Ship to land , and yet they will be of Divine Right : Is it not true that the Learned said of necessity ? Necessitati quodlibet telum utile est ? Any club is a sword good enough for poor necessity , or then it is true , Necessitas egentem mendacem facit : Necessity turns the poor man in a liar , or which I rather think ; Necessitas quod poscit , nisi das , eripit . If you give not willingly to necessity , what it suiteth , it must take it by strong hand and club-law . CHRIST hath fairly begun to his Universal conquest . Ps. 45. 3 , 4. Gird thy sword upon thy thigh o most mighty ; and blessed shall all ages to come call all these Nobles who have shoulders to carry one stone to the raising of the wall of this Temple , and to built the City whose name is the LORD is there . Ezech. 48. 35. And in this course ( my Lord ) live , flourish and grow , and JEHOVAH built you a sure house , which is the prayer of Your Lordship's obliged servant at all respective obedience in CHRIST SAMUEL RUTHERFURD .