TO The most Noble and Potent Lord Archbald Marquess of Argile , one of His MAJESTIES honourable Privy Council , wishes Grace , Mercy and Peace . WHo knoweth ( most Noble and potent Lord ) how glorious it is , and how praiseworthy , when the mighty , and these who are Psal. 47. 9. called Thee shields of the Earth , and the Cedars of Lebanon cast their shadow over the City of God ? Airy wits and broken spirits chase fame , but fame and glory shall chase him , who is ( as the spirit of God speaks ) 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 a Son of courage , and one who hath done Sam. 23. v. 20. 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 many acts for the Lord . The followers of Christ are the sons of Nobles Omnis sanguis concolor . Franc. Petrarch . All blood is of one colour , holiness makes the difference . Fortuna vitrea est , tum cum splendet , frangitur . Things we rest on here be made of crystal glass , while they glister , they are broken . Plures tegit fortuna , quam Psal. 84. 11. tutor facit . The world may cover men , it cannot make them secure . But the Lord is a Sun and a shield . What hath Jesus Christ on Earth , which he loves , as he does his Church ? What a created piece is the true Church ? Revel . 12. 1. A woman clothed with the Sun , and the Moon under her feet , and upon her head a Crown of twelve Stars . Her very servants are the 2 Cor. 8 , 23. glory of Christ . Yet is this poor woman in Brittaine , crying , traveling in birth , pained while she be delivered , because of the Idolatry of the Land , and our defection and apostasy practised , countenanced , tolerated in both Kingdoms . Many graves , many Widows , and the Land turned into a field of blood are the just fruits of many Altars , of Mass-idols , of Bred worship , of many inventions of men , let then : have a name and flourish in the House of the Lord , and let them be written with the living in Jerusalem who contribute help for the desired birth of the manchild . Prelacy and Popery wither , as in a Land of drought , except they be planted beside Rivers of blood ; but the Lord shall built his own Jerusalem . Your honour may justly challenge this little expression of my obliged respects to your Lordship . I acknowledge it is little , though it may have some use . Etiam capillus unus habet umbram suam ; one hair casts its own shadow . Jmpotency to pay debt layeth not upon any the note of unthankfulness , except it be impotency of good will . If I be not a debtor for will , I am nothing . And this I owe , and this Church and Nation may divide the sum with me ; for which , wishing to your Lordship all riches of Grace , I stand obliged . Your Lordship's servant at all dutiful observance in Christ Jesus . Samuel Rutherfurd .