To his deer Friend , Mr W. Greenhill . Sir , MAny strugglings I have had about publishing these Notes : I have looked up to God , and at last been persuaded upon these grounds : 1. The many desires both of friends and strangers , both by private speeches and Letters , which I thought might be the voice of Christ . 2. Some good ( as I hear ) those which are already out have done , and which the rest might do , which I have looked on as a testimony of the Lords acceptance of them . 3. I knew not what the Lords meaning should be to bring to light by his providence without my privity , knowledge , or will , the former part , unless it was to awaken and enforce me ( being desired ) to publish the rest ; our works I thought should resemble Gods works , not be left imperfect . 4. I considered my weak body , and my short time of sojourning here , and that I shall not speak long to children , friends , or Gods precious people , I am sure not to many in England , to whom I owe almost my whole self , whom I shall see in this world no more ; I have been therefore willing to get the wind , and take the season , that I might leave some part of Gods precious truth on record , that it might speak ( o that it might be to the heart ) among whom I cannot ( and when I shall not ) be . I account it a part of Gods infinite grace to make me and instrument of the least good to any . If the Lord shall so far accept of me in publishing these things , it is all that I would desire ; if not , yet I have desired forgiveness in the blood of his Son , for what ever errors or weaknesses may be in it , or are in my self , which may hinder success , and frustrate its end ; only what I have in much weakness believed , I have written , and sent it unto you , leaving it wholly with your self , whom I much love and honour , that you would add or detract any thing you see meet , ( so as it be not cross to what I have writ ) and if you then think it meet for public view , you see upon what grounds I am content with it ; but if you shall bury it , and put it to perpetual silence , it shall be most pleasing to him who thinks more meanly of it then others can , Though : Shepard .