TO The Illustrious and Generous , the Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom of England . I. S. wishes all increase of Honour , Happiness , and Prosperity . Right Honourable , I Know it will appear strange & preposterous , to many , to see a Poem of this nature , in these distracted and confused times ( when scarce the iron hand of War is ceased : but like a fearful and prodigious Commet still hangs over us , threatening ruin and destruction to this royal Kingdom ) set forth to the view and Censure of the World . For , noble Gentlemen , I must ingenuously confess , it had been much more suitable to the Times , had it had its birth in our Halcyon days , when blessed peace and prosperity reigned in our happy Albion : but since it's so unhappy to breathe life in this unnatural age , let it beg your favourable and candid censures : not of Abortive , but a Posthumus . And now to vindicate my self from foul detraction , which the envious and carrying Zoylusses & Momuses of all ages ( by their virulent tongues & pens , to prejudice and traduce the works of others ) have too frequently , but most falsely cast upon Writers : I shall endeavour to give you some satisfactory reasons of publishing this my Pamphlet . As first , because I never herd or read of any book of this subject , set forth in the English tongue , although in all other languages they are most frequent . The next is for the benefit , pleasure , or delight of the Reader , especially now in these sad and disconsolate times , it being a great refreshment , and recreation to the mind of man , ( by way of diversion ) to take him off from the consideration of these danger-threatening times , and entertain his thoughts , sometime with sweet variety of matter , according to that saying : Interpone tuis , interdum gaudea curis , ut poss animo , quemvis sufferre laborem . And lastly , although this Poem is but a collection of diverse sentences , phrasers , etc. as appears in the Title , ( not methodically composed or digested ) it being unpossible in a subject of this nature , so to do ) but promiscuously intermixed with variety and delight ) which many years since in times of my better prosperity . I gathered out of some hundreds of Authors , never having the least thought of putting it to Press . Yet now , by the importunity , or rather the commands of some noble friends , to whose endearments for their noble favours , I owe my gratitude : I have adventured , or rather presumed , ( under your noble patronage and protection ) to put it into print : And noble Gentlemen , let me indulge your favours , not to read it with prejudicate opinions , for then I know you will doom it to scorn and your contempt : but that you will behold it , with a gracious and favourable aspect , rather pitying then censuring the Author ; and where you find it worthless and unuseful , you would bury it in the Ocean of your goodness , thereby you will oblige me for to be , Your Honours in all humble observance and duty , I S. 〈1 page duplicate〉 〈1 page duplicate〉