TO THE WORSHIPFUL My much Honoured friends , John Crew Esquire , and Richard Knightley Esquire , worthy Patriots of our Country Northampton-Shire . I Address unto you both , these several Treatises , not only out of duty and obligations to your selves , but in regard of your public good affection to maintain the patrimony of the Church in Tithes , which is so fundamentally settled by our Laws , that nothing can be more certain by them . And the times now growing dangerous to the whole state of the Clergy in this particular , your selves having the • l • read your opinions for Tithes , and accordingly been careful to preserve us in our rights , I hope this my service will be acceptable to you : what farther may be done depends upon Gods providence , and the good endeavours of all pious men to afford tO ••• r best assistance . Seeing the Parliament hath honourably declared themselves for Tithes , both by their Ordinance and the repulse given to some Petitioners against them . For mine own part , though I expect censure and opposition from many , yet as and Ancient said , In causa qua Deo placere cupio , homines non formido . I have therefore in this needful time , at the earnest request of many , adventured the rather to discharge the trust reposed in me by the worthy Knight Sir Hen . Sp. who being employed in greater works , committed these to my care & trust to be published . His charge does nearly concern me , and in conscience I could not longer conceal them from the public view . They have been long in my custody ; and if the favour of your self M. Crew , in a time of danger , beside M. Knightleys public deserts and defence of me since from scandalous people , had not prevented , they had been utterly lost by the injury of soldiers , together with other Manuscripts and Monuments of great consequence against the common adversary . Your selves having preserved them and me , I could not do otherwise then return you the thanks and fruit of your own favours ; and whosoever shall think these worthy the public view , will have the like cause to render you thanks for saving both them and my self , being extremely injured by some that are styled in our ancient Laws , Villani , Cocseti , Perdingi , viles & inopesLl . H. 1. c . 29. personae ; by whose troubles I am enforced to omit diverse additions material to this argument , which the learned Knight committed to me . But lest hereafter they should miscarry by any common danger , or neglect of mine , I could find no better means to prevent the same , then by committing these to the Press , that they may live & be extant for the common benefit of Gods cause and Church . The piety , excellent learning and moderation of the Author , in all his expressions , will prevail much with those that are truly wise and sober , and if your protection shall concur to defend both them and my poor studies , I shall hope to give you farther account hereafter in other works of great moment . Thus praying God to guide and bless you in all your pious endeavours , I subscribe my self , Yours ever obliged , JER : STEPHENS ▪