To the Believers of several Opinions for outward Ordinances or diſpenſations , ſcandalouſly called Independents , Presbyterians , Anabaptiſts , Seekers . Brothers , I Have fairly ſet down how far each of you have attained in the Myſtery of Truth ; and ſurely we are all ſhort of the glory which ſhall be revealed in the Temple or Church of God ; and there are ſuch clouds rolling about each opinion , that may darken it , or ſomething of it , So as things are not ſo clear as they are commonly taken by each of us ; If any man think he knoweth anything , he knoweth nothing yet as he 1 Cor. 8. 2. ought to know : So as the common ignorance and infirmity amongſt us , may be a riſe for a common Ʋnity amongſt us : and ſeeing we all come out of Babylon ( though in ſeveral ways ) to the glorious Temple or Tabernacle which God hath ſent down to be with men , and walk thus diversely thither ; yet our several and diſtinct goings are but like ſo many Travellers to the City of London ; ſome travel from the North , ſome from the South , and from the Weſt , ſome from the Eaſt , yet all thither ; though too , there may be ſome miſtaking of the way in each , becauſe of the little light that is abroad . The gathering of the Saints into the Heaven , or Kingdom below , in this day of Revelation , is like the gathering at the laſt day , which ſhall be all into one glorious Body , though the gathering ſhall be from the four winds or ends of the Earth , by the several Trumpets or Angels . One thing I have more . Let us ſeek for the Spirit of wiſdom and revelation , to open to us the Myſtery of the Scriptures called The Revelation ; for in that Book is the Prophecy of the Churches laid up , and the ſeaſons and times for Truth revealed . Let us ſearch and ſeek out by the Spirit of Ieſus , even that Ieſus which was in the Viſion , and gave it out to Iohn ; for there is none found worthy to open the Book with Seals but the Lamb . Surely in the Myſtery of Angels , Vials , Sea of glass with fire , Temple with Smoke , the Angel with the everlaſting Gospel , the Angel enlightening the Earth , the Whore in scarlet and precious pearls , the Cup of abomination , the Beaſt like a Lamb , the Image of the Beast , the Horus and Kings of the Earth , the mark in the forehead and in the right hand , the buying and ſelling , the Tabernacle of God with men , the firſt and ſecond Reſurrection , the Ihron • of God , the pure Crystal River of water , the Holy Ieruſalem deſcending from God , etc. In theſe is much of the glory wrapped up , and from theſe ſhall the Truth we contend for , appear to our further enlightening . Yet one thing more . We that are thus contenders for Ordinances , for the Temple and the Veſſels in it , let us take heed we forget not him who is greater then the Temple ; for one greater then the Temple is here It would be ſpiritually conſidered , that while we ſtrive for the Veſſels and Cups , we ſpill not the Wine . And it ought to be ſo carried by all of us , that ▪ becauſe we are ſo much in opinion , we may not be thought to place Religion there , as I fear too many do , making a Chriſt of the very Ordinance of Chriſt , and preſſing ſome outward Ordinances of the Gospel ſo legally ; as ſome hearing ſuch a power of Salvation put into them , and finding and outward diſpenſation more eaſily god then the spiritual , make haſte thither only , and then fit down as ſaved under a mere outward Ordinance . The Lord grant that we may neither undervalue and Ordinance nor the leaſt Inſtitution of Ieſus Chriſt , nor raiſe it up into a Jesus Chriſt , and ſet up the Law above or beſide the Lawgiver . We muſt now learn to know Ieſus Chriſt less after the fleſh , and not to embody ſalvation in a mere outward diſpenſation , and ſo incarnate Ieſus Chriſt over again from the glory and ſpirituality he is in . Brothers , farewell ; For my part , I am fully aſſured from Scriptures of the Church of Chriſt here , or Goſpell-fellowſhip of the Saints ; and unto this If any man with •• do his will , he ſhall know of the Doctrine , Ioh. 7. 17. fellowſhip with the Father and the Son , I endeavour ; and I have one way to reveal Truth to me which I cannot conceal , nor yet cannot practice as I would , and that is this ; To ſee Truth by living in the power of Truth , and by firſt obtaning Jeſus Chriſt to live in us in the power of his ſuffering , death , and Reſurrection ; for ſurely Jeſus Chriſt muſt doe all ( though more gloriouſly and ſpiritually ) over again in his , which he did in himself . If Jeſus Chriſt the Light be in us , the light by which every outward diſpenſation is ſeen , will flow in ; for where the Sun is , there will be every beam with it .