To the Right Honourable , the Lord Maior , Aldermen , and the Common-Councell of the City of LONDON . Right Honourable , MAny who call themſelves Miniſters and Prophets of God , accuſe us of Heresy and Schiſm before you . But I hope you will take notice they are but men as we are , and of like passion with us ; neither Apoſtles , nor Prophets of the firſt Baptiſm , or gifts of the Spirit . Yet if the Prieſts and Elders , or any Orator , as Tertullus , accuſe Paul to Feſtus or Agrippa , be cannot but anſwer for himself . I have but few words to ſpeak to you ( Noble Citizens ) That you would in that Spirit which is of God , judge the Doctrines of Men , and ſingle them from Traditions , Customs , Counsels , Synods , Intereſts . You are bid to try the ſpirits whither they be of God , or no . Try whither it be according to God , for ſome Miniſters , and thoſe not Apoſtles , to call others Heretics who believe not as they believe : What will become then of the ſtrong and weak Chriſtian , of the Rom , 15. 1. 1 Iohn 2 : 13 , 14. children , father's , and young men ? Try whither they ought to preach to you to suppress all but themſelves ; ſince they are not infallible , but may err ; and where is the Remedy then , if they err ? Who ſhall judge the Judges ? Try whither this make for unity of ſpirit , to allow no more fellowſhip nor brotherhood then in Horme and practice . And what will they have you do if Forms ſhould altar ? For States may change : England hath done ſo . Try whither this make for the glory of Chriſtians , to perſecute or baniſh ( as they would have you ) all but themſelves . May they not as well tell you that God hath made England only for men of the Presbytery or one opinion to live in , and worſhip in : And where find they that ? Try whither ſome by their daily Invectives from Press and Pulpit againſt Independent's and others , bring not in the Popiſh Design in another Form , to divide the godly party , both Presbyterian and Independent , and ſo to ruin all . Try if all ſuch Doctrine as they commonly preach and write to you , reſolve not it self moſt into their own intereſts , profits , place , power : And what does the Scripture and Hiſtories tell you of that ? And now I have done ; praying for you , That you may be ſtill a free City , and not diſputed by the miscellany of Logic and Divinity of ſome , into bondage . That you may be ſtill populous , and not your ſtreets growing with grass through any un neighbourly Principle of Perſecution , which muſt needs loose you many , and much reſort from this famous City , under the name of Heretics , not letting ſuch live beſide them . That you may be a peaceable City , and not raiſed up and daſhed by any breath of men againſt the other and greater part of your ſelves , the Parliament . England hath long enough broken it self againſt its own walls : let it now be our ſtrength to fit ſtill , and to ſtand ſtill and ſee ſalvation . And ſince the Lord hath let the most of the success of the Presbytery , which is ſo much deſired , come thorough the hands of thoſe and that Army whom they have told you over often were Heretics ; let this be but taken notice on by you , what God hath told you in the success of that Army ; and I truſt you will never regard the Meſſengers by whoſe hands the Presbytery in a kind came , by beating them out of doors . Thus reſts he , Who would rejoice in your Peace , Proſperity , and GOSPELL-unity , JOHN SALTMARSH .