TO THE HONOURABLE , THE Knights , Citizens , & Burgeſſes of the Houſe of COMMONS In PARLIAMENT . Honourable , I Here preſent you with ſome Notions of the Brothers of the Presbyterian Way , which were preſented to your HOUSE ſome foure or five years ſince ; wherein they do in much ſtrength and piety , as it ſeems to me , open the way and ſecrets of Spiritual Tyranny , and Conſcience-yoaks ; there is ſome occaſion now of reminding the Brothers of theſe , becauſe the strain of their preaching and printing seems to have forgotten theſe principles : Spiritual ▪ The • ks and Burdens being taken off from us ( through the hand of God upon you ) the memory of them ſeems to be gone off too from ſome ; ſome have forgotten that they were ſtrangers in the Land of Egypt ; the Lord hath ſeemed to forgive the formerly Nonconforming Brothers all their debt , becauſe they deſired him : And now the Queſtion is , Whither they ſhould have compaſsion on their fellow ſervants as he had pity on them ? The Controversy now before you , is of all your Faithful ones , and therefore it calls for the tenderest judgement : Father's may better beatrice ſervants then children out of doors ; the one ſort •• I miſtake not ) contend that they may rule with you ▪ the oath •• ••• tO they may be ruled by you in the things of your own Kingdom and in that of the Kingdom of God , that Ieſus Chriſt may rule both you and them : how juſt , how spiritual , this latter plea is , will appear from the choicest Reaſonings of ſome in reputation with you , which I have awakened . The things I preſent you , I would not preſume to make too poſitive , becauſe I would not conclude a wisdom of your latitude under any notion of mine , ( though I ſee private men take too much liberty in that way towards you ) though it is your indulgence not to know it . I here preſent you things only to be conſidered , to be quaered , in the behalf of truth , and the advancement of your State , to which I am covenanted ; and I am the bolder and freer , having ſold ſomething that I had for that pearl , for which we are bidden to fell all : I ſhall add ſome Conſiderations here to the reſt : 1. Conſider whither under Popery the myſtery of the National Prieſthood was not rather held up by the power of Princes and States , then States themſelves by ſuch a way of power ; and whither the myſtery of the National Ministry be not rather held up by the power of States now , then the States themſelves in ſuch a way of power ; and then , whither all the Pretences and Conſequences to draw • in States and Kingdoms for the Churches intereſt ( if clearly diſcuſſed ) be not rather a way of Antichriſtian myſtery ▪ then of zeal to Religion , or the power of Magiſtracy ? 2. Conſider whither in the Kingdom of Jeſus Chriſt any other Sceptre ſhould be lifted up then that golden one of his own , and whither if there be a Kingdom of God , if Ieſus Chriſt be the Lawgiver , and the Spirit of of Chriſt the interpreter of thoſe Laws , and this Kingdom of God within the throne of that King of Kings , and Lord of Lords the Lord Ieſus , any other power ſhould rule , any other Sceptre ▪ any other Laws , or any other fit down in that Throne , which is only the Throne of the Son of David ▪ whoſe Throne is for ever , the Sceptre of whoſe Kingdom is and everlaſting Sceptre ? 3. Conſider whither there be not and Heatheniſh or Gentiliſh world , and and Antichriſtian world , or a world of many called Chriſtians and believers in Chriſt , and yet a Church of Chriſt which is neither of theſe ; and if ſo , whither is all this Kingdom of England that Church of Chriſt , or not rather much of it that part of the Antichriſtian world , over which one part of the myſtery of iniquity hath ſat long , and is yet upon it ? And if ſo , then is there not room in England both for Presbyterial Churches , and Believers of other ways to live in that part of this Kingdom which is the world , and not that Church ? And if ſo , you may be rich in people , rich in peace , rich in the praiſes of the people of God . Honourable , go on to do worthy things ▪ for our Nation , as worthy things have been done by you ▪ and may you be as the wings of a Dove covered with Silver , and her feathers with yellow Gold . So prays , Your humble faithful Servant , IOHN SALTMARSH .