TO THE HONOURABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS , Assembled in PARLIAMENT . Noble Senators , NOt like Araunah in the Holy Story , as a King in Spiritual Things : but like the Widow in the Gospel , Poor in the Riches of Christ , and too much a Widow by the absence of her Heavenly Spouse , my Soul hath offered from her Penury to your Treasury . Yet , as a Steward , have I endeavoured to be Faithful , bringing forth the Best of my Spirit , for Service , and Food to your Spirits : as the Priests of old gave the Fat of the Sacrifices to the Flame on the Altar . As the Royal Preacher sought out Choice Words : so have I sought for the most Pleasant , most Profitable , most Powerful Discoveries of God , in my Scanty Store , in the midst of that Thick Ignorance , which covers my Poor Heart . Now I have laid them at your Feet , where they lie , as Scattered , and Dry Bones ; except the Spirit of our Lord Iesus breath upon them , bring them together , infuse a Warmth , Power , and Beauty into them , to make them Living Company for you . Not able to bring Stately , and Costly Beasts to the Sanctuary ; I have made it my Desire , and Design to present for and Offering before God , and You , a Pair of Turtle Doves ; Simplicity , and Sweetness ; or , and Innocent Integrity with and Humble Meekness . I hope both are , if not without blemish , because they have alighted on my Heart : yet of the right-breed of that Dove , which descended from Heaven , and alighted on the Head of our Lord Iesus . And now , what is my Expectation ? For my own Soul , for my Brothers in the Flesh , all the Children of Seth , for the rest of my Fellow Creatures , which groan continually in my Ears ? Is not my desire and Sighing before thee , Oh my God ? Even This ; The Descent of the Dove upon them ; the Manifestation of the Spirit in them , the True Jubilee , the Divine Liberty of the whole Creation . All within me testifies of this Spirit to me ; All without me proclaims this Spirit before Me ; as the Spring of my Joys ; the End of my Faith ; the Glorification of my Person ; and not of mine only , but of all those , who are rooted in this Principle of Life , what ever the Soil of Education , Profession , or Custom be , in which they are Planted ; whatever the Bark of Opinion or Affection be , in which for the present they are Enclosed . The most Known Men for Wisdom in all Languages , Learning's , Religions , Ages , Regions have worshipped , have waited for This Eternal Spirit ; The Understanding of the World , riding forth in a Chariot of Light , upon the Face of all Forms of Things ; The Good Converting All Things into it self ; The Unity , or something above and Unity , To 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , The Supreme Band of Unity , and Multiplicity . This Spirit brought forth from it self the Creation , and still sits upon it , hatching it , till it break the Shell of This Dark Flesh , and spring forth into its own Life and Image . The Lord Iesus is this Spirit ; who is , before Abraham was , by whom the World's were Made ; who is a Spirit , Comprehending , Cherishing , Enclosing , Coming forth into all the Fleshly Births of Time . This Iesus came Himself in the Last of Times , into Flesh ; was by His Cross drawn up out of it into Spirit ; and now by the same way is drawing up all Things after Him into the same Spirit . That your selves , and these Kingdoms may Feel , Obey , Enjoy the Drawings of this Iesus , the Descents of his Spirit , is the Affectionate Prayer of him , who is Your Honours lowest Servant in Christ : PETER STERRY .