To THE HONOURABLE THE KNIGHTS & BURGESSES OF THE HOUSE of COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT . GOD hath promised his people to carry them on the Eagles Wing . The only desire and humble endeavour of your lowest servant in Christ , hath been to work with God in this Sermon ; that your Souls , Counsels , Wars , may be carried on by the Spirit of God ; who in the language of the Scriptures is not only the Dove for Purity and Peace ; but also the True Eagle for Wisdom and Power . Worthy Senators , if you knew this Spirit , you would ask Him of your Saviour ; and He would be in you a Fountain of Counsel and Strength springing up to Everlasting Peace and Glory . But have you not known The Spirit ? His found hath gone forth into all your Ears . All the Scriptures speak of Him as they do of Jesus Christ . Daniel was chosen by the King of Assyria to sway the great affairs of that vast Empire ; because the Spirit of the immortal God was found in him . David was a Statesman , Wiser then his Teachers : David was a Soldier ; His fingers were skilled in fighting , his hands trained up to Victory over Wild Beasts , Giants , Armies of Men . was not the Spirit the Lamp of God which shone thus gloriously on David's Court and Camp , which made his Throne so great ? Thy Word , says he , was a Light to my Feet . The Word of God is the Spirit of God , says St. Paul ; The Sword of the Spirit , 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , as relating to 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 not 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , as relating to 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . which ( Spirit , not Sword ) is the Word of God . This made David when he had sinned , cry : Take not thine Holy Spirit from me . When the Spirit of God once left Saul , and evil Spirit came upon him , which vexed him , which haunted him to the loss of his kingdom and life together . Honourable Father's of your Countries , I humbly move to know , By what Title you fit there and rule over us . Is it not as Powers on Earth ? But All power on Earth as well as in Heaven , is given to Iesus Christ . You are Substitutes and Vicegerents to the Lord Iesus . Look then to Iesus the Beginning and End of your Authority . God hath laid the Government on his Shoulder . What is his sufficiency for it ? The Spirit of the Lord rests on him , and this is , A Spirit of Counsel and Might in him . You who fit at the right hand of the Lord Iesus , in this Commonwealth , as the Lord Iesus sits at the right hand of his Father in that Kingdom , which is over all : pray , that the same Spirit , which was poured forth on him , may be by him poured forth on you : So shall you be Messiahs , anointed ones , and Saviours to this people . Can You be able to rule over any spot of this earth ; when Jesus Christ was not fit for the government of the whole ; without the Spirit ? Do you put your whole trust in the promises of God , and expect by them to be made partakers of every blessing ? Do you believe the promises made in the Word of God ? I hope , I may say , at least with as good confidence , as Paul said it to Agrippa ; I know you believe them . This is the promise : The Spirit shall led you into all truth . You are now searching into the deep things of God , which concern Religion ; Live in the Spirit , and the Spirit shall bring all into your mind , and show you the things of Iesus Christ . It behoves you to know the method of Satan ; the stratagems and dark deeps of the Devil himself , in mysteries of State and Religion . Walk in the Spirit ; he shall led you into their chambers , as he did Ezekiel ; and let you see what mischiefs they are there contriving in secret . This is the promise : The Spirit of God and of glory shall rest on his servants , in their conflicts and sufferings . Fit still in all humble resignation of your selves , to the working of this Spirit ; that he may rest on you : so shall he manage your counsels , finish your wars ; and end all your sufferings with glory . I shall conclude my Epistle with and humble Petition to your Honours : and hearty Prayer for you . My humble Petition is , that You would ever remember to converse as Doves , among Doves ; with this Dove ; He is a tender Spirit , take heed of grieving this Spirit , where ever he dwells : For by him alone can your hope's be sealed to a day of full accomplishment . My hearty Prayer is , that , as you fit debating in Parliament , the appearances of the Holy Ghost may be among you ; as he was with the Apostles , sitting over them in the from of fiery tongues : that when you fight in the field , the Holy Ghost may be as a two-edged sword going forth from the mouth of the Lord Iesus into your enemy's hearts : that you may never see upon the walls of your house , that handwriting which made Bel-shazzer tremble ; Your kingdom is divided ; but in stead of this , that uniting and building Principle ; Not by might , nor by power , but by my Spirit , says the Lord . This is the fervent , constant prayer of Your Honours humble servant in Christ , Peter Sterry .