To the RIGHT HONOURABLE IOHN LORD VISCOVNT SCUDAMORE . Right Honourable , IT is necessary that Christians should be warned of since against God , lest they incur his wrath . And withal it is as necessary that the sins of which men are warned should be plainly , and distinctly declared . Without the one men's consciences will sin without fear : without the other they will fear where no fear is : the defect of the former will make conscien • es secure : the want of the la • ter perpetually unquiet , oh • settled in error . And errors in conscience produce many great evils not only ad intra in mens own souls , but also ad extra in humane affairs . The endeavouring then tO • direct men's consciences in practic cases cannot but be a needful and charitable work . And surely as it is useful in other arguments , so very needful in this of scandals . Few there be that heed the terrible commination of our Saviour against scandalizers , and therefore are affected as if by transmigration they had Cains spirit , when he said nuqquid ego fratris mei custos ? Whence it is that offences are multiplied daily , many souls perish , alienations of mind , schisms , jars and wars too arise . we wish , we pray , I would we might say we hope for a true union and consolidation of men's minds . Certainly it is not to be hoped without removal of scandals . On the other side the grievous threatening of our Lord Christ does so affright many consciences , that they are almost irresolute in every thing they do before men , as fearing least there be anguis in herba , some scandal in it . In my small reading and experience I find few doubts of conscience , concerning men's patent actions , in the resolving of which the difficulty hath not most of all rested on this point of scandals . Which considerations moved me to apply some part of my studies to clear this argument , and to remove this evil . And having in this form fashioned a treatise , I cannot say polished , it is now produced into the light for public good by discovery of truth . Such as it is I humbly present to your Lordship , as to a person made honourable not only by your high dignities , but also by your noble virtues , manifested abroad in your employments of State , and in this your native country ( wherein as in your proper Orb you shined many years tanquam stella primae magnitudinis ) by your eminent prudence and integrity in government , and by your rare , pious , and large munificence in restoring tithes , and bestowing lands and building on the Church , and endeared to my self by reason of that noble favour by which your Honour hath been pleased to cheer me in this very great , and very poor Cure , in and under which I now labour . Which I beseech your Honour to accept of as from him that rejoiceth in the prosperity of your Honour and your noble House , and studies to acquit himself Your Honours in most humble observance IOHN TOMBES .