TO THE WORSHIPFUL His much honoured Friend Colonel JOHN BRIDGES , Governor of Warwick-Castle , Justice of Peace for the County of Warwick , and one of the Honourable Committee for the Safety of that County . Worthy Sir , THis book of mine does at once both crave and claim Your Patronage , for I cannot bethink me of any one that ( all things considered ) hath better right to it 〈 ◊ 〉 me , then Yourself . I must never 〈 ◊ 〉 , how that being carried prisoner by the enemies , You soon set me off by exchange : and after that , being by them driven from house and home , You received me to harbour ; yea , being driven out of one Pulpit ( where they thought to have surprised me ) You presently put me into another , where I had a comfortable employment , and a competent encouragement . What hours I could then well spare from that pensum diurnum , of praying and preaching , I gladly spent in these Notes upon the New 〈 ◊ 〉 . Testament : as hating with the Athenians , 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , 〈 ◊ ◊ ◊ ◊ ◊ 〉 a fruttlesse feriation ; and holding with Cato , that account must be given , not of our labour only , but of our leisure also . For that two-years-space ( well-nigh ) that I lived in Your Garrison , I think I may truly say with Seneca , 〈 ◊ 〉 . epist . 〈 ◊ ◊ 〉 per otium exiit dies , partem etiam noctium studys vendicavi , that I laboured night and day ( amid many fears and tears for the labouring Church , and bleeding State ) Vt ad vitam communem aliquem , saltem fructum far 〈 ◊ 〉 . possem ; that I might be some way serviceable to the Public , Amos 6. 6. and to You. And albeit I was even sick at heart sometime 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 of the affliction of Joseph ; and even ready thorough 〈 ◊ 〉 in Ezech. faintness to let fallen my pen , as it befell Hierom , when writing 〈 ◊ 〉 . upon Ezekiel , he herd of the sacking of the City of Room by the Goths : yet as God ( who comforts those2 Cor. 7 6. that are cast down ) gave us any lucida intervalla ( this last triumphant year especially ) I took heart afresh to set closer to the work , which now by Gods grace is brought to some perjod : And because I have ever held ingratitude a monster in nature , a solecism in manners , a paradox in Divinity , and ugly sin ( yea , if there be any sin Camd. Elizab. against the holy Ghost , it is this , said Queen Elizabeth in a Letter of hers to the King of France ) therefore I could do no less then dedicate this piece of my pains unto You , to whom I owe so very much ; it being penned ( most of it ) within Your walls , and under Your wing , where I so long sat and sang , O Melihaee , Deus nobis haec otia fecit . Virg. Eclog. The Stork is said to leave one of her young ones , where she hatcheth them : The Elephant to turn up the first sprig towards heaven , when he comes to feed ; both out of some instinct of gratitude . The Egyptians are renowned in Histories Diod. 〈 ◊ 〉 lib 2. for a thankful people : And the Israelites were charged not to abhor and Egyptian , because they were once 〈 ◊ 〉 . 23. 7. strangers in his land , and had tasted of his courtesies . TheLuk . 6. 35. unthankful and the evil , are fitly set together by our Saviour . And , Ingratum dixeris omnia dixeris , said the Ancients . All that I can do by way of retribution for Your many free favours is , to make this public acknowledgement thereof under mine hand ; that if any shall reap benefit by what I have written , they may see to whom , in part , they are beholden . Now the good Lord that hath promisedMat . 10. 41. a Prophets reward to him that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet ; He that ministereth seed to the sour , and hath said , That who so watereth shall be watered also himself : Prov. 11. 25. Ipse pluvia 〈 ◊ 〉 , Kimchi . He that is able to make all grace to abound towards You , that You may abound to every good work : The same God All-sufficient multiply Your seed , and increase the fruits of Your righteousness , 2 Cor. 9. 8 , 10 , 11. being enriched in every thing to all bountifulness , which causeth through us , thanksgiving to God . This is , and shall be , Sir , the daily desire of Your Worships , affectionately observant John Trapp .