TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD WILLIAM by Divine providence LORD ARCH-BISHOP OF CANTERBURY His Grace , Primate of all England , and Metropolitan , CHANCELLOUR of the University of OXFORD , and one of his MAIESTIES most Honourable Privy Council . My most Honourable good LORD . May it please your GRACE , IT was obedience to my Superior that engaged me upon this last Anniversary commemoration of the great Goodness of God Almighty to our King and Country in the discovery of the most damnable Powder-Treason . It was a blessing which no tongue could express , much less mine , which had scarce learned to speak , at least , was most unfit to speak in the Schools of the Prophets . Delicata autem est illao bedientia quae causas quaerit . It had been no good argument of my obedience to have disputed the inconvenience of my person , and the unaptness of my parts for such and employment . I knew God , out of the mouth of Infants , could acquire his praise , and if my heart were actually as Uotive as my tongue should have been , it might be one of Gods Magnalia to perfect his own praise out of the weakness and imperfection of the Organ . So as I was able , I endeavoured to perform it , having my obedience ever ready for my excuse to men , and my willingness to perform my duty , for the assoilment of my self before God ; part of which I hope was accepted , and I have no reason to think , that the other was not pardoned . When I first thought of the Barbarism of this Treason , I wondered not so much at the thing it self as by what means it was possible for the Devil to gain so strong a party in men's resolutions , as to move them to undertake a business so abhorring from Christianity , so evidently full of extreme danger to their lives , and so certainly to incur the highest wrath of God Almighty . My thoughts were thus rude at first ; but after a strict inquisition I found it was apprehended as a business ( perhaps full of danger to their bodies , but ) advantageous to their souls , consonant to the obligation of all Christians , and meritorious of and exceeding weight of Glory , for now it was come to pass which our dear Master foretold , men should kill us , and think they did God good service in it . I could not think this to be a part of any men religion , nor do I yet believe it . For it is so apparently destructive of our deer Master his Royal laws of Charity & Obedience , that I must not be so uncharitable as to think they speak their own mind truly , when they profess their belief of the lawfulness and necessity in some cases of rebelling against their lawful Prince , and using all means to throw him from his kingdom , though it be by taking of his life . But it is but just that they who break the bonds of duty to their Prince , should likewise forfeit the laws of charity to themselves , and if they say not true , yet to be more uncharitable to their own persons , then I durst be , though I had their own warrant . Briefly ( Most R. Father ) I found among them of the Roman party such prevailing opinions , as could not consist with loyalty to their Prince , in case he were not the Popes subject , and these so generally believed , and somewhere obtruded under peril of their souls , that I could not but point at these dangerous rocks , at which I doubt not , but the loyalty of many hath suffered shipwreck , and of thousands more might , if a higher Star had not guided them better , then their own Pilots . I could not therefore but think it very likely that this Treason might spring from the same Fountain , and I had concluded so in my first meditations , but that I was willing to consider , whither or no it might not be that these men were rather exasperated then persuaded , and whither it were not that the severity of our laws against them might rather provoke their intemperate zeal , then religion thus move their settled conscience . It was a material consideration , because they ever did and still do fill the world with outcries against our laws for making a rape upon their consciences , have printed Catalogues of their English Martyrs , drawn Schemes of most strange tortures imposed on their Priests , such as were unimaginable , by Nero , or Dioclesian , or any of the worst and cruelest enemies of Christianity , endeavouring thus to make us partly guilty of our own ruin , and so washing their hands in token of their own innocency , even then when they were dipping them in the blood Royal , and would have emptied the best veins in the whole Kingdom to fill their Lavatory . But I found all these to be but Calumnies , strong accusations upon weak presumptions , and that the cause did rest where I had begun , I mean , upon the pretence of the Catholic cause , and that the imagined iniquity of the Laws of England could not be made a veil to cover the deformity of their intentions , for our Laws were just , Honourable , and Religious . Concerning these and some other appendices to the business of the day ; I expressed some part of my thoughts , which because happily they were but a just truth , and this truth not unseasonable for these last times , in which ( as S. Paul prophesied ) men would be fierce , Traitors , heady , and high minded , creeping into houses , leading silly women captive , it pleased some who had power to command me , to wish me to a publication of these my short and sudden meditations , that ( if it were possible ) even this way I might express my duty to God and the King . Being thus far encouraged , I resolved to go something further , even to the boldness of a dedication to your Grace , that since I had no merit of my own to move me to the confidence of a public view , yet I might dare to venture under the protection of your Graces favour . But since my boldness does as much need a defence , as my Sermon a Patronage , I humbly crave leave to say , that though it be boldness , even to presumption , yet my address to your Grace is not altogether unreasonable . For since all know that your Grace thinks not your life your own , but when it spends it self in the service of your King , opposing your great endeavours against the zealots of both sides who labour the disturbance of the Church and State , I could not think it 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 to present to your Grace this short discovery of the Kings enemies , 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , and proper to your Grace who is so true , so zealous a lover of your Prince and Country . It was likewise appointed to be the public voice of thanksgiving for your University ( though she never spoke weaker then by so mean and instrument ) and therefore is accountable to your Grace to whom under God and the King we owe the Blessing and Prosperity of all our Studies . Nor yet can I choose but hope , that my Great Obligations to your Grace's Favour may plead my pardon , ( since it is better that my Gratitude should be bold , then my diffidence ingrateful ) but that this is so far from expressing the least part of them , that it lays a greater bound upon me , either for a debt of delinquency in presenting it , or of thankfulness , if your Grace may please to pardon it . I humbly crave your Grace's Benediction , pardon , and acceptance of the humblest duty and observance of Your GRACES most observant and obliged CHAPLAINE IER . TAYLOR .