TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sir FRANCIS DARCY Knight , my much honoured friend : All happiness in Christ IESUS . SIR , not having of mine own , wherewith I might tell the world of your great and continual favours unto me , by such a pub • ke testimony , I thought good to do it by publishing this work of another , whose Person and Doctrine you well knew and respected . Which I do the more willingly , because it is suitable to the Contentment here treated of . I am well contented with that mediocrity of gifts and abilities , which God hath bestowed on me . I hold it better in this life , to be faithful in a little , then ruler over much . No doubt but some are Master's of great parts , and estates , and faithful too : rich in this world , and rich in good works too : high in place and respect among men , and high in the favour of God too . But , both such have their hazards and temptations , against which they need to be watchful ; and the brother of low degree hath cause ( in God and his love ) to rejoice and be contented . And o how happy were it with godly Christians , if they had taken forth this lesson of Contentment ! How comfortless would their lives then be ! How blessedly free from those torturing passion of emulation , envy , murmuring , impatience , and the like , wherewith the spirit is too often , and too much disquieted ! Godliness with Contentment is great gain , says the Apostle : as if the purchase were small , where Contentment is wanting : And indeed much of the benefit and advantage is taken away , where this lesson of Contentation is not taken forth perfectly . And how unbeseeming is it to and heir of the promises , to be Malcontent for worldly wants , or afflictions ! How thwarting to the wisdom of God , as if he knew not best to make allowance to his children ! How terrible to lie disconsolate in death , or any deadly trouble , moaning as that great Emperor when he lay dying at Yorke ; In my life time I have been all 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . Sev. things , and now nothing does me good ! I w • sh to your Worship all the comforts and mercies of God in Christ , both in life and death ; and thereunto at this time I commend to your reading this little Treatise of Contentment : resting ever , Your Worships much obliged , W. JEMMAT .