TO THE INCOMPARABLE , SOVEREIGN PRINCESSE , HENRIETTA-MARIA OF FRANCE , QVEEN OF GREAT BRITTAINE , FRANCE , AND IRLAND . MADAME I Preſume not now , to approach to your Majesty's preſence , with design to beg your Favours , ( though this , use to be the caſe of every Creature ) but to pay your Majesty a Service , and that , a great one , for the many Princely benefits , which I have received already , from your gracious hand . For her , I come to offer your Majesty a means , of magnifying your own natural greatness , by your avovving , & protecting , and enlarging the glory of and incomparable Saint , S. Tereſa . To whom , as I have well understood that already , yovv carry and extraordinary devotion ; and not only devotion to her self , but affection alſo , to the holy Religious women of her Angelical Order ; whereof , the English Nation ( which now enjoys the honour , to be alſo , yours ) hath a Monaſtery at Antwerpe , which needs not , perhaps , be ashamed , to appear near any other of the whole world , whether it be , for their great , & entire contentment in Recollection ; their inſatiable , yet moſt delightful thirſt , after Perfection , & Union with our Bleſſed Lord ; or the everlasting Feaſt , of Joy , & Iubily , which they ſolemnize , both in the hearty , & high reſpects , which they carry to their Reverend Mother Superior , and their true , & moſt tender love , to one another : ſo , it will not be unworthy , either of your own greatness , or goodness , that , when there is queſtion of conſidering the virtues , & perfections of the Glorious S. Tereſa , and the celebrating her praiſes , and the ſtudying her Life , ( J mean that Life of hers , which she wrote , with that moſt holy , & wise hand of her own , which I her preſent ) your Majesty vouchſafe to march at the very head of that whole Troop , which may address it self , to the imitation of her Heroical actions , and to the admiration of thoſe incomparable Graces , and Favours , which the God of Heaven , and Earth , thought fit to infuſe , with his enamoured heart , and omnipotent hand , into that moſt happy Soul . For , who can ever , be more fit , to patronise ſo great a Saint , as she is , then ſo great a Queen , as your Majesty ; who , beside your Birth , and renown , whereof ( to speak after the manner of men ) yovv have ſo much occaſion to brag , have alſo ( in order to Heaven ) showed ſuch conſtancy , in the way of Religion , and piety , as may justly , ( all things conſidered ) give cauſe to the reſt of your own most eminent Rank , at least , to shrink , if not to blush . For my self , to beg your Majesties pardon , for this appearance of preſumption , were now , to acknowledge ſome ſuch fault , as whereof , J acquitted my self , before . I will therefore , rather by this means , hope to obtain a Suit for this Service ; yea and that , of the moſt savoury kind , of all other ; & it is , That yovv will vouchſafe to employ the Sacrifice of my whole Life , in obedience to any of your Majesty's leaſt commands . God make , & keep your Majesty , as healthy , & as happy , as this world can tell how to wish ; yea , and as the other , can tell how to grant ; & I moſt humbly ask leave , to do your Majesty all Reverence , at your Royal Feet . Your Majesty's moſt humble , moſt obedient , moſt devoted , & moſt obliged Servant M. T.