To the Worll . my very worthy friend , and much honoured Patron , Mr. RICHARD CAMDEN . Sir , SAint Augustine and diverse reverend Father's of the Primitive Church , because there were many heretics in their time , writ themselves and advised others of competent ability to write against Heresy . We have alike reason in these our days , and , if the mouths of our grave Ecclesiastical Worthies could breath through the iniquity of the times , might from them too assuredly have alike encouragement to preach against Schism . My apprehension hereof first incited me to a rational discussion , which at length concluded in this resolution , That my silence ( how inconsiderable soever ) should not entitle me to the least interest in betraying the Church to either of her two homebred prevalent enemies , Blind Ignorance or Obstinate Malice . The success which my endeavours herein found by this Academical performance ( if my friends tongues translated aright the language of their hearts ) being as beyond its desert , so , I truly and ingenuously confess , beyond likewise either my expectation or hope , could be but a mean , if any incentive to this my farther publication of it ; whereby it may meet with a different character from that which their charitable impression at first afforded it . For I'll not go about so to captivate the judgements of my candid auditors , as to chain them to their first conceived opinion . I know the eye is a lamp which often lights the understanding to the discovery of some errors formerly lost in the labyrinth of the ear . Things approved when herd may undergo a contrary most just , because more deliberate , censure in the reading . What motives soever I had ( such , it may be , as imposed rather a kind of necessity then gave me satisfaction ) I desire to conceal . The reason of my dedication to your self ( my many and great Collegiate obligations engaging the choicest of my future endeavours in a higher discharge ) needs run no hazard of your various conjecture , being my desire to employ it as a thankful acknowledgement of your first Christian grace vouchsafed me at the Font , seconded by your pious most careful performance of that charge the Church there gave you of my nonage , and still continued by your most frequent ample accumulation of favours , which shall hereafter upon the emergence of any farther occasion be most duly commemorated by Your ever-obliged servant and dutiful Godson , RI . WATSON .