TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE , both Houses of the High Court of PARLIAMENT . Right Honourable and Renowned Patriots : NExt to the saving of your own souls ( in the lamentable shipwreck of Mankind ) your task ( as Christians ) is to save the Souls , but as Magistrates , the Bodies and Goods of others . Many excellent Discourses have been presented to your Father's hands and Yours in former and present Parliaments : I shall be humbly bold to say , that ( in what concerns your duties as Magistrates , towards others ) a more necessary and seasonable debate was never yet presented . Two things your Honours here may please to view ( in this Controversy of Persecution for cause of Conscience ) beyond what's extant . First the whole Body of this Controversy formed & pitched in true Battalions . Secondly ( although in respect of my self it be impar congressus , yet in the power of that God who is Maximus in Mini • is , Your Honours shall see the Controversy is discussed with men as able as most , eminent for ability and piety , Mr. Counterfeit • ton , and the New English Ministers . When the Prophets in Scripture have given their Coats of Arms and Escutch • ons to Great Men , Your Honours know the Babylonian Monarch hath the Lion , the Persian the Bear , the Grecian the Leopard , the Roman a compound of the former 3. most strange and dreadful , Dan. 7. Their oppressing , plundering ravishing , murdering , not only of the bodies , but the souls of Men are large explaining commentaries of such similitudes . Your Honours have been famous to the end of the World , for your unparalleled wisdom , courage , justice , mercy , in the vindicating your Civil Laws , Liberties , etc. Yet let it not be grievous to your Honours thoughts to ponder a little , why all the Prayers and Tears and Fastings in this Nation have not pierced the Heavens , and quenched these Flames , which yet who knows how far they'll spread , and when they'll out ! Your Honours have broke the jaws of the Oppressor , and taken the prey out of their Teeth ( Iob. 29. ) For which Act I believe it hath pleased the most High God to set a Guard ( not only of Trained men , but ) of mighty Angels , to secure your sitting , and the City . I fear we are not pardoned , though reprieved : Oh that there may be a lengthening of Londons tranquillity , of the Parliaments safety , by mercy to the poor ! Dan. 4. Right Honourable , Soul yokes , Soul oppressions plunderings , ravishings , etc. are of a crimson and deepest die , and I believe the chief of Englands sins , unstopping the Viols of Englands present sorrows . This glass presents your Honours with Arguments from Religion , Reason , Experience , all proving that the greatest yokes yet lying upon English necks , ( the peoples and Your own ) are of a spiritual and soul nature . All former Parliaments have changed these yokes according to their consciences ( Popish or Protestant ) It's now your Honours turn at helm , and ( as your task , so I hope your res • lution , not to change ( for that is but to turn the wheel , which another Parliament , and the very next may turn again : ) but to • ase the Subject's and Your selves from a yoke ( as was once spoke in a case not unlike Act 15. ) which neither You nor your Father's were ever able to bear . Most Noble Senators , Your Father's ( whose seats You fill ) are mouldered , and mouldering their brains , their tongue • s , etc. to ashes in the pit of rottenesse : They and You must shortly ( together with two world's of men ) appear at the great Bar : It shall then be no grief of heart that you have now attended to the cries of Souls , thousands oppressed , millions ravished by the Acts and Statutes concerning Souls , not yet repealed . Of Bodies impoverished , imprisoned , etc. for their souls belief , yea slaughtered on heaps for Religions controversies in the Wars of present and former Ages . Notwithstanding the success of later times , The famous saying of a late King of Bohemia . ( wherein sundry opinions have been hatched about the subject of Religion ) a man may clearly discern with his eye , and as it were touch with his finger that according to the verity of holy Scriptures , etc. men's consciences ought in no sort to be violated , urged or constrained . And whensover men have attempted any thing by this violent course , whither openly or by secret means , the issue hath been pernicious , and the cause of great and wonderful innovations in the principallest and mightiest Kingdoms and Countries , etc. It cannot be denied to be a pious and prudential act for Your Honours ( according to your conscience ) to call for the advice of faithful Counsellors in the high debates concerning Your own , and the souls of others . Yet let it not be imputed as a crime for any suppliant to the God of Heaven for You , if in the humble sense of what their souls believe , they pour forth ( among others ) these three requests at the Throne of Grace . First , That neither Your Honours , nor those excellent and worthy persons , whose advice you seek , limit the holy One of Israel to their apprehensions , debates , conclusions , rejecting or neglecting the humble and faithful suggestions of any , though as base as spittle and clay , with which sometime Christ Iesus opens the eyes of them that are born blind . Secondly , That the present and future generations of the Sons of Men may never have cause to say that such a Parliament ( as England never enjoyed the like ) should model the worship of the living , Essay of Religion . eternal and invisible God after thee By •• of any earthly interest , though of the highest concernment under the Sun : And yet , says that learned Sir Francis Bacon ( how ever otherwise persuaded , yet thus he confesses : ) Such as hold pressure of Conscience , are guided therein by some private interests of their own . Thirdly , What ever way of worshipping God Your own Consciences are persuaded to walk in , yet ( from any bloody act of violence to the consciences of others ) it may be never told at Room nor Oxford , that the Parliament of England hath committed a greater rape , It is rarely seen that ever persons were pers ••• ed for their 〈 … 〉 then if they had forced or ravished the bodies of all the women in the World . And that Englands Parliament ( so famous throughout all Europe and the World ) should at last turn Papists , Prelatists , Presbyterians , Independents , Socinians , Familists , Antinomians , etc. by confirming all these sorts of Consciences , by Civil force and violence to their Consciences .