To the HONOURABLE HOUSE of COMMONS Now Assembled in PARLIAMENT . THE Great God , the Lord your God , God of Gods , and Lord of Lords , in pity to his people , and mercy to this Land , hath raised up ( in our great distress ) Micah 5. 5. seven shepherds and eight principal men , out of the several divisions of the Kingdom ; when the enemy would come in like a flood , the spirit of the Lord hath lift up a S • andard against him . God hath called you for such a thing as this , at such a time as this , to this Great Court , your call is high , your work is hard , you know why you are born , for the benefit of many , as Bucers Physicians said to him , non sibi se , sed multorum utilitati esse natum ; You are our deliverers from heavy burdens , our reformers of great corruptions , You find Church and State bruised and diseased . You are our healers , 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . Sept. ligator vulneram . Chirurgus & Reip. medi • us . 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 ab 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , medelam Corn • l. à Lap. in Isai. 3.7 . What though Israel fret ? shall Moses faint ? when men of renown murmur at the instruments of good , the Lord will show who are Gods ; no man suffers so much injury as God does contumely , as Melanchthon said , nullum hominem tantum sustinere malorum , quantum contumeliarum Deus . It is not strange that some prefer Egyptians Onion • to Canaan , and its dainties ; yet their Caleb ( a noble spirit ) fully followed the Lord . Bucer and Melanchthon framed a from of reformation , with approbation of the Peers and States , but the Clergy in the College of Colen ( wherein were some stood right affected , but more were contrary ) 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 in alta omnia iverunt . Melchior Adam . vita Buceri . p. 217. rejected with slander , and affirmed they had rather live in Turky , then under such a reformation , sub imperio Turcico malle se vivere , quàm sub Magistrate • qui reformationem illam sequatur . Nehemiah , when he was in the Lords work , was scorned , resisted • accused , threatened , and by Nobles in Iudah , ( sworn unto Tobiah ) deserted , yet he builds and prospers , desists not his work , defieth his adversaries factions , dreads not words , nor letters : Mens Furere is't • ic & •• emere reges , principes , populos , adversus Christum Domini : foelix Omen puto , ac melius , quam si blandiren • ur , etc. Id. vita Lutheri . p. 158. fury against Christ ( is a good Omen ) is better then their flattery , they laugh at him , ( weep not for it ) God laugheth at them . Gods infinite providence ( the seven eyes upon • ne stone , Zechar. 3.9 . ) is upon the Churches foundation , all things below are wheeled about , as the r • ngs full of eyes , infinitâ Dei providentiâ , Iun. in Ezek. 1. 18. Built you , God will prosper your work , make up the hedge , ( God hath sought you for it ) stand in the gap before the Lord , that he may not destroy the Land , who now visits our ingratitude , as Luther to Melanchton , valdè cupio ut sint adversus Satanae furores inaestimabiles aliquor reliqui , qui se pro do more Israel muros opponant , in hoc die furoris Domini visitantis nostram , sicut dignum est , ingratitudinem . Id. vita Melan . p. 358. You love our Nation , your acts are national , execute judgement and seek the truth , ( thus love our Land ) and the Lord will pardon , Ier. 5. 1. Doe men hate him that rebuketh in the Gate , and abhor him that spèaketh uprightly ? it is known by it , it is and evil time , you contend for peace and truth , be constant , and confident , your war is peace , as Zwinglius de bello Helvetico , writing to his friends , Id. vita Zwing . p. 36. Bellum cui nos instamus , pax est , nonbellū , they strove to preserve verity & liberty of the Gospel . Men may ( may be not ) hurt the body , but they cannot reach , not touch the soul that spiritual sparkle , as Zwinglius his heart was whole ( cor illaesum ) when his body was turned into ashes . Luther warmed Melanchthons spirit by a letter about the common cause then molested by Pontifical rage and Caesars fury , I ( says he ) about the public cause have a quiet mind , assured it is just , true , and unappalled , I fear not the fierce and cruel Papists , Id. vita Luth : p. 138. if we be overthrown , Christ shall be overthrown with us , and come what can , malo ego cum Christo ruere , quam cum Caesare stare , I had rather fallen with Christ , then stand with Caesar . You fast , you pray , you consult with the God of heaven , who will answer in due time with good and comfortable words , Zechary 1.13 prey ( as Tanta reverentia aliquid petit ut cum WORSER • oh , tanta spe & fide , ut • um patre & amico se loqui s • ntiat . p. 142. Luther was wont to do ) with rever • nce as to a God , and with confidence as to a friend and father . The day of fasting allows no ornaments in lesser things then Sermons , it was only my purpose to speak something pertinent to the day ; fasting must have prayer , prayer faith , and faith activity ; What can be more necessary in the ca • se of faith , then faith ? Luther • animosa ep . de negotio Evang • lii and Spalatin . in tantū est opus fidei , ne causa fidei sit sine fide ; your difficulties many , faith ( which hath a kind of omnipotency ) will carry you through all , tantum possumus , quantum credimus . In this service my study was that the word of truth propounded , your hearts ( lift up in the way of the Lord to the work of the Lord ) might continue in their height and heat by the spirit of burning , till all our filth and blood be purged , and washed away , till fasting be turned into feasting , till men may use this speech in England , concerning the State , The Lord bless thee o habitation of justice ; and concerning the Church , The Lord bless thee o mountain of holiness ; till there be one Lord , and his Name one . That this Parliament ( the repairer of the breaches , the restorer of the Paths to dwell in ) by loyalty to our Sovereign , fidelity to the Kingdom , and zeal to Religion may be the joy of many Generations ; which is the prayer of Your devoted servant , and daily Petitioner to the God hearing Prayer , THOMAS WILSON .