TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL , Sir EDWARD DERING , of Sarendon-Dering , in the County of Kent , Knight and Baronet . SIR , IT is Bernards Bern. Ep. 91. saying , Nemo esse bonus plusquàm oporter potest ; There is not a man alive can be better then he should be ; and it is without doubt he is not good , who would not be better : Ubi incipis nolle fieri melior , ibi etiam desinis esse bonus ; adding they be professedly the children of the lukewarm , who say , We will be no better then our Father's : Nolumus esse meliores quàm patres nostri ; whereas men are in Religion not to be stinted by any Antiquity , but what is divine from God the Ancient of days . The children of light be proficients , they reach forward , their spark comes to be a coal , their coal a most vehement flame ; God hath kindled in your breast and ardent love to the house of God , your zeal provokes many , your zeal makes many a glad heart , your zeal honours God , who hath put honour upon you : For them that honour him , he will honour . Your present employment in the honourable House of Commons in Parliament , calls for zeal : It is a fire , 1. Active , to set all on work , the hand , the tongue , the head , the heart . 2. Quick , speedy ; it is and utter enemy of delays in its work . 3. Vehement ; it bestoweth the top of affection , and strength of intentions on what it loves . 4. Aspiring ; it is the highest element , mounts up nearer heaven , nearer the Lord . Anciently , they who published Books were wont to honour Personages with the patronage of that , which they found them to be lovers or professors of ; To whom then may this present word of zeal ( which once you herd with patience ) be Dedicated more properly , then unto you ? Whose abilities in conjunction with zeal , graced with magnanimity , and modesty , render you amiable to all that know you , and honourable in minds that hear of you . I humbly pray your acceptance of this my memorizing your zeal for Zion ; You read not here swelling words of vanity , my study was to be not plausible but profitable ; Nos autem qui rerum magis quàm verborum amatores , utilia potius quàm plausibilia sectamur : Salvian . praef . in lib . de Gubern . This I present you withal , to deliver my self from suspicion and imputation of and unthankful mind towards you , who countenanced me with ain your first speech in Parliament , when I was pursued by a Pu • sevant from the Archbishop of Cant. for not reading the prayer against Scots , etc. mention too honourable for me , when I was in contempt ; who testify my respect to you much honoured of good men for welldoing : Others zeal would have consumed me , but that your zeal Ps. 119. 139. consumed you ; for I have seen God in you , yet I have a greater bound of deeper acknowledgement of your zeal , then your many favours to meward amount unto , which is the faithful discharge of that place the Country hath most worthily put upon you , and entrusted you withal ; wherein your forwardness for the good of the Church ( the welfare whereof is above my chief joy ) hath been to my comfort , hath warmed many a heart , and hath occasioned thanksgiving by many unto God . The fruit of true wisdom is credit and confidence , Eccl. 8. 1. A men wisdom makes his face to shine , and the boldness of his face shall be changed , as faultless and fearless . Adorn your personal sufficiencies with the true fear of God , a wise men treasure , a zealous forwardness for Gods glory , goodness , and good causes , whereby your public employment may be blessed : Keep good conscience , the dearest jewel your heart can have in it ; Hold a constant countermotion to the course of the world ; mind the life of grace as that which far excels all ornaments of nature , art , or policy , that it animates and ennobles them . What you do for God , do it by his Word , all Laws are to be rectified by Gods Law , men must set their Watch by the Dial , and the Dial by the Sun. This way the more you labour , the more rest will you find . Thus with my unfeigned prayers to the God of all grace,1 . Thess. 3. 13. That he may establish your heart unblamable in holiness , and guiding you by his counsel , may after receive you to glory . Otham , in Kent . Your Worships Petitioner to the Throne of Grace , THOUGH : WILSON .