To the High , and Mighty , CHARLES By the Grace of God , Prince of Scots , and Wales , Duke of Cornwal and Rothesay , Heir of Great Britaine , etc. LOw and humble ( Most High , and Mighty Prince ) doth Your Montrose address himself to Your Highness presence : not He himself , in his full aequipage , no , nor a moiety of him , and in truth Scarce a mean scantling of that matchless worth . Who , though unpolished and rude , and , in this his Roman dress , ill deck • , rough , and uncomely ; yet shall be not fear the public view , if You deign him that favourable aspect , and grace , which You are wont to vouchsafe even foreigners , and strangers that court You. And he thinks , he may , upon better grounds then they , presume to entreat this , he being no alien , but a lawful native of your Royal Father's haereditarie Kingdom : and no otherwise , then by the fatal calamity of those times , exposed , bred , and fed in a strange land . Nor does he want lively characters , and marks imprinted in him , to evidence from what land , and father he is descended : That , Your own Scotland , wherein one hundred and nine of Your Progenitors have reigned ; all whose Royal blood runs in Your veins , and divine souls breathes in Your breast : Him a free , born , and bred native , of that most ancient Kingdom ; a loyal servant of Your dearest father , his most Gracious Lord , and faithful follower of his , in despite of all the casualties of fortune . Which arguments , if they be not sufficient to conciliat the sweet gale of Your Grace , to inspire health , and life , in this tender birth , otherwise ready to expire : yet let me beseech Your singular clemency , to lend it so much of Your countenance , as to observe in it ( though drawn with a rude pencil ) some lineaments , and shadows of it's first pattern ; and even for those resemblances sake , vouchsafe it so much of Your countenance , as may give it some life and being , if not immortality . For , who would despise that only Pourtra • cture that were of Scipio , Caesar , Alexander , or of Your Royal Grandfathers , exstant , Iames the Peaceful , or Henry the Great , because the work of some obscure , and perhaps , unskilful craftsman ? I can well divine , Montrose will not long want and Apelles , or Leucippus to paint him out , and limb him to the life ; nor and Homer perhaps to sing his praises : only ( most Gracious Sir ) be pleased to use a while these my poor endeavours , till those more worthy show themselves to the world . And look not on the harshness of my style , but bend Your high and generous thoughts upon the actions , truly Roman , that's to say , Noble , High , Heroic , Great , and far transcending mean and vulgar spirits . And , if You will impute ( as is fit and just ) the blemishes and errors , which herein may occurre , to the weakness of my wit and judgement , and no ways , to my Patterns Genius , I dare boldly undertake , that your Montrose shall prove neither unpleasant , nor unprofitable . For , what can be more pleasant to a Prince , second to none on earth , but his Father , born in that eminent dignity , bred in that condition , and from his infancy trained up in those ways , which resent nothing but Heroical deeds ; then to have always before his eyes , that worthy , whom ( be it said without envy ) no man in his time goes beyond , to embrace , caress and cherish him , and copy out his actions , and observe , How he behaves himself , how brave and goodly , In Martial feats , manhood and Chivalry ? Who taking up arms to serve the commands of the best of Kings , your most Gracious Father , and leading the dance , as it were , to usher in Your Valour , which now waxes to ripnes and strength apace ; hath performed such exploits , as strikes the present times with admiration ; and grateful posterity shall ever preserve in memory . For , though envy press hard upon true glory , and tread upon her heels ; yet that short lived , and self destroying fury , shall never overtake , nor eclipse her solid and immortal lustre . In the mean time ( most Gracious Sir ) we present You here with no smooth fables , or Romanses . Antiphates , and Scillaes gulf are not my theme , Swallowing Charybdis , devouring Polypheme . No giants , or glorious wonders ; yet enemies , as like giants , and Victories obtained over them , as like wonders , as may be . For , what did ever lying Greece feign of the proud attempts of their old giants , which these conspirators , the sons of the earth , have not dared to do against God , religion , faith , loyalty , and right , in all their dealings , with Your Royal Parents , Your self , and all Yours ? who heaping up more intains , upon mountains of lies , calumnies , and slanders ; reared up those bulwarks , from whence , with horrid violence , they have fought against the Gods. And what did they imagine done by Apollo , by Pallas , or Mars , to overthrow those monsters ; which our Montrose did not with like courage undertake , and success perform ? And now that having vanquished , he did not finally , and totally triumph over them ; we must impute it to the force of Your Fate , which would not permit the Genius of Your country , to owe so glorious a deliverance , to any others valour , but Your own . Nor indeed , seemed it convenient , that any other should thunder down Enceladus , with those other Titans , to Hell ; but the son of him , whose father those giants kept in chains . And then ( Great Sir ) when You intend those courses , to which the laws of God , and man oblige You ; the vindication of Your Father , and country , from that most savage bondage ; what can be more profitable , then to have Your eyes still on him , as the guide , and leader of Your way , who first of all discovered the counsels , plots , and treacheries of these traitors , and , as I may say , alone did show the way , how to lay their intolerable pride , and break their power , though grown very great , before it was perceived . For You shall find him a body , without a soul ; for being no more valiant in arms then wise in counsel and managing affairs , he advised • mously ( and would to God his counsel had prevailed ) to strangle that monster in the cradle , aswell as when it was grown strong , he had crushed it , but that Your growing virtue , was not to be defrauded , of so large a field , for purchasing renown . So that beside his singular valour , and military skill , You may find in him choice instructions of civil prudence , and politic wisdom ; which though ( through the sad fatality of the times ) they were but ill believed , yet such as may perhaps be useful to Your self , and after ages . And this is seen clearly , in that advice , to prevent betimes , the purposes and practises of these traitors , who had built their hope's upon the sweet disposition of our most Gracious King . His clemency to wickedest rebels , his trust in unworthy persons , his bounty to ingrate men ( for such most of them proved ) and great compassion on all ; more then on any strength , or power of their own : and to compass , and quell them , by the force of just arms ( since they had left no other way ) before their forces , with too long delay , should bulk , and grow too puissant and great . And if but this had been put in execution ( to say nothing of what else befell us ) our Britaine had never become the bloody stage of this unnatural war ; the glorious Temples of our Lord had never been so vilely , so wickedly prophaned ; our streets had never so swam with the innocent blood of our best Nobles , and Churchmen ; Your Royal Father , and Brother's had never been detained in so unworthy bonds ; Your Gracious Mother as a widow , and Your self , as a banished exile , had never been forced to live beyond seas ; though in and hospitable , and friendly , yet strange and foreign land . Who is't , that can such stories tell , And his dry eyes , with tears not swell ? And sing in all these exploits ( even above envy it self illustrious ) the Almighty most evidently kithed his own immediate hand ; so that to God alone the whole and solid glory is duly to be rendered : yet withal , who can but acknowledge , honour , admire , love , and set forth his worth , whom that Great God thought good to depute his instrument of so glorious achievements ? For , had our Montrose been only to grapple with open enemies in the fields , perhaps these might seem matters of lesser moment : That he was never pursued , with less then two , sometimes three armies at once , in the front , the rear , and flank ; and the least of those , for number of soldiers , choice of weapons , and abundance of all warlike provision , far exceeding all the forces that he could gather ; yet did he still free himself of them all , with equal resolution and success : That , he had never other Magazin of arms , powder , shot , or instruments of war , but what by force he took from his conquered enemies : That , in the space of one year , he obtained six complete victories , in set battles in the fields ; and chased the conspiring Lords quite out of all Scotland : That he endured the winter , in a most bitter frosty cold country and Climate , without Garrison , without tent , or hut , or booth ; for most part under the open Canopy of Heaven : That dry , he quenched his thrist with cold water , and that such , as from the melting snow came dropping down these mountains : That , without bred , or salt , with beife alone , and that often scarce , stale , and lean , he sustained hunger ; and all such other inconveniences of war . But his masterpiece , and hardest task was , to wrestle with those , who would seem the sharpest avengers of the wrongs done to the King ; and patrons of Majesty : with some of their dull , heavy , and stupid sloth ; others intolerable pride , some of their base couwardise , others their sordid avarice , some of their horrible perfidiousness . So that had not his constancy , and courage been undaunted ; and that loyal flame of zeal , which in his heart did burn towards his dearest , and most dread Sovereign , been unquenchable ; he had never been able to bear out , endure , resist , and rectify all those several unruly passion , and humours of men . For , by severe laws of military discipline , or other punishments ( as Commanders in chief are wont ) Montrose neither ought , nor could restrain his soldiers ; who received no pay ; but took up arms freely , of mere loyalty to their King , and goodwill to him their General : and who could easily have turned to the rebels side , so soon as ever they had but seemed to themselves to be provoked by the sleightest injury , or branded with the least note of disgrace ▪ men , for the most part , headstrong , turbulent , factious , and ready to revolt , upon the meanest irritation and pet . So that to preserve , at once his own authority , with the good liking of his soldiers , was the most difficult task in the world . Nor was there any thing that more violently exercised his wit and judgement , then that it behooved him to square out his counsels and actions , to the measure of other men's capacities , or at least , seem so to do . But he , that he might advance the Kings service , made no account of , and despised , as things far under him , all the hatred of his enemies , the envy of his emulous rivals , the backbiting of Court-sycophants , the complaints of his friends , the reproaches of the people , and ( which was of all others , most terrible , and most affrighted the superstitious minds of the simple multitude ) all the execrations ; and anathemas of their fiery and furious Ministers , Verily , He , a General worthy of a nobler command , and more happy times then these . And now ( most Excellent Prince ) this same Your Montrose , will plainly show that which I hope will most of all conduce to Your affairs : That all Your Scots have never made defection from their most Gracious Lord and King . Which , while some unjust enemies of our good name , too bitterly , and maliciously strive to rub upon us ; they are no more undeservedly injurious to us ; then indeed unfaithful , and treacherous to Your Royal Father , and Your self . Because , they go about only to render Your best and fastest friends , servants , and subject's suspected , and odious , and consequently useless unto You , and unprofitable : of whose loyalty , and valour , they themselves ( the worst of evil counsellors ) have just cause to be jealous ; lest by their means , it be brought to pass , that one day they may receive the just punishment of their treacheries . But , let no man unworthily upbraid us , that this reflects upon the most renowned nation of the English , as if we did neither think , nor speak aright of them : which is a crime that we abhor from our very souls . And to the contrary we do confess , applaud , magnify , and congratulate to their immortal glory , that many worthies of that nation have shown themselves most loyal , brave and gallant , and done rare , and glorious deeds for their King . Only this we entreat for , that with the same ingeniousness , and candour they would deal with us ; and not lay the guiltiness of any one faction , though never so powerful and prevailing , to the charge of the whole nation : nor do to others what they would not have done to themselves . Neither let them deny , but that there are , and have been Scotsmen , eminent personages , of every degree , and quality , who in these most disastruous times , have been ready and willing to shed their dearest blood , for asserting and vindicating the Royal Majesty , from the combinations of most pernicious rebels in both Kingdoms . And this is so evident , and clear ; that these Scots may ( without all boasting ) boldly affirm , That they , being hired with no pay , nor expecting other reward ; but merely moved by a good conscience , and faith , and piety towards their most Gracious Sovereign ; have suffered for him greater loss , according to the condition of their fortune's , and done the rebels greater harm , and obtained more noble victories over them , then others ; who , having drained and exhausted the Kings Exchequer , reduced him to that extreme penury , & want of all things , that in the end he was necessitated , to render up his Sacred Person into the hands of the conspirators . But , o how much better had it been ( in our weak judgments ) if it had pleased God , that his Majesty had retired himself to his own Scots : not those , who then were armed against him , for the English rebels ; out these loyal , trusty , faithful , and valiant ones , who fought for him under the conduct of Montrose . Assuredly , to those , who under the command but of his Lieutenant , and Leader of his Armies , durst so gallantly attempt , and did so happily atcheive , what in this book we have most faithfully recorded , nothing could have appeared too arduous , and difficult to compass , had they been encouraged , and animated with the presence of so dear a pledge . Nor can any doubt , unless he be altogether ignorant of the Scottish affairs , but that , if his Majesty had come among them , he would have easily drawn to his party , the hearts and affections of his native subject's ; who wholly inclined to him , of their own accord . But this being too to well known to the leaders of the rebellion , their special care was , that he should find no entrance to his native country , when he was in their hands , not fourtie miles distant from the borders of it . And truly the Scots in general , though ( chiefly at that time ) sorely oppressed with the heavy yoke of those usurping tyrants ; yet were they not afraid to curse , with bitter maledictions , the authors , and abetters of that shameful deed , of delivering up their King to the hands of the English . And even those , who formerly went along with the conspirators , in all things else , did openly , and not without danger of life , talk thus aloud : That , the single Kingdom of Scotland , had of old sufficed his Majesties ancestors , to maintain their just rights , and Royal dignities : That their own forefathers had been sufficiently able , to defend and fight for them , against their fiercest enemies , chiefly the English , of whom they had purchased many , great , and glorious triumphs , while they opposed them for their Kings . That , though they had warred often and long with sundries , as well inhabitants of the same Island , as of other countries' , with various success of uncertain war ; yet could they never be reducted to those straights , so slightly , and as it were perforce , to deliver up their Kings to the arbitrament of others . And that they should not now consent to do it the very ghosts of their father's ( they said ) the most sacred name , and Majesty of a King , their faith , allegiance , loyalty , reputation among stangers , example to be derived to posterity , all right , all laws of God and man did withstand . And moreover ( they added ) that it did plainly contradict , and fight against their own very covenant ; wherein they had invoked , as both witness and judge the immortal God , that they would maintain and defend their King , the safety of his person , his dignity , crown , and greatness , against all men living , with their lives and fortune's to their last breath . So that , beside those seditious and sacrilegious persons , ( who first raised that army by wicked means , and then god the command of it in their own hands , and with the dreadful terror thereof overawed their poor countrymen , unarmed , unprovided for war , without any head , or cheistaine ) believe it , most of all the Scots , desire no greater happiness then and occasion to testify their fidelity , obedience , and love to their drearest King , and to seal it with their blood . Nor is it to be questioned , but that they , being now so trampled on by most barbarous tyranny , would gladly return to their wonted subjection , under the just and easy government of their most Gracious Lord and King : so soon as ever Your Royal Father's most wished for presence , or Your own shall appear or shine in their Horrizon , like a blessed star , or influence from heaven . It behooveth You then ( most Gracious Sir ) to employ all the power and force You can , of body and mind , to succour Your country , and Father , both in extreme danger at this instant . All , to this end , pray , implore , expect Your help ; and promise theirs . This undertaking , by the law of God , and nature , and prerogative of birth , belongs unto You : and the eyes and thoughts , not only of Your own , but of all the world are upon You. And all men of honour , and honesty , heartily desire , that by Gods help , and with their best wishes , and assistance , You may go about this glorious enterprise , of restoring the Church of God , now sunk , and drowned in the stinking puddle of so many vile , and odious sects , to her former luster , and purity ; of reestablishing Your Father's throne and Kingdom ; of recovering Your countries wonted felicity , and happy conclusion of all , in a solid , lasting , and much desired order and peace . And so , in a good time , may that most ancient Kingdom of Europe , acknowledge , fear , love , and adore You , as their only highest Lord , and Sovereign : and so may this happiness befall from time , to time , world without end . To You and to Your offspring evermore , To them , and those , who from them shall be boar . Wherefore ( Most High and Mighty Prince ) vouchsafe to raise up Your Montrose in Your thoughts , to cherish him with Your countenance , to employ him in peace , or war , as a counselor , or Captain , a worthy , of whom ( I hope , and dare promise ) so Great a Prince shall never be ashamed . The first of October In the year of our Lord . 1647.