To his little flock , the Inhabitants of the Parish of S. Iohn the Evangelist in Watlingstreet in London , Georg • Walker their weak , but wellwishing • astor , commends this small token of his unfeigned lvoe , and hearty desire of their eternal happiness in the fruition of God ; by their fellowship and communion with him in the Lord Iesus Christ . BEloved in the Lord Christ , seeing now I have spent one half of my days in Preaching to you and your predecessors the Gospel of Christ , in expounding the sacred Scriptures , & in watching and labouring for the good of your souls , to wit , for the space of 29 years , until there is not one left alive of all those inhabitants , who were master's of families at my first coming to this place , and did all with one consent and voice make choice of me to be their Pastor : I hold it high time for me , to think of my departure from hence by putting off this earthly tabernacle , and of leaving you as your predecessors who were my first flock , have left me their Pastor behind them to feed you a succeeding generation . And lest my labour and pains , which I spent among them for the good of their souls should seem to die with them , and to be buried in their graves : I have thought good to renew the memory of them ; and to leave to the World some Monuments of that Doctrine I have Preached to them heretofore , as also to you of latter times , by Gods gracious assistance , though in great weakness of body , yet with a willing mind , and with a courage never daunted with any menacings and threatenings of potent adversaries , and malicious persecutors . The principal heads and true platform of which doctrine I have briefly comprised , and compendiously set forth in this short Dialogue , which contains in it the principles and foundations of Christian Religion and which I do here commend to you , as a testimony of that unfeigned love which I bear to you , and of my fervent desire of the salvation of your souls . I have already published , and have ready for the Press diverse larger Treatises , wherein are contained many particular doctrines which may be reduced to these principal heads ; and are there largely handled , plainly opened , and fully proved by Scriptures ; and the true use of them showed in such manner as they have been by my mouth publicly preached among you . But this golden Key , which is the quintessence of them all , will open Heaven unto you , if you can learn to use it aright . It is made of divine metal , even the Word of God revealed from Heaven , which is more pure than the most refined gold . It will teach you by a short and compendious way to know God , not only in the unity of Essence in his essential attributes ; In the Trinity of persons , and in his Works of Creation , and actual Providence overruling men fallen , and disposing it and all the evils which entered in by it , to his own glory , and the good of his Elect : but also in Iesus Christ , in whom to know him the only true God is eternal life , as our Saviour testifieth , Iohn 12. 3. Here Gods eternal Counsel and Decree of Predestination is discovered : Here you may learn the saving works of God , in and by Christ , God and man humbled in our nature . What love God hath showed in giving his Son for us ; and what Christ hath done and suffered for our Redemption . Here you may see what saving works God works by his Spirit , shed on his Elect through Christ , as Regeneration , Renovation , effectual calling , Union with Christ , Adoption , Communion of his ransom for Redemption , of his Righteousness for Justification , of his satisfaction for Remission of sins , and Reconciliation . And what Gods Spirit works in us and by us , as Mortification , Sanctification , Faith , Repentance and all holy graces ; and how and by what means he enables us to apply Christ and his benefits unto us , and to enjoy him and them for Salvation ; and also does beget and increase grace in his Elect , to wit , by the Word preached and herd , the Sacraments rightly administered and received , faithful and fervent Prayer , and the like . And how these work in the Elect to eternal life and blessedness , and are abused by wicked reprobates , to their own everlasting damnation and destruction . These things have I written to you Father's and Master's , that you may read them your selves , and commend them to your children and families ; I commend them to you Young men , that you may grow strong , and may overcome the wicked one . And I commend them to you little children ; that you may learn to know his name , and that your sins may be forgiven you for his names sake . If after so much preaching & teaching you be found ignorant & unprofitable , it is because the God of this World hath blinded your minds , lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ , who is the image of God , should shine unto you . This word will be to you the savour of death unto death , and this book shall witness for me against you , that you are wilfully ignorant and a lost people . But if , as I hope , and pray fervently and wish from my heart ; You do cheerfully receive the love of this Truth : then shall my Doctrine be to you the savour of life unto life , and we shall both together , I of my work and labour in preaching , and you of your reverence in hearing , and faithfulness in obeying the Word Preached , receive the reward of righteousness , which Christ hath purchased for them that believe and obey the Gospel , even the Crown of glory , which never fades . This brief sum of Christian Religion , with other more large Treatises I have written in my bonds , for the common benefit of you and others , to testify unto you , that the many waters of troubles and persecutions , which I suffer for the Truth sake , which I have preached unto you , cannot quench my love to you , nor my desire of your salvation , nor hinder me from labouring for your good . In all which I seek not yours , but you . And as I have preached the Gospel freely to you , never seeking any of your temporal goods , for my ministering of spiritual things plentifully unto you ; but spending beside my spirits , much substance over and above the revenues of my small Benefice , which from you I have received ; so I commend to you freely this and all other works and labours of my love , which if you do lovingly accept and use , and employ to your own advantage , I shall think my work in some good measure rewarded , and shall ever remain a faithful labourer for the good of your souls , according to the utmost of my power , and Your welwilling , though weak Pastor , GEO . WALKER .