To all that love the Lord IESUS CHRIST , especially , the godly and religious professors of the true faith in and about the City of London , grace and peace be multiplied . BEloved in the Lord , as your Christian love and charity hath abounded towards me in my bonds : So Christian affection binds me to return to you some tokens and testimonies of thankfulness . When I was sick and shut up so fast in close prison , that no liberty to visit me , nor any access unto me for my comforts could by any importunity , prayers , or petitions be obtained : then , next under God ( whose holy Word the sacred Scriptures in the Original tongues were allowed me for my solace and sole companions day and night ) your faithful and fervent prayers which you poured out to God in my behalf , were my chiefest outward help : & the virtue & power of them piercing through the double doors , locks and bolts , through which no keys of gold or silver could make way or entrance , did most sensibly reach unto me , and I had a lively feeling , and sweet fruition of the benefit and comfort of them . Also after the loosening of my strait bans , and imprisonment ; when , for the preserving of my life and recovery of health , I had obtained the favour to be only confined to the house of my brother , where my friends might visit me ; diverse of you did most charitably minister unto my necessities , and did ease me of the clog of cares for necessaries of this life , which otherwise would have pressed me down , as and unsupportable burden , and consumed me , being stripped of my maintenance and means of liveli hood , and the profits of my benefice , which were sequestered and given to others . This your Christian charity ▪ I do acknowledge with all thankfulness , and do mention in my daily prayers and thanksgiving to God ; firmly believing and persuading my self , that he will abundantly reward your work of love , and charity , who hath promised that whosoever shall give to drink unto one of his little ones which belong to Christ a cup of cold water only , verily he shall in no wise loose his reward , Mat. 10. 42. Neither have I in this time of my restraint neglected to use all diligence , and to do my best endeavour ( you also helping together by prayer for me ) that your charity bestowed on me might bring forth some manifest fruits to your selves and others ; and that by means thereof thanks and praise may be given by many to God on2 Cor. 1. 11 our behalf . For being freed by your bounty from worldly cares , I gave my self wholly to care for the things of God , and to spend my whole study and pains in some things which might be profitable to the people of God , especially in revising papers , and making fit for the press , and for public use , diverse of my labours and works which they whose judgement I do much reverence , have persuaded me to be more profitable ; and many of my most judicious hearers have importuned me to publish for the common benefit of many . The first , ( in the communicating whereof I have yielded to their desire ) is this small treatise which is as a preface to the rest , and indeed it was first delivered in some few sermons , as a preface to the exposition of the Gospel of Saint Iohn in the year 1616. It justly challengeth the first place , because the first receiving of men into the Church of God to be visible members of Christ , is by their baptism , which is the Sacrament of initiation , and their entering into covenant with God in Christ ; which Covenant is here in this treatise plainly described , and the agreement and difference showed between it , and the old Covenant of works , as also between the old and new Testament , and between the Law and the Gospel . The next in order is , the instruction of Christians in the Doctrine of Christ , which in another treatise is described , and set forth by the matter , form , fruit , affect , end , use , and ground of it . First delivered in diverse sermons upon Heb. 6. v. 11 , 12 , 13 , 14. and now made and formed into a Treatise fit to be published for the benefit of Gods Church , at the importunity , and request of diverse well affected hearers . The third is a treatise of God , who is the proper subject of the divine art of Theology , or sacred Divinity , in which the eternal and only true God is described , and set forth at large , out of the words of Moses , Deu. 6. 4. in the unity of his essence , and all his attributes , and essential properties , and in the sacred Trinity of persons ; all fully and clearly proved by plain Testimonies and demonstrations out of the sacred canonical Scriptures . The fourth is the doctrine of Gods internal operations , and eternal works , to wet his eternal counsels , purposes , and decrees , concerning the last and utmost end of all reasonable creatures Men and Angels , and concerning the way and means by which they are brought to their last end , some to eternal life and blessedness , and some to eternal damnation , woe and misery . The fifth is the doctrine of Gods external works , and outward operations ; which are first generally laid open and proved out of several texts of holy Scriptures ▪ and afterwards divided into several heads . The first is the great work of creation , fully and plainly described out of the first and second Chap. of the book of Genesis . To which is joined a treatise of Gods actual providence by which he does order and dispose all things created , and the actions and motions of them to his own glory , and the eternal salvation and blessedness of his elect . The sixth is the fallen and corruption of mankind , with all the evils which thereby entered into the world ; fully and plainly described out of Gen. cap . 3. The seventh is the institution of the Sabbath on the seventh day of the world , on which day Christ was promised : and by the promise of Christ which was the greatest blessing given and revealed to the father's in the old testament , that day came to be the most blessed day of the week , and was sanctified by God to be the weekly Sabbath , until by the full exhibition of Christ a perfect redeemer in his resurrection on the first day of the week , that first day became a more blessed day , and by Christ the Lord of the Sabbath ▪ was sanctified , and had the honour of the weekly Sabbath transferred unto it , and is to be observed of Christians for their holy day of rest , until they come to the eternal rest in heaven . These several Treatises I have in this time of my restraint made fit for the press , & the public view of the world , and here I offer them up to God , as a sacrifice of thanksgiving for his bounty extended to me , by you his instruments , by whose charity my necessities have been supplied , the burden of worldly care removed from my shoulders , and I have been enabled and encouraged to perform these works with cheerfulness . If with you , ( to whom I tender them as testimonies of my love , and tokens of my thankful heart ) they find acceptation , and prove profitable to the Church and people of God , I shall think my vows performed , my desires in some good measure obtained , and the best recompense of my pains which I expect and seek in this world , received ; And with strength , courage , alacrity , and cheerfulness shall proceed in the opening , and unfolding of the rest of Gods great works of wisdom , power , goodness and mercy , which concern the restauration of mankind corrupted ; by which the elect are gathered unto God in Christ , lifted up out of their woeful wretched and miserable condition to the state of grace in this life , and in the end exalted to the blessed state of glory . As namely the works which belong to redemption , which God hath wrought only by Iesus Christ ; And the works which belong to the application of redemption , which God works in his elect by the holy Ghost shed on them abundantly through Iesus Christ in their new birth , and spiritual regeneration ; as their effectual vocation , adoption , justification , sanctification , and glorification , Diverse of which I have in my course of preaching , opened and unfolded out of several texts of holy Scripture , as occasion hath heretofore been offered ; and if God be pleased to continue life , health , and liberty , they may be continued into several treatises in that order and method which I have in the first beginning , and entrance into the body of sacred divinity propounded , in the treatise of God , Deut. 6. 4 , For the accomplishing of these works by the good will and pleasure of God , I do in the words of the Apostle exhort and beseech you , Ephes. 6 18 Col. 4. 2. to continue in prayer , and to watch in the same with thanksgiving , praying always with all prayer andAct . 20. 32 supplication in the spirit , and watching thereunto with all perseverance , & supplication for all Saints , withal praying for us his Ministers , that God would open unto us a door of utterance , that we may open our mouths boldly to speak as we ought , and to make known the mystery of the Gospel . And now , Brothers , I commend you to God , and to the word of his grace , which is able to built you up , and to give you and inheritance , among all them which are sanctified . George Walker .