To the most High and Illustrious Charles Prince of GREAT BRITAIN . SIR , YOu set back the Clock of my age and make it dayspring , when it is passed the mid noon of my life . I court my fancy in my observations of you . My first Love , my first Master , your Uncle Prince Henry , whose name is , and ever must be sacred to Mars and the Muses , whose memory is still precious to the World , justly was the Rival and Competitor to Honour , with your glorious Grandsier Henry the Great , of France the greatest . In you deer Sir I find the Character of them both , as if you were sole heir to both ; and it joys my Soul to see it . I had the Honour to gird the first sword about you , with this wish , that you might use it in peace , like our Northern Solomon King Iames , and drawn , as that Boanerges the son of Thunder , the glory of France , your Grandfather . When your Father ( whose goodness makes him glorious ) shall be gathered to his Father's , his Titles must as your Birthright descend on you ; among the rest that which is 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , Defender of the faith . This , as it is well worthy observation , was given by him who they say could not err in Cathedra , plenario Consistorio & pleno Concilio , to him who as some of his Successors say even in that gave him the lie , who gave him the title ; this true it and unkind requital , but there was Digitus Dei in it , for it was like the selling of Ioseph into Egypt , faelix scelus in eventu , guided by that hand which cannot err . It was a work of great and high daring , a voyage wherein many of his Predecessors had suffered shipwreck , and Sir Walter Rawleigh observes the work suited the man , and the man was made for the work : as Nebuchadonezar was for Tyre . Sure it is strange that out of the ruins of good works faith should spring , & disorder set all the Church in order , Said Deus est qui fecit , & est mirum in occulis nostris . Sir , the Title is the most glorious your Royal father hath , and his Second is , that he is the best Friend living . It was a promise of the Prophets , that Kings should be Nursing Father's , and Queens Nursing Mother's to the Church . And believe me Sir , the words are Emphatical , for the Father's wisdom and power should provide for the child ad extra , the mother's care ad intra ; The father's is and should be protegendo , instruendo , promovendo , corrigendo ; The mother's in her Economics pro victu & amictu , Necessaries and Decency , and all with a ▪ Nurse's affection . And I am so much Irish , that as they love , the Children the Nurse , and the Children their Nurse's , and foster brother's as much or more then their own : such mutual love wish I betwixt the Prince and the Church , and as that habit is acquired partly , and partly infused , So may God infuse that into your heart , and by many mutual reciprocal actions may it become habitual . So shall the Church be happy in future , and you shall be glorious in your timely reign , and blessed in your Succession , as your Father is in you , and the Prayers of the Church attracted as the Due and Exhalations , by the glory and heat of the Sun above , shall be returned in rich showers of blessing upon you and yours . Poets are Prophets , or at least would be ; If I be one this is my prophecy : Your name's no stranger to the Imperial seat , Our turn comes next , we must have Charles the Great . Your highnesses most humble servant , FRANCIS WORTLEY .