To the Bishops of ENGLAND . O , that your visards were unmasked , that your ways might be discovered , that the state might see your aim , whereas now it is so much disturbed to rove to find out your seducements by conjectures ! Now you are a great advancer of the Chair of Room , and by and by a child of our Church , and in difficult and unsettled times betwixt both , and stand out for neither . And sure Room scarce dare trust you , lest you will not leave us , and we are fearful , lest you will fly to them , your own consciences can testify that you affect both , yet are you entire to neither , give me leave to speak plainly , because you are firm to neither , you are troublesome to both . To be too zealous in a pretended good work is ill , and so is it to fit still and be satisfied with ignorance , but worst of all to know both , and he firm to neither , will you still abide among us , and yet not be of us , and will you still cast your eyes on Room , and yet ahide with us , are you ignorant , or unconstant ; that you still stand on doubts , know your selves , that we may know you : either abide with us with whom you speak , and cut your wings , or else betake you to your wings , and speak at Room , and not so trouble us both . Either speak to us in the light , or abide with them who work in the dark . Remember death , and let the thought thereof cause your wavering to cease , and be firm in your resolutions . Will you not yet resolve ? If you mean to choose , when shall it be , why not now , let your learning discover to you the dangers of delay , it makes you miserable in what you want , & doubtful in what you have , and trouble us to know what you are : why will you look to heaven with one eye , and on Romes pomp with the other ? God calls you if you will stand for him : then take a resolution , to cast this Jezebell out of the Windows of our Churches , this Whore of Room that hath thus advanced her pride , & bewitched you , is their not just cause for what I cry ? Yet if you will still remain unconstant , who shall make you firm ? If you love to stagger , yet acquaint us why you wi • thus be unconstant ? Surely you waver , because you speak not plainly to us , your words are one thing and your aim another . Methinks I see your silence with a blush to answer this conjecture , as if thereby you granted , this to be the cause ? Are you offended ? I am grieved , and have I not cause , since civil jars have been by you so lamentable : will nothing please you but the glory of your own partaking , and the quietness of your own full-bellied peace ? Think you to find more glory in them then in our Churches , we have one Christ ; labour not then for those who divide his Garments : nay , his very body and blood . If you will be to us like Barnabas to Paul , yet be not to us like Simon Magus to Peter . Other Churches have complained of these distractions as well as we ; yet our greatest grievance is in your unsettledness . Think you the glory of Room to be so famous for you , among whom are several hundreds of Contrarieties among her self , which will distract you more then you expect , though their Dissensions are smothered by their subtleties ; have not you learned of them to fight closely within doors , without noise , which endangered , I had almost said begun frays in the field ? Surely the more you labour for their policy , the more you run with them into want of Peace , and if you be not either partial , or incredulous , you may easily perceive the mischief of their secret Differences . Will you Rule the Church alone ? alas ! how full is such rule of contradiction and purposes repugnant to Christ her head ! If you alone lay claim to the Church as yours ; why do you chide with her best members , & disturb them ; why do you fight with your self ; will you look for Peace , and not from GOD ; indeed much pomp , and glory Romes Churches sons receive , but it is better to be content with what estate Christ bequeathes to his Church . Will you rather let your Soul , and the Souls of all your Flocks want their food , then you be taken from your Palaces ? Is nothing worth your respect but earthly peace ? But if you love your peace and glory so dearly that you will not leave it ; take your peace and pomp to your selves ; let us have truth : yet if it may be Peace too ; If you love your safety , and the Churches , seek rather grounds whereon to rest , then excuses for your abided in trouble , seek Peace and follow Truth , forsake Room , and follow CHRIST : except you will rather abide in earthly pomp then come to Christ . Yours , if you Christs , H. W.