TO All the Right Honourable , and Right Worthy of all Honour ; together with the Right Worshipful , and Right Worthy , the Members of the High , and Honourable Court of PARLIAMENT . In especial , In regard of a more especial Engagement , To the Right Worshipful Sir Edward Deering Knight , and Baronet ; and Sir Thomas Middleton , Knight , his very noble Friends ; and Sir Thomas Barington , Sir William Massam , and Sir Martin Lumley , Knights , and Baronets ; Of , and for the County of Essex . RIght Honourable , Right Worshipful , and Religious Senators ; I know , that to the aid , and furtherance of some great enterprise , and design , there is more required then Wishes and Desires ; and therefore ( as to the building of the Lords House , every one brought some thing , according to his ability , so ) to the Prosperous success , and happy issue , of this long desired Parliament , there is required not only a Religious care , and endeavour in your Honours ; but also , that we ( whose causes you are pleased to agitate , and manage , and whose grievances you take into your grave considerations ) should afford unto your Honours that furtherance , and assistance , which lies in our power ; that is , both in zealous , and fervent calling upon God for you , and in a modest , and humble informing , and advising of you . The secious Animadversion hereof , emboldened your humble Orator , to present this Petition ( for it is no other ) unto your Honours , for Unity , and Unanimity in Religion among yourselves , considering with my self , the necessity , and excellency of the Theam , ( for the furtherance of your Christian consultations , and deep designs ) and that none as yet have tendered any Treatise unto your Honours of this Subject . As fair faces need no Painting , nor good Wine a gaudy Bush ; So a rare and transcendent Subject , needs no poor Oratory to praise it , nor affected Language to set it forth . And therefore , I will not make any Encomions in commendation of that religious Amity and Unity , which should shine , and show forth it self , in your Honours ; but only give you a short hint of the necessity , and excellency thereof , and then refer your Honours to the pious consideration of the Treatise Andreas Alciatus , Lib. Emblem . page . 144. it self . And Emblematist , by and acute Emblem endeavours to show , the excellency of Unity , Unanimity , and mutual accord , and aid , in those who are joined in Commission together , for any public good . His Impress , or Emblem is , Diomedes , and Ulisses , the two Gretian Worthies ; The former whereof be supposeth to be wise , politic , and prudent , able to advice , counsel , contrive , and manage a War ; and the latter strong , courageous , and bold , yea able to achieve any feazible enterprise . His word , or Motto is , Unum nihil , duos plurimum posse , One is as good as none , but two can do much . The declaration , and amplification of the Emblem is expressed in these verses : Viz. Viribus hic praestat , hic pollet acumine mentis , Nec tamen alterius non eget alter , open Cum duo conjuncti veniunt victoria certa est . That is , When one is strong , the other very wise , To help each other , they must not despise . For when both strength , and wit , conjoined are , Then crowned victory does follow war . I have so amply , amplified , and applied this Emblem , in this Discursive Petition presented to your Honours pernsall , that I will wholly here balk the application thereof . That the Treatise dedicated unto your Honours , might carry the more weight , the Dedicator being of small worth ; I have not stolen a Coal from the Altar , but borrowed a sentence from Haven , ( of Him , who spoke nothing but Golden Sentences , and unto whom Kings , Princes , Peers , and the mightiest Monarchs must stoop ) that your Honours may look upon , and accept of this Present , as a Stem sprung from that Stock , ( though it be very rough hewn ) as and explication of our Saviours own prayer , for your prosperous Proceedings , ( although not unfolded with • … hat curious art , that it deserves ) as a sacred , saving , and necessary truth , ( though folded up in course cloth ) and as a Message sent unto your Honours from Heaven , from the King thereof , though by a most mean Messenger , and unworthy servant of his . And then he shall think himself happy ( in being and instrument of Peace , Love , Unity , and Concord , unto your Honours ) who will always pray for your Persons , and proceedings , and all that concerns you , and acknowledge himself ever , Your Honours most humble , and observant , Orator , RICH . WARD .