TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL SERJEANT WILD ; J. H. wishes grace and peace in CHRIST JESUS . WORTHY PATRIOT , THe life we live we live in God , happy is the improvement of that life that is lift up to him , and to his ways . It is a glory ( above the crown ) of the worthy Kings of Judah , that they prepared their hearts to seek the Lord . What's the life of man without comfort ? And what greater comfort does man enjoy in life , but his communion with God ? The life of the best is but a pilgrimage ; and a life of service lies upon every man ; though the raze be short , employment attends it ; if a servant neglect his Lords affairs , he had the honour to be called a servant , but lost his glory for casting by his industry ; how sweet is their peace that know their Lords command , and cheerfully take up his charge ? Every man is at work , but many mistake their Master's business , they do their own , and put his name upon it . Servants that love to walk in the dark , are unfit to attend npon the Lord of light ; light and darkness have nocommunion . This present age affords us full testimony : how do the deeds of darkness vanish , that passed without control not long ago , which in this time of trial will not endure the touchstone ? Mens confidence of their actions is no ground of their justice , the Judge will search him out that seems just in his own cause , nor must the Judges , or those that assist them in advancing Justice , be discouraged , though the impeached challenge them of unjust proceeding . Who shall be innocent , if the condemneds test may be sufficient to fix a crime ? Sir , I reckon it a part of your honour , that God hath conferred upon you , to be and instrument to bring so great and offender to justice , rather then to be ensnared by him . You served our Lord Christ in helping to subdue a mountain of ambition ; you have suffered for your love and endeavour , to establish a throne for Christ , and a throne for the King in righteousness : your labour of love will not be forgotten ; your work is with your God , and your reward in the Lords hand . Go on and prosper , and God that hath made the evil bow before the good , and the wicked at the gates of the righteous , make you every day more successful . If this ensuing Subject may yield any refreshing to your spirit , or provoke the church of Christ to exalt their Lords glory , and sanctify his glorious Name that hath delivered us from so great a burden ; my spirit hath rest ; rejoicing in the God of our salvation ; waiting for further manifestation of greater consolation . The God of peace fill you with comfort in believing , and preserve you to his heavenly Kingdom . Your Worships in all service of love ;