TO THE ILLUSTRIOUS AND MIGHTY LORDS , THE STAES of Zeland . I Purpose not ( Honourable LORDS ) to insinuate my self , or my endeavours into your Favour , by fine words , and feigned commendations of your Virtues . For I do not think it will be acceptable unto wise men , who both suspect that Art , and account it base ; Though of my self I am not apt to flatter , yet the very name of Conscience that is set before this Treatise , charges me to avoid it . Many indifferent good Books are in the very beginning disgraced by it . I will only show the true cause , by which I was persuaded ( though my name perhaps be more obscure , then to be known unto you ) to set down your Name in the forefront of this Treatise . It is reported over all places near hand , that the Doctrine according to Godliness , is both more Practically Preached by the Pastor's , and more put in practice by the Hearers in your Churches , then yet hath been marked in many others , though they hold the same Doctrine . That worthy Servant of the Lord , Master WILLIAM TEELING , who was by this means in great admiration , and famous throughout all the Low-Countrey Churches , ( to say nothing of others , that both have , and do take the same course ) took such painful pains this way , both publicly and privately , by word and writing , that it may be truly said , The zeal of Gods house hath eaten him up : whereby also ( Envy the follower of such a Virtue , being now overcome ) he hath obtained that Crown , which God hath prepared for those that have instructed many unto righteousness . Because I hope this Treatise will more excite to this kind of study , it being also desired by many , who were not to be neglected . Its fittest it should be sent , where it may find those running this raze , who will be easily put on , and where others also may take example of that course that is taught here . This being the true cause of the Dedication , gives me cause to hope , that this intention and service will not be unacceptable unto you . This only remains ( Noble Lords ) The good and great God in Christ , vouchsafe to bless you more and more , and your Churches , with a true faith , a good Conscience , and perfect Happiness . Your Honours most addicted W. Ames .