TO MY MUCH HONOURED , THE two virtuous young Gentlewomen , Mris Elionor Carent , and Mris Elionor War , Cousin Germanes in the flesh , Concordants in the Spirit , and Co-inhabitants under the domestic government of the Right Worshipful , and truly religious Matron Mris Amy Long widow , of Steeple Ashton , in the County of Wilts , my singular good friends , and neighbours , peace of conscience , and joy in the Holy Ghost , be multiplied here in this life , and endless glory be assured hereafter , in the life to come . Sweet Lady , AS I desire not to flatter your apparent youthful , and future hopeful deserts , both for your Christian profession , and godly conversation : so for your farther encouragement herein , I fear not to publish to the World ( under your only protection & countenance ) this ensuing Treatise , wherein my aim is only at Gods Glory , the Churches good , and your acceptance . It hath in a Manuscript long lyen by me , as a dead letter , without any vulgar use ; but now having the approbation of some judicious Divines my Friends and Acquaintance , I am resolved ( maugre all the malice of Belial's Brats , who fancy nothing but to satiate themselves with terrene pleasures and profits ) to propose it to the reading & perusing of all that cheerfully endeavour to know the Lord Iesus , and him crucified , to the salvation of their souls ; in comparison whereof the whole World , & all things therein cannot afford the least parallel . Let me make so bold with you ( lovely Mris Carent ) as to call to your remembrance , how Solomon ( unto whom your Sex is much beholding for divine instructions ) concludes his Proverbs ; Favour is deceitful , and beauty is vanity , but the woman that fears the Lord , she shall be praised : wherein ( be it spoken in verity without any obsequiousness ) you have exceeded many of your Sex , and Age , but yet I know that you acknowledge , Jer. 32.40 . that it is the Lord only that hath put this fear in your heart , and I pray God continue it unto the end ; Psal. 35.18 . then shall his eyes be always upon you , Ps. 34.9 . and nothing shall be wanting unto you , to make you complete in the whole duty of man , Eccl. 12.13 . & then shall you be incomparably more rare and precious in the sighed of God in respect of your soul , then you are now fair , and comely in the eyes of man in regard of your body . I doubt not , but you well consider , what and invaluable thing it is to be one of the Lords Jewels ; as all his children are termed , Mal. 3.17 . whereas others are compared to the loathsomest of all vessels , Hos. 8.8 . wherein there is no pleasure . Muster up , I pray you , all the devout women , from Sarah the mother of the faithful , Heb. 11.11 . to the Elect Lady , to whom S. John dedicated his second Epistle , and you shall find a whole Army to animate you in the Lords battle , and receive in the end with them the Salary of your victory , 2 Tim. 4.7 . Once more , meditate upon the Honourable Prerogatives Gods children have : for their nobleness they are the Sons of God ; for their education , they are the Scholars of Christ ; for their protection , the Angels are their servants ; for their calling , they are Saints ; for their riches , it is Christ , and with him all things else ; for their life , it is spiritual , for their death , it is precious in Gods own sighed , and their birthday to all felicity . Now to conclude ; that you are already of this Tribe , I am thoroughly persuaded , earnestly imploring the highest Mercy Seat , that you may so persist to the end . In the interim , let me beseech you diligently to read this your own Book , and the Lord give his Blessing , that you may increase your knowledge of him , your faith in him , your delight to serve him , and your fear to offend him ; which the Almighty granting , and you my misprisions pardoning , you have nobly gratified the poor endeavours of Your real and affectionate friend SAMUEL WHITE . Polsholt , the first Month of this hopeful year . 1641.