To the Honourable Houſe of Commons Aſſembled in PARLIAMENT . WHat I had to ſay unto you , I expreſſed my ſelf at large , in that which I now preſent you , with ſome fillings , which the time then permitted not to tender : I ſhall now only add a word of excuſe , and caution . Excuſe I muſt , Becauſe all that ſpeak to you do ſo ; my ſelf much rather ; Becauſe hearing of this ſervice , but ſome ten days before the Faſt , in the amid of ſorrow for the loss of and only parent ; I could not with that freedom of ſpirit , as I ſhould , attend this business . But your piety hath I hope herein supplied my deficiency , in receiving the matter with all readiness of mind ; leaving the manner of handling to thoſe weak stomachs that cannot ſavour wholeſome food , without a great deal of curioſity in the dreſſing , Care , and Cleanlyneſſe , and Concoction we commend : The work of the Lord is not to be done negligently ; Too much diligence we decline ; for that argues suspicion , either of the food , or of the gueſt . We would have your faith and godly affection , ſtand , not in the wisdom of words , but in the power of God . I muſt alſo caution , Touching thoſe words in the entrance of my diſcourſe , [ In a settled Church , the Miniſtry is to be puclikely admitted to that employment . ] I would not have it underſtood as and approbation either of any unlawful office , or undue ordination in any particular Church ; but in general of all settled Churches . And that firſt in reſpect of order , That every man be not at his own diſpoſing , but abide in that calling , whereunto God by the ordinance of man ſhall design • im . 2. Of advantage to his Miniſtry ; that he may have more boldness with them , who have acknowledged him as appointed to that employment . Which call ( as I conceive ) lies chiefly in theſe particulars . 1. The inward ability , and upright intention of the heart , to do Chriſt ſervice in that employment . 2. In the public approbation of ſuch abilities after trial had , by the Church , both Miniſtry and people of God , that are indeed able to diſcern . 3. A special call by ſome particular people to be their officer in that kind ( or and after approbation from them ) or elſe a more general commiſſion from the Church , to a more universal employment that way ; ſuch as was the ſending of Paul and Barnabas , by the Church of Antioch • Act. 13. . All which is to be underſtood eſpecially of the adminiſtration of the Sacraments and diſcipline : For , as for preaching , it is a more common work ; which yet no man is to do to the scandal of the Church wherein he lives , nor ordinarily without calling thereunto , if it be done in a public way . Which calling ( as other Church affairs , ) that we may have more agreeable to primitive purity ; we implore your aſſiſtance ; as you can not effectually obtain the vigour of yours , without our ſervice . Magiſtracy and Miniſtry , though they be not immediate relatives , yet do see mutuo ponere & tollere . So , as you are Gods hands to us ; ſhall we labour to be his mouth to you , and for you Iſai . 45.17 .. To you ; that no Council deviſed againſt you , ſhall ſtand , ſo long as you make the advancing of This man , the Lord Chriſt , your aim : No weapon framed againſt you ſhall proſper Iſai . 9.6 .. And for you ; That having ſuch promiſes , you faint not , but proceed to the finiſhing of the work with power : and be like your Maſter , the great and wonderful Councillor and Prince of peace Iſai . 9.6 . , who when he begins , does uſe alſo to make and end Iſai . 66.9 . : That you may not be weary of welldoing , for in due time you ſhall reap if you faint not Gal. 6.9 .. So prays Your meaneſt ſervant In the Lords work . John Ellis , Junior .