To the Chriſtian and courteous Reader . IT cannot be unknown to any , except ſuch as are ignorant of Satans devices , and altogether ſtrangers to the Hiſtories of former times , that when ▪ the Church comes out of Idolatry , and out of bitter ſervitude and grievous preſſures of conſcience , all her ſtorms are not over her head , but ſhe begins to be aſſaulted and afflicted more then before with hereſies , schisms , and homebred diſturbances . Which through the manifold wisdom and overruling diſpenſation of God , who works all things according to the counſel of his will , is Englands lot this day , that this may be to thoſe in whom the Lord hath no pleaſure , a ſtone of ſtumbling , and a rock of offence , that they may go and fallen backward , and be broken ; & ſnared , and taken : that others , who are approved , may be made manifeſt ; yea , that many may be purified , and tried , and made white ; and that in the iſſue God may have the greater glory in making a sovereign remedy out of poisonful Ingredients , and his people may ſay , bleſſed be the Lord God of Iſrael who only does wondrous things . But now will the Sectaries be contented ( as Chriſts witneſſes in former times were ) to be examined and judged according to the word of God , and if they be found to be what they are accuſed to be , then to ſuffer accordingly ? Nay , if ſo , they fear they ſhall run too great a hazard . Therefore they cry out for toleration and liberty of conſcience , hereby going about not only themſelves to fiſh in troubled waters , but to improve at once the manifold advantages of ſympathiſing with the principles of the moſt part of men amongſt us ; for as it is a common plea and bound of union among all heretics and ſectaries , how many ſoever their diviſions and ſubdiviſions be among themſelves ; See thee Review of the Covenant . yea , they give ( in this ) the right hand of fellowſhip to the Prelatical ▪ and malignant party , for they alſo put in for liberty of conſcience : and as carnal and profane men deſire nothing more then that they may not be compelled to any religious duty , but permitted to do what ſeem good in their own eyes . So liberty of conſcience is a ſweet and taking word among the less diſcerning ſort of godly people , newly come out of the houſe of bondage , out of the popiſh and Prelatical tyranny ; I ſay the less diſcerning ſort , becauſe thoſe of the godly who have their ſenſes exerciſed to diſcern good and evil , know that liberty of heresy and schism is no part of the liberty of conſcience which Chriſt hath purchaſed to us at ſo dear a rate . But is there no golden hook and taking bait for the Magiſtrate ? yes ſure ; for his part he is told that he may puniſh any breach of peace or civil juſtice , or a trespass againſt the State and againſt civil authority , but yet not put forth his power againſt any man for heresy or schism , being matters of religion and of conſcience . As if both Politicians and Divines had been in a great error when they ſaid that the end and uſe of Magiſtracy is to make bonum hominem , as well as bonum civem , a good man as well as a good commonwealths man . Shall I add further , that all who wiſh well to the public from principles either of religion or policy , want not here their own tentations , persuading to a toleration of ſectaries , in regard of the neceſſity of and union againſt the common adverſary , and the great hazard , if not certain ruin , of the cauſe , by our own ruptures ? Under theſe fair colours and handſome pretexts do ſectaries infuſe their poison , I mean their pernicious , God-provoking , Truth-defacing , Church ruinating , & State-ſhaking toleration . The plain engliſh of the queſtion is this : whither the Chriſtian Magiſtrate be keeper of both Tables : whither he ought to suppress his own enemies , but not Gods enemies , and preſerve his own ordinances , but not Chriſts Ordinances from violation . Whither the troublers of Iſrael may be troubled . Whither the wild boars and beaſts of the foreſt muſt have leave to break down the hedges of the Lords vineyard ; and whither ravening wolves in ſheeps clothing muſt be permitted to converſe freely in the flock of Chriſt . Whither after the black Devil of Idolatry and tyranny is trod under our feet , a white Devil of heresy and schism , under the name of tender conſciences , muſt be admitted to walk up and down among us . Whither not only pious and peaceable men , ( whom I ſhall never conſent to perſecute ) but thoſe alſo who are as a peſtilence ▪ or a Gangrene in the body of Chriſt , men of corrupt minds and turbulent ſpirits , who draw factions after them , make a breach and rend in Iſrael , reſiſt the truth and reformation of religion , ſpread abroad all the ways they can their pernicious errors , and by no other means can be reduced ; whither thoſe alſo ought to be ſpared and let alone . I have endeavoured in this following diſcourſe to vindicate the lawful , yea neceſſary uſe of the coercive power of the Chriſtian Magiſtrate in ſuppreſsing and puniſhing heretics and ſectaries , according as the degree of their offence and of the Churches danger shall require : Which when I had done , there came to my hands a book called The ſtorming of Antichriſt . Indeed , The recruiting of Antichriſt , and the ſtorming of Zion , ( if ſo be that I may anabaptize and Anabaptiſts book ) Take one paſſage for inſtance , pa . 25. And for Papiſts , says he , though they are leaſt to be born of all others , becauſe of the uncertainty of their keeping faith with Heretics , as they call us , and becauſe they may be abſolved of ſecurements that can ariſe from the juſt ſolemn oaths , and becauſe of their cruelty againſt the Proteſtants in diverse Countries where they get the upper hand , and becauſe they are professed Idolaters , yet may they be born with ( as I ſuppoſe with ſubmiſsion to better judgments ) in Proteſtant government , in point of religion , becauſe we have no command to root out any for conſcience , etc. Why then ? is this to ſtorm Antichriſt ? or is it not rather a ſtorming of this party , in the prevailing whereof God will have far more glory then in the prevailing of the Popiſh and Prelatical party , as himſelf speaks , pa . 34. And if he will ſtorm , ſure ſome of his Ladders are too ſhort . If any one rail againſt Chriſt ( says he , p. 23. ) or deny the Scriptures to be his word , or affirm the Epiſtles to be only letters written to particular Churches , and no rule for us , and ſo unſettle our faith , this I take may be puniſhed by the Magiſtrate , becauſe all or moſt Nations in the world do it . That all the Nations ▪ in the world do puniſh for theſe things , I am yet to learn : and thoſe that do , do they not alſo puniſh men for other ways of unsettling the grounds of faith beside theſe ? The declining of ſome of the Epiſtles as being letters written upon particular occaſions , and no rule for us , is and error which hath been pretended to be no less conſcientious then thoſe errors which now he will have indulged . Laſtly , if he would needs ſtorm , why would be not make ſome new breach ? I find no material arguments in him for liberty of conſcience , but what I found before in the bloody Tenent , the compaſſionate Samaritane , and M. S. to A. S. ſo that my enſuing anſwers to them ſhall ſerve his turn . And now Reader buy the truth , and fell it not . Search for knowledge as for hid treaſures . If thou readeſt with a unprejudiced mind , I dare promiſe thee through Gods bleſsing a ſatisfied mind .