To the Right Honourable the Lords of the Council , and others His MAJESTIES Commiſſioners for the Government of the City of OXFORD , Lionell Gatford wishes increaſe of honour , and the bleſſing of Peace , Temporal and Eternal . BEing unjuſtly forced from that Cure , whereunto God had called me , as the moſt of my ▪ Profeſsion are , that will not turn Mountebanks and poison the People ) and not ſuffered ▪ upon His Majeſties gracious Exchange , ( after ſeaventeene months impriſonment in London , without any cauſe shown in all that time ) either to return to that Care or to practice any where elſe with ſafety ( though licenſed for all parts of this Kingdom ) I was neceſſitated to repair to this City made happy in the amid of misery's by your Vigilancy & Gods bleſſing thereupon . I had not been long here , but I ſaw and partook ( praised be the Lord for it ) of one of the greateſt mercies ( let others valve it as they pleaſe ) that ever this City was bleſſed with : A vaſt , and in their own opinion , and invincible Army ſurrounded us,2 King 18. and 19. as sometime the Aſſyrians did Jeruſalem : Their Tartaris , their Rabſariſes and their Rabſakehs opened their mouths wide both againſt our religious Hezekiah , and againſt all his loyal Subject's then attending his ſacred Perſon , thinking ( as their own bloody Pamphlets did intimate ) inſtantly to have devoured them all . And without doubt , If the Lord himself had not been on our ſide . Pſal . 124. If the Lord himself had not been on our ſide , when thoſe men thus roſe up againſt us , they had ſwallowed us up quick when they were ſo wrathfully diſpleaſed at us : But bleſſed be the Lord , he did not give us up as a prey unto their teeth ; but put his hook in their noſe , 2 Kings 19 ▪ 28. and his bridle in their lips , and turned them back by the way , not by which they came , but by which they became the object of their Sovereign's tender mercy and compaſſionate pity , whom they then purſued with their Rebellious malice and merciless cruelty . This unſpeakable mercy of God to this City , or rather to this whole Nation , was attended upon ( whither for our unthankfulness , or for our other sins , or for both ! with that formidable judgement of Plague . Upon the increaſing and ſpreading whereof , obſerving , that your Honours , in your extraordinary care of this place , had commanded certain Physical directions in time of Plague to be publiſhed , I was encouraged to believe , that Hyper-phyſicall directions for ſuch a time could not want your patronage , And therefore finding none other of my calling , though far more able , to have prevented me , I preſumed to preſent you with theſe : Knowing withal , that without your help and aſſiſtance , both Physical and Hyper-phyſicall preſcripts , how excellent ſoever , will be but of little benefit or profit to the moſt of men ; all men being naturally prove to reject , at leaſt to neglect that advice which would do them moſt good : and unless the Magiſtrates make them know that they bear not the ſword in vain , but will proceed to ſevere correction where wholesome inſtructions are deſpiſed , the Divine and Physician both may preſcribe till they are weary , and all to no purpoſe . Numb . 16 ▪ 46. We read of and Aaron needing a calling upon from Moſes to do what belonged to him in the time of a Plague . Numb , 25. 8. But as the Plague may be ( and , for ought any man knows to the contrary , this Plague may be ſuch ) the Magiſtrates actual exerciſing their power in the execution of juſtice upon ſome provoking Offenders may be ſo neceſſarily required , that the raging contagion will not ceaſe without it . This I am confident of , and not without good grounds : That would your Honours be pleaſed but to revive the execution of ſome of your own Laws againſt that one horrid crying sin of ſwearing and blaſpheming Gods name , which ſo reigns in our ſtreets and houſes , the Plague of God would not rage ſo much in them , as now it does . Exod. 20. 7. The Lord ( says the Commandment ) will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain It's ſwearing ( says one of the Prophets ) that brings the flying roll of the curſe into men's houſes , Zach. 5. v. 3 , 4. and makes it to remain there , till it have conſumed both them and the very timber and ſtones thereof . And it's for ſwearing amongſt other foul crimes ( says another Prophet ) that the Land mourns . Hoſe 2 4 , v. 2 , 3. As therefore you tender particular men's perſons , that have jeoparded their lives , for you , as you regard the welfare of this City , wherein God hath preſerved you , and as you love this whole Land , wherein God hath highly honoured you , ſuffer not the ſacred Name of that gracious and glorious God , who hath wrought theſe and other infinite mercies for you , to be diſhonoured and profaned ſo as it is by curſed Oaths and blaſphemous Curſings . Let ſome sharp mulcts againſt Curſing and Swearing be duly inflicted and required , that if the dread of that Name do not terrify men from ſo abuſing it , yet the fear of that Power wherewith God hath entrusted you , and their own juſt puniſhment for diſregarding both , may make them afraid to uſe that Name in vain , which you have found by ſo often experiment not to be in vain to thoſe that honour and rely upon it : ſo ſhall your names be precious in Gods account , your friends and ſervants that fly hither for ſuccour be ſolaced and confirmed in their expectation thereof , your enemies mouths be ſtopped in one of their loudest clamours , and all both friends and foes , that viſit this City , be conſtrained to acknowledge , that the ſtreets and ordinary places of concourſe , under your Government are ſweeter and better kept , then the Churches and Pulpits under the Rebels Tyranny . Pardon me ( I humbly beſeech you ) for Pleading thus earneſtly in this cauſe . The King's , your Honours , and this whole Kingdoms hope's of deliverance from thoſe soar judgements , under which they ſtill groan , ( as well as thoſe miraculous deliverances that have been vouchſafed us ) depend wholly upon that great Name . And therefore if not my zeal to Gods glory , yet my loyalty to my Sovereign , my duty to your Honours , and my love to my Nation , may excuſe my boldness in minding you of a ſpeedy vindication of the honour of that Name . I know there are many other crimes amongſt us , that cry allowed for your more then ordinary care and diligence , zeal and courage , Hom. 3. and pop • Antioch . in chaſtening and correcting the daring actors of them : but ( as Chryſoſtome once-ſpake ) I conceive this to be the beſt way of correction , 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . to begin firſt with one part of the Law , and ſee that that be obſerved , and then to go on to the reſt . And with what part ſhould you begin firſt , if not with that , which is moſt tranſgreſſed , and ( if it be rightly conſidered ) eaſieſt to be amended : Ʋp , then in the name of God , and ſanctify the People by purging out from them this ſpreading sin of curſing and ſwearing ; Joſhus . 7. v. 13 and prove the Lord whither he will not , Malach. 3. 10. upon your baniſhing the Plague of God , and other raſh curſes and oaths out of men's mouths , baniſh that Judgement of the Plague it self and other Judgements from this City ; The forementioned Father was bold to engage his word & credit to the Citizens of Antioch , that upon their abſtaining from ſwearing God would free them from that great Calamity which was then upon them . 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , etc. I dare not undertake ſo far ; but it were well if you would pleaſe to make trial , whither God would do ſo much , or not . This you may be aſſured of , for you have Gods own word and promiſe for it , whither the Plague ſhall thereupon be removed from others dwellings or not , Hom 3. and Pop. Antioch . That love of yours to his name ſhall keep you and your own dwellings ſafe . Pſal . 69. 36. & Pſal . 91. As for your Honours obſerving theſe Directions your ſelves , it were too preſumptuous a thought in me to expect , that any advice of mine ſhould be harkened unto by you who have ſo many learned and renowned Doctors to conſult upon all occaſions : yet where you find that I speak home to the purpoſe and God himself speaks the ſame , though not for my ſake , yet for his , deign it the hearing , I and the following too , if you love your own ſafety . Howſoever if you ſhall but tolerate and approve theſe Directions ſo far , that others under your preſent charge , who cannot , many of them have access to thoſe that are more learned and better able to counsel them , or rather are afraid or aſhamed to appear to ſuch , how willing or ready ſoever to receive them , may by that your toleration and approbation ( the Reverend Doctors not diſſenting be fully ſatisfied , that there is nothing herein preſcribed , but what is good and wholeſome , and will , through Gods bleſſing , conduce much to their health and preſervation , this will be ample honour and encouragement to Your Honours moſt humbly devoted Servant L. G.