TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE Thomas Atkin , Lord Major of the Honourable City of LONDON . Right Honourable , BY a Note under your own hand , I was appointed to preach at Paul's Church on the ſeventeenth of November . The ſeventeenth of November is a day of ſo high account with me , that I durst not make any excuſe , though otherwiſe in way of excuſe , I might have pleaded my age , my weakness , and multitude of other employments : but the ſeventeenth of November , being ſuch a day as is ſet out to be in the following Sermon , ought to be had in perpetual remembrance . It may be that all have not that day in ſo high account as I have , and that if another had performed that duty , he would have overslipped it , without any mention made thereof . Length of time makes memorable matters to be forgotten ; and it is now above fourſcore and ſix years ſince that ſeventeenth of November . Therein England firſt received ſuch a bleſsing as never ought to ſlip out of the heart of and Engliſh man . That ſeventeenth of November was the day when unparalleled Queen Elizabeth firſt came to the Crown . through Gods bleſsing , I ſpent eight and twenty years of my days under her reign ; and I have oft bleſsed God that I was born , and ſo long brought up in that bleſsed time . I have been called in my younger years to perform public Scholastical duties on a ſeventeenth of November , and me thought , I never performed any more cheerfully . The very ſubject matter put life and ſpirit into me . Since I was called to the ministerial Function , I have many years on the ſeventeenth of November made the beſt remembrance that I could of that days bleſsing . Being by you called to the moſt public place of London , I could not , I durſt not pass over the mention of that bleſsing . I did the more willingly publiſh it to the view of all ſorts , that I may provoke others to be more mindful of that day . And to your Honour in special , I dedicate theſe my poor labours , becauſe you were the firſt mover thereunto . And now , my good Lord , having this occaſion in public to speak to you , give me leave , I beſeech you , to stir up your honourable mind unto ſuch faithful courſes , as , to the joy and benefit of many , you took , when you were Alderman of Farrington within . I have been now thirty ſeven years ( to the praiſe of Gods good Providence and mercy I speak it ) a Miniſter of Gods Word in a Precinct within that Ward : in which time , there have been ſundry several Aldermen . But ( to your praiſe , but not to the diſpraiſe of any of the reſt , I do here publicly attest it ) I never obſerved any more careful of the good of their charge , more inquiſitive after the ſame , more industrious in ſearching out diſorders to redress them , more pitiful over the poor , more solicitous about ſuch as were infected with the sickness , and that which ſets the crown upon all , more pious in preventing all manner of profaneness on the Lords Days , and procuring people ( ſo far as in you lay ) to obſerve the holy Ordinances thereof . Right honourable , the Lord hath now advanced you to a higher place , given you a larger juriſdiction , and put more power into your hand . You have now ten Talents in compariſon of the five that you had before . Know that God now expecteth of you and improvement of all thoſe ten Talents ; Anſwerably more care , more induſtry , more diligence , more prudence , if more can be showed , is requiſite : Above all , let your conſcionable care be yet more manifeſted about the Lords Day ; and herein I beſeech you , Sir Thomas Middleton . Sir Thomas H •• es . give me leave to ſet before you the prudent and pious courſe which two Lord Majors of famous memory , in the years 1613 and 1614 took thereabouts , which was this , They made choice of conſcionable perſons , who with and holy zeal were ſet againſt all profaneness of that Day , and put on to redress all manner abuſes thereof : ſuch they chosen , and to ſuch they gave power and authority to apprehend and bring before them all delinquents in that kind , whom , for the greater terror unto others , they ſeverely puniſhed . Conſcience will more put on pious perſons to a thorough redreſsing of diſorders , then hire or reward . It is the due execution of Law that puts life thereinto , and makes it the more effectual : and inward Principles will work men unto a due execution more then outward motives . Go on in promoting Gods honour , and he will promote yours . For he that ſaid , will perform what he hath ſaid , Them that honour me , I will honour . That you may do the one , and God the other , it is the hearty prayer of Your Honours daily Orator , W. GOUGE .