To the choicest of my Noble Friends , Sir — D. Knight . SIR , among many other Barbarisms which like and impetuous Torrent have lately rushed in upon us , The interception and opening of Letters is none of the least , For it hath quite bereft all ingenious Spirits of that correspondency and sweet communication of fancy , which hath been always esteemed the best fuel of affection , and the very marrow of friendship . And truly , in my judgement , this custom may be termed not only a Barbarism , but the basest kind of Burglary that can be , it's worse then picking of a lock , or breaking into a room by violence for he who does so , robs us peradventur of some outward pelf or baggage offortune ; but he who breaks open ones private letter or seal , may be said to plunder his very brains , and rob him of his most precious meditations . We are reduced here to that servile condition , or rather to such a height of slavery , that we have nothing left which may entitle us free rational creatures ; the thought it self cannot say it's free , much less the tongue or pen . Which makes me impart unto You the traverses of these turbulent times , under the following fables . I know you are and exquisite Astronomer . I know the deep inspection you have in all parts of Philosophy , I know you are a good Herald , and I have found in your study sundry books of architecture , and Comments upon Vitruvius . The unfolding of these Apologues will put you to it in all these , and will require your second , if not your third Thoughts , and when you have concocted them well , I believe , ( else I am much deceived in your Genius ) they will afford you some entertainment , and do the errand upon which they are sent , which is , to communicate unto you the most material passages of this longed for Parliament , & of these sad confusions , which have so unhinged , distorted , transversed , tumbled and dislocated all things , that England may be termed now , in comparison of what it was , no other then and Anagram of a Kingdom . One thing I promise you , in the perusal of these Parables , that you shall find no gingles in them , or any thing sordid or scurrilous , the common dialect and disease of these times . So I leave you to the guard and guidance of GOD and Virtue , who do still advance Their Votaries , maugre the frowns of Chance . Your constant servant , 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉