TO THE Most Renowned and Illustrious Knight and Champion of the Gospel HIS EXCELLENCY ROBERT EARLE OF ESSEX , etc. Lord General of all the Forces raised by the Honourable Houses of Parliament for the defence of Laws , Liberties , and Religion . SIR , THis whole undertaking was vowed to your great name , and this piece of it in writing presented to your Noble hands , before the Lord , and the State had placed you in that high Station in which you now stand : And as I cannot but applaud the happy Prognostic of mine own thoughts , which found out such a Patron for The Harmony of the Evangelists , as the high Court of heaven , and of England have since called out to be the Patron of the Gospel it self : So can I not but bewail the unhappy condition of mine own disabilities ; which can neither present any thing better , then what I now publish , to so great a person : nor yet could publish any whit sooner , that which I then presented , though it had been better . Your Excellencies candor will help to excuse both the one failing and the other , [ give me leave to presage it ] since I know such nobleness as yours , accepteth according to what a man hath , and expecteth not according to what he hath not . Mine address in this kind unto your Self , I shall not go about to excuse , but must rather justify , and though it be exceeding bold , yet to me it seems exceeding reasonable . For to whom should a Staffordshire student devote his studies , but to the glory of Staffordshire ? and whither should a Treatise upon the Gospels refuge for patronage , but to the great Patron of the Gospel ? I know mine own unsufficiency for such a work , and am conscious to my self of my many failings in the managing of it , yet could I not but undertake it , in hope of some profit to the Reader ; nor could I but address it to such a Patron , in hope of some entertainment with your Excellency . The Harmony of the Evangelists in our English tongue is rare to find , especially with that proof of the order of the story , and that illustration of the Text and Language , that a thing of that nature does require , & that it hath found in other tongues . Mine own heart did tell me , that I of all others was most unfit and unable for such and undertaking in regard of want of parts , means , and opportunity ; yet could I not desist from such and attempt , but must needs try what I could do in this kind , partly that I might bring something towards the building of the Tabernacle , though it were never so small , and chiefly that I might stir up some pen of a greater ability , to set to a work of so brave import . And assay and trial of some of my progress in such and undertaking , I do here most humbly lay at your Excellencies feet , and that not only as and Oblation tendered to your nobleness this once , but also as and earnest of a future tribute of this kind , till the whole work be finished , and the Harmony completed , if God vouchsafe health , strength , and opportunity , and your Excellency acceptance , countenance , and encouragement : There is nothing in the workman , or the workmanship , that can ground any hope for any such thing , from you , but there is enough in your own known worth , goodness , and noble disposition , to make me confident , that you will not only not reject the work , but that you will also accept the workman for the works sake , because the subject of it is the Evangelists . It is now become your honourable profession to be the Champion of the Gospel , and the Lord hath installed you in and Order , of which , to a Constantine , a Sweden , and and Essex , I know not what Histories can add a fourth , that hath been the Evangelicall Knight , or the Knight of the Gospel . How you have honoured this your Order , by your great achievements , and how the great trust reposed in you , hath met with as great trustiness , it is the happiness of the Nation to have tried , and to remember , and it cannot but be the rejoicing and comfort of your poor suppliant to think of , and to consider : For to have to deal with so constant worthiness , nobleness , and candor , with so great piety , zeal , religiousness , and honour , with so much accomplishment , excellency , and splendour , cannot but promise a comfortable access , a cheerful entertainment , and a desired issue . I have no more to say [ for short speech best agreeth with your great employments ] but only this , to beg of your Excellency , that among the serious cares and thoughts of your noble heart , you would remember our poor wronged Staffordshire for good : and labour her delivery , not only from her open enemies , but also from her seeming friends which do worse devour her . And to the Throne of grace it must be my continual suit and petition , that the Lord would Crown all your great engagements with happy success , make you still a blessing , and rejoicing to the English Nation , preserve your Person , increase your Honour , support your Heart , direct your steps , immortalise your name here , and lade your Excellency with the most excellent weight of glory hereafter . So ever prayeth , and so ever must pray , Your Excellencies most humble and most devoted servant , and poor Countryman , IOHN LIGHTFOOT . From my Study in Little Britain , Sep. 30. 1644.