To his dearly beloved Brother , Mr. VVilliam Neale at Tours in France , or elsewhere these . IF all men in a manner ( most dear Brother ) applying themselves unto any actium of consequence , may seem to need , a Counsellor and director : much more certainly may he want this aid , which wandereth through uncertain passages , and walks through the unknown ways of and unstable conversation . And since ( as it seems to me ) that man hath good , and propitious luck , which in his doubtful extremities may have the opportunity to fly unto wholesome and grave counsels : there can nothing be more happily assigned unto and ingenuous , and well educated nature , then some path or learned direction , which may be rather signed with the lively portraiture of eloquence , then with lime or chalkstone . This noble faculty , I must confess , I cannot boast , because it is both unseemly for a teacher of naked truth , to use the adulterate flourishes . of Rhetoric , and also , because it is so meanly apparent in me , that it will presently decay , if it should be brought before , the judicious lights of these times : only my chief aim is in this Treatise , to show and breath forth the ingenuous candour of my mind ; and my brotherly affection towards you ; if those rules , which in the following subject be proposed , may by you be received with the like kind inclination . There are some ( I persuade my self ) of a light and brainsick condition , which ( being also not few in number ) desire to borrow no directions from the storehouse of learned Philosophy : and so much contemn the rules of contemplation , and the demonstrations which are deduced from our solitary thoughts , that they suppose these Canons , but mere ridiculous , and crazy fancies , and the vain blasts of swelling Air . But how much you contemn the sottish opinion of these men , and dislike of this most pernicious tenet against all virtuous proceedings I am very well acquainted : having in your childish years , herd your labotious Essays , most elegantly for that age employed , in the praises and commendations of contemplative men ; for there is no man without all question , which desires ( with Ennius ) to live the life of a reasonable creature , but does cordially admire learning , and desires to salute those sweet flowers of Science , from whose fragrant beds , sundry ohoyce compositions of elocution does arise , whereby ordinary things , may be understood with delight , and obscure things may be made easy by industry . So general and learned a mistress is Theory , joined with the discreet practice of things , that from this storehouse for all uses , will not be wanting matter and workmanship , to supply the richness of our wits , for intention , judgement , or the final ends of our enterprises . Those things therefore ( dearly • esteemed brother ) which I deduce from this Magazine , and in the subsequent Tract , do propose unto you ; I entreat you not to undervalue , until the second consideration , the third reading over , and the fourfold more accurate knowledge ( then yet your years are capable of ) of humane subtleties and affairs , may convict men in these present directions , and importunate affecter of trifling observations , or a bringer forth of such productions , which are obscure , and erroneous from that round Cylind • r of virtues peregrination . Neither can I conceive , that you spend your precious time amiss , when you cast your eyes , and your most serious faculties upon learned discourses , as though that these were but employments for idle times , and hindrances to affairs of consequence ; thinking it a childish practice , ( as many do , ) to meditate , or write out any learned Contemplation . Believe me , those follies which they that affect this laziness , commit , are mere frivolous ravings , and oftentimes , not valuable in the right scale of reason , to turn down the weight of a cracked nutshell . Avoid them ; for rightly does Homer instruct you , in his first book of the learned Travailour ; under the person of Telemachus ; It fits thee not ( now age more wisdom brings ) Still , for to follow those same childish things . Dated at Warneford Aprill 3. 1638. Farewell .