To the Reader . MAny there are ( Courteous Reader , ) which have and do daily observe , to their due commendation , in the voyages they undertake , things worthy the eternal register of fame : and some have not been wanting in all ages which in the words of that learned man ( Gaspar Waserus ) non tantum transcurrendo , corpora hominum aspiciunt , sed etiam animos , atquererum momenta , non margins , aut super fines introspiciunt : But few or none , which have prescribed the exact and profitable limits , which ought to direct this laudable purpose . And therefore I have observed it to be a custom ( perhaps , where it is well sorted , not unprofitable ) among those which send forth their sons , pupils , or kinsmen to travel , to elect some discreet , and well experienced Companion , which may more safely waft them to their own homes back again , through many tempests , that continually use to assault those which Journey from their homes . But these do not always fulfil the intentions of the Directors , or rather employers ; because frequently most men belie or overween their own sufficiency : and ( which is worse ) usually overshadow , by their cunning demeanour , at or before their election , their ownen vices . I have therefore thought it , in my opinion , always a profitable work ; if any ( which bath ability for directions of this quality ) studious , and sober man , would , collect , to necessary and pertinent heads , such monitions cautions , and observations , which might be easily found out : whereby the hight spirits of some novices may be wholesomely restrained and faithfully instructed . For these dumb counsellors , are commonly most trusty , and carry with them in their prudent directions , collected from both reading and experience more solid profit : then those which either readily spend their Judgements without meditation , or at leastwise have no other but transitory and superficial knowledge . Finding therefore none that hath in our vulgar language ( to my remembrance ) undertaken this profitable essay ; I have adventured to make public a small treatise of direction how to travel profitably , and safely into foreign Countries ; which in another idiom I had some 4 years since addressed , to a near and deer travellor of my acquaintance . The original shall hereafter appear , ( although not so fully furnished ) if this impolished translation , with the not altogether unnecessary additions may pass without the censure of the critical , and with the allowance of the Courteous reader . I well know the presses groan with the weight of pamphlets and ( since this most happy invention ) innumerable books of all sorts lie moulding in most private studies , and libraries , fearing the worms , and desiring their readers . Nay many judicious volumes of former , and modern times do now cum blattis et tincis rixari ; while many more idle vanities or raging folly's doe busymens minds upon worse employments . Said ( in the phrase of Baudius ) quae est ista profusio temporis in hac vitae brevitate , tanta que copia rerum scitu dignissimarum , tempus tanquam remembering vacuam aut noxiam super vacuis impendere ? nec supervacuis tantum sed noxiis , vtquae dulcedine quadam sui , praeclarissima quae que ingenia alliciant ad se , & avocent a melioribus ? expertus loquor , nec quisquam tibi mihi ve verba dederit , ut in plurimorum nugis , magnum aliquod aut secretum bonum inesse suspicemur . I have therefore provided a remedy in this little treatise to mitigate this disease , for my self and others ( if they will as many do , ) have any confidence of and unknown physician . Here also the patient may trust without danger ; and knowing once the quality of the potion , take as little as it pleases him self . For the needless ( which some perhaps , male volent esteemers of other men's endeavours , may object ) subject of this book ; I will answer with a learned Philologer : Stultum est , certain serum nimis jam demum incipere misereri chartarum , quae tam diù , tam miserè , sine omni gratia perierunt , & pereunt quotidie . Beside , Scribimus indocti docti que And there is not ( if we believe Pliny ) any book out of which the laborious , and candid reader , may not collect some profit . How ever I have made it public for to serve my own turn ; who have now one , I may not repent to leave this unto , as a legacy , or direction . But I would be willing to benefit more , and among the rest my courteous , and benevolent reader otherwise . Optarem ut placeam , since minus ut taceam From my house . At Warneford . T. N. 3. Feb. 1642.