To His EXCELLENCY , Robert , Earl of Essex , Viscount Herreford , Barron Ferrars of Cha • tly , Lord Bourcher and Lovaine , one of his Majesties most Honourable Privy Counsel , and General of the Army raised by the Parliament in defence of the true Protestant R • ligion , His Majesties Person , the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom , and the Privileges of Parliament . Great General . I Take the boldness to style you , what God himself hath certainly made you ; Surely , as yet God never honoured any man with so great a prize , as he hath now entrusted your Excellency with . God hath put you into his own place ; God hath graced you with his own Name , Lord of Hosts , Gene • all of Armies . God ( in our appearance ) hath committed unto your care , what is preci • us to himself . A precious Gospel , precious Ordinances , a precious Parliament , & a precious people . God hath called forth your Excellency as a choice worthy to be his General , and the Champion of Iesus Christ to fight the great and last Battle with Antichrist in this your Native Kingdom . Rev. 19. La • confident your Excellency is not so little read in Divine history , or such a stranger to the world's experience , as to think this Church-work • , this thing called Reformation , will be found a matter of ease and pleasure . No , it is a business of the greatest difficvl • y in the world . Antichrist w • l engage the Kings of the earth , Rev. 16. • 4 Rev 12.12 and set the whole world in a combustion , before he will leave his hold . It is the nature of the devil to rage horribly towards his end . It is the property of a dying Beast to give one great struggle when life is departing ; why may not God now make this Good in this Roman Beast among us ? Great General , think not less of God , • r worse of this Cause , for one foil . Josh. 1.2.3 , 4. Joshuahs Army may flee and fallen before the men of Ai though he had good warrant to fallen on , and the design wisely managed . Iudg. 20.18.21 . Math. 14.2 • .23 , 24. Israel may loose two battles together , before Benjamin , when God had them go . Iesus Christs own Disciples may meet with a cross gale when they go about his business . Now it being within my own verge to open • n Scr • pture , I tO • k • this liberty to him • tO un • oh your Excellency the meaning of God in this strange dispensation , and further to let your Excellency know , that God would • h much sweet in this bitter , Iosh 7.11 12.24 , 25 , 26. Iudg. 20. • 6. Math. 14.27 . much good in this seeming evil . Israel was routed , fled and fell before Ai , that plundering Achan might be found out and punished . Israel fell in two Battles together before Benjamin , that th • y might learn more seriously to seek and trust God upon the first undertaking . A • worser the Disciples must be in a hopeless , helpless , perishing storm , that their faith in Christ ( though by a miraculous experience ) might be firmly established . Little did I think when first I preached and writ out these collections , that God intended to m • k • them so suitable to the condition of your Excellencies Army , as now I conceive them . It is not the least of my thoughts in this , to look at my self , but my aim is alone Gods glory . I am not unacquainted with your Excellencies goodness as well as greatness , ever discerning and unwonted humility , in so great a personage , which is my strong encourag • meant to present unto your Excellency this small tender of a most real affection . If your Excellency be pleased to peruse it , it bears the character of a right Soldier , and I know you will not love it the worse for that ? Your Excellency will here find a sincere heart , and and undaunted Spirit , in a plain and mean Press ; Flattery is fitter for the Kings Court , then the Lords Camp ; Be pleasant • worser then great General , to honour me in the acceptation ; Protect it as you approve it , and I have my desire . The great God prosper his great woe • ke in your hand • , and make your Name glorious to succeeding Ages . Most Noble General , in the Name of the Lord go on , and he will yet do mightily for you ; You will exp • esse your greatness in overlooking difficulties ; And certrinly , a General of so many faithful prayers cannot miscarry . You may yet assure your self , Gods people have you in a high-esteeme ; The Saints a • e daily begging at the Throne of Grace of you . Question it not but God will make a sweet and full return of all the prey • rs , tears , wrongs , and Blood , which hath so long cried to heaven . This is the desire and the exp • ctation Of your Excellencies most faithf • lly devoted in the Work of Jesus Christ . Thomas Palmer .