TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE The Houſe of PEERES AND TO THE HONOURABLE The Houſe of COMMONS Aſſembled in Parliament at Westminster . THe Records of Holy Scripture , whither they concern the Actions of GOD or Men , are not only Stories of things done in that Age , but Prophecies alſo of future events in ſucceeding Generations . This GOD hath been pleaſed to exemplify particularly in that Word , which diverse weeks ago on a Solemn Day appointed for extraordinary Humiliation He ſent to be preached in your Ears . While ſome bodily Indiſpoſitions hindered me from a ſpeedy obeying the Call of tendering it alſo to your hands and eyes : It ſeemed good to Him , ( who does all things wiſely and faithfully , ) to give Inſtances of His fulfilling both parts of it ; affording ſome anſwers of Grace , and expreſſions of Pardon and favour in Wales and the parts thereabouts ; and yet withal taking ſome Vengeance upon our towardnesses , by the ſad blow given us in the Weſt . I hope that as we ſhall all learn by it , even more and more , that1 Sam. 3. 19. GOD lets none of His Words fallen to the ground , but whatſoever He speaks to us hath its effect upon us , andZech . 1. 6. takes hold of us , even whither we take hold of it or not : So we will believe alſo , that the effect of it will never be ſpent as long as we live , or any of mankind , in as much as all the Word of GOD lives and abides for ever , as both theIſai . 40 8. Prophet and1 Pet. 1. 23. 25. Apoſtle tell us . And this Belief will both make all the Word profitable to us , and make us Happy by the Word : The Promiſes and Expreſſions of Grace in the Word never doing us good , never being fulfilled to us completely , but by our believing them : And the Threatenings or Expreſſions of Severity never endangering us , never being fulfilled at all upon us , but when we believe them not . We have all need to Pray , Lycia 17. 5. LORD Increase our Faith ! even in relation to Terrifying Truths , as well as to Comforting . And though Faith most commonly comes by Hearing , yet unqueſtionable Experience telling us , that it is partly increased by Reading alſo , ( ſpecially of what was once attentively herd ) I cannot doubt , but this Paper-remembrance of matters of ſo grand Importance , will be bleſſed by GOD , as to ſome others into whoſe hands it ſhall come , ſo ſpecially to your ſelves , according to Your Leisure for making uſe of it , unto your Furtherance and Joy of Faith . Which that it may be continually augmented in You , who have ſo great buſineſſes to go through , and ſo great Adverſaries to encounter , and all Calling for Faith in the ſtrength and Glory of it , through Ieſus Chriſt the Author and Finiſher of our Faith , is and ſhall be the earnest Deſire and Prayer of Him , who is for IESVS ſake Your ever moſt Devoted and Humble Servant HERBERT PALMER .