TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE AND moſt Illuſtrious Lord , PHILIP Earl of Pembroke and Mongomery , Baron Herbert of Cardiffe and Shurland , etc. Lord Chamberlain of his Majeſties Houſehold , Knight of the Honourable Order of the Garter ; and one of his Majesty's moſt Honourable Privy Counsel . RIGHT HONOURABLE , IF Books were to be eſteemed for their Bulk , and not for their Worth : I would not preſume to Dedicate ſo little a Book as this is , to ſo great a Lord as You are . But ſince it is their Goodness , and not their Bigness , that makes them recommendable : the Book it self , I hope , ſhall anſwer for me . For in It , your Honour ſhall find a great deal of good matter , contained in a little room . In It , You ſhall ſee the Doctrine of the Church of Rome flatly condemned ; and the Doctrine of the Reformed Church , fully Juſtified : And that , not by any paſſages taken out of the broken Cisterns of the Traditions of men ; but by many express Texts , and neceſſary Conſequences drawn out of the Pure Fountain of the very word of God . In a word , though it be of a contemptible Stature : yet you ſhall find It to be a pretty tall Man of his hands ; skilful in his weapons ; and ſo full of mettle and ſpirit , that like a little DAVID ( coming in the name of the Lord , and being armed with his Word ) he foils and utterly overthrows that Great GOLIAH of Gath , I mean the Church of Rome . And now , moſt Illuſtrious Lord , the thing that hath encouraged me to make choice of Your Honour , and seek after Your Patronage , is , that my Author ( of Noble extraction himself ) Dedicated this Book of his to a Great and Religious Princess of my Nation , Daughter to that Renowned Prince , the late Duke of ROHAN : by which example , I thought my self obliged not to diſparage it in England . But the moſt prevalent Motive , and , as I may ſay , the very Loadſtone that hath attracted me thereunto , is , chiefly , thoſe tranſcendent virtues which I ſee ſhine ſo brightly in Your Honour , and wherewith God hath adorned Your Soul as with a garment : I mean that Fervent love You have to the Truth : That Ardent Affection You show to the Sincerity of Religion : and that Inbred and Holy Hatred You bear , not only to all Popery and Superſtition : but alſo to the leaſt thing that might conduce thereunto . And for the Confirmation of this teſtimony of mine : Give me leave , Moſt Noble Lord , to boaſt that I am very ſtrong ; and may , with as much right as any man , uſe in this the common Engliſh Proverb , that says , I come with a Witness : ſince I bring no less with me than the Voice of the whole Kingdom . For indeed , Right Honourable , though I have been in moſt places of England , and have carefully and diligently obſerved the bent and affections of the People : I never yet met with any man that diſſented from that opinion . What hope's then ſhould not I have that Your Honour will accept of this poor Labour of mine , and afford It Your Protection , ſince It suits ſo well with Your diſpoſition ; and that You ſhall ſee in It the Truth of that Religion which You Profess ; and the Falsehood of that Religion which You Deteſt . Vouchſafe therefore Moſt Illuſtrious Lord , to receive It with a gracious eye , and to afford It Your Countenance . I know that for Your Honours ſake , it will be welcome to this Nation , when they ſee Your Honourable Name in the front of It. And I make no queſtion but after they have read It , they will love it alſo for its own ſake . If in theſe times ( wherein many look back towards Babylon again , and Popery hath been here ſo bold as to think her self at home ) the Public receive any fruit thereby , they ſhall be obliged unto Your Honour for it : but I more eſpecially , who will acknowledge my self bound ſo long as I live , to be and remain , Your Honours moſt humble and moſt devoted Servant , J. MOVNTAINE .