TO THE HONOURABLE MEMBERS OF THE COMMONS House assembled at OXFORD . Honourable Senators , I Do here most humbly present uncovered to your judicious view , a Sermon once Preached , and afterwards dedicated to your selves at Westminster : as it was at first and unhappy mean , to provoke diverse ( then of your society ) to set their feet in paths of blood : so if now it shall help to a fuller sighed , of the greatness of that mercy , which preserved your selves from so great a danger , I have also my option . There be Mysteries of Iniquity as well as of Godliness , a Ministers duty is to discover both ; our Saviour revealed Satan when he spoke by Peters tongue , and thereby taught us to detect him , when he comes in the shape of and Angel of light ; ( as his custom is to do , when he is endeavouring most mischief against Church or State ) the most eminent , popular , and well-guifted men , have always been his instruments to pervert the Truth , and to break the Peace ; he does but actum agere in these times ; omne malum ab Ecclesia , was true of old , and is so still : They were Churchmen to whom that Rebel Rodolphus spoke , ( when lying on his deathbed he showed his right hand cut off in fight against his Sovereign : This ( says he ) is that right hand , wherewith I vowed my faith unto the Emperor , now is the same become a witness of my breach of fidelity , and traitorous attempts against my Sovereign by your instigation . They were also Churchmen that stirred up to the Barrons wars , in the days of our Henry 3. and enjoined the Earl of Leicester in remission peccatorum , ut causam illam ( meaning his Rebellion ) usquè ad mortem assumeret , asserting , pacem Ecclesiae Anglicanae nun quàm sine gladio materiali posse firmari . Our age ( alas ) hath been too fruitful in such Churchmen ; and they in such Assertions ; but the Apostle prophesying of such says , that their folly shall be manifested unto all ; and to this purpose ( right Noble and Worthy ) are my poor endeavours in this following discourse , I humbly beg , that your favourable acceptance ; may make the same in some sort valuable : it tends to Peace , and you are Counsellors of Peace , to a King of Peace , no way delighting in blood , rather wishing with Theodosius , se potuisse mortuos à morte revocare . Indeed He is our Theodosius , Gods gift to us ; and you are his Theodosii , God's gifts to him : and as such , we ( his inferior Loyal Subject's ) do most sincerely honour you . And be confident ( Grave Senators ) what ever hath been suggested heretofore ( by any of those Boutefeu's , ) that assisting him the Anointed of the Lord , and true possessor of the mild and gracious spirit of the Lord , you do most really and truly help the Lord himself : and if your care shall add some further edge to His most pious Order , and Proclamations against Swearing , and Profaning Gods Name and Word ; and for the more strict observing the Lords day , and days of Fasting ( appointed by His Majesty , yet much neglected in His Quarters ; ) you shall fit a people for the Lord , to show mercy upon , and to restore that peace unto , which you labour for : yea , and thereby not only your Consultations , but your Persons , shall continually be attended with Gods blessing ; and your Names had with Posterity in and everlasting joyful remembrance ; for this Honour have all his Saints . And that the same may be and unseparable portion to every of you , is , and shall be the constant , and earnest prayer of Your humble Se ••••• EDWARD SYM •••• Novemb. 30. 1644.