TO The Honourable House of COMMONS , Now Assembled in PARLIAMENT . Renowned Worthies , WHEN I received your Message , sent to me by one of Your Worthy Members , that you had appointed me to Preach before You , at the Monthly Fast then next to come , mine Insufficiency , 63 years ▪ Age , and Weakness of Body , began immediately to put a just excuse •• my mouth : But the strong obligation in which the whole Land is obliged unto You , ( being the only powerful Nehem 9.27 . and Obad. 21. Saviours under God , of Church and State , from ruin and destruction , when they were already overrun , and at the point to be swallowed up by the Bans of Antichrist ) did silence all Excuses . Beside , I was afraid to incur the blame or suspicion of ingratitude to them who had delivered me from the paw of the Lion , which thirsted after my blood ; and had set me at liberty after two years imprisonment , and Voted a just recompense of the wrongs done to me , and a Satisfaction from mine Oppressors' , for all my losses and damages , by their malice sustained . Which recompense , through your favour and forwardness to relieve me I had certainly received , if the multitude of Malignant spirits , then too prevalent among you , but now expelled out of your Assembly , had not opposed and hindered the transmission of my Cause in due time , to the Honourable House of LORDS . I saw also a special hand of GOD in calling me to Preach to so Honourable and Assembly , and his power and providence , in frustrating and bringing to nought the Counsels and purposes of the proud persecuting Prelate of CANTERBURIE , Ianuar. 29. 1638. who on the same day of the VVeeke of the same month of the Year , six years before , brought me to answer Over tenus in the Star-Chamber , with full intent to lay a heavy Censure on me : And when the truth of GOD for which I suffered , did bear me out against all his Slanders , and false Accusations , he most proudly affirmed , and bid me assure my self of it , That I should never come in a Pulpit to preach any more . Upon these Considerations , I did cheerfully submit my shoulders to bear this burden , though it seemed far heavier then my strength was able to sustain and undergo . And now , Ye Worthies of GODS Israel , I humbly beg this favour at Your hands , that You will accept of the willingness of the Workman to serve You , not the worth of the Service it self : Look upon the pure , precious matter here handled , chosen out of a golden Psalm of DAVID , the sweet Singer of Israel , not on the weak handling of it . I conceived it very seasonable for the Time and Occasion : For the present Calamities by which the LORD calls us to public and general Fasting and Humiliation , proceed from the Bans of the Brothers in Iniquity , which are so many cursed Brambles of several sorts , pestering the whole Land , and stinging us with their hurtful pricks , which abound in every Band , Sect , and Faction . The thing for which we seek unto GOD by Fasting and Prayer , is Deliverance of our Church and State from the mischief which they are sharply set to bring and inflict upon all that are Righteous and Religious in the Land. This Deliverance cannot be fully and perfectly obtained , till the Lord our God be pleased to cut down these cursed Brambles , and to rid these three Kingdoms of them . And this the LORD will do very speedily , so soon as he sees us made ripe for Deliverance by true unfeigned repentance , and amendment of our lives : For then he will take away , as with a Storm and Whirlwind , not only the great Faction of the Antichristian Papists , Atheists , and Malignants , banded together , and waging open VVarre against us , but also all the Sects of Anabaptists , Antinomians , Libertines , and Schismatical Separatists , who by opposing the Reformation , and union of our Church , with the rest of the best Reformed Churches , both in Doctrine and Discipline , according to the written VVord of God , do act strongly for Antichrist , and by raising up Divisions and Distractions , in the City , Country , and all our Armies , do as much as in them is , to weaken us , make breaches in our VValls , and to lay us open and naked to the violence and fury of our open enemies : All these things my Text , as I have faithfully opened and expounded it , does offer to your grave and wise consideration ; and in this Sermon I have proved every particular by clear testimonies out of holy Scriptures , and in obedience to your command , I have committed it to the Press , and here humbly present it to your Honourable Assembly , with my hearty desire and prayer to God for you , that by it , and many other most godly and more learned Sermons , which found continually in Your cares , You may take occasion to observe and note the danger in which our Land is , by reason of those many Sects and Heretics , and Schismatics , which like so many cursed Brambles grow up and increase daily , even to the overspreading of the whole Kingdom ▪ which when you come to do once seriously ; I doubt not but your zeal will stir you up , to curb so many of them as are curable , and to cut off those that are incorrigible : even such Thorns and Brambles as David describes in his last words , saying , The sons of Belial are all of them as Thorns thrust away , because they cannot be taken with hands . But the man that shall touch them , must be fully fenced with Iron , and the staff of a Spear ; and they shall be utterly burned with fire in the same place . 2 Sam. 23.6 , 7. The great God , who hath so often , and wonderfully preserved You heretofore from the secret treachery and open fury of these wicked men , be still your shield , and your defence , and make his great work to prosper in your hands . So prayeth , Your humble and hearty ( though weak and unworthy ) Servant in the Lords Work , GEORGE WALKER .