TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE LORD MAIOR , To the Aldermen and Common-Councell of the City of LONDON . GIve me leave to join You together in and Epiſtle , and may it be a pledge of Union in all things that tend to and happy and speedy eſtabliſhment of Truth and Peace . The Kingdom is very ſenſible how conſiderable You are in the welfare of it , eſpecially as it now ſtands . And according to the influence you have upon the public good or evil are the endeavours of the Enemies of our reformed Settling to diſtract and divide you , for they ſee no other means to deſtroy you , and thoſe with you , whoſe welfare is bound up in yours . And in this you are a reſemblance of the Kingdom of whom a great Politician says , that it is Magnum Animal ne que interit niſi a ſeipſo : and according to this Axiom have the Enemies of our Religion and State framed their designs . The zeal of Spaine and Rome carried them on indeed at firſt to furious attempts , as in 88. and Powder Treaſon ; but when they ſaw they were not able to prevail that way , they put on the Foxes skin , and have moſt ſtudiouſly raiſed and fomented jealouſies and differences betwixt the King and Parliament , betwixt the Parliament and Kingdom : not to mention thoſe ſubdiviſions lately ſtirred , which I would not be ſo far guilty of keeping alive as to name them . So hath it fated with your renowned City , you have been to the Reformation and Liberty of this Kingdom , what this Kingdom hath been to the Proteſtant Religion in other parts , a great ſupport . The oppoſing party as impatient of ſuch and adverſary ( you know ) directed the firſt fruits of their ſtrength and malice againſt you they were indeed interrupted in their way by the battle at Edge-hill , but as ſoon as they were recruited and recovered , how eagerly they purſued their former purpoſe , Brainford can witness : but the next day when the City appeared ſo unanimouſly , and heartily , for their own and the Parliaments defence , they ſaw it was neceſſary to take another courſe , and try if they could become your master's by design and fraud , and bring you to a cheaper ruin by making you deſtroy one another . To this purpoſe several courſes have been taken , and not altogether without effect . But ſo long as there was a Common Enemy appeared , there was a diverſion of the humours , which ſince our late ſemblance of Peace have broken out into violent and ſtrange diſeaſes , which have already diſtempered the health , and go on to endanger the life of that famous City . The beſt expedient to remedy this great evil , were doubtless a reconciliation of thoſe perſons and parties who are now diſtant , but were in the beſt eſtate of the City affectionate and unanimous . This is not only policy but piety , as by a ſerious perusal of Jam. 3. from the 13. ver . to the end may appear . Experience witneſſes the hard task and fate of reconcilers , who lie betwixt the extremes as corn betwixt the Millstones : But yet I muſt profess my ſelf one of them , and I had rather they grind me then one another . To the accompliſhing this great work , a special portion of the wiſdom that is from above , which is mentioned , Jam. 3. ult . is very neceſſary , which let us beg on the behalf of all Chriſtians , eſpecially thoſe whoſe influence into public affairs requires a greater meaſure . A probable expedient hereunto may be this , that extremities on both hands be laid aſide , and perſons that drive them on . For of each party there are ſome parts ſo heterogeneous , that there is little hope they ſhould ever mingle together , neither is it beneficial that they ſhould while they ſo remain , for they tend to diſtraction , that is , to deſtruction . And give leave to him that hath many faults to complain of one : That is , that thoſe who have and might have agreed , have put ſo little truſt in God , and ſo little mutual confidence in each other , that they have choſen rather to ſupport and ſtrengthen their factions ( for that it's come to ) with perſons less deſiring their welfare then themſelves of one another . And therefore whatſoever perſons ▪ principles , or practiſes tend to bring us under old revenges , or new confuſions , ſhould carefully be avoided . There is hardly any man who is not in reaſon convinced , that the continuance of this diſtance and oppoſition betwixt good men will certainly expoſe them to the power and revenge of them who equally hate both , and yet how few are there whom paſſion or faction will ſuffer to act accordingly . You will pardon the mention of this odious word Faction , it is of miſchievous conſequence , and deſerves to be branded , for it will undoubtedly ruin both ſides , eſpecially when there is a third to wait the advantage , and the iſſue . And he that would be free from this evil , muſt not inordinately affect his own opinion or intereſt , which will expoſe him to that inordinate courſe of making parties to maintain it , but be content to have all his Propoſitions fairly examined ; neither muſt he look at perſons more then things , as weak and angry men are wont to do , having ſome men's perſons ſo in admiration , as they moſt cry up , or at leaſt justify or excuſe all their ways ; and others in ſuch deteſtation , as to undervalue , blaſt and blemiſh all they ſay or do . It's hard to find ei • her a man ſo good , as in ſome things he ſhould not be declined : or ſo evil , that there may not be ſome uſe of him : and if we could abſtract from perſons , and let things and actions take their own demerits , much injury and miſery might be prevented . There have been many viciſſitudes of late , and thoſe that have been higheſt have ſtill loſt themſelves , and endangered others by extremities . Moderata durant . It's now come to your turn again , and unless God grant ſo much wiſdom , self-denial , and forgetfulness , as may diſpoſe towards moderation , it will not , it cannot laſt . I add no more but and excuſe , firſt , for this Epiſtle , if plain dealing need one : and 2ly , for the Sermon , which when I compoſed , I was ſo far from thoughts of the Press , that I never thought of a London Pulpit : it hath been a month delayed in hope's of and excuſe . But ſince you will have it , I ſubmit with a homely but hearty compliment , Much good may it do you . And the God of peace give you peace always by all means : The Lord be with you all . So prayeth York , May 15. 1648. Your welfares faithful Servant , EDW : BOVVLES .