To all the true Lovers of Truth and Peace in the Church of England , Specially thoſe in the Town of Great Yarmouth . TO You have I dedicated this part of my labours , to whom I have devoted all . What ſad and dangerous diſtempers have invaded the Ecclesiastical body of this Kingdom in this springtime of Reformation , I ſhall not need to tell you ; there being ſcarce any part of it but feels of them , and labours under them . Hereupon it hath been , and is my higheſt ambition , to show my self ( what one of Col. 4. 14. Lucas de Medico corporum factus jam erat Medicus animarum . Hieron . in ep . ad Phil. the Penmen of ſacred Writ is ſaid to have been , and what every Miniſter of the Goſpel , ( at this time ſpecially ) ought to be ) both and Evangeliſt , and a Phyſician . To this end I have already adventured abroad ſome Counſels and Preſcripts , The healing of Iſraels breaches An. 1642 Church-Reformation . An. Church-Remedy . An. 1644 , which being proper for the place where Providence hath laid out my Practice , may alſo ( if rightly applied ) prove not unuseful to others . And to the ſame end it is that I have now ſent this Tractate after them ; wherein you have a Topical Remedy for that ſpreading Gangrene of Anabaptiſm , which , unless timely prevented , may prove fa • all to the whole body both of this Church and State . This evil beginning to show it self as in ſome other parts adjacent , ſo ) in this place , which God hath in part committed to my Cure , I was induced ſometime ſince to encounter with it in the Pulpit . My endeavours herein ( I bless God ) I found not altogether unsuccessful . And hereupon I am now the rather encouraged to preſent them to a more public view . Wherein , if any ſhall conceive my ſervice M. Marſhals Sermon . M. Cook . WORSER • . Featly etc. Gen. 38. 30. 31 needless , in regard of the diverse learned Treatiſes of this kind already publiſhed , I ſhall only deſire them to believe , that ( as , however thoſe Pharezzes were firſt brought forth , yet this Zarah put forth the hand before moſt of them , the Pulpit being for moſt part delivered of the one , before the Press was of the other ſ •• they ſhall meet with somewhat here , which they may yet call New. among other paſſages I ſhall humbly take leave to Apologise for one , which poſsibly may riſe in the stomach of ſome , viz. the Holding forth of Confirmation ( as it is called ) in the primitive ſimplicity of it , for and Apostolical Ordinance . This ( I confess ) I cook the firſt hint of from learned and judicious M. Calvin , as he himself , though he would Non inficior , in counterfeit nonnihil hallucinari Hieronymum , quod Apoſtolicam eſſe obſervationem dicit , viz. Confi • mationem . Calv inſtit . l. 4 c . 19. S. 4 . not from St. Hieron contra Lucif . Ierome , yet after upon ſecond thoughts , did from S • Heb. 6. 2. Hic unus locus abundè teſtatur hujus Ceremoniae ( ſc . Impoſitionis manuum in Confirmation ) originem fluxiſſe ab Apoſtolis . Cat. Com. in ep . ad Heb. ca. 6. v. 2. Paul . And finding it a point ſo useful , not only in the preſent controversy oh • Paedobaptism , but alſo for the healing of ſome of the chief differences of the times , videlicet ▪ about mixed . Communion , and Church ▪ Covenant , I could not but hold forth that little light concerning it , which I have received from ſome others , ſuch as were in their times magna Eccleſiae lumina , Rev. 1. 16. 20. ſtars of the firſt magnitude , Joh. 5. 35. burning and ſhining Lamps . If any ſhall not hereby ſee what others have done , and my self imagine to do , I ſhall only crave of them , firſt to take off that film of prejudice which poſsibly the gross corruption of this ſuppoſed Ordinance in the former practice of it , both in the Church of Rome , and among our ſelves , may have drawn over their eyes , and then I ſhall freely leave them to believe and report what they ſee . For my self , let the World know , all that herein I deſire and aim at , to be only this , That If there be any thing Apostolical in this Ordinance , it may be revived and received : otherwiſe if merely Prudential , ( as and explicit • Church-Covenant ( ſo far forth as diſtinct from the Covenant of Grace ) is ſuppoſed to be ) then how far to be embraced or rejected , I leave it to thoſe who have Authority and Ability , to judge : With the ſubmiſsive tender of which humble motion , I ſhall fit down , and reſt Yours in the ſervice of Chriſt , Ioh. Brinſley . Yarmouth June 26. Anno 1645.