TO THE HONOURABLE HOVSE OF COMMONS now Aſſembled in PARLIAMENT . WHen firſt it pleaſed You to require our ſervice in Preaching at Your late Public Faſt , we reſolved to cloſe our eyes againſt all Clouds of diſcouragement ariſing from our own unworthiness and inſufficiency , and to ſet our ſelves wholly to ſeek what the Lord would command us to deliver in his Name , at ſuch a time , to ſuch and Honourable and awful Aſsembly , with a total denial of our Pſalm . 82. ſelves . And albeit we ſhould have been glad to have been ſpared this expoſing of our ſelves to the public view ; yet , You appointing other wiſe , we hold it equal that the joint entreaty of the Repreſentative Body of the whole Communality of the kingdom ſhould be regarded , and have choſen rather that others ſhould cenſure us of weakness , than You ſhould charge us with Diſobedience : Your Requeſt being no less than a command ; and Your acceptance ſufficient to give valve to things of themſelves both mean and worthless . Wherefore , according to our Duty , ſo willingly as the consciousness of our ſlender performances would permit , we obey Your Order , and do now , although ſomewhat late , humbly offer theſe two plain Sermons ( for , who expects other in a Faſt ? ) at the footstool of Your Tribunal , as a laſting Monument of Our Gratitude for Your encouraging Approbation of , and solemn Thanks for our weak endeavours in the preaching of them . If in ſome places we have taken that juſt liberty which all others have done before us , we truſt it ſhall not be imputed ; ſo long as in the most material paſſages we have kept to the very words which at firſt we uſed , ſo far as was neceſſary ; and have not wittingly ſwerved and hairs breadth from the ſenſe and ſubſtance in the reſidue . we have indeed pared off ſome Repetitions , which in ſpeaking had their uſe , the more to inculcate , and the better to ſet on the matter , but would not have been ſo grateful in Writing , becauſe Readers account every thing too long that hath any thing too much . We have likewiſe contracted ſome expreſſions , which in diſcourſes of ſo much length , could hardly be ſo conciſe as we deſired , Memory being not always at hand to give birth to every Conception of our minds in ſuch forms as we intended . And ſome few things we have added , where straits of time , or defect of memory made ſome balks in the firſt delivery . What ever our performances be , we humbly leave them in Your hands , and under Your Honourable Protection , which we are bold to expect , becauſe they are by Your own Act drawn from us , and that in a time ſo queasy and diſtempered as can hardly bear that food , or Phyſik which is needful for it . Seldom does a wiſe Reproof , a neceſſary Exhortation , or wholesome Doctrine meet with and obedient Eare. The God of Heaven steer all Your weighty conſultations by his own Counsel , to his own Glory ; cover You ſtill under his own Wing , and make You the most accomplished , beſt united , & moſt successful & glorious houſe of Commons that ever sat in that High Court ; but chiefly in the effectual endeavouring of a further Sanction of , and ſtronger Guard about our true Palladium , the true Religion , already eſtabliſhed among us ; in the perfecting of the Reformation of it ; in the erecting , maintaining , protecting , and encouraging of anable , godly , faithful , zealous , profitable , Preaching This was our joint & earneſt ſuit to You , in Preaching ; and we now again beſeech You to ſet your hearts and hands to this work , as Benhail , Obadiah and other Princes in Iudah did . Ministry , in every Pariſh Church and Chapel throughout England and Wales ; and in the interceding to the Kings ſacred Majeſty for the ſetting up of a Faithful , Judicious , and Zealous Magiſtracy , where yet the ſame is 2 Chr. 17. 7 , 8 , 9. wanting , to be ever at hand to back ſuch a Ministry : without either of which , not only the power of Godliness will soon degenerate into formality , and zeal into Lukewarmeneſſe ; but , Popery , Arminianism , Socinianism , Profaneness , Apostasy , and Atheism it self will more and more crowd in upon us , and prevail against us , do You all You can by all other means . And now , commending You to God and to the Word of his grace , which is able to Acts 20. 32. built You up further , and to give You and inheritance among all them which bee ſanctified ; and theſe our Labours to his further bleſſing , whereby all may ſpeedily be brought under the line of his Covenant , which is our ſafety ; that he may continue with us , The Sum of both Sermons . which is our Glory ; and we with him , which is our happiness : we reſt , Yours , moſt devoted to the ſervice of Your Faith in all Duty , Cornelius Burges . Stephen Marshal .