TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE HOVSE OF Lords Aſſembled in PARLIAMENT . THe differences and Diviſions of England at this day are ſo many , ſo great , and ſo deſtructive to Church and State , as that it cannot but be accounted a tranſcendent act of Piety and Charity for any man to endeavour according to his place to compoſe the one , and remove the other . But though this work be very excellent , yet it is alſo very dangerous to him that ſhall undertake it . For it is often found , that he that will ſtep into reconcile two parties that are a fighting , does prove the party againſt which both of them will fight . Or if not both , yet always the party that does the wrong will be a bitter enemy to him that would make up the breach . And therefore it is expressly ſaid , Act. 7. 26 , 27. That when Moſes ſaw two of his brothers ſtriving one against the other , and stepped in to ſet them at one , ſaying , Sirs , you are brothers , why wrong you one another ? He that did his neighbour the wrong thruſt him away , ſaying , Who made thee a Ruler and a Judge over us ? But yet notwithſtanding , happy is that man whom God ſhall make any ways instrumental to the bringing in of a holy and bleſſed Peace into this diſtreſſed Island , though with the loss of his own life . Famous is the example of Gregory Nazianzen , who was Biſhop of Conſtantinople , eminent for Learning and Piety : And yet when he ſaw a prevailing Faction endeavouring to chooſe another into his place , and that it would much disturb the peace of the City Ruffini hiſtor . Eccleſiaſt . lib . 2. cap . 9 . if he did not yield it up ; he brake out into this ſpeech : Abſit , inquit , ut mei causâ aliqua ſimultas oriatur in Dei Sacerdotibus . Si propter me eſt iſta tempeſtas , tollite , & mittite me in mare , & deſinet à vobis quaſſatio . God forbid that for my cauſe any difference ſhould ariſe amongſt the Miniſters of God : If this tempeſt be raiſed for my cauſe , take me , & throw me into the Sea that ſo the tempeſt may ceaſe . A ſentence worthy to be written in letters of Gold , and to be put in practice by every true hearted Engliſhman . The like we read of Codrus a Heathen King , who for the love of his people expoſed himself to death . And of Curtius , and of three Decii that devoted themſelves to ruin for the safety of their Country . The Book of God tells us of Moſes that was willing to have his name blotted out of the Book of life : and of Paul that was willing to be and Anathema , that ſo God might be reconciled to the people of Iſrael with whom he was diſpleaſed . But the greateſt example of all is of our Lord and bleſſed Saviour , who emptied himself of his Divinity , and became a ſervant , and a curſe , that he might become our Peacemaker . Much to this purpoſe is ſaid in the ensuing Sermon , which is now made public by your Commands . Something alſo is ſaid to keep up your ſpirits from being over-diſmaied at the conſideration of theſe Landdeſtroying Diviſions . Great are the ſearchings and tremblings of heart , becauſe of theſe Diviſions . But be not over-diſcouraged : It is Gods Prerogative to bring light out of darkness , good out of evil , unity out of diviſion . He works by contrary means as well as by unlikely means . He delivered Jonah by a Whale , and kept him ( as Baſil says ) vivus in ſepulchro . He raiſed Joſeph by caſting him into priſon ; he cured the blind man by clay and ſpittle . And I doubt not but he will bring a great deal of good at laſt out of our Diviſions . It is obſervable that Simeon and Levi , that at firſt were brothers in iniquity , joining together to deſtroy the Shechemites , and for this cruel act , as a suitable puniſhment , were divided in Jacob , and ſcattered in Iſrael , Gen. 49. 7. Yet notwithſtanding becauſe afterwards Levi was zealous for God againſt the worſhippers of the golden Calf , and did appear valiantly on Gods ſide , Exod. 32. 26. God did turn this curſe into a bleſſing , Deut. 33. 10. For Levi was conſecrated to teach Jacob Gods judgement , and Iſrael his law , etc. And the Simeonites , as Ainſworth obſerves , Ainſw . xi Gen. 4 • . 7 . were alſo Teachers of the Law in the Synagogues of Jacob ; and the Levites in the Schools of the sons of Iſrael . This ſtory is written for our conſolation . The time was when we dwelled in peace and unity , but then we combined againſt God and his children ; and for this cauſe as a juſt curſe , God hath divided us one from another , to the utter ruin one of another . But yet notwithſtanding , if you ( Right Honourable ) will go on to show your ſelves zealous for God and his Cauſe , and to appear vigorouſly and faithfully on his ſide ; God will turn our great curſe into a great bleſſing . And as the dividing of the Read Sea was made by God a way and means to led the people of Iſrael over into Canaan , and to deſtroy the Egyptians : So God will make our Diviſions in this Read Sea of blood , into which we are plunged , a way and means to a happy Canaan of unity and peace ; and to the utter ruin of our implacable Adverſaries . Thus he did with the diviſions of Paul and Barnabas , as this Sermon relates unto you . Only be courageous for God , and in nothing be terrified at our differences , but make your peace with him , and he at laſtwill make us at peace one with another : which is the earneſt prayer of Your Honours Spiritual ſervant , EDMUND CALAMY .