TO THE LEARNED AND EMINENT FRIENDS OF Mr CHILLINGWORTH , And in particular TO Sir JOHN CULPEPPER , Knight , Doctor JOHN PRIDEAUX Biſhop of Worceſter , FELL Deane of Chriſt-Church , BAYLY Deane of Sarum , SHELDEN Warden of All-souls , POTTER Provoſt of Queens , and MORLEY Canon of Chriſt-Church . SIRS , YOur deceaſed friend is not yet speechless , he calls upon you to beware and repent ; ſome preach more , at leaſt more practically , when they are dead , then ever they did while they were alive . You that were his Patrons and Encouragers , as he acknowledged ever , Dr. Baily , Dr. Prideaux , Dr. Fell . when he was in the heighth of his Rebellion , do you beware leſt a worſe thing come unto you . You that were the Licenſers of his subtle Atheism , Repent , Repent ; for he was ſo hardened by your flattery , that ( for ought the moſt charitable man can judge ) he periſhed by your Approbation : he ever appealed to his works even to his very dying day , and what was it , which made him dote upon them , but your Licence and Approbation ? Hark what he says , The third and laſt part of my Accuſation was , That I anſwer out of principles , which Proteſtants themſelves will profess to deteſt : which indeed were to the purpoſe , if it could be juſtified . But beside that , it is confuted by my whole Book , and made ridiculous by the Approbation premiſed unto it , etc. read Mr Chillingworth his Preface to the Author of Charity etc. Sect. 30. Sure I am , that the Accuſation may be juſtified , and therefore is to the purpoſe ; but the Approbation cannot be juſtified , and is therefore juſtly Reprobated : The Accuſation is ſo ſerious , that the Approbation cannot make it ( but may well make the Approvers and their Church ) ridiculous . O what a ridiculous Church do the Licenſers make the Church of England to be , by ſaying that there is nothing in Mr Chillingworth his Book contrary to the doctrine of the Church of England ; ſure they meant the Church of Canterbury . But Dr Fell , and Dr Baily are not aſhamed to ſay , that there is nothing in that Book contrary to good manners , which Dr Prideaux would not ſay ; but enough of that . Sirs , the following Hiſtory will testify my compaſſion towards your deceaſed friend , whom I ever oppoſed in a charitable and friendly way . 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . I do not account it any glory to trample upon the carcase of Hector , or to pluck a dead Lion by the beard ; ſhould I miſquote his Book , and make that error mine own by a falſe citation , which I pretend to be his in and Accuſation , you that were the unhappy Licencers of his Book would soon take me tripping . If you conceive that he deſerved a more Honourable burial , be pleaſed to anſwer my Reaſons , and patronise his errors with all the learning Bodleyes Library can afford : or elſe ſtudy his Catechism , pardon my boldness , ſome Courtiers never learned , and ſome Doctors have forgotten their Catechism , or elſe this man we speak of had never been ſo much admired , his Book extolled , or theſe Antichriſtian wars fomented by ſuch great Clerks and busy wits . I looked upon Mr Chillingworth as one who had his head as full of Scruples as it was of Engines , and therefore dealt as tenderly with him as I uſe to do with men of the moſt nice and tender conſciences : for I conſidered , that though Beef muſt bee preſerved with ſalt ; yet Plums muſt be preſerved with ſugar . I can aſſure you I ſtooped as low to him as I could without falling , and you know he is not a wiſe man in the judgement of the Philoſopher , who ſtoops ſo low to another men weakness , that he himself falls into weakness : and it is a Rule with us at Weſtminſter , that he falls into weakness who falls into sin . Do not conceive that I ſnacht up my pen in and angry mood , that I might vent my dangerous wit , and eaſe my overburdened spleen . No , no , I have almoſt forgotten the Viſitation at Merton College , the Denial of my Grace , the plundering of my houſe and little Library : I know when and where and of whom to demand ſatisfaction for all theſe injuries and indignities . I have learned Centum plagas Spartanâ Nobilitate concoquere . I have not yet learned how to plunder others of goods or living , and make my self amends by force of arms . I will not take a living which belonged to any civil , ſtudious , learned Delinquent , unless it be the much neglected Commendam of ſome Lordly Prelate condemned by the known Laws of the Land , and the higheſt Court of the Kingdom for ſome offence of the first magnitude : I can , without ſtraining my conſcience , ſwallow ſuch a gnat , a camel I ſhould ſay , for every one of their Commendams hath a bunch upon its back , and may well make a bunch upon their conſcience . I ſhall not trouble you with any long diſcourſe about State matters , only you will give me leave to ſay what the Lacedaemonian ſlave ſaid , when he stood to be ſold in the market ; 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . and one asked him what he was ? I am ( says he ) a Free man , and ſo am I , for though I have not taken Antidotum contra Caeſarem , yet I have taken Antidotum contra Tyrannidem . I could never yet ſtoop ſo low to the moſt tyrannical Prelate as to cry Your humble Slave . Sirs , we hear you have made a New Almanac at Oxford ; and ſome conceive that you hold correspondence with all the ſwore Planets , and that you have enticed the truſty Sun from his Ecliptic line , and taught him to go Retrograde . We wonder , I muſt tell you , that the Sun never came into Libra , that Opinions , Proteſtations , Actions were seldom or never weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary : and we wondered more , that Venus ( I had almost forgotten my Aſtronomy , and ſaid Iuno ) was shuffled into Virgo's place , and the sign was in the Dogs head , when we did expect it in a more propitious place , the Lions heart . I remember that of Tertullian , Habet & Eccleſia dies Caniculares , the Church of Chriſt hath cauſe to complain of Dog days ; for the Dog does not only show his teeth ; we hear him bark and feel him bite ; we may in every month write the Dog days in capital letters , nay you write them for us ( ſo capital are your crimes ) in letters of blood . What is England become a Wilderness ? if it be not , why are ſo many wild beaſts ſuffered to go lose and prey upon the zealous Proteſtants ? for ſhame chain up thoſe beaſts before the firſt of March : if ſhame work not , fear may , the ſame fear which falls upon the men of Northumberland , the fear of a Scottiſh Reformation : I will not liſten at the door of your Junto to hear what news , nor will I peep into your pretended Parliament , no nor into Merton College , for fear I ſhould ſee ſome ſights like thoſe in the eighth of Ezekiel , Ezek. 8. 16. ſome with their backs towards the Temple of the Lord , and their faces towards the Eaſt ; and if I ſhould look farther , one that is no Prophet tells me , that I may ſee greater abominations then theſe . Sir , I beſeech you keep down your staff : but if you will hold it up , as Eurybiades did , I muſt cry as Themiſtocles did , 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , ſtrike if you pleaſe ; yet hear me , or at leaſt hear what the Prophet says to me , does he not ſpeak of you ? Then he ſaid unto me , Ezek. 8. 17. 18. Haſt thou seen this O son of man . Is it a light thing to the houſe of Iudah , that they commit the abominations which they commit here ? for they have filled the Land with violence , and have returned to provoke me to anger : and lo they put their branch to their noſe . Therefore — read and tremble at the reſt . Come , come away with this learned Atheism , your Judge looks upon you , the ſearcher of hearts and diſcoverer of ſecrets is acquainted with all your plots . The Lord ſees what the Ancients of Oxford do in the dark , every man in the chambers of his imagery : the Lord hears what you ſay — Oh do not ſay as the Ancients of Iſrael ſaid , The Lord sees us not , the Lord hath forſaken the earth . I am afraid that you have the ſame temptations at Oxford , which were preſented to Origen , and Ethiopian woman , and and Idol ; he was ( you know ) put to this unhappy choice , to commit folly with which he pleaſed . Some luſt as mnch after idols , as others do after women ; if in theſe days of liberty you restrain from neither , you do in effect tempt to both , and are the grand ſeducers of the hopeful Gentry : but alas you are guilty of a more ambitious wickedness , it is your ſtudy to ſeduce a King . I remember and old ſtory of King Canutus , who ( as the Chronicler relates ) took off the Crown from his own head , and ſet it upon the Crucifix at Weſtminſter : But tell me ( you that have read ſome Italian Jeſuite more subtle then the Politicians Saint , Saint Machiavel ) do you conceive that you can persuade our King to take off his Crown from his own head , and place it upon your idol the Queen , or her idol the Crucifix , at Oxford ? We have none at Weſtminſter . Well , plot on my Master's , and walk in the light and warmth of that fire which you have kindled ; Iſa . 50. ult . but hear what the Prophet says , Behold all you that kindle a fire , and compass about your ſelves with sparks , walk in the light of your fire , and in the ſparks which you have kindled ; This ſhall you have of mine hand , you ſhall lay down in ſorrow . Pardon our just fear , if we dare not ſay a confederacy to all thoſe Welch Atheiſts , Iriſh Rebels , bloody Papiſts of the French or Spaniſh faction , to whom you ſay , A confederacy ; Aſſociate your ſelves together ( you know what follows ) take counsel together ( in your pretended Parliament ) and it will be brought to nought , Iſa . 8. 9 , 10. enact and pronounce a decree , imagine mischief as a Law , yet you ſhall not proſper , for God is with us . I know you urge the 13 to the Romans , to justify your royal cruelty ; but you know what Chryſoſtome , and many others , have ſaid upon that place : But I ſhall only ask you one queſhion ( with which I ſtopped your friend Chillingworths mouth ) be pleaſed to answer it : Do you believe that Tyranny is Gods ordinance ? I ever held it a violation of Gods ordinance : and whither the ſupreme Judicatory of the Kingdom may not repel that force with force , which would violate Gods ordinance , judge you ; for it is abſurd to talk , as Doctor Ferne does , of a moral reſtraint in ſuch a caſe . Sure I am , the Parliament hath power to raiſe and Army to preſerve Gods ordinance inviolable , Vbi jus humanum , natural vel divinum , arma e • pere jubet , ibi juris autoritas intervenit , etiamſi expreſſa voluntas principis non accedat . Biel. 4. Sent. q . 4. when it cannot be preſerved by any other means : They do certainly reſist Gods ordinance who seek to violate it ; You endeavour to violate it , We to preſerve it ; who is in the fault ? I have examined your great Champion Doctor Ferne his three books , and cannot find any thing in them , whereby the conſcience of and impartial Scholar may be fully reſolved or ſatisfied . It is very impertinent , in my weak judgement , to talk of the privileges of the Kings of Judah , who were immediately elected by God ; or to diſcourſe of the power of the Roman Emperor , or the first draughts of Government in the Saxon and Norman lines ; for Doctor Ferne does acknowledge that it is not injurious to his Majeſties poſterity , Dr Ferne his 2. book p. 33. that the King swears to a limited power , a power limited by privileges and immunities , granted , or reſtored to the people ſince the conqueſt ; which privileges grants , Dr Fern ib . p. 27 liberties , though not original , yet are they irrevocable . Doctor Ferne diſtinguiſhes between the Title of the King , and the Power of the King ; but we did never ſo much as once queſtion his Majeſties Title , whither it be limited or no ? It is confeſſed that his power , and therefore much more the exerciſe of his power , is limited by the Privileges of the Parliament , the immunities of the Subject , and the Kings own oath : Nay , it is acknowledged that the two houſes of Parliament are in a ſort coordinate with his Majeſty , Dr Ferns 2. book p. 6. to ſome act or exerciſing of the ſupreme power , by a fundamental conſtitution Truly here is , in my judgement , ſo much granted , that the reſt need not be diſputed . But what if theſe powers be divided , and claſh one againſt the other ? why then the power is not fully in King or Parliament , for the power which is in the three Estates is ſuspended , whilst one part ſuſpends : Book 2 p. 34. So Doctor Ferne . Give me leave to ask him , and you , whither the power of the Militia be not in the three Eſtates , as well as the power of making Laws ? if it be not , then ſure the power of making Laws is to no purpoſe , becauſe they have no power to defend or enforce I awe : and if the power of the Militia be in the three Eſtates , then the Kings power of levying , arming men , etc. is ſuſpended by the several Ordinances of Parliament ; for it is Doctor Ferns concluſion , that the power which is in the three Eſtates is ſuſpended whilst one part ſuspends ; Ergo , much more if two Eſtates ſuspend . But on the other ſide , I deſire Doctor Ferne to show how the Kingdom is ſecured by the government of three Eſtates , if the two houſes of Parliament have not ſufficient power to preſerve the King and the Kingdom , in caſe the King refuſe to preſerve it or him . Book 2. p 28. It is unreaſonable ( says Doctor Ferne ) that the ſupply ſhould be made by the body only , without the head : nay rather , Doctor , it is unreaſonable for the Head to neglect the preſervation of it self , and the body ; but it is very reaſonable for to lift up both arms , to defend the head , and the whole body ; and therefore reaſonable for both houſes to take up arms , and lift up their arms , put forth their whole ſtrength to defend the King and themſelves . Book 2. page . 6. Doctor Ferne talks of a Fundamental conſtitution , which hath provided this temper of three Eſtates , as the reaſonable means of our ſafety . But I muſt confess , that it cannot enter into my dull pate to conceive , that our Government is of any settled temper ; or that we have any reaſonable means provided for the ſafety of this Kingdom , by that fundamental conſtitution , if the King may do what he pleaſes , ſeize on our goods , ( it's Doctor Ferns ſuppoſition ) impriſon our perſons , kill us outright , and ( which is worſe ) overthrow our Laws , our • iberties , our Religion , and all at once , and by conſequence enſlave not only the bodies , but the conſciences of our poſterity ; and there is no more power in both houſes of Parliament to protect us by force against force , then if we had no ſuch remedy provided , as the government of three Eſtates . Are we not ſubjected to and abſolute Monarch , if the other two Eſtates have no legal power to relieve our neglected or oppreſſed Commonwealth ? how are we ſecured by the temper of three Eſtates ? or how can it be called a temper ? or a temper of three Eſtates ? if the firſt of the three may oppress us , and the other two have no power to relieve us ? Sure I am , that by this account there is but one Eſtate that hath a true power , and therefore that Estate muſt be and eſtate of abſolute Monarchy , which Dr Fern himself seems to abhor ; and yet ſo vain is that Doctor , as to call the Power of Supply legally placed in both Houſes of Parliament , a Conceit , nay a vain Conceit ; his words are theſe ; The Conceit of Supply by the two Houſes in caſe the King refuſe ( to preſerve the Kingdom ) is a vain Conceit : 2 Book p. 28. and if that be true , then I muſt conclude , that this proviſion of a Temper of three Eſtates is not Temper , no proviſion , two of the Eſtates are no Eſtates ; or elſe this proviſion is in the phraſe of Doctor Ferne , Ib. ubi ſupra . a lame proviſion , which argues the firſt contrivement of our Anceſtors very inconſiderate ; becauſe then it follows , that there is no Reaſonable Mean of ſafety provided for this Kingdom by that Fundamental Conſtitution which provided this Temper of three Eſtates,2 Book p. 16. ſo the Doctor loves to call it , though he make one Eſtate ſo predominant , that as there is no Temperamentum ad pondus , ſo there will be no Temperamentum ad juſtitiam neither by his conceit . How ſay you Sir John , are not you of my persuasion , or are you aſhamed to tread in the steps of your learned Countryman ? The Lord open your eyes , and clear your eyesight ; you are naturally ſharp-ſighted , but if your eye look read or yellow , you know your diſeaſe by the symptom . It ſball be my prayer , that your eye may neither be dim nor bloodshotten . Iudg. 9. 24. Conſider that the blood of the 70 was laid upon Abimelech their brother who ſlew them , and upon the men of Shechem , which had aided him by strengthening his hands to kill his brothers . Whither you have strengthened their hands who ſlew their Brothers , only for being too zealous in the maintenance of that Religion which you profess , I appeal to God , your Conſcience , and the evidence of the fact . If you have dealt truly and ſincerely with thisAc ne maledicis verborum in eos uti conviciis arguamur cauſam perditionis publicae ne cuiquam ignota fit non tacemus , Hilar. contra Arian p. 214 Reforming Parliament , nay with your own party , rejoice and flatter your ſelves with hope of a deſired success ; but if not , then take heed the curſe of Iotham do not fallen upon you : Iudg. 9. 19 , 20 , 23 and 57 verſes . there may be and evil ſpirit ſent between the Iriſh and Engliſh , the French and Spaniſh factions ; nay , fire may come out from the Queen and conſume the Prelates , and fire from the Prelates and conſume the Papiſts ; or elſe there may come a fire from the North , a fire to purge and refine , not to deſtroy ; which is my prayer , and will be your happiness . I will not hold you any longer upon the rack : Learn the firſt leſſon of Chriſtianity , Self-denial ; deny your own will , and ſubmit your ſelves to Gods ; deny your reaſon , and ſubmit to faith : Reaſon tells you that there are ſome things above reaſon , and you cannot be ſo unreaſonable as to make reaſon judge of thoſe things which are above reaſon : Remember that Maſter Chillingworth ( your friend ) did run mad with reaſon , and ſo loſt his reaſon and religion both at once : he thought he might truſt his reaſon in the higheſt points ; his reaſon was to be Judge , whither or not there be a God ? Whither that God wrote any Book ? Whither the books uſually received as Canonical be the books , the Scriptures of God ? What is the ſenſe of thoſe books ? What Religion is beſt ? What Church pureſt ? Come , do not wrangle , but believe , and obey your God , and then I ſhall be encouraged to ſubſcribe my self Your Friend and Servant , FRANCIS CHEYNELL .