TO THE HONOURABLE Houſe of COMMONS , now aſſembled in PARLIAMENT . I Dare not diſpute your Power , for even Dr. Dr. Fern his Conſcience satisfied lately printed at Oxford . ſect . 2. page 6. Ferne himſelf is Satisfied in his Conſcience ( or elſe he would never have granted it in his Tract , entitled Conſcience Satisfied ) that the two Houſes of Parliament are , in a ſort , Coordinate with His Majeſty and aliquid , to ſome Act , or Exerciſing of Supreme Power , that is , to the making of Laws , by yielding their conſent : and this ( says he ) they have by a Fundamental Conſtitution : Nay , the Order of the Houſe of Commons cannot in reaſon but oblige all the Commons of England ; it does not indeed oblige the King , he is exempt by his Sovereignty ; the Lords plead Peerage , I have not yet herd of any other Plea , and therefore I will not diſpute your Power , but obey your Order . You ſhall have the glory to command , mihi autem obſequii gloria relicta eſt , pardon the expreſſion : we Merton College men have been uſed to Tacitus , it's his expreſſion . The times are ſad , my Text was ſeaſonable : Though Babylon be at Room , yet there are ſome sons and daughters of Babylon too here in England : Sion is now ſurrounded by them , and your Honourable Houſe is moſt eminently oppoſed by them : Many there are that plot againſt you , all the Antichriſtian Politicians in the Chriſtian world are beating their brains how to deſtroy you , but their Plots are diſcovered , their Designs defeated by the watchful providence of and Omniſcient God , Many there are that fight againſt you , againſt you , I ſay , for it is evident that thoſe many thouſands who are up in Arms , do not fight for the King , but againſt the Parliament : This man fights for a place at Court , and the other , perchance , for a place in the Church , or rather over the Church : Oh bloody Simony ! ſome fight for Pluralities , and ſome for Bishoprics , ſome for Patents , ſome for Monopolies ; ſome have loſt their places in the Star-Chamber , and High Commiſſion , and have ſcarce any thing to • razed to but the ſword . The Papiſts fight to ſubvert Religion : Delinquents , to ſubvert the Laws , and the Parliament too , becauſe it hath power to make , declare , enforce the Law : The Roisters fight to deſtroy your perſons , and gain your eſtates to pay their Tavern-tickets : and yet there is a Divine , one Dr. • yearn , who ſeems to excuſe all this , and by his excuſe , does certainly encourage them , to do what is inexcuſable . And the good Doctor would fain persuade you and all the Commons of England , to fit ſtill the whilst , and loose your Religion for Conſcience • ache ; your Laws , Liberties , Eſtates , Lives , for Peace ſake : And what will Peace advantage your Poſterity , if the Army in the North will give them Peace upon no other terms then theſe ; that either they muſt turn Papiſts , or elſe be content to be Beggars , and which is worſe , Slaves ? Some that gloried in the Title of Royaliſts , do now perceive , That it is not enough , to ſtand for the King , unless they will declare themſelves for the Queen : and they are not a little ſtartled at that : Is this the Biſhops holy War for the Catholic Church ? Be it the Biſhops War , says Dr. Ferne in his firſt Book ▪ Well , be it ſo : Why , then ſure the Biſhops have much blood to anſwer for . For it is well known to this whole Kingdom , and to ſome Churches abroad , that the Parliament deſired to have all Church-matters fairly debated , 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , as Nazianzen speaks , not by and Army , but by and Aſſembly ; the Biſhops then have clearly declined this Rational way of trial , and taken up Arms againſt the Parliament in the old quarrel , and ſure the Parliament hath good reaſon to defend themſelves . It ſeems the Biſhops arguments are ſpent , and therefore they call for Powder and Bullets , to prove that Prelacy is Jure divino . I ſay Prelacy , for there is a great deal of difference between Prelates , and Biſhops . Pontifices nunc Bella juvant , ſunt caetera nugae . Palingenius . What they cannot prove by the Word , they would fain make good by the ſword . What ? becauſe men of tender conſciences can be no longer purſued in their Courts , muſt they be purſued even unto death , by force of Arms ? but ſtay : What's their fault ? Why , they are enemies : They are enemies to ſuch pomp and ſtate as ( ſome Biſhops cannot but confess ) may well be spared . This Plot came from Rome , for I remember Hoſtienſis says , That from the days of Pope Adrian , till his time , the Cardinals and Biſhops of Rome had ſcarce ever laid down their Arms. Nunc belligerantur Epiſcopi , nec ali • worser fere quam belligerantur . Eraſ . Annot in cap . 3. Luc • . Eraſmus complained , that in his time the Biſhops were men of war . When the Duke D'Alva tyrannized over the Netherlands , there were new Biſhops Mr. Fullers Pro ▪ fane State . 〈 ◊ 〉 . 19. Sees erected in every City , and then preſently the Inquiſition was brought in upon them : as if there could never have been any abſolute tyranny without the help of the Biſhops . But you will tell me , that the Men may be faulty , and yet the Order blameless . I anſwer , that the dignity of their Order ſhould be tried by the Word , and the men being faulty , ſhould not be protected by the Sword ▪ Bluſh you heavens , and be aſhamed , Oh earth , that ever proud ambitious spirits ſhould inflame differences between King and Parliament , only that they may feed themſelves with vain hope's of being Biſhops at laſt , and enjoying Pluralities the whilst . Let the Searcher of hearts judge between us , and let them beware that they do not hear aconfounding voice , like that in the Hiſtorian , Quintili Vare red Legiones , Tu Epiſcope red Legiones , red Animas . I was bold in my Sermon to lay Prelacy as low as Prelatical men have laid Monarchy . I was too bold , they ſay , in calling the Pope whore ſo often . But it is as certain that Pope John the eighth , ( or Joan the firſt ) was a Whore , as the credit of impartial Hiſtorians ( I except the Sacred See Mr. Alexander Co • k his Dialogue about Pope • oane . Cognomine Anglicus , nation Moguntinus ▪ vide F • ſci • temporum ata •• 6. and An. 854. only ) can make a matter of fact certain , which was done ſo long ago . The ancient Popiſh Hiſtorians acknowledge this truth . The Successor of Leo the fourth is generally deſcribed , by name John the eighth , by firname Engliſh , by place a Pope , by ſ • x a woman , aod by her luſt a Whore : She tyrannized ſomewhat above two years , ſome reckon the months and days ; ſhe played the beaſt with one of her own ſervants , and died in travail , in time of ſolemn Proceſſion in the high ſtreet . No man ever went about to prove this Story a Fable , but he proved himſelf a Foole. For this ſtory is confirmed by the teſtimony of 〈 … 〉 & 〈 … 〉 Theodoricus de N • em , one of the Popes Secretary's , by 〈 … 〉 Charanza Archbiſhop of Toledo , by 〈 … 〉 • ulgoſus , sometime Duke of Gen • a , by WORSER • … m • mora • … Platina , keeper of the Library in the Vatican at Rome , a man commanded to write the truth by De 〈 … 〉 Pope Sixtus the fourth ; a man that had been racked and deprived of his dignities by Paul the ſecond : it seems he bade spoken truth too freely , and therefore Sixtus reſtored him to his 〈 … 〉 dignities , and did not only enjoin , but encourage him to write the truth . To theſe I might add John of Paris , Divinity Reader in the Ʋniverſity of Paris , g Pola •• s and Archbiſhop , and the Po • es Pe • … tiary , h Trithemius Abbot of S • . Martins Monaſtery , i Philippus Bergomenſis , I will not omit Krantius , he is and excellent Chronographer , and k Bellarmine says , not to be ſuspected , becauſe he wrote before Luther , nor is Achil • es Grass • erus to be d • ſrespected , becauſe he collected his Epitome out of very changed •• ce Hiſtorians . Here is weight in theſe teſtimonies , if any man look for number , he may ſee Sigebert , Boccace , Mantuan , Petrarch , Gotefridus , Viterbien • s , Palmerius , Nauclerus , • abellicus , Volateran , Schedel , and diverse others cited at • arge in that learned • ra • tO of Mr. Alexander Cook , ſet out on purpoſe to confirm this truth : or he may read Mr. Bell his Mo • ives , or his Survey of Popery ; Books that I never yet ſaw anſwered . But what if one Pope were a Whore , and delivered of a Baſtard before all the People , peradventure the reſt of the Popes 〈 … 〉 WORSER 〈 … 〉 . were more holy . No , John the eleventh was promoted to the Popedom by Theodora a famous Whore : John the twelfth , was a Baſtard begotten of Marozia ( another men wife ) by Pope Sergius the third : John the thirteenth abuſed his father's Concu • … e . Some Popes have been notorious for Inceſt and Sodomy , Julius the ſecond , Martin the ſecond , and diverse others ; Boniface the eighth had iſſue by both his Nieces , Lucretia was daughter and whore to Pope Alexander the ſixth ; her Epitaph will be more laſting then Brass or Marble , Hoc jacet in tumulo Lucretia nomine , said re Thais , Alexandri filia , ſponſa , nurus . You may ſee more inſtances in Platina , O •• phrius , Sleidan . We are ſo much given to Roman Courtſhip now adays , and our ears have been ſo little uſed till now of late to the old expreſſions of zealous Proteſtants , that ſuch like paſſages will be counted little less then railing by ſome Gentle Readers ; but let ſuch hear what Reverend Dr. Abbor , sometime Biſhop of Sarum , a man of a meek spirit , obſerved when he treated of this Argument . The Ib. ubi ſupra page . 199. Pontifical Chair , says he , was ſo infected with that She-Pope and famous Whore John the eighth , that ſcarce any man ever ſince climbed up to that Seat of Peſtilence , but he hath stunk of that , or ſome other Whore . I will not give you occaſion to ſtop your noſes , by ripping up the beastliness of the fat Monks , and wanton Prieſts , whom the people might well call Father's , becauſe they begotten Hoſ • jens de Orig. M • nach lib . 6 c . 3. ſo many Baſtards ; Non male ſunt Monachis gra • a indita nomina Patrum , Cum numerent natos hic & ubique ſuos . There hath been enough ſaid , to give ( and I know all impartial men will take ) ſatisfaction . The great Design I had in my Sermon , was to overthrow Babylon , and built up Sion . I touched upon the Heresy , Idolatry , Tyranny , of the Antichriſtian Faction , that Proteſtants might be more • e watchful , and Popery more odious , It is my daily prayer , that God would unite the King and Parliament ; and my great Requeſt to your Honourable Houſe was , that you would put forth your ſtrength for the recovery of that Power , which the Antichriſtian Faction by force , or fraud hath wreſted out of the Kings hand , that when it is regained , it may be settled upon the Kings Royal Perſon , and Poſterity . For this end and purpoſe , I made and humble Motion to you , that you would ſeriouſly conſider what Points we muſt ſtand upon , and what Errors we muſt Proteſt againſt , that ſo there might be a more special and punctual Covenant of Peace drawn up , ſubſcribed , nay ſealed , and King and Parliament might Victoriouſly join in and happy Union againſt the Antichriſtian Faction , this in England , which is intimately Confederate with that in Ireland , and equally Rebellious againſt the Kings Authority in His higheſt Court of Juſtice . In my diſcourſe about the Covenant , I mentioned a Book , which directs us how to make a Chriſtian Pacification by a thorough Reformation : The Author of that Book did not ſet himſelf to dispute with Turks , or Jews , or gross Papiſts , but with ſome treacherous Reconcilers , who under colour of Pacification , and ſome pretence of a moderate Reformation , would take away half Chriſt at leaſt , and three quarters of our old Creed , as if they could make us amends , by giving us a New one , and we might Covenant to tear Chriſt and his Goſpel to pieces for Peace ſake . The Proteſtants talked much of the Cauſe of Chriſt ( says the ſame Author ) as long as they had 〈 … 〉 . their ſwords by their ſides , but when they had laid down their Arms , and were in danger of their lives , then they forgot the Cauſe of Chriſt , and began to think that zeal was rashness , and conſtancy stubbornness . But if we love Chriſt and our ſouls better then our lives , let us reſolve never to embrace any conditions of Peace which mingle the Inventions of men with the truth of God : Let us maintain the Doctrine of free Juſtification , our Salvation depends upon it , and let us preſerve the Worſhip of God entire and pure ; for says he , if we look only to matters of Faith , and contend not for purity of Worſhip , we ſeem to have less care of Gods honour , then of our Salvation . Moreover , in matters of ſuch moment , we muſt weigh and conſider every phraſe , word , title , leſt by obſcure , or ſlipper • terms , our Adverſaries evade , and leave us in the lurch . This is the ſubſtance of the firſt Chapter . His ſecond Chapter concerns Juſtification , and he would have us conſider , that it is not enough to ſay , we are juſtified by Faith , but we muſt ſay , we are juſtified by Faith , becauſe Chriſts righteousness is imputed , and our ſins are not imputed to us that believe . We muſt not deny our Regeneration , and yet we muſt not confound it with our juſtification . We muſt obey God with all our heart , and all our ſtrength , and yet we muſt not plead any other obedience for our Juſtification at the Tribunal of God , ſave the obedience of Ieſus Chriſt . Our good works ſhall be rewarded , that's encouragement enough ; but the reward is grounded upon a free Pardon , and a gracious acceptation : if we were not firſt juſtified , our works would not be accepted , nor rewarded ; Becauſe our perſons are accepted in Chriſt , therefore our works are rewarded for Chriſt ; that imperfect righteousness of works which we have , does wholly depend upon the righteousness of faith ; now the imperfection of our righteousness is pardoned , the ſincerity of our obedience is accepted , and yet we are not juſtified by our own ſincere obedience , no not in part , but are only ( and wholly , becauſe perfectly ) juſtified by the complete and perfect obedience of Ieſus Chriſt . We muſt then truſt with our whole ſoul to the obedience of Ieſus Chriſt , and not truſt at all to any good quality infuſed into us , or good works wrought by us , for our Justification : This is the pure Proteſtant Religion , commended to us in the ſecond Chapter . In his third Chapter , he does largely explain the office , and uſe of Faith , becauſe Faith is the inſtrument of our juſtification , and we can never keep the unity of Faith in the bound of Peace , if we do not agree about the Nature , or the Offices , and uſe of Faith . I am ſorry I muſt lay aſide this Book , but if you will be pleaſed to take it up , I may conclude my Epiſtle ; only give me leave to renew my ſuit to you , concerning a National Covenant , a National Thankſgiving , a ſpeedy and free Aſſembly : If the Prelatical men are diſpleaſed , that ſo many Biſhops are paſſed by , let them remember what the Archbiſhop of Canterbury Schol G ▪ Naz. worser • worser • … vit Cer. Archb. Cant. Relat. p. 27. says , That there have been ſome corrupt crafty Biſhops , who by plots and tricks have diſturbed all Synods , and moſt Counsels . Aſtutos & veteratoriae improbitatis Epiſcopos , qui are • ibus ſuis ac dolis omnia Concilia perturbabant . I ſhall conclude all with that Prayer which I uſed at the Faſt . Lord , never was there any Kingdom that made and higher Appeal to thy Majeſty then our poor Kingdom hath made : Both ſides appeal to thee , not only by a War , but a Proteſtation Lord , be pleaſed to decide the Controversy , let that ſide prevail which does moſt ſincerely deſire thy glory , the Kings good , the Kingdoms welfare by and happy Reformation , and a Chriſtian Peace : I am ſure you will ſay Amen to the prayer of Your daily Orator at the Throne of Grace , FRA : CHEYNELL .