To the Right Honourable , the Houſe of PEERS . Right Honourable , GOd hath given us four Books to ſtudy : The Book of Scriptures ; The Book of Conſcience : In which , there are ſo many Errata's , that all Books were Written to mend that one Book of Conſcience . The Book of Creation , and therein the Treatiſe of Beaſts , deſerves our ſad conſideration : We may read ſuch excellent things in Beaſts , and ſee ſuch abominable things in men : That I may ſafely ſay , All they who quarrel at the Language of the Holy Ghoſt , in my Text , think too highly of themſelves , and too cheaply of the Beaſts . Wiſe men may go to School to Ants , Bees , Elephants , Serpents , etc. And moſt men to the Ox , and Ass , Iſai . 1. 3 , 4. What ſtrange things have Beaſts done by fantasy , and memory helped with experience ? Believe it , The providence , wit , do • ilitie , sagacity , meekness , temperance , chastity , diligence of Beaſts , ſet forth to the life by Baſil , Ambroſe , Chryſoſtome , Auguſtine , Ariſtotle , Pliny , Atheneus , Elian , Geſner , and the reſt , may put too many Nobles to the bluſh . The laſt Book , is the Book of Providence , and we are compelled to ſtudy this Book ſo often in theſe ſad times , that ſome 〈 ◊ 〉 feared our Divines will turn Stateſmen : But you know , my Lords , That he • ho is to Preach a ſolemn Sermon , does not Preach constionably , unless he Preach ſeaſonably : We muſt ſtudy how to apply spiritual Remedies to our ſick State ; and it is our duty to ſtir up you , to apply ſome civil Remedies : But for my part , I had rather be Preaching of Faith and Love , Chriſt and Heaven , for I am not cut out for Court-work ; yet ſ • re I ſhould have more Courtſhip then Conſcience , if I ſhould crave your pardon , or make any ſneaking Apology , for preſſing Scripture-notions , and phra • … or any neceſſary truths , home upon your conſcience . You did command me to Preach before you , and I was bold for to Preach to you : Some paſſages of my Sermon were ſharp , and others bitter ; but if Pills be well acuted , they will purge the better : My roughness is like that of a file , to ſmooth and poliſh my Auditors ; and if by that means , you become more bright , and pure , I ſhall not repent that I was no ſmoother . Miniſters , eſpecially in times of war , are inſtead of Drums and Trumpets , we muſt not let you ſleep in quiet ; but ſome expreſſions of mine , may ſeem too blunt , why , a Whotſtone's blunt , yet ſerves to ſharpen what was dull before , though made of excellent mettle . We are enjoined by the Directory , to give every one his own portion , without neglecting the meaneſt , or ſparing the greateſt in their ſins . 〈 ◊ 〉 moved your Honour's almoſt in down right terms , to pass that Self-denying Ordinance , which binds not only Lords , but Commons alſo , to deny all private intereſts , that you and they , may unanimouſly promote the Public Service : Your Honour does not depend on Wax and Parchment ; and it is clear , that rebus ſic ſtantibus . You will gain more Honour by laying down your Commiſſions , then by keeping them . Your Lordship's are pleaſed to approve , what was delivered , by a double Order ; the firſt of Thanks , the ſecond for Printing . My Lords , I underſtand and obey , only give me leave , to preſent ſome humble requeſts to you , which being granted , will increase your Honour . Be pleaſed to conſult how to relieve diſtreſſed Ireland , and beſieged Taunton : How to purge the Committtee's ( in the Counties near London ) in Eſſex , Suſſex , Surrey , Hampſhire : It is proper to give them Physic now at Spring ; you will thereby do your ſelves , thoſe Counties , and the City right . Conſider , how you may unſtop the mouth of the other Fountain : We fight for Learning , as well as Piety ; How to prefer able Divines that have ſpent their ſpirits , and loſt their voice , and are by that means disabled for any Preaching Service , but admirably qualified for Writing , if they had leisure and encouragement to put Pen to Paper : How to rebuke preſumptuous Incendiaries , who occaſion the bloodſhed of many hundreds , plunder thouſands , and yet hope when they have done all the miſchief they can , to make their peace for 500 l. and get a Warrant from ſome Juſtice of Peace , to receive the Sacrament : Finally , How to relieve the Orphans and Widows , of them who have loſt their lives ; and maintain ſuch as have loſt their limbs , in this preſent Service . Keep a preciſe watch , my Lords , over your own ſouls ; They who have the greateſt temptations , muſt allow themſelves the leaſt liberty . Prepare , and wait for the coming of our Saviour , Chriſt will wait upon ▪ them , that wait for him : Theſe are Honourable Services , and you cannot deſire a more Honourable reward , then to be Honoured , nay , ſerved , by the King of Kings , and Lord of Lords , Luk. 12. 37. That you may never be weary of doing him ſervice , who will never be weary of doing you good ; is the Prayer of your Honours , moſt humble Servant Francis Cheynell .