TO THE HONOURABLE THE COMMONS Aſſembled in PARLIAMENT . Honourable and Worthy , AS the LORD repreſented theſe truths to you before , in the Ministry of the Word ; ſo now again , He offers them to your ſecond conſideration , in this Printed Book ; becauſe he hath a mind , you ſhould take notice of them . And I muſt needs ſay , it is the LORD's voice to you ; and I hope he will move your hearts , to regard it ; though Satan hath mightily bestirred himſelf , by caſting and ill Vizard upon the Truth , to make you diſlike it . But if you like CHRIST the worſe for a Face ſpit on and buffeted , you may want a SAVIOUR : And if you like the truth of CHRIST the worſe for a scratched Face , you may make your dwelling place , with Error & Humane Doctrines , which are all one . Micaiah had no ſooner delivered the truth of GOD , but there was a Falſe Prophet , to ſmite him on the face : the LORD no ſooner prepares Inſtruments to reveal his truth , but Satan hath his inſtruments , ready to turn the truth of GOD into a lie . And this GOD ſuffers to be done , to exerciſe your skill and wisdom , that you might learn , not to be offended at the truth with the World ; but to receive and love the truth , notwithſtanding all the indignities and reproaches of men . When you read what you have herd , you muſt needs acknowledge it to be the mind of GOD , if you received the anointing of the Spirit : and the truth herein contained , ſhall prevail with all that belong to GOD . For my part ; I am not careful touching the success of it , I can truſt GOD with that , whoſe Word it is . For , as the Doctrine of the World , hath the weak power of the World to carry on that ; ſo the Doctrine of Ieſus Chriſt , hath the mighty power of GOD to carry on that ; and the power of GOD in the World ſhall as ſoon be made void , as the true Doctrine of the Goſpel , though called Error , Heresy , & Schism , and have all the miſguiſes of Hell put upon it . The truth you then herd delivered , and may here read again , ſhall carry all oppoſition , and oppoſers before it , and none ſhall be able to ſtand againſt it , that engage againſt it : And of this , both your ſelves and this generation ſhall be Witneſſes . If any think that I gave too much power to CHRIST , in the Reforming of the Church , his own Body ; let them conſider again , that too much cannot be given to CHRIST in GODS kingdom , ſeeing he is all in all in it . Neither is that exaltation the Gospel gives to CHRIST in this Business , any diminution to your ſelves : neither by making CHRIST all in the Kingdom of GOD , are you made ever the less , in the Kingdoms of this World . But what ever power the Word of GOD hath given you , I will deny you none of it ; nay , I will be among the firſt , that ſhall attribute it to you . And do deſire , you would not more any of you be diſpleaſed for attributing the Reformation of the Church , to CHRIST alone , then the Redemption , Justification , Sanctification , or Glorification of it , to CHRIST alone : The former being every whit , as great and glorious a work of CHRIST , as the latter . I do moſt willingly allow you your Thrones in the Kingdoms of this World , but only deſire to reſerve to Chriſt his own Throne in the Kingdom of GOD . There are thoſe indeed that would lift you up to this Throne , not becauſe they would have you fit there , but place them there : they would aſcribe to you , the power only due to the Son of GOD , not becauſe they would have you uſe it , but would uſe it themſelves ; they would derive power from you , to do that , which they ſay you cannot do : and the power they attribute to you in the things of GOD , they ſay , is not well in your hands , but in theirs . And here I would deſire you , to take notice of the working of the Mystery of Iniquity , from the Head , to the very Little-toes of the Man of Sin : At firſt you know the Pope intereſted himſelf in the Emperor , and Powers of the World ( for his own advantage and ſupport no doubt , rather then for theirs ) after , the Prelates ſucceſsively , ſaid to worldly Kings , Lend us your power , and we will lend you ours ; Let our ſpiritual power deal in temporal things , and your temporal power ſhall deal in spiritual things : and ſtill the Clergy-power ( which called it ſelf ſpiritual ) ſo linked it ſelf with the temporal , that the power that was not of God , might be upheld , by the power that was of God ; and ( having god this advantage ) they cried , Deſtroy one , Deſtroy both ; and ſo the Prelates were wont to ſay , No Biſhop , no King . And their ſucceſſors in the Kingdom of Antichriſt ſtill cry , No Miniſter , no Magiſtrate ; and ſo ſtill mingle intereſts and powers with the civil Magiſtrate ; that under the Magiſtrate , the power of GOD , they might cunningly shroud that power that is not of GOD . And thus they ſtill , under the name of the Magiſtrate , ſeek themſelves , and the drawing of that power that is only his , from him to themſelves , to whom it does not belong : Being , in the mean time , really againſt Magiſtracy , further then it is ſerviceable to their own ends . Whereas , we reckon Magiſtracy , not less Magiſtracy , no less the Ordinance of GOD , though we ſuffer under it , and by it . This Clergie-Antichriſtian power where ever it is , will ſtill fit upon the power of the Nation ; the power of Antichriſt , ſo domineering over the powers of the World , that none but the power of CHRIST can caſt it off . That will ſtill be uppermoſt , what power ſoever is supreme . Beside all the experience of former Ages ( which is the greateſt wonder in the World , that men conſider not ) GOD gives you ſparklings enough of it , in this Age ; ſome preaching , That the government of the Church ( which they make outward and viſible , and over men's eſtates , bodies , and lives , ) belongs not to King nor Parliament , but to the Miniſters and their Elders : and better it is , there ſhould be no government at all ( ſay they ) then not in their hands by whom it ſhould be . And here lies the Mystery of Iniquity in this , That they make the whole Kingdom a Church , and then require a power , authority and juriſdiction in their Church-Kingdome , which the Magiſtrate is not to deal withal , but themſelves . Whereas we acknowledge the whole power of the Kingdom , to belong to the Magiſtrate , and only give unto CHRIST the power of his own Kingdom , which is not of the World , but spiritual and heavenly . And here alſo , fully to deliver my self from miſapprehenſions , I underſtand not by the Church of CHRIST , any company of men whatſoever , who under the notion of a Church or Saints , or any other title , may plead privilege or exemption of their lives , liberties , or eſtates , from the power of the Civil Magiſtrate ; for that were to justify the Papal , Prelatical , or any other government of a newer name , which under pretence of Ius Divinum , ſhall ſet up and exerciſe and outward and viſible power and juriſdiction , free and exempted from the authority and power of the civil Magiſtrate ; which I utterly both deny and deteſt , as Antichriſtian . And therefore , I humbly repreſent , how prejudicial this may prove to you in the end , to ſuffer a Generation of men in the Kingdom , under the name either of Church or Clergy , whoſe power , preferment , and intereſt is different and excentrical from the power , welfare , and intereſt of the Kingdom ; and what a balance they may prove againſt the State , where they live , in turning and tumultuous times , as they themſelves know , ſo ( I hope ) you clearly perceive it , as well as they . How they already dare lift up the Head againſt you , who ſees not ? How do they manifeſt their diſcontents againſt you , in Pamphlets and Pulpits , in their Sermons and Prayers , becauſe you have not settled the Government , they have ſtudied out for you , as Ius Divinum , and the certain and unchangeable mind of GOD ; though they can neither make it out , to your ſelves , nor to any body elſe , by the Word , that it is ſo . And how do they labour to inſtill , into the people , their own diſcontents ; persuading them , you have done nothing at all , becauſe you have not done all that ever they would have you do , though you can ſee neither Scripture nor reaſon for it . And for this cauſe , rendering you every where odious to the people . Many other things beside , do they ſcramble up , and uſe againſt you , which they conceive may make for your diſadvantage , and disinterest in the people : becauſe they think , they ſhall never get much higher , except they make you a little lower ; for they muſt ( according to the law of Antichriſt ) ſet their feet on your power , to get up to their own . Some diſcoveries of this ſpirit you might ſee in Mr. Loves Sermon , telling you before your faces , and before the people ; That ſome called you a Mongrel Parliament : Indeed the King ( as I underſtand ) called the Parliament at Oxford ſo , but Mr. Love was the firſt ( for ought I can learn ) that ever nam you ſo , and I wiſh he may be the laſt , ( but any Doctrine is Orthodox , out of a men mouth of his Order ) farther threatening you with a diſcerning people , to look into your actions , and to ſpy out your boundless privileges ; as if you muſt do juſtice , not out of the love of Righteousness , but out of fear of Mr. Loves diſcerning people . Telling you alſo , The Clergy had done as much ſervice for you in their Pulpits , as your Regiments in the Field : that by this means he might mind you , what they can do againſt you , as well as for you , if you be not ſervants to their designs ; for they that have heretofore been for you , can ( if they pleaſe ) turn to others againſt you , who ſhall be more for themſelves . And in many other things flying out againſt your worthy Commanders in the Army , upon suspicions of his own ; and againſt the Articles at Oxford , etc. For it is no proper Presbyterial Doctrine , that does not ( at leaſt ) meddle with the affairs of the State , which in time they may hopefully come to order . In theſe and diverse other things , he took his full ſwinge , all of them ( no doubt ) deeply appertaining to the mystery of the Goſpel . The other things , he spoke , to the diſadvantage of the ignorant and weak , and neither to the Truths diſadvantage , nor mine , I ſhall clear in a ſhort Reply , ſet after the Diſcourſe ; and ſo ſhall trouble you no farther , with any ſuch stuff , but only with a ſmart expreſsion , from one ( it ſeems ) of ſome note in the Aſſembly , who ſaid , If the Parliament approved Mr. Dells Sermon , it were no blaſphemy to ſay , They were no Parliament . So that it ſeems you ſhall be no longer a Parliament then you approve , what the Aſſembly approves ; but the Kingdom hope's you are built upon a better foundation . And to him ( who hath been ſo bold with you ) I ſhall only crave leave to Reply in your preſence : If the Aſſembly ( which I hope they will not ) ſhould condemn that Doctrine of the Goſpel for the ſubſtance of it , delivered then by Mr. Dell ; it will be no blaſphemy to ſay , They are the enemies of the truth of Chriſt : And ( I hope ) the laſt prop of Antichriſt in the Kingdom . For your ſelves , Honourable and Worthy , I beſeech you conſider , that GOD is wonderful in counſel , and excellent in working ; and that all power is given to CHRIST , in Heaven and in Earth , that he might give free paſſage to the Goſpel . And therefore take heed , after GOD hath blessed your Power and Forces in the field , and ſubdued that Malignant power that was againſt you , and hath given you a little peace and quietness in the Kingdom ; you do not now begin your affairs with diſcountenancing , diſreliſhing , much less condemning , the faithful and true Word of GOD , witneſſed in the Scriptures , and confessed to by the faithful and Martyrs of Christ , in all Ages ; and with the ſetting off from you , that Ministry , that hath most of the Spirit in it , leſt the Lord withdraw his preſence from you , and your latter end be not anſwerable to your beginnings . It might be eaſily showed unto you , how many great and wiſe Kings and Magiſtrates , acting according to humane wiſdom and prudence , and deſpiſing or neglecting the wisdom of the Word ; have with all their own wisdom , prudence , and designs , deſtroyed themſelves , and their Kingdoms : For it is written , He takes the wiſe in their own craftiness : And again , The Lord knows the thoughts of men , that they are but vain . And therefore renounce the wiſdom of the world , with all its fleſhly Counſels , and cleave cloſe to the true , faithful , and ſincere Doctrine of the Goſpel ; and then , though you have many enemies and Kingdoms againſt you , you ſhall not be moved , but GOD will yet establiſh you , in all the ſhakings of the World , and your Enemies ſhall be as a thing of nought . I ſhall no longer detain you , but only deſire this , in the behalf of the faithful , GODS peculiar portion in the Kingdom , That you would not ſuffer us to be oppreſſed by our Adverſaries , who would uſe your power againſt us , not for you , but for themſelves : neither would ſuffer them , thus publicly and shamelessly to call us Sectaries and Heretics , who do believe and profess the truth of the Goſpel in ſincerity and ſimplicity of heart , according to what we received from GOD ; but that you would ſuffer , yea , procure us , to live quietly and ſafely under you , in the faith and practice of the Goſpel , we in all things obeying you , as becomes Christians . The Remainder is , to aſſure you , That there is no man ſhall ſerve the State more ſincerely , according to his place and calling ; nor in more faithfulneſs and humility tender the Truth of GOD , either to your ſelves or the Kingdom ( as occaſion ſerves ) according to the meaſure of the gift of CHRIST ; Then , Your Servant in the Goſpel , VV. DELL .