TO THE HONOURABLE THE KNIGHTS , CITIZENS , and BVRGESSES Of the Commons Houſe OF PARLIAMENT . This not unknown to You , Right Noble and Worthy Senators , that the Great and Preſent Controversy of theſe Times is about the Church , and Church Government . In the days of Luther , Zuinglius , Calvin , Bucer , and the reſt of thoſe Worthies , the controversy of that age , was concerning the Sacrament of the Lords Supper , being generally styled Bellum Sacramentarium , and the Sacramentary Controversy , the contention about it ( even amongſt the Servants of God ) being ſo sharp , that it produced moſt ſad and woeful effects . The e was not any one thing more hindered Melch. Adam . vita Oecolamp . page . 53. Melch. Adam vit Bucer p. 213. Melch. Ad. vit Toſan . page . 702. Melc . Ad vita Brent . page 441. the cauſe of God , or the free paſſage of the Word , or the progress of the work of God begun in the Church then this . This weakened and wounded the Proteſtant party , their weapons being turned each againſt other , this made them a grateful ſpectacle to their enemies , this ſtrengthened the Popiſh ſide , they placing more confidence in their cauſe by theſe differences than in all other ways beside . This Sacramentary controversy kindled ſuch a fire in many Reformed Churches , that it even burned them up , and turned them much a ſide from that true edification which is in Chriſt , and in the practice of godliness : And hath proved ſuch a laſting fire , that it is not quenched till this day ( although thoſe Churches have had ſword , famine , and Peſtilence , to put it out . ) Now in our days in this Kingdom , the chief queſtion is about the Church and the diſcipline of the Church , and our Controversy may fitly be termed the Diſciplinary Controversy , which however it differs from the Sacramentary Quid ? nonne vident diſſidia noſtra eſſe amicorum diſpendia , hoſtium compendia , & publica irae divinae incendia . in the ſubject matter , yet it is too like it in the manner , & way of it , being likely to bring forth as ſad births and fruits as did that ? What ? Is it not ſo , that we do ſee already ( that I may speak with Hierome ) that our differences about the Church and Diſcipline are the loss of friends , the gain Junius By • enu . Epiſt . land Haſ . of enemies , and the public flames of Divine wrath ? The great differences in this Kingdom about the Church and Diſcipline , are one of the ſaddeſt and greateſt symptoms of Gods diſpleaſure againſt us . Theſe contentions and opinions make us forget the proper cauſes of God , and that main building up of one another , which is in faith and love , ſo craſtily does that old Serpent Adeo vetera •• ie hic antiqu • s worser • aco imprudentiae noſtrae ne vit illudere . know how to delude our ignorance ; ( as Iurius speaks upon a like caſe . ) O there is ſuch a fire kindled in this Kingdom about theſe points , that unless the Lord look down from Heaven , and graciouſly be pleaſed to quench it timely , it may hazard the burning and conſuming all . Now it is the duty of all the Sons of Sion to endeavour in their places , the putting out this fire , before it go too far , as by pouring out buckets of tears and prayers before the Lord , ſo by all other good ways , but eſpecially of the Miniſters of the Gospel by all mean , both by themſelves and by ſtirring up of others to do it . The ſerious conſideration of which hath ſtirred up in me ſtrong reſolutions , to lay out my self ( according to that meaſure of the giſt of Chriſt beſtowed upon me ) for the healing of this schism , and quenching this fire . Now the firſt born of this kind ( though not the firſt conceived ) is this preſent Treatiſe againſt Independent Government , and the Toleration of it , which I here humbly preſent to this Honourable Houſe , ſubmitting it to your grave Judgements , and ſerious Conſiderations , humbly deſiring your Acceptance of it : Now the Reaſons moving me to take this boldness , to Dedicate this Book to your Honours , are theſe . Firſt , that great and general liberty you grant of free access to your Honourable Houſe , unto all ranks of perſons , in this Kingdom , both by Petitions and Books . Secondly , that hereby I might take and occaſion to testify my humble duty and thankefullneſſe unto , together with my high thoughts and eſtimation of this Honourable Houſe for all the Indefatigable pains and care beſtowed on the Public ; Seeing that by You ( under God , and the Kings moſt Excellent Majeſty ) I , and hundreds of my Brothers , enjoy ſo great quietness and freedom in our Miniſteries , Eſtates , Perſons , ( after ſo great a storm ) and that very worthy deeds are done , both to us , and to this Nation by your Providence , we accept it always , and in all places , moſt Noble Patriots , with all thankfulness , and here I offer to you the firſt fruits of my labours , as a laſting Monument of Gratitude . Thirdly , that by preſenting it to You , both my self and Book might here take Sanctuary , and have your Protection againſt the many Calumnies and Reproaches which will be caſt upon us from that ſpirit of Separation . Neither fly I to this Honourable Houſe , as if I were conſcious to my self of any crimes or juſt grounds of ſuch revilings ( for had I not Innocency and Integrity in my actions , and intentions , I durſt not preſent this Book to this Juſt and Honourable Houſe , as knowing well you are a refuge only for Innocent and oppreſſed perſons , and perſons who seek the Public good ) Or , as if I were not forearmed to bear them ; I know whom I ſerve in this work , and Quiſquis volens detrabir fama meae , iſte nob •• addit mercedi meae . Auguſtirus Regium eſt male audire cum bene feceris . that therefore , whoever does willingly detract from my name , does but add to my reward ; I know alſo this a Royal privilege for a man to bear ill when he hath done well , and I have long ago given my back to the ſmiters , and by the grace of Chriſt hope to bear all calumnies with much quietness of ſpirit , having in part learned that leſſon to go through bad report ( even amongſt good men ) as well as amongſt evil men , and to be counted and enemy ( as Paul was ) for telling the Truth ; but I therefore preſent it to your Honours , and put it under your ſhadow , that ſo your Countenance and Acceptance of it ( according as you find it ) may counterbalance and weigh down with all ſorts of men , the calumnies and cenſures caſt upon it , to hinder that good intended by it , and may the more commend the Work to make it take with many for their ſatisfaction . Fourthly , I take this boldness , that ſo I might have and opportunity , to move and stir you up , moſt Noble Worthies , to put to your hands for the early and timely compounding of this great Controversy about the Church , and Church Government : When fires are begun in great Cities and Towns , or Tumults raiſed , the Father's of Families , and the Citizens run to the Magiſtrates and Governors to acquaint them with the caſe , and to deſire their help , who having power to command both Men , Arms , Waters , Engines , buckets from every quarter , the fire is quickly out , and the peace settled . Now be pleaſed to ſuffer me to mind you of that which few or none do , namely of our danger from errors on the right hand , the growing and ſpreading evil of this preſent time . Every one minds you by Petitions , Sermous , Books , concerning the Reformation of this Church , in Government , Ministry , Ceremonies , and worſhip ; and God forbid that a word ſhould ever fallen from my mouth , or my pen draw a line , to call you off from it . Go on ſtrongly and fully in the work of Reformation to purge this Church thoroughly , and purely to take away all our dross and tin ; caſt out of the way all ſtumbling blocks , & gather out all things that offend , let nothing be left to hurt or to deſtroy in Gods holy mountain ; Break down all Images and Crucifixes , throw down all Altars , remove the High Places , break to pieces the brazen Serpents , which have been ſo abuſed to Idolatry and ſuperſtition , put out the unpreaching and ſcandalous Miniſters , take a courſe for ſetting up good Pastor's and Miniſters in every Congregation , and in your great Wisdoms , and zeal be pleaſed to conſider of ways to provide oil for all the Lamps of the Sanctuary ; Go on Comfortably ( for God is with you , and the Miniſters with ſounding Trumpets of Ministry of Word and Prayer ; and the people of God with you , covering you all over with earneſt prayers , and and tears , as alſo with praiſes to God for you ) and be pleaſed to remember not to do the work of God by halves , or negligently . Perfect and thorough Reformation , will be your praiſe both with God and all good men , at home and abroad ; and your zeal may provoke other Kingdoms , and States , and many will ariſe up and call you bleſſed , for the good Pastor's , and pure Ordinances that they ſhall enjoy . This the blemiſh of ſome of the good Kings that were reformers , as Aſa and Iehoſaphat ; But nevertheless 2 King . c . ult . v. 43. 2 Chron. 15. v. 17. 2 King 18. v. 4. the high places were not taken away . It was the praiſe of other Kings , that they were taken away , as of King Hezekiah . Perfect Reformation takes away all poſſibility and hope's from men , of bringing things back again ; but and imperfect leaves both a groundwork , and fair poſſibility upon any advantage or opportunity to return : Theodoret in his Eccle. history relates that Theodoſius that moſt faithful Emperor , being fully ſet Theod. hiſt . Eccle. l. 5. cap . 20. to overthrow the errors of the Gentiles , he made Laws , by which he commanded that the Temples of the Images ſhould be pulled down . Conſtantine the great , with ſome other Emperors , who ſucceeded Conſtantine , forbade all Sacrifices and worſhips to the heathen gods , and their Images , and forbade any to come to their temples , but they did not demoliſh the temples & places wherein they were worſhipped ; ſo that Iulian and Valens , Emperors who came after , did renew the impiety of the Gentiles , ſo that fire was kindled again upon the Altars , and Sacrifices were offered to the Images : All which things when Theodoſius underſtood for certain , he did not only ſhut up the Idols houſes , forbidding all to come to the Temples , but he did extirpate them by the roots , and took care to have them buried in eternal oblivion . It was the ſaying of Ziſca the famous leader of the Thaborites , That the very neſts of the Storks are to be pulled down , leſt Diruendi ſunt etiam ipſi ciconiarum nidi ne redeant . Lavat . in Deurer . they return again . And may it pleaſe this Honourable Houſe to purge us thoroughly , and the rather for this , becauſe the more perfect our Reformation is , according to the will of God , you ſhall by this lay the better and ſurer groundwork , for healing and compoſing the great schism , and diviſions riſen about the Church , and Church Government . But amid all your care and pains in this kind , I beſeech you caſt and eye upon the errors and evils of the other hand , as Anabaptism , Brownism , etc. and be pleaſed to take into your ſerious conſiderations the means and ways how to hinder their growth , and ſo much the rather , in regard there is not now in this Kingdom ( things ſtanding as they do ) ſo much danger of errors on the left hand . Popery , ſuperſtition , profaneness , have been ſo diſcountenanced of late , ſo diſcovered , and their nakedness laid ſo open , as that Altars , Images , preſſing of Ceremonies , and profane Miniſters are falling of themſelves . Satan for this time hath even done with errors on the left hand , and their time is going out , growing like and Almanac out of date . Any man who hath but half and Eye in his head , and obſerves the courſe of things may ſee that errors on the right hand are now coming on the ſtage to take their turn alſo and to act their part ; the Devil ſeeing he cannot effect his ends in the former ways he went , he will now try others , as Theodoret ſpeaks in the caſe of Neſtorius , that Satan Theod. Heret . Fab. lib . 4. the Neſt . gave over moving againſt the Church by outward & manifeſt enemies , but came under the ſhow of the Orthodox , and in the habit of great strictness bewitching many & drawing the injudicious common people to a deſire after him . Satan is now transforming himself from and Angel of darkness into and Angel of light , and though he muſt uſe other kind of inſtruments , and go other ways , yet this to bring about the ſame things , the upholding of his kingdom and the hindering of Gods , ſo that he will now labour to do that by correcting and building up , which he did before by perſecuting and pulling down ( as Luther speaks . ) In a word plainly to express my meaning , one extremity ( as many examples both ancient and modern testify ) Neſtorius ſpeaking againſt the personal union of the divine and humane nature of Chriſt : Extiches fell into and error contrary , confounding the nature's , that he would have the humane nature ſo ſwallowed up by the immensity of the divine nature in Chriſt , that there was not two nature's in Chriſt , but one only , to wit , the divine nature , Evag. lib . 1. cap . 9. So Ofiander broaching that error , that Chriſt was our mediator only according to the divine nature , Stancarus oppoſing that fell into another error that Chriſt was mediator only according to the humane Schluſſels the Stancar . page . 37. ſo Flacius Illyricus oppoſing Strigelius who made original sin to be but a light kind of accident , he to aggravate the monſtruouſneſſe of original sin , fell into that error , that original sin was the ſubſtance of a man , Schluſſels de ſecta Manic : page . 4. hath cauſed another , the Tyranny of Epiſcopall government in ſome Biſhops hath brought forth the Democracie and Independency , the violent preſſing of ſome pretended order hath ſet many againſt all order , and Satan sing he cannot do as he did , the times not favouring thoſe things , they being grown old , and even antiquated that every man is ready to hiss at them , he now goes about by other ways , and if he can but effect what he is in a fair way for and what he hath begun in a great meaſure , he hath enough . This reported of the Fiſh called Polypus petrae cui adhaeſit colorem referens . Nazianz : de see ipſo . Polypus , that it will be of the colour of that ſtone to which it cleaves , whither white or black , or any other : ſo will Satan be of that colour and that temper juſt that the men are of with whom he deals , and the times are of . ( For beside this that Satan hath more ways to kill Souls and advance his designs then one , as Oreg . Naz ad epiſcop . when he cannot have his will by perſecution , then he will attempt it by schism and ſowing diviſion amongſt miniſters ( as Nazianzen shows : ) Satan will in time bring about the ſame things though in another way , for Independency will bring again what now it would caſt out , namely libertinism , profaneness , errors , and will by ſome removes bring many men to be of no religion at all . Be pleaſed moſt worthy Senators to let me tell you that the greateſt ſort of erroneous ſpirits with all unſtable and wanton witted men , will be much for Independent Government and Tolerations , and be to their uttermoſt againſt Synods & settled Government : Socinians , Arminians , Anabaptiſts , Separatiſts , how different ſoever in other principles , yet will agree in this ; Independency will both breed them , and being bred will foſter them . And however in many men who bee principal actors in this way of Independency , the dangers and evils may not ſo appear for the preſent , there being many things in moſt of the Miniſters lovely , which the more commends this way , yet wiſe men , ſuch as this Honourable houſe conſiſts of , look upon things and judge of them not only as they are for the preſent , but as they may be hereafter , and accordingly settle things ; that being the great principle Legiſlators go by , to preſume that men may degenerate , and things will be abuſed , and therefore ſo to provide that they may not . All errors commonly be beſt at firſt , moſt modeſt then , and the firſt Authors of errors be commonly the beſt and faireſt . Ecclesiastical Hiſtory mentions that the Novatian errors did more hurt in the fourth Century then in the third wherein it was firſt broached . The followers of Novatus did add many other errors to his , as Theodoret relates . Arminius was more candid , and less erroneous then his Theod. lib . 3. Haeret : Fabul . Parvus error in initio fit magnus in fine , negligenda non ſunt parva initia , ex quibus paulatim majores fiunt acceſſiones . followers , they having much improved the points , as ſome Divines have showed . Be pleaſed therefore to give me leave to stir you up to lay theſe schisms and diviſions to heart , ( the diviſions of Reuben being great thoughts of heart ) and in your great wisdoms early to find out means and remedies to heal the great rends about the Church and Church Government , and to hinder the further increaſe of this way : God hath called you together , and continued you for this work amongſt the reſt ; Noble Patriots do your parts , and what in you lies to conclude of ſome ſpeedy way and courſe for settling theſe differences . This the praiſe of Cyprian and Cornelius that by the help of a Council they did endeavour timely to suppress the errors of Novatus . And in the mean while till Church Government be settled , whither it be not neceſſary to provide by ſome means againſt the ſpreading of this ſect , and the meetings of theſe ſeparated Aſſemblies , I leave it to your great wisdoms to conſider , leſt otherwiſe we be overgrown with Anabaptism , Brownism and ſuch like . And I humbly crave leave to tell you , that delays in this kind will prove very dangerous , many falling to that way daily , and others by continuance will be ſo accuſtomed to it , that it will be harder to regain them : Beside the Independents lie at the catch and advantage of delays , all their hope's and ſtrength ſtanding in this , that it will be long before there be a Synod , or before the Church Government be settled , hoping that in the interim while things ſtand between two , and are unsettled , they may both gather and increaſe their Churches , and make their party more conſiderable ; and there is juſt ground to think they are not wanting to endeavour by ſome inſtruments how to effect it : The hand of Ioab is sometime where this not dreamed of . I could preſent this Honourable Houſe with a ſad relation of the ſtate of things both in the City and Country in reſpect of errors on the right hand , as alſo bespeak You by the tears & fears of all the godly & painful Miniſters of this Church of England : But I know I speak to the wiſe , and to them who are deeply ſenſible ; and this time for me to take off my hand leſt the porch be too large for the houſe . Now the good will of him that dwelled in the buſh reſt upon your heads ; The Lord hide you from the counsels and plots of wicked men , and from the raging diſeaſes of the time , making you more and more his hidden ones ; He make you more and more his choſen & ſanctified ones to fulfil all his mind and to do his whole work both againſt all heresy and schism , both errors on the left hand and right ; He double and triple upon you all that ſpirit of wisdom , counsel , might , and unanimity , which former Parliaments ever had . The Lord ſet your feet upon a rock , and eſtabliſh your goings ; He give you and unwearied ſpirit to go on without fainting , till there be a perfect settling of peace in Church and Commonwealth , and till the work of reformation ſo happily begun be finiſhed . And the Lord recompense into your bosoms sevenfold in bleſſings both temporal , spiritual , and eternal , all your work and labour of love which ye have showed towards his name , and towards this Kingdom . And ſo humbly laying my self , and theſe poor endeavours at your feet , I reſt Your Honours moſt devoted ſervantThomas Edwards .