To all the friends of the Bridegroom , the White-raiment Chriſtians , and citizens of the New Jeruſalem . DEare and faithful Brothers , Mr. Brightman fore-propheſied of a Church to ariſe , that ſhould be the Woman clothed with the Sun , which ſhould glitter on every ſide round about , with the moſt clear light of the Scripture , of the Sun of righteousness , in the doctrine of juſtification ( as you may ſee , on Rev. 19. 17. and chap. 12. 1. ) with the clear knowledge whereof , ſhe being adorned , as it were , with a goodly garment , came forth abroad , and laid her ſelf open to the view of the world . And Reſt ( says he ) ſhall be the natural daughter of the woman , clothed with the Sun , ( meaning a spiritual reſt ) which are the moſt entire and chaſte Congregation of all the reſt , ( yet no Sect ) which above others ſhine with this glorious array ; And it seems , ( says he ) that all the chief stress and violence of the laſt battle in the Weſt , ſhall be turned againſt that holy Congregation , which we ſaid right now , to ſtand glittering in the Sun , which are the hill of precious fruits , and the mountain full of holy pleaſures , of which God makes more account thenSee 2 Eſdr . 7. 26. 34 , 35. See 2 Eſdr . 6. 28. of all delight ſome things in the world . Now you white raiment Chriſtians , are this woman , clothed with the Sun ; for you all believe that you are clothed with the Sun of Righteousness , and ſtand in him before God : Here is and Ax for you ; for the bleſſing of Joſhua belongs to you , which he spoke to the children of Joſeph . Thou art a great people , and haſt great power , therefore the mountain ſtall be thine , for it is a wood , and thou ſhalt cut it down , and the ends of it ſhall be thine , and thou ſhalt caſt out the Canaanites , though they have iron Chariots , and though they be ſtrong , J • ſh 17. So here are mountains of ſins , errors and falſe religions , in England and Ireland , it is a wood of Sects , Schisms and Hereſies , but thou haſt cut them down , for thou art a great people , and haſt great power ( with the Lord in prayer ) and England ſhall be thine , and thou ſhalt caſt out the Canaanites of ſin , Idolatry , and falſe Religions , though they have Ordnance of iron , and though they be ſtrong , lay this Ax of the Law to the root of them ; and show them , that now alſo every tree , i . Religion , Church , Sect , or man , that brings forth ſin before God , ( Iſai . 1. 16. ) is hewn down and caſt into the fire of God wrath , for the wrath of God is now revealed from heaven againſt all unrighteousness of men , which withhold truth in unrighteousness ( Rom. 1. 18 ) for the hour of temptation is come , to try them that are upon the face of the earth , Rev. 2. 10. in which friends ſhall fight with friends , as with enemies , and the earth shall fear with them , 2 Eſdr . 6. 22. when there ſhall be ſeen and earthquake in the world , and and up • over of the people , that is , the time wherein the moſt High will begin toSee 2 Eſdras 15 • . 6. 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 8 , 19. 22 , 23 , 24 , 26 , 26 , 37. See 2 Eſd 16. 10 , 11. 14 , 15. 19. 5. 33. 8. 46. viſit the world which he made , 2 Eſdra . 9. 4. & 3 hard it is for men to keep faith and a good conſcience now , yea , the ſtrongeſt faith ſhall find it difficult . Would not you be glad to be delivered from this hour of temptation ? and were it not labour worth the pains , to show that you ſhall be delivered ? And though all evil trees ſhall be cut down with the a • of the Law ; yet that you are good trees of righteousness , of his own planting , that God may be glori • ied , and ſhall be ſaved ? Iſai . 61. • . Come forth , come forth thou Kings daughter , all glorious within , all light in the Lord , the Sun of Righteousness , show thy ſelf to the world , thy garments are of broidered gold , Pſal . 45. 13. that is , of the merits of Chriſt crucified , death and reſurrection , given you freely in your Baptism into Chriſts death , for remiſſion of ſins , Rom. 6. 3 , 4 , Acts 2. 38. and are made glorious in the Sun of Righteousness , that is riſen upon you , Mal. 2. 4. show your ſelves to the world , for the ſtreſſ • of thee ba •• ell in the Weſt ( you hear ) ſhall be againſt you , but you ſhall overcome by faith , 1 John 5 4. when the ax ſhall cut down the wicked , yet fear not ; you are god into the Sun , and therefore are out of gunshot for your ſouls , yet put on the whole armour of God , Eph. 6. 14. and gird up the loins of your minds , with the girdle of verity , and put on the breastplate of Chriſts righteousness ; and above all , take the ſhield of faith in your Baptism , and in the blood of the Lamb , wherewith you may quench all the fiery darts of the wicked , and take the helm • tO of ſalvation in Chriſt , that you are in him that is true , 1 John 5. 20. and the ſword of the Spirit , the Word of God ; and your feet thod with the preparation of the Goſpel of peace , that teſti • ies of Jeſus , that came by water ▪ and blood , not by water only , but by water and blood ; it's the Spirit that bears witness , and that Spirit is truth , and ſhall conquer . Therefore ſtand faſt , and pray , with all manner of pra • er , and ſupplications , in the Spirit that teſtifieth of the water and blood of Chriſt , for remiſſion of your ſins , and you ſhall overcome : For you have a ſtrong city , ( of the new Jeruſalem ) ſalvation ſhallAll that get into this city are ſafe . God ſet for wa • ls and bulwarks , Iſai . 26. 1. open you the gates of it , Rev. 22. 14. that you the righteous nation , that keep the truth , ma • enter in ; for by and aſſured purpoſe , will Chriſt preſerve perfect peace for you , becauſe you truſted in him verſ . 3 Oh truſt in the Lord Jeſus for ever , for in the Lord ( our righteousness , Jer. 23. 6. ) is ſtrength for evermore , verſ . 4. for he will bring down them that dwell on high , that fight againſt you , the high city ( of Room ) will he abaſe even unto the ground , and bring it unto the duſt , v. 5. that your fee • ſhall tread it down , and all doctrine of infidelity . I call you White-raiment Chriſtians ; if any ask my reaſons , they are theſe : Firſt , becauſe you are the few names in Laodicca , of England , ( as well as in Sardis ) that have not defiled your garments , ( • by a falſe faith , or reigning ſin ) therefore you ſhall walk with Chriſt in white . for you are worthy , Rev 3. 4. M • . Mi. Con. M • . Mi. Con. Secondly , whoſoever overcomes , ſhall be clo • head with white raiment , says Chriſt . Rev. 3. 5. but you have overcome , 1 John 4. 4. Ergo , you ſhall be clothed with i • , and therefore ſhall be white-raiment Chriſtians : for whomſoever Chriſt says ſhall be clothed with white raiment , I may truly call a white-raiment Chriſtian ; but you overcomers are they , that Chiſt says ſhall be clothed with white raiment , E • go , I may truly call you white-raiment Chriſtians . Thirdly , whoſoever have bought of Chriſt white raiment , that he may beMa . clothed , that the ſhame of his nakedness may not appear , may be called a white-raiment Chriſtian , becauſe he hath bought it , Rev. • . 18. But you areMi . Con. Ma. Mi. Con. Ma. they , Ergo. Again , whoſoever watches , and keepeth Chriſts garments that are white , as ( Rev 3. 18. ) leſt he walk naked , and they ſee his ſhame , is a bleſſed white-raiment Chriſtian , as Rev. 16. 15. But you are ſuch , Ergo , you are bleſſed white-raiment Chriſtians . Alſo you are citizens of the new Jeruſalem ; for on whomſoever Chriſt will write upon , the name of the city of my God , the new Jeruſalem , which comes down from my God out of heaven , Rev. 3. 12. ſhall rightly be called a citizen of the new Jeruſalem ; but on you that have overcome , Chriſt will write theMi . Con. name of the new Jeruſalem , Rev 3. 12. Ergo , you ſhall be called citizens of the new Jeruſalem . This was ſpoken to Philadelphia , not to us of Laodicea . I anſwer , whatſoeverObject . was ſpoken to any one of the ſeven Churches , runs into the laſt : for let him that hath and ear , hear what the Spirit says to the Churches , Rev. 3. it says it to you , overcomers in Laodicea , in England , for , what I ſay to you , I ſay to all , Mark 13. Now concerning the Philadelphians , that were admoniſhed by Chriſt , to hold faſt that they had , that no man take their crown , Rev. 3. 11. I gather the Philadelphians being admoniſhed , to hold it faſt , ſhould loose it , for if man muſt hold faſt a crown , he will loose it , and that the La • worser ceans ſhould take it from them ; for the white-raiment Chriſtians that have overcome , and taken Chriſts counsel , Rev. 3. 18. ſhall take their crown from them , to be called , firſt citizens of the new Jeruſalem ; And you ſhall take the crown from the Lutherans ▪ ( becauſe they defiled their garments , and their works were not perfect before God , Rev 3. 2 , & 3. ) and ſhall be called firſt White raiment Chriſtians . Secondly , whoſoever is come to the celestial Jeruſalem , and to be citizensMa . Mi. with the Saints , and of the household of God , are citizens of the new Jeruſalem ; but by the blood of Chriſt in Baptism , and by faith , Eph. 2. 13. Rev. 1. 5. you are come to the celestial Jeruſalem , Heb 12. 22. and to be citizens with the Saints , and of the household of God , Epheſ . 2. 19. Ergo , you are citizens ofCon . the mew Jeruſalem ; therefore call your ſelves no more the Church of England , or of the Lu • herans , or the like , for they are ſhaken , and ſhall be removed , Heb. 12. 27. but call your ſelves White-raiment Chriſtians , and citizens of the new Jeruſalem , for you ſee God calls you ſo . Now your city is of pure gold , like clear glass , Rev. 21. 18. for your city of the new Jeruſalem , is built of pure gold , that Chriſt hath counseled you to buy of him , Rev 3. 18. which is the lively faith , in the merit • of Chriſts death . in our baptism , for remiſſion of ſins , ( Acts 2. 38. ) in the firſt love of Chriſt , ( not of ſuch as have taken a new baptism , and ſo forſaken their firſt love of Chriſt , as the Church of Epheſus did , and therefore the candleſtick of the Church was removed out of their place , Rev. 2. 5. becauſe they took a ſecond baptism , and forſook their firſt , for which cauſe , the Council of Nice made it and Article of their Creed ( I believe one Baptism , for the remiſſion of ſins ) and it is like clear glass , becauſe through this golden glass of your baptism , wherein you were waſhed , ſanctified , and juſtified , in the name of the Lord Jeſus , and by the Spirit of our God , 1 Cor. 6. 1 • . you may ſee the face of God through it , what a reconciled , merciful , and loving Father he is to you , that hath ſealed a new Covenant to you , to become your father , and you his children , and that your ſins and iniquities ſhall be remembered no more , Heb. 8. 12. and you may ſee through thisHebr . 8. glass of your baptism , the face of Jeſus , what a bleſſed , meek , and loving Saviour he is to you , that hath loved you , and gave himſelf for you , ( Gal. 2. 20. ) and waſhed you from your ſins , in his own blood , and made you Kings and Prieſts to God his Father , Epheſ . 5. 25. Rev. 1. 5. and you may ſee as in a glass , ( 1 Cor. 13. 12 ▪ ) what a bleſſed , holy , and ſweet Comforter you have , that hath waſhed you in the new birth , and the renewing of the holy Ghoſt , Titus 3. 5. And the ſtreet of your city is of pure gold , like to tranſparent glass , Rev. 21. 21. O walk in this golden ſtreet , for it is tranſparent , like perſpective glass ; for , as he that hath a good perſpective glass may ſee far off , ſo may you , even your ſins , ſet as far as the Eaſt is from the Weſt , Pſal . 103. 12. Peter complaineth2 Pet. 1. 9. of many that are blind , and cannot ſee far off , becauſe they have forgotten their baptism , wherein they were waſhed from their old ſins ; they have forgotten this tranſparent glass . But all you citizens of the new Jeruſalem , walk in this golden ſtreet of your baptism , it is a perſpective glass ; and as in a perſpective glass , men look through two glaſſes , ſo in this there are two glaſſes , the firſt is made of the pure river , of the water of life , clear as Crystal , which is the pure water of baptism , Heb. 10. 23. the ſecond is the blood of theRev . 22. 1. Lamb ; both theſe meet in one , look through them both together , and anoint your eyes with eyesalve of the Spirit , and you ſhall ſee far off , even into heaven , and behold Chriſt to be your wisdom , righteousness , ſanctification and redemption , 1 Cor. 1. 30. and your blessedness , happiness , holiness , eternal life , everlaſting glory , immortality ; yea , thou may ſee thy name written in heaven : through this golden clear glass of thy baptism , which thou receivedſt in thine Infancy , and now walk in this golden ſtreet by faith , you may be aſſured , and rejoice , that your names are written in heaven , Lycia 10. 20. Queſt . How know you that ? Anſw . There be three which bear record in heaven , the Father , the Word , and the holy Ghoſt , theſe three are one , and bear record in heaven , that he hath given you a new name , Rev. 2. 17. in baptism , for all your names were Adam before , Gen. 5. 2. but they bear record , that he hath given you a new name and his own new name , Rev. 3. 12. And there be three which bear record in earth , the Spirit , and water , and blood , theſe three agree in one , that your names are written in heaven ; for to whomſoeverMa . Mi. Con. God hath given eternal life , which life is in his Son Jeſus Chriſt , his name is written in heaven . But the three in heaven , and the three in earth , do bear witness , that he hath given you eternal life , 1 John 5. 7 , 8. 11. Ergo , your names are written in heaven , that believe it on this ground , and you are let into Paradiſe again ; for though Adam , and all his children , were ſhut out of it , and the Cherubin with a flaming ſword , which turned every way , to keep the tree of life , Gen. 3. which signifies this axe of the fiery Law , Deut. 33. 2 ▪ See 2 Eſdra 8. 52 , 53 , 54 , to 63. given by Angels ( Acts ▪ 7. 53. ) keepeth every man from the Paradiſe , of aſſurance of ſalvation ; for this axe of the Law cuts men off , and ſhuts them out , every way , for original or actual ſins , men merits , or humane righteousness ; whoſoever hath but one ſin is cut down by the Law . But by your baptism into Chriſt , you are let into Paradiſe again , and have now right and title by your baptism , and by faith , to eat of all the trees in the garden , i . title to all things to be yours , and you are Chriſts , 1 Cor. 3. And you may eat of the tree of life in the amid of the Paradiſe of God , Rev. 2. 7. that is , of Chriſt in the Supper , and be more ſure of eternal life , then the tree of life could have made Adam , and ſhall be kept in the Paradiſe of Gods protection : For thus says the Lord , Becauſe you have kept the word of my patience , I will deliver thee from the hour of temptation , that is come upon all the world , to try them that are upon the face of the earth , Rev. 3. 10. Now , what is the word of Chriſts patience , but the faith of baptism into Chriſt crucified , for the remiſſion of our ſins ? for the word of Chriſts patience , is the faith in Chriſt crucified , which Paul deſired only to know , 1 Cor. 2. Now what is a man the better , to1 Cor. 2. 2. ſay , I believe Chriſt was crucified , dead and buried , except he keep the faith of it for remiſſion of his ſins ? for the devils believe ſo much . But the word of Chriſts patience , which you keep , is this , that you ſay , and believe , that I am in him that is true , in that his Son Jeſus Chriſt , 1 John 5. 20. in whom I am crucified , and dead , and buried , and riſen again with Chriſt in my baptism , into Chriſts death , for the remiſſion of ſins , and have put on Chriſt , Rom. 6. • , 4 Col. 2. 12. Gal. 3. 27. That Church that keeps the word of Chriſts patience , i . faith in their baptism into Chriſts death , for remiſſion of ſins ( though they knew not what Chriſt did for them , when he waſhed them , as he told Peter , John 1 • . but know it afterwards ) ſhall be delivered from this hour of temptation ; but all other religious plants , which my heavenly Father hath not planted , ſhall be rooted out . The axe of the Law cuts them off , for one ſin before God ; but he that is holy , and true ( says ) be that believeth and is baptised , ſhall be ſaved , Mark 16. 16. ( that is , he that believeth one baptism into Chriſt , for remiſſion of ſins , ſhall be ſaved ) but he that believeth not his one baptism into Chriſt for remiſſion of his ſins , ſhall be damned , as Heathens , Turks , Jews , Witches and Apoſtates , that have denied it : For thisNicen Creed . Athanaſius . is the Catholic faith , I believe one Baptism for the remiſſion of ſins , which except a man believe faithfully , he cannot be ſaved , the axe cut them off . Now when men have loſt this Paradiſe , then they muſt go till the earth , full of falſe religions , all ſerve and angry God . The Heathen run to Jupiter , the Turks to Mahumet , the Jewes to Moſes ceremonies , the Papiſts to Saints , to Pilgrimage , a wilderness and Purgatory : Lo , here is Chriſt , ſay the Papiſts , in the Popes chair , and pardon : Lo , here is Chriſt , ſay the Luberans , in conſubſtantiation ; and lo , here is Chriſt , ſay the Anabaptiſts , in our new Jordan , and yet it carries them into the lake Aſphaltes , mare mortuum , the dead ſea , for he that denieth his firſt baptism , to take a ſecond , it is a dead and damnable ſin , as Heb. 6. 4 , 5 , 6. and Heb 10. 29. • 5. 38. Lo , there , ſay all ſects , in our Church way , and yet never a one of them have aſſurance of ſalvation , becauſe they have not faith in one baptism , for remiſſion of ſins , for no man can have the knowledge of ſalvation , but by the remiſſion of ſins , as Lycia 1. 77. Well , you ſee the hour of temptation is come , a flood of judgements flow upon earth for ſin . Here is and axe for you , to cut down ſin , and and ark for you white-raiment Chriſtians , and citizens of the new Jeruſalem , namely , the ark of our baptism into Chriſts death , for remiſſion of ſins . It hath been building in England about and hundred years , you only have God ſeen righteous in this generation , and end of all falſe religions is come , and God will deſtroy them with the earthly men : Enter you , your wives , and your children , into the faith of this Ark , Gen. 6. but leave not your children out of this Ark , nor take a new one ; for that is curſed , Gal. 1. 8 , 9. For , as the Ark ſaved Noah , ſo 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , the ſame Antitype which now ſaveth us , Baptism , ( the tranſlators were to blame , to call it a figure , for there is as much difference between a figure and and antitype , as between the brazen Serpent and Chriſt , 1 Pet. 3. 21. ) meaning of the inward Baptism . Now , as you know many before the flood might come into the A • k , and look upon it , and yet , becauſe they did not abide in it , they all periſhed : So now a • lood of Gods judgements are come in this hour of temptation , and many people have ſeen baptism , and been within it ſacramentally , but all that do not ſtay in it by faith , ſhall periſh . Therefore little children , abide in him ( that were ſhut or graffed into him by one baptism ) that when he ſhall appear , we may be bold , ( 1 Iohn 2 28. ) for behold , Chriſt stands at the door , and knocks , in Laodicca in England ( and he will not leave knocking with judgements , till they take his counsel , Rev. 3. 18. ) if any man will hear my voice , ( says he ) and open the door , I will come in to him , and ſup with him , and he with me . You ſee Chriſt raps loud with the ſword and cannons , and he will knock with and earthquake , and with peſtilence , Lycia 21. 11. In England and Scotland , where are Saints , with the ſword and peſtilence , but in Ireland , where are moſt Idolaters , with ſword and famine : reaſons I give in a book to come out , in Chriſts knock at the doors of England . Now , is it not good letting of Chriſt in to ſup with us , and we with him , when he knocks , and calls to us to take his counſel ? to buy of him gold to make us rich , in the lively faith of the merits of Chriſts death , in baptism , for a perfect remiſſion of ſins , ( for he likes not this lukewarm , lame remiſſion of ſins to halves , which many profess ) and white-raiment juſtification to cloth us , that the ſhame of our nakedness may not appear , and eyesalve of the Spirit that takes of Jeſus , water and blood , to witness to your ſpirits , you are the children of God , Rom. 8. 17. that thou mayest ſee , Rev. 3. 18. Chriſt will not leave rebuking , and chaſtiſing England , and knocking , till they hear , and let him in . Now therefore , let the loins ( of your minds ) be girded about ( with verity ) and your lamps ( of faith ) burning , Lycia 12. 35. and you your ſelves , like men that wait for their Maſter , when he will return from the wedding ; that when he comes and knocketh , they may open unto him immediately : Bleſſed are thoſe ſervants , whom the Lord , when he comes , ſhall find waking , i . in the wedding garment ; Verily I ſay unto you , he will gird himſelf about , and will make them fit down at table , and will come forth , and ſerve them ; and if he come at the ſecond watch , or in the third watch , and find them ſo , bleſſed are thoſe ſervants , verſ . 36 , 37. Now , you bleſſed White-raiment Chriſtians , underſtand , that Chriſt our Maſter , is now returning from the wedding ; for I believe not any more Churches of the Gentiles , ( before the marriage of the Lamb , to the Iews ) ſhall be called , and the third watch is come , and the dawning of the day of the Iews is at hand , and our Maſter now knocketh , the dinner of the wedding of the Gentiles , hath laſted about 1623. for the marriage of the Gentiles , was called a dinner , Mat. 22. 4. and the marriage dinner was furniſhed with gueſts of good and bad , for all had not a wedding garment , and therefore bad . Now , as noble Bridegrooms often times will bid a multitude to dinner , but none but his special friends are bidden to ſupper ; So Chriſt , the moſt noble Bridegroom , hath bidden ſeven Church • of the Gentiles to the dinner of the marriage , and now he is returning from the wedding of the Gentiles , and he knocks and calls , Rev. 3. 20. Rev. 3. 20. Bleſſed are you that let him in immediately , for he calls for you , his friends , the White raiment Chriſtians , to come to ſupper . Give me leave to show you , the friends of the Bridegroom , why Chriſt now knocks , and calls in England ; it is to call you to ſupper , all that were bidden to the wedding-dinner : were not bleſſed : But now ( he says ) write , Bleſſed are they that are bidden to the marriage ſupper of the Lamb ; theſe are the true ſayings of God , Rev. 19. 9. The wedding-dinner is passed , and Chriſt is returning from the wedding , as Lycia 12. 36. and behold , he stands at the door , and knocks in England , with the ſword and peſtilence , let him in ; for it ſeems , ſome have not let him yet ; ſay , it is the voice of my well beloved that knocks , ſaying , Open to me , my ſiſter , my love , my dove , my undefiled , for mine head is full of due , and my locks with the drops of the night , Cant. 5. 2. for men that are let in , uſe not to knock , but thoſe that are ſhut out . Chriſt is about to marry his wife , of the Iewes , that ſhall make her ſelf ready by baptism and faith , and he will grant to her to be clothed in fine linen , bright and pure , 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , the juſtifications of the Saints , Rev. 19. 8. And now Chriſt knocks at the door in England . to call his friends , to go with him to the marriage-ſupper , with his wife , and will begin his ſupper in England , he will ſup with them , Rev. 3. 20. The moſt rareſt junkets are kept for the marriage-ſupper . Now therefore hark ; he says , I will ſup with him ( that lets me in ) and he with me ; ſee how Eſdras propheſied of you , 2 Eſdras 2. 38. Ariſe and ſtand up , and behold the number of thoſe that are ſealed for the feaſt of the Lord , which are departed from the ſhadow of the world , and have received glorious garments of the Lord : Take thy number , Oh Sion , and ſhut up them that are clothed in white , which have fulfilled the Law of the Lord . Here you ſee , he propheſied of you White-raiment Chriſtians , ſealed for the feaſt , as Chriſt does , Rev. 3. 4. & 18. & 16. 15. Now therefore all you , that have put on Chriſt in infant-baptism , Gal. 3. 27. and made your long robes white in the blood of the Lamb , as my Sermon of the blood of the Lamb declares , prepare a ſupper for Chriſt ; the cheer muſt be prepared of hearts , My ſon , give me thy heart , and it muſt be broken , and contrite , for he loves no ſtones that will not break , for the ſacrifices of God are a broken ſpirit , A br • ken and a centrite heart , Oh God , thou wilt not deſpiſe , Pſal . 51. 17. Secondly , theſe hearts muſt be ſerved in at your ſupper , in gold , that he counſelleth you to buy of him , Rev. 3. 18. which is the lively faith in the merits of Chriſts death , in one baptism , for remiſſion of ſins ; for thus Peter ſerved in three thouſand hearts that were pricked by the Law , in baptism , in the name of the Lord Jeſus , for the remiſſion of ſins , Acts 2. 38. Thirdly , you muſt ſerve it in , in the white-raiment juſtification , wherein no ſhame of nakedness do appear , for Chriſt cannot endure ſin . Fourthly , you muſt buy eyesalve , of the Holy Ghoſt , to anoint your eyes , that you may ▪ ſee , Rev. 3. 18. For Chriſt will not ſup with blind ſinners . Fifthly , the marriagechamber muſt be paved with the love of the daughters of Ieruſalem , Cant. 3. 10. i . with love to all the citizens of the new Ieruſalem , and now invite him , ſaying , Ariſe thou Northwind , and come thou South , and blow upon my garden , that the ſpices thereof may flow out ; let my well beloved come into his garden , and eat of his pleaſant fruits , Cant. 4. Now Chriſt hath prepared a ſupper for you ; for thus he says , I am come into my garden , my ſiſter , my ſpouſe , I have gathered my myrrbe , with my ſpice , I have eaten mine honey comb , with mine honey , I have drunk my wine , with my milk , eat , Oh friends , drink and make you merry , Oh well beloved , ( Cant. 5. 1. ) for the firſt diſh that you ſhall have at my ſupper , says Chriſt , is the tree of life ; for , to him that • vercometh , will I give to eat of the tree of life in the amid of the Paradiſe of God , Rev. 2. 7. Eat of Chriſt therefore , the tree of life , at ſupper , and drink his blood , and make you merry . Secondly , you that are faithful , ſhall have a crown of life , and not be hurt of the ſecond death , Rev 2. 10 , 11. Thirdly ; you ſhall have the hidden Manna , this is good cheer indeed , Eat , Oh friends , and make you merry , for you ſhall have a white ſtone , with a new name written , that no man knoweth , ſave he that receives it , ( yea , no man can underſtand theſe things that I write , but he that hath the white ſtone , ) Fourthly , you that are bidden to the marriage-ſupper , ſhall be a conquering people ; for you ſhall have power over nations , and rule them with a rod of iron , and break them in pieces like a Potters vessel , and ſhall have the morning Star , which is Jeſus , the root and the generation of David , to be your light , Rev. 22. 16. and Rev 2. 26. Fifthly , be merry , for you you ſhall be clothed with white-raiment , and he will not blot out your names out of the book of life , Rev. 3. 5. True faith in the White-raiment , is and argument , your names are written in the book of life . Sixthly , be merry in the Lord , for he will make you a pillar in the Temple of God , and you ſhall go no more out ; and I will write upon you the name of my God , and the name of the city of my God , which is the new Jeruſalem , which comes down from my God , out of heaven , and my new name , the new Chriſtian , a new creature , Gal. 6. 16. Seventhly , be merry , for you ſhall fit with Chriſt in his Throne , as he overcame , and fit with the Father in his Throne , Rev 3. 21. Eat therefore , Oh friends , drink and make you merry , Oh well beloved , much good do it you at this ſupper . You ſee therefore , that all the promiſes of the ſeven Churches , run into the laſt , which is ours , and to the ſupper of the Lamb . Therefore you ſee , that the moſt conquering and reigning Church that ever aroſe in Chriſtendome , is now ariſing in England ; for you Whiterayment Chriſtians , ſhall fit with Chriſt in his Throne , therefore you ſhall reign : For Chriſt hath loved you , and waſhed you from your ſins , in his own blood , and made you Kings and Prieſts , to God his Father , and you ſhall reign on earth , ( Rev. 5. 10. ) for Chriſt will be clothed in a garment dipped in blood ſhortly , if he be not already , and you the hoſts of heaven , ſhall follow him on white horſes , for you are clothed in • ine linen , white and pure , Rev. 19. 13 , 14. There be many religions now in England , and maay m • see , which ſhall prevail ; ſome ſay the Papiſts , ſome the Prelate , ſome the Anabaptiſts , ſome ſay the Browniſts , and every ſect now think to prevail ; but I ſay the Whiterayment Chriſtians are the Iſrael of God , that have not defiled their garments , and they ſhall walk with Chriſt in white , for they are worthy , Rev. 3. 4. Peace be upon that Iſrael of God , Gal. 6. 16. for they ſhall fit with Chriſt in his Throne , Rev. 3. 21. And therefore , becauſe you can ſing the ſong of Moſes , and of the Lamb , Rev. 15. 2. therefore I ſet Moſes bleſſing upon you , Deut. 33. Bleſſed are thou , Oh Iſrael , who is like unto thee ? O people , ſaved by the Lord , the ſhield of thy help , and the ſword of thy glory ; therefore thine enemies ſhall be in ſubjection unto thee , and thou ſhalt tread upon their high places . Chriſt is now ſhaking the heavens of the Churches , and the earth of the Heathen now ; and ſhaking of the Churches , shows the removing of thoſe things that are ſhaken , that the things which are not ſhaken , may remain , Heb. 12. 26. But the Churches of the Lutherans and of England are now ſhaken , by a civil war , they are Churches divided againſt themſelves , Ergo , they muſt not ſtand , but come to nought , as Chriſt says , Mat. 12. 25. and Rome ſhall be ſhaken too , and come to deſtruction , Ergo , they ſhall be removed from being Churches , that the things which are not ſhaken may remain , and that is the Church of the White-raiment Chriſtians , and citizens of the new Jeruſalem , which ſhall remain ; for we receive the Kingdom which cannot be ſhaken , Heb. 12. 28. and are the pillars in the Temple of God , Rev. 3. 12. Therefore leave your wrangling for a Diſcipline , and hear Chriſts voice , for behold , he knocketh , and will never leave rapping , until you take his counsel in England , to buy gold , white-raiment and eyesalve : mark , he knocks to be let in for doctrine , for ſcarce one of a thouſand have bought theſe three : ſay with the White-raiment Chriſtians , Thou ſhalt guide me by thy counsel , and after receive me to a glorious Throne , Pſal . 73. 24. and city , for they ſhall enter into the gates of the city , and have right to the tree of life , R • v 22. 14. And now , deer friends , I have ſet before you in this Book , and in that of the blood of the Lamb , as it were , the two ſides of Jacobs ladder , whoſe foot was on earth , but the top reached to Heaven , and the Angels of heaven aſcended , and deſcended upon it , Gen. 28. •• . The two ſides of this ladder on earth , are Baptism , and the blood of the Lamb , though the foot of it be on earth , 1 John 5. in viſible signs , yet the top of it reaches to heaven , for we are baptised into Chriſt in heaven , and by faith feed upon Chriſt , and are ſprinkled with Chriſts blood in heaven : The Angels of heaven will aſcend , and deſcend for your protection Heb. 1. You friends of the Bridegroom , and children of the marriagechamber , that are clothed in white-raiment ; make much of this ladder , for though the foot of it be on earth , in water and blood , yet it reaches unto heaven , unto Jeſus that came by water and blood , to ſend Angels down to you upon it : they that have no faith in their baptism into Chriſt , and in the blood of the Lamb , cannot tell , whither the Angels of God deſcend or aſcend for their protection , as Heathens , Jews , Turks , Devils , Witches , Papiſts , and all unbelievers . I have writ a little book of Good news for soldiers , or , the way to overcome the Devil , by the blood of the Lamb : I find by Lycia 21. 11. there isSee 2 Eſdras 13. 31. and earthquake , peſtilence and famine coming ; for thus says my Lord , and my God , When you hear of wars , and ſeditions , that nation riſe againſt nation , andMa . kingdom againſt kingdom , there ſhall be great earthquakes , 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , i . in , according to , or through thoſe places , and famine , and peſtilence , Lycia 21. 11. Mark 13. 8. theſe are the beginnings of ſorrows . But in England , Scotland Mi. and Ireland , we hear of wars and ſeditions , that nation riſe againſt nation , and kingdom againſt kingdom . Ergo , there ſhall be great earthquakes , Con. 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , i . in , according to , or through thoſe places , and famine and peſtilence , theſe are the beginnings of ſorrows ; of which I have writ more fully in the Counsel of Chriſt to England . Now , as Moſes , when a peſtilence was coming , counseled the Iſraelites a way to eſcape the deſtroying Angel , by ſprinking the blood of a Lamb , upon the two door-posts , and the upper dorepoſt of their houſes , that when God ſaw the blood , he ſaid , he would pass over them , and the plague ſhall not be upon you , to deſtruction ; ſo • counsel you , the Iſrael of God , buy one of them books , for every houſe , and ſprinkle the faith of the blood of the Lamb upon your two door-posts of your bodies and souls , and the upper dorepost of your ſpirits , that when the deſtroying peſtilence ſhall come , God may ſee the blood of the Lamb upon your conſciences , he may cauſe it to pass over your houſes , where the Iſraelite of a good conſcience is within ; and whatſoever comes to your bodies , yet your ſouls ſhall be ſafe : for as the Angels of heaven went up and down on Jacobs ladder , ſo they ſhall aſcend , and deſcend for your protection , that believe your bodies were waſhed with pure water in Baptism , and your hearts ſprinkled from and evil conſcience , by the blood of the Lamb , you may keep your profeſſion without wavering , ( of deliverance ) Heb. 10. 22 , 23. For he that dwells in this ſecret of the Lord , ſhall abide under the ſhadow of the Almighty , Pſal . 91. 1. and he ſhall give his Angels a charge over thee , to keep thee in all thy ways , to bear thee in their arms , that thou daſh not thy foot againſt a ſtone , v. 11. and peace ſhall be upon them , that walk according to this rule ( of a new creature ) and upon the Iſrael of God , Gall 6. 16. Thine in the Lord Jeſus , JOHN EACHARD .