TO the Two moſt Famous VNIVERSITIES OF ENGLAND I Dare not give you ſuch high Epithets as Maſter Saltmarſh beſtoweth upon the Aſſembly , Quid amplius praepotenti & immortali Deo tribuimus ſi quod eius proprium eſt eripimus ? Bodin . de Repub. l. 1 c . ult to call you the MOST SACRED . Be contented to be Styled the Two moſt Famous Universities ; a Title , which it is no Flattery to give you , but Injury to deny you . I have the Studies of ſome whole days to ſpread before you . I am not aſhamed to confess ſo much , but ſhould be aſhamed to preſent your learned Conſiderations with less . And will rather run the hazard of other men's Cenſure , to have ſtudied ſo long to no purpoſe , then to be guilty to my self of ſo much diſreſpect to You , as to offer to your Patronage what coſt me but ſleight ſtudying . Indeed I examined his Examinations of my Sermon with the ſame pace that I read them . But I could not confute his Errors ſo ſpeedily as I could diſcover them , nor could I ſo ſoon make them appear to others , as they appeared to me ; and the Evidencing of his Faults did coſt me ſome Pains , whereof I hope I ſhall never have juſt Cauſe to Repent . I am altogether out of hope that my Truth ſhould quickly overtake his Error , which had the Advantage of me both at the Starting and in the Speed ; And yet I believe what I want in the swiftness of my Feet , I ſhall have in the Firmness of my footing . And when I overtake it at laſt , as I am ſure I ſhall , ſeeing untruths will Tire ( as being better at hand then at length ) I am confident by Gods Aſſiſtance , it will get firm and quiet Poſſeſſion in spite of oppoſition . It is altogether Improper for me to compare You being Two in number to the Palm Tree under which the Prophetess Deborah sat ; But the Analogy will , hold well , if I ſhould reſemble You to the Two Olive Trees continually dropping oil in the Preſence of God . And methinks Maſter Saltmarſh his Expreſſion to the Aſſembly , UNDER SUCH A SHADE AS YOUR SELVES , making them in the Aſſembly but a Shadow , ( and then what is the Shadow of a Shadow worth under which he desires to fit ? ) was but and undervaluing and diminutive expreſſing of their worth . I honour you as You Deſerve , and Counting You a Real and Laſting Subſtance , ſo I address my Reſpects unto you : Humbly requeſting you to be pleaſed to Patronise and defend this my defence : the rather becauſe what doctrines therein I deliver , not long ſince I sucked from One of you , and in this reſpect I believe both Breaſts give Milk alike ; And therefore as your Learning is moſt Able , ſo your Goodness will be willing to Protect the ſame , not ſo much becauſe I had them from you , as becauſe you had them from the Truth . Some perchance may blame my Choice in Chooſing You for my Protection who in theſe troubleſome times are ſcarce able to defend your ſelves ▪ The Univerſities being now Degraded , at leaſt ſuſpended from the degree of their former Honour . And I wonder , Men ſhould now talk of and Extraordinary great Light , when the two Eyes of our Land ( ſo you were ever accounted ) are almoſt put out . However this ſhort Interruption of your Happiness will but add the more to your Honour hereafter . And here , as it were Store of Pride for me to Counsel you , ſo it were want of duty not to Comfort you . Know , the only Good Token of theſe Times is , That they are ſo extremely Bad they can never laſt long . God give you a ſanctified Impreſſion of your Afflictions , neither to ſleight them nor ſink under them ; and ſo , forbearing to be longer troubleſome to your more ſerious Employments , rests The meaneſt of your Sons or Nephews Thomas Fuller .