TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE The Houſe of PEERES Aſſembled in PARLIAMENT . Right Honourable , AS the goodness of God , that hitherto hath afforded a miraculous preſervation to the Parliament of England , and hath never failed to give in merciful Deliverances in time of need , and to make many admirable returns of Prayer , does manifeſt that God is with you in your pious endeavours for the ſettling of Truth and Peace : So is it evident that our sins do withhold good things from us , that notwithſtanding the Balm that is in Gilead , and the Physicians there , yet we are not healed . The Sword is not ſheathed , the Peſtilence not ceaſed , and Famine a Plague worſe then theſe , begins to threaten us . Ignorance , Profaneness , Hereſies , get ground in many places of the Land ; and hence ſuch as are enemies to Peace and Reformation , encourage themſelves with hope to ſee the time when they ſhall cauſe your work to ceaſe , and bring us back again to Egypt . It therefore highly concerns all of all conditions , to examine what their iniquities are , that put a ſtop to the current of Gods Mercies towards us ; and when they have ſtoned the Achans in their own bosom , to mourn for the sins of others , and to wreſtle with God for pardon , and ſuch a ſpirit of repentance as may fit the Land for thoſe high and excellent Mercies , both for ſoul and body , which hitherto have been the object both of our prayers and hope's . Now as no means of cure are successful further then Gods own power and bleſſing have a concurrence with them ; ſo the only way to procure Gods aſſiſtance , is , to make ſuch application to him as may moſt ſtrongly engage him to be with you in all your endeavours . And ſeeing God does all things for his own glory , to advance ſuch ways as will make the name of God moſt glorious in the Land , muſt needs be the greateſt engagement you can make of God . Some few directions for this purpoſe by your Lordship's command I preſented to your ears ; and now by the ſame command preſent them to your eyes . The chief whereof was this , the advancement of Goſpel-truth , and the power of godliness . The Pſalmiſt tells us . In Jury is God well known , his name is great in Iſrael : Where God is beſt known , he is moſt glorified ; God is rightly made known only by his own truth revealed in his Word ▪ and as this is more or less defended , propagated , and obedience thereunto yielded ; ſo is ▪ God more or less honoured by any Nation , and their spiritual and temporal privileges more or less enlarged . Baſill and Ambroſe ſay of the Echineis or Remora a little fiſh , that if it join it ſelf to a Ship under sail , it will make it ſtand ſtill and quiet , though driven with the greateſt tempeſts . Like this Echineis to a Ship , is Religion to a State , which while your Lordship's have endeavoured to reform and eſtabliſh , you have been preſerved in ſafety , while ſo many dreadful storms have blown from one end of the Land unto another . God therefore having truſted you in a special manner with the guarding of his Truth and Ordinances , let it be your greateſt care to preſerve and propagate theſe in their power and purity ; And then you may commit both your own and the Kingdoms safety with confidence unto Gods keeping . And whatſoever ſtorms ſhall be raiſed againſt you , and ſuch as be with you in the Cauſe of God , he will quiet them in his appointed time , and give a prevailing command to all your enemies , ſaying , Deſtroy not the Cluſter , for there is a bleſſing in it , Iſaiah 65. 8. Thus may your Honours not only be Physicians to heal our Land , but make plentiful proviſions for your own happiness to eternity : whereas otherwiſe thoſe great talents of honour , authority and wealth , which God hath entruſted you with , will be but the improvement of your everlaſting miſery . Alcibiades bragging of his great poſſeſſions , Socrates to abate his pride , fetched him a Map of the World , and deſired him to ſhow him where his poſſeſſions lay , but there he could not find them ; All Athens in that being but a point . Remember , that what ever poſſeſſions great men have here , yet Not many wiſe , not many rich , not many mighty , ſhall have inheritances in heaven . As therefore God hath done great things for you , ſo do you great things for God . Let your authority be the bulwark of the innocent , the axe to cut down profaneness , injuſtice and oppreſſion in the Land : Let Ireland be relieved , and ſuch at home as the Public ſervice hath made Widows or Orphans , or neceſſitous , be ſuccoured . Let thoſe little Siſters that have no breaſts , be provided for all the Kingdom over ; Let grace and holiness be ſeen in their own colours in your lives and examples , that your copies which are ſeen and read of all men , may make them in love with godliness , that , when God ſhall diveſt you of your great poſſeſſions here , he may inveſt you with a glorious inheritance among the Saints in his own Kingdom for ever , which that he may do , is the prayer of Your Lordship's humble ſervant in the Lord WILLIAM GOODE .