TO THE HONOURABLE HOVSE OF COMMONS in Parliament Aſſembled at WESTMINSTER . I Could have drawn many ſtrong arguments from mine own weakness againſt the publiſhing of this Sermon , had not your deſire deprived me of my freedom . It is enough to me , and I hope it will be ſo to others , that what I do herein , is and act of obedience to your Commands . The doctrine I have herein preſſed upon others is , that they ought to be ſerviceable to the Public , which I durſt not confute by concealing my poor and weak labours , after they received the ſtamp of your judgement upon them to be in the leaſt meaſure useful for the Public good . In this Diſcourſe I now preſent you with , I have laboured chiefly to diſcover thoſe Rocks of ſelf-ſhipwrack which lie hidden in the waves of Public employments , that in your ſteering of the Public Ship , you might not daſh your souls againſt them , and ſo sink the comforts that out of all your worthy labours might eternally redound unto your souls . If you seek Gods honour , God hath ſecured your honour by his own promiſe . You muſt not expect always to be paid1 Sam. 2. 30. in good coin by men , who reap the benefit of your hazards for their ſecurity . Many will deal with you , as beaſts do with trees , they get under their ſhadow in time of a storm , and when that is over browſe and crop the boughs thereof : But in reference to God , you may ſafely conclude , as Marcus Antonius did , Hoc habeo quodcun que dedi . You know what Chriſt will ſay to his Church-Samaritans , Matth. 21. 40. In as much as ye have done it to the leaſt of theſe , ye have done it unto me . I have often ſadly wondered , what was the meaning of that Balancing providence of our moſt wiſe God , who hath often made the ſcales even betwixt us and our enemies , in this civil War , nor can I find it out , unless it be this ; becauſe the wheels of our Reformation drive ſo heavily . It is Gods Great mercy , and your great honour , that ſo many unprofitable Thorns are already ſtubbed up which choked the liberty of the Goſpel , yet if now the Churches field ſhould lie half tilled , we muſt expect abundance of weeds . The ſooner you can accompliſh the planting of a good Ministry , and the giving of iuſt encouragement to thoſe that labour in the Vineyard , and that a Government with Scripture warrant may be fully executed , the ſooner you may expect to bring the Ship of the Commonwealth into the harbour of a happy Peace . That you may ſo manage all your employments in the Public ſervice , as may be moſt for Gods glory , the ſpeedy redress of our preſent misery's , and the comfort of your own souls ; is and ſhall be the earneſt and conſtant prayer of Your moſt unworthy ſervant in the work of Chriſt , WILL . GOODE .