To the Right Honourable , ISAAC PENNINGTON Lord Major of the City of London , together with the Right Worshipful the Sheriffs , and Aldermen of the ſame City . SIRS , MAy it pleaſe you , Saul that great Perſecutor of the new beginning Church of Chriſt , that enemy who breathed out threatenings and ſlaughter againſt the diſciples of the Lord , after he was caſt down from his horſe , and his pride was quelled by the might and power of Chriſt , he was by the Lords order committed to the care of Ananias , Acts 9. 11. True it is , Ananias anſwered the Lord , that he was jealous and fearful of Saul , becauſe he had herd by many , how much evil he had done to the Saints at Jeruſalem , 13. v. But the Lord replied no more unto him , but that he ſhould not fear nor miſtruſt him , becauſe he had turned his heart , and made him a choſen vessel to bear his name before the Gentiles , and Kings , and children of Iſrael , & that he would teach him how great things he ſhould ſuffer for his names ſake . Let it pleaſe your Honour and Worſhips to behold here my own caſe deciphered ; for if Saul perſecuted the Church of Chriſt ; I my self have perſecuted the ſame Church , by oppoſing the doctrine of it , by preaching and teaching contrary to it , by procuring to ſeduce souls from it , by writing againſt it . But now it hath pleaſed that mighty and powerful Lord ; againſt whom there is no reſiſtance , to caſt me down upon the ground , to quell my pride , to lighten me round about with the beams and light of his mercies , to make me know how hard a thing it is to kick againſt the will & calling of God , and with trembling and fear to make me ſay , Lord what wilt thou have me to do ? If Saul was ſent to Damaſcus to Ananias , a chief and zealous follower of Chriſt , that by him he might be protected from the Jews and enemies of the Lord , who doubtless hearing of his change and converſion would have cruelly torn and ſlaughtered him if they could have found him . So I my self by a ſecret and inward order , which I have found by God delivered to my Soul , have judged it meet and fit to ſearch out in this City ſome zealous Ananias , ſome religious follower of Chriſts pure doctrine , that I may be ſafely ſheltered & protected from the violent attempts of the Lords enemies the Papiſts , who I know will endeavour to do me all the miſchief they can . Therefore let it pleaſe your Honour and Wps. who are well known to be as Ananias in Damaſcus , zealous and truly religious followers of Chriſts own doctrine , and favourers of the pure Word of the Lord , to caſt your eyes upon me a new converted Saul , to ſhelter and protect me from thoſe that plot my miſchief . O when ſureſt they are to hinder my perſeverance in the truth , by plotting and ſtudying my deſtruction , let them find me hovering under the wings of your protection . O fear not ! nor ſay what Ananias ſaid , I have herd by many of this man , how much evil he hath done to thy Saints , but praiſe the work of the Lord in me , who hath opened now my eyes , who hath brought me now out of Babylon , who hath made me confess my ſins and iniquities with a sorrowful and contrite heart . And as it pleaſed the Lord to show Saul , as ſoon as he was converted how great things he ſhould ſuffer for his names ſake ; even ſo be you confident , as I my ſelf am that this my calling & converſion is purely & merely from above and from the Lord ; from whom I have received this teſtimony , that he hath showed me already how great things I muſt ſuffer for his names ſake ; for I muſt for him ſuffer many injuries and calumniations from the Papiſts , I muſt ſuffer the loss of all my kindred , I muſt ſuffer the loss of that maintenance , which I was wont to receive from them , I muſt ſuffer want and poverty . But for whom ? For the Lords ſake ; for the teaching and preaching the preciſe rule of the Word of the Lord , for abjuring all Popiſh errors , for renouncing all ſupertitions , for abhorring all idolatries . Let theſe my ſufferings ſerve to your Honour and Worſhips for a true teſtimony of my converſion ; let theſe my ſufferings remove from you all fears and jealouſies of my perſeverance , that thus with your favourable protection I may rejoice in my calling , I may freely teach the pure Word of the Lord , I may oppoſe all Antichristian doctrine , and by my example may draw many wandering souls to the true Faith & Church of Chriſt . And I ſhall always pray to the Lord to keep your Honour and Worſhips in grace , and that you may ſo rule & govern this City by your conſcionable and upright actions before God and men , that you may truly here be called zelotes of the Honour of the Lord , and afterwards you may have your ſeats above in the triumphant City of Jeruſalem . Your Hon. and Wor. humble and faithful ſervant , in the things of God , and Chriſt . THOMAS GAGE .