To the Right Worshipful Sir SAMUEL OWFIELD , A Worthy Member of the Houſe of COMMONS , now aſſembled in PARLIAMENT . SIR , IF my boldness may reach ſo far upon your patience , I ſhall briefly touch what Iohn in the fift chap. of his Gospel writeth of a pool which was in Ieruſalem called Betheſda : About this pool were wont to lie a great multitude of impotent folk , blind , lame , and withered , waiting for the moving of the water , which was done by and Angel , who went down at a certain time into the pool and troubled the water , and then whoſoever ſtepped in , was cured of whatſoever diſeaſe he had . But one lying there 38 years , who in all this time could never be cured , becauſe being of himself impotent ( as he anſwered to our Saviour ) he had no man , when the water was troubled , to help him or to put him into the pool . I will not ſtand to moraliſe this holy ſtory unto you at large , lest you might justly ſay that I abuſe to much your patience , by confounding the style of and Epistle , which ought to be brief , with the diviſion , parts and order of a Sermon . Only I beg your patience ſo far as to peruſe this my enſuing Sermon , and in it you ſhall find and impotent man , not only blind , but deaf and dumb , and truly beaten by Satan , and by him expulſed out of the Church of Christ , and as I may truly ſay ) lying in this miſery near 3 • years . The diſcourſe of my enſuing Sermon will inform You that I my self have been this impotent man . Many times my Conſcience hath been moved and troubled from above with good and heavenly inſpirations ( which God hath been pleaſed to ſend into my soul ) by my conſidered aberration from the true Church , for which the waters of my tears and inward ſobs from my heart have been alſo moved with the troubles of my soul . So that I would many times full feign have ſtepped and entered into the true Church of England , where all diſeaſes of the soul are most ſurely healed . But alas ! mine own impotency and weakness joined with my long blindness , hindered the execution of my good reſolutions ; temporal reſpects and fears kept back my ſteps . Many times I feared I ſhould want a man and a friend ( as the cripple at Betheſda did ) to help me , to encourage me , and to further my good deſires . I feared the high Aſſembly of Parliament would rather mistrust him , that ſo many years hath been and enemy to the State of this Kingdom , than now in theſe times approve his penitency and contrition , which might rather have ſeemed unto them a feigned hypocrisy . All theſe fears kept back for a time the forwardness of my will and heart . Until at laſt I reſolved to diſcloſe and diſcover unto Your Worſhip , theſe troubles of my heart , theſe diſeaſes of my soul , even the want of a man to help me . God whom I ſought too pleaſed , with my request ; I found that aſsistance from you , that I ſo earneſtly deſired , for , I found a man , I found a friend , I found a comforter , I found and Advocate to plead for my pardon before that high Court now aſſembled . For by Your means I have been quietly brought into the Church ; by Your means alſo , I hope , I ſhall be henceforth protected againſt all ſlanderers , who will whet their tongues against me and seek to trouble me , and grudge at my good , as the Jews excepted against the Cripple and impotent man , who was cured by our Saviour . I ſhall always be ready to render due thanks to God , and next to You , for Your bleſſed help towards my Converſion , and firſt fruits of my Vocation , which in this humble . Work of mine , I have endeavoured to make known to the World , remitting my further expreſsions to better occaſions . And in the mean time praying to God , that he will be pleaſed with his powerful hand to ſupply to You , and Yours what my heart can wiſh , but never will be able to perform according to the full meaſure of ſo glorious a Work , which truly next to God the beginner and Author of all goodness , by Your means hath been accompliſhed . Your Worſhips humble and ever obliged ſervant in Chriſt THOMAS GAGE .