TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE Houſe of PEERS Aſſembled in PARLIAMENT . RIGHT HONOURABLE , AS in ſundry other ages and places , ſo in this age and place wherein we now live , hath my Text been verified : and that within the compass of theſe laſt five years ; in every of which God hath done better unto us then at our beginnings : and we have great and juſt cauſe to hope that he will yet continue to do better and better . It was and eſpecial evidence of Gods good providence , that the great Counſel of England was called at that time , that it was called . The State of Church and Commonwealth was ſo far out of order , and the diſorder in both ſo backed , as , without a Parliament , it would not , it could not ( in men apprehenſions ) have been redreſsed . The Reformation that was then intended by that Parliament , being by ſome envious eyes eſpied , a diſſolution thereof was procured . But that , and other former diſsolutions of Parliaments ( neceſsity forcing another Parliament ſoon after to be called ) occaſioned and Act to prevent inconveniences , which may happen by the untimely Adjourning , Proroguing , or diſſolving of this preſent Parliament . What better thing ( rebus ſic ſtantibus ut tunc & nunc ) could have happened to this State ? The good conſequencies , that have happened thereupon , are evident demonſtrations of Gods mind , ſtill to do better and better for us . It would exceed the proportion of a Dedicatory Epiſtle , to reckon up the particular instances of the Divine Providence , increasing time after time for the better unto us , and that by virtue of this preſent Parliament : they are ſo clear and evident , as none , but ſuch as take notice of nothing , can be ignorant of them : and none , but envious and malignant ſpirits , can conceal or pervert them . When might the good Providence of God have been better diſcerned , in protecting the perſons , upholding the ſpirits , directing the counſels , and proſpering the endeavours of ſuch as were aſſembled in a Parliament , then in this ? When might the like Providence of God have been better diſcerned in ſtirring up men's minds , encouraging their ſpirits , enabling their bodies , and preſerving their perſons for maintaining a cauſe , then in this cauſe that is now maintained by the Parliament ? Of them who with a ſingle eye behold the footſteps of the Lord in the Counſels of our Parliament , it may juſtly be ſaid , They have ſeen thy goings , Oh God , the goings of my God , Pſal . 68 : 24. my King . Have not our Armies had success beyond expectation , even to admiration ? What a stop hath been ſet to Superſtition ? How good a progress hath been made in Reformation ? And may we not yet hope that God will do better unto us then at our beginnings ? Gods promiſe is the ground of hope : and my Text shows that God hath promiſed as much . Go on , Right Honourable , and put forth your utmoſt endeavours , Cum aliqua spes ſubeſt , vehementiores vires apparere aſſolent . Aug. de quant . animae . c . 22. Spes ad marjoram audenda seize erigit . Greg. M in Iob 4 l. 5 c . 29. for bringing on thoſe better things that yet remain . Where their is Hope , there endeavours uſe to be most earneſt : For Hope stirs up men's ſpirits to ſet upon great things . Though the full accompliſhment of the remaining better things ſhould be reſerved to a future age , yet it becomes us , to be as earneſt in proſecuting them , according to the ability and opportunity that God does give us , as if we our ſelves were ſure , while we live , to have the fruition of them . Experience shows that to be true , which of old was ſaid of the provident husbandman , that he plants trees which may be useful in and other age . But I hope that God will let you ſee and enjoy the fruit of your Counſels , and of our deſires . This ſhall be the continual prayer of Your Honours humble Servant and Orator , William Gouge .