TO THE HONOURABLE HOVSE OF COMMONS Now aſſembled in PARLIAMENT . Right Honourable ; DAniels Prophecy concerns the JewesDan . 1 • . 1. Thy people . in Hypotheſi , the whole Church of God in Theſi , for no Scripture is of private interpretation , says 2 Pet. 1. 20. 1 Cor. 10. 11. 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . S. Peter , and Theſe things happened to them as enſamples , says S. Paul . To them it speaks two things ; 1. Their Calamities under the foure great Monarchies now almoſt at and end . 2. Their Conſolation afterwards , and now approaching . To us it speaks two things more ; 1. Our Hope , living in days of trouble , but withal , of delivery ; it is not a Tympany , but Dan. 1 • . 1. a Child , that the Churches of the Saints go withal , if they ſtick long in the place of birth , it Hoſe . 1 • ▪ 〈 ◊ … 〉 is becauſe they are fooliſh ; but at length a ſafe deliverance is promiſed , the manchild of Reformation ſhall be born , and Heaven and earth ſhall cry grace grace unto it . Zech. 4. 7. 2. Our Help , ( for hope deferred makes theProv . 1 • . 12. heart ſick , ) in this book two ways it is afforded . Firſt , From the Hiſtory of it , See here how the Church , though it be a little and but a deſpiſed flock , yet is it of that esteem with God , that for the Churches ſake he wheels about all the Monarchies of the world ; the Perſian ſhall daſh in pieces the Dan. 2. & 7. Babylonian , the Greeks the Perſian , the Romans the Grecian , and the God of Heaven the Roman Empire and them all , and ſet up the Kingdom of Ieſus Chriſt , that ſtone cut cut without hands , which ſhall become a great mountain and fill the whole earth . Secondly , From the Prophesy of it , not Humane , but Divine , that ſacred Calendar , and great Almanac of Prophesy : the foure Kingdoms of Daniel , are not only , and Historical , but a Prophetical Chronologie of times , meaſured from the beginning of the Jewes captivity till all the Kingdoms of the world ſhould become the Kingdom ofRev . 11. 15. our Lord and his Chriſt ; a courſe of time , during which , the Church and Nation of the Iewes ſhould carry the veil upon their hearts , but afterwards ſhould turn to God , and be raiſed up from the death of sin ; are turn ſo ſtrange , a delivery ſo Dan. 12. 2. Rom. 11. 15. great , that it is reſembled to a reſurrection from the grave . To this great Calendar of times the Apoſtles in the new Testament relate , when they call the times of the fourth Kingdom , the laſt times , and the latter times of that Kingdom , the latter times ; ( viz. ) the latter part of that laſt Kingdom ( as says a learned Interpreter : ) Go we then to this Mr Mede Apoſt . of latter times , p. 64 , 65 , 66. Prophetical Calendar , we have the Roman Monarchy almoſt at and end , and concerning the Iewes , ( whoſe coming in ſucceedeth their going out ) two things foretold . The final end of the Turkiſh Empire ( as learned 1. men conceive ) the only obstacle to thoſe Kings ofM . Brightman , and many others . Rev. 16. 12. the Eaſt as the Iewes are called , and the last defence of the Beaſt ; whoſe beginning , was about the year 1300. and the addition of 350. ( which is the time , Dan. 12. 7. M. Brightman , in locum . times , half a time ) does bring that Turkiſh tyranny to and end , in the year 1650. The beginning of their gracious delivery , this 2. ſhall be after a twofold epoche . 1. The taking away of the daily ſacrifice , Dan. 12. 11. which was wickedly done by Antiochus , long before , but de jure by our Lord Ieſus Christ his death , destroying Dan. 8. 10. 11 , 24. 25. all other ſacrifices by the ſacrifice of himself , the fullness of all their shadows , and defacto by TitusIoſeph Antiq. Veſpaſian , who took away the place of ſacrificing , when he deſtroyed the Temple . 2. The ſetting up of the abomination of deſolation , ( or which makes deſolate ) this was wickedly attempted by the Iewes in the days of Iulian the Apoſtate ; he in contempt of Christ gave licence to the Iewes to built their Temple , and renew their Jewish worſhip , hereupon they took up every Tripart . Hiſt . stone of the old foundation , but before they laid any new one , they were diſperſed by a special hand of God . A fearful earthquake in the night deſtroyed all their work • , a ſudden fire conſumed all their tools , and themſelves ſo diſperſed that from that time the Jewish ſuperſtitions did for ever ceaſe . Cyril Biſhop of Ieruſalem , who admoniſhed them of this Prophesy of Daniel , but after no dissuasion could prevail , he openly profeſſed , that now the time was come which our Lord foretold , that there ſhould not be left one ſtone upon another . M • tO . 24. 2. Now underſtand we this to be the epoche , Iulians reign fell out in the year 360. to which add 1290. they make up 1650. the very time formerly deſigned for the finiſhing of the Iewes diſperſion . Theſe things being ſo , I knew not ( Right Honourable ) a Text ſpeaking more to You , Us , Our times , then what I preached on , and by your Authority have expoſed now to more public view . To you it speaks by way of Caution , that no 1. ſpot , nor blot , nor ſhrinking back be found amongſt you , that are repairers of our breaches , and reſtorers of paths to dwell in . To us it speaks by way of Criſis , it diſcovers the 2. temper of the ſick body of both Church and State under you our great and ( under God ) only Physician , your physic ſtirs the humours ; makes ſome better , ſome worſe . To our times it speaks by way of comfort , they 3. are troubleſome , but trying times , and after trial , there ſhall be delivery to thoſe that are purified , made white , and tried , but deſtruction to thoſe that do and will do wickedly , true wisdom and underſtanding is hid from them , and revealed to the godly wiſe . Let then a bloody crew fight on , and fill up their meaſure , and let a fooliſh people refuſe to aſsiſt you as they ought , the Lord himſelf hath ſaid the word , to you as to Cyrus . He is my shepherd , andIſa . 44. 28. ſhall perform all my pleaſure , even ſaying to Ieruſalem , Thou ſhalt be built , and of the Temple , Thy foundation ſhall be laid : and to them , the Lord will throw down his hail upon them that Rev. 16. ſtand againſt Reformation , and rend their hearts with indignation and blaſphemy ; he will go and end with his work , though they swear and storm , till he have utterly conſumed them from the face of the earth . Perfect is the work of God , and ( as the Lord Deut. 32. 4. spoke concerning Eli ) when he begins , he will alſo1 Sam. 3. 12. make and end . Thus craving your pardon , and ( which is more ) your acceptance , as you have my faith , ſo ſhall you have my prayers , that what Caeſar once ſaid of Room , He found it brick , but left it marble , Romam latericiam inveni , marmorea • … relinquo . may much more Honourably be ſaid of you , you found our Church and State Atheistical , Prelatical , you leave the beams of our houſe Cedar , Cant. 1. 17. Plin. l. 43. c . 5 & 16. c . 41. and our galleries fir ; famous for durableness , acceptable for sweetness ; by laying in the walls of the Church ſuch ſolid and eternal truths of God as may hold out instead of Socinianism , Arminianism , and many more ; and by ſetting up ſuch Worſhip , and Diſcipline , and Government , as may keep off wind and weather , that Gods people may walk hand in hand together , as in galleries of fir . Your Honours , both at the throne of grace , and in the work of Chriſt ▪ STANLEY GOWER ▪