TO THE Honourable Houſe of COMMONS Aſſembled in PARLIAMENT . WHen the World was ſhaken by Adams sin , God secured it by the Promiſeof his Son ▪ Gen. 5. When Canaan was diſtreſſed by the Midianites , he ſent Gideon to ſave Iſrael , Iudg. 6. Now England is diſtracted , and her foundations out of courſe , He hath raised up you , the Worthies of our Iſrael , to repair her breaches , and ſettle her foundations ; we acknowledge the infinite mercy of God to raiſe you up at ſuch a time , and for ſuch designs . It's great hard work to ſave Kingdoms : but Honourable , whoever would not ſave a Kingdom , is no more worthy to live in it , then the Man seeks the deſtruction thereof . Wicked men will venture all to get or ruin Kingdoms , and ſhall not good men venture as far to ſave Kingdoms ? Had men public ſpirits they would do it . Heathens have ſo minded the public , as that they have forgotten themſelves . Publius Decius the Roman Army Valex • maxim , l. 5. c . 553. being brought low , rushed into thee amid of the enemies , demanded ſafety for his Country , Death for himself ; and ſo occaſioned and unexpected Ʋictory . Luc. Alvanius his Wife and Children , being • Dein , lib . 1. c . 11 . in the VVagon , eſcaping for their lives in a common Calamity ; commands them down , and takes up the Vestal Ʋirgins , who had the care of their holy things : he was proprior publicae Religioni quam privatae charitati , the Publiqueneſſe of his ſpirit carried him above private intereſts . Where ſpirits are right ſet ; self is much forgotten . Ji's domeſticknes of ſpirit , ſelviſhneſſe , which is the great let to Armies , Religions , and Kingdoms good . Eſther was right when she ſaid , if I periſh I periſh , ſhe would venture for the public , and for her God . The Quicunque occupati ſunt negotijs reipublicae debent hoc ipſum facere propter Deum Rabbi Gamel . in Paul . Fagio Capit. patrum . Rabbis give a good leſſon for Men in publiqne employment , They muſt do their work propter Deum Then neither difficulty of work , diſappoinment in event , nor ingratitude in People , will disturb the ſpirits of men . Then nothing will be done againſt the Kingdom of Chriſt , evidence of truth , or liberty of Conſcience ; If men be public and act for God they are Eſhbaals , Ruling lights ; if private and ſelviſh , they will be Iſhboſheths men of ſhame . The Axe is at the root of our Tree , we hope your ſpirits are all unſelviſhed , that none are now unpublic ; Publiqueneſſe of dangers calls for publiqueneſſe of ſpirits ; Eminency of danger for speediness of help . When Ieruſalem was brought low , Aſaph cried to God for ſpeedy prevention , Pſalm . 79. 8. England , Ireland are brought low , the Aſaphs cry to God , and cry to you alſo for ſpeedy prevention . There be ill ſpirits abroad which tear us , which caſt us into the Fire and water to deſtroy us , as the men Son in the Mar. 9. 22. Gospel , and we ſay , Master's if you can do any thing have compaſsion on the Kingdom , and help it , help us ; keep back nothing may ſave a Kingdom , help by ways ordinary , and by ways extraordinary . You are Eſ . 36. ſiqua eſt miſerecordia & humanitas extremae noſtrae miſeriae ſ • ccurrere ne graveris Calvin . Rulers and our ruin is under your hand ; Vote our Reſurrection nomine contradicente , effect it quamvis mille repugnent , and this ſhall be your Impress , Hoc Regnum eſt vere veſtrum . Yea other Kingdoms ſhall contribute to your praiſe , and the Kingdom of Kingdoms be your reward . Bestir you they are active , who would undo us . Think on the * Rabbies Rabbi Shimeon in Paulo Fgio Capit. patrum . words a little altered Die brevis , opus multum merces magna , Pater familias urget operarij ne ſint pigri . This Epiſtle and Sermon had both lay on in the dark , if your authority which commands Perſons , Pulpits , Preſſes , had not brought them forth ; accept the fruits of your own power , and bleſſed be the Lord for what you have done ſince you herd what is now preſented unto you . The Lord inable you to perfect all your intentions and undertakings , which are for the public good . The Lord unite you , Watch ever you , fill you with his Spirit , Proſper you , All yours , and accompliſh yet greater things by You , So Prays ▪ Your moſt Unworthy Servant , and meaneſt in the work of Chriſt . WILLIAM GREENHILL .