TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD BRIAN , Lord Biſhop of Sarum , and Tutor to both their Highneſſes , The moſt Illuſtrious CHARLES the Prince of VVales , and the moſt noble JAMES the Duke of Yorke , my moſt Honoured Lord and Patron . Right Reverend Father in God , YOUR Lordſhip hath often times called upon me to go out and show the people their Tranſgreſsions , and the Houſe of Iacob their sins . Next to my own conſcience I confess my self bound to give your Lordſhip ſatisfaction . To fallen foul upon the degenerous and intractable nature of this people cannot anſwer you , for it does not me . I do not ſay I am not eloquent , and therefore that you would ſend by the hand of Him whom you ſhould ſend . When I am indeed able for theſe things , I doubt not to have Him with my mouth , becauſe I mean to leave all my self out . There was never more provocations for all men to speak then now , when all the mischief that other ages did but imagine are practiced by a Law , and in the mean time the dumb Aſses are taught to forbid the madness of the Prophets . The Harvest is confeſſedly Great , but then the Labourers are not few . And if while ſo many are thus excellently employed about the reſt of the Building , ſome one or other doe as well as he can towards the making good of the Ground work , I think he may be let alone at leaſt . The hope's of the Superſtructionly from the aſſurance of the Foundation I ſhall give them leave to be Pillars : This I am ſure is the Cornerstone , and I need not tell you how rejected , I mean it not of all , but of the Common Builders . If the Church be and Ark he that hath never ſo little to do with the Compass , though he fit ſtill in his place , yet does as much or more then all the other neceſsary Noiſe in the Ship The Compariſon is quit of arrogance , for it holds in the design , it is not meant of the performance . The courſe I have run here is Labour too , and in the ſame Vineyard . And I truſt my self for this , that my accounts will be as well passed above , if I reckon upon theſe pains , the pretence whereof though not ſo popular , yet is as ſubſtantially proficient towards the main Edification . I have principally endeavoured to redeem my Reader from that ſlavery , by which I have ſo long sat down my self , in not printing ( ſo near as I could I have not ) the ſame things over again . I am ſure I have ſet down nothing but what I believe , if more sometime then I well underſtood , I have company enough , and the acknowledgement of and error is more eaſe to me , then the committing of it was . Why I ſhould make theſe Addreſſes to your Lordſhip there is all the reaſon in the world ; what have I but what I have received from you ? and that which is , would be Nothing of it self . Rays of incidency contract no warmth upon the Earth , unless reflected back upon their original Sun. My Lord , As once the Sons of the Prophets ſaid unto the Man of God , Behold now the place where we dwell is too straight for us . We are humbly expecting the laſt courſe of that Judgement which began at the Houſe of God . What ſhall be done to the dry Tree , or where the ſinner will appear , is to be left to him to whom vengeance belongeth . The Great Genius of this Place muſt now burn a while like thoſe Subterraneous Olibian Lamps under the Earth . We ſhall ſee it but Bernardin . Scarde • nius de Priſcis civibus Patavin . Lib. 1. not now , we ſhall behold it but not nigh . Have , ſalve , fit tibi terra Levis . Abite hinc peſſimi fures , Quid voſtris vultis cum oculis Emiſſitiis . Your Lordship's moſt faithful Servant and Chaplain . JOHN GREGORY .