TO THE HONOURABLE THE KNIGHTS , CITIZENS And Burgeſſes of the Houſe of Commons , Aſſembled in Parliament . MOſt Noble Senators , having had a neceſſary occaſion to publiſh a Treatiſe againſt Superſtitious Jesu-worship , I dedicated the ſame to a worthy Member of your Houſe . Now finding it encountered in two volumes by Maſter Barton , who after dedication of his firſt Book to the Kings Majesty , seems next to dedicate the ſame to you , I have therefore taken boldness to dedicate this my Reply to you alſo , ( being indeed and encounter with both his Books ) which otherwiſe I ſhould not have done nor preſumed to soar ſo high . This man is very confident in his cauſe , he tells you he hath hit the Mark ▪ at which he aimed , but I am confident it will appear for all his boaſting , that he hath took his level with a falſe deceitful eye . He firſt flatters you and tells you , that your Honour advanceth truth , and nothing more , and preſently after complains , that the • loose followers of truth and peace are purſued , ( he means himself , and his faction ) and ſo the two ſacred Siſters are forced by humoriſts . Upon whom this will reflect , I leave to your wisdoms to conſider . He is not ignorant that you have broken the neck of this ſuperſtition , and favour not the followers of it . Againſt me he complains to the Kings Majesty that I have crucified Chriſt in his name , and have ſhamefully handled the Church : heavy charges if I cannot avoid them ; For the firſt , I appeal to what I have written ; for the ſecond , I am not guilty , unless affirming it to be unlawful to give a Church authority over Gods word , do make me to be ſo . For this opinion I know it to be one of the main props , and pillars of Antichriſt , and it lives and die with him , and bleſſed be God both are hastening to their end , but if I ſhould hold my peace at this time I ſhould betray truth , which I abhor to do . There be many Malignant Spirits fit for a Malignant opinion that do yet plead for it . And ſome I know doe greatly cry up this men book ; I have laboured to strip this ſuperſtition stark naked , that the ugly deformity of it may appear , and what I have done herein I humbly ſubmit my self to your Honours grave cenſure , and humbly crave of you pardon for my boldness . The Lord watch over you for good , be a wall of fire round about you , and the glory in the amid of you , keep you ſafe under his wings from the deſperate plots of wicked and unreaſonable men , ( as , his Name be eternally praiſed , hitherto he hath done ) till Babylon be laid in the duſt , and the King of glory appear on Mount Sion in perfect beauty ; Thus prayeth The unworthieſt of your Servants , MASCAL GYLES .