TO THE HONOURABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS , Aſſembled in PARLIAMENT . HONOURABLE SENATORS ; WHen formerly I have been moved by friends to preach before you at the Monthly Faſt , I have always declined it , and earneſtly entreated them not to make the motion ; being ready to ſay , as Auſonius to Caeſar in another caſe , Non habeo ingenium , I have not parts for ſuch a ſervice in ſuch a Preſence ; or as Moſes anſwered the Lord , Exod 4. 10. Non ſum facundus , I am not eloquent ; for I never thought my Oratory worthy ſuch and Auditory : but when a learned Member of your Houſe came to me in your name , and ſignified your will to have it ſo , I could not ſay as that Poet did , Obſequium 〈 ◊ 〉 eſſe 〈 ◊ 〉 Id : though not ſine subdue •• ione & ſudore . Caeſar said juſsit , habebo , as if he had wit at command , but the Senate ſending , I reſolved , I muſt obey , & do as well as I can with Gods aſsiſtance . Lipſ . Ep Now having in obedience to your Order , both preached and printed this plain Sermon , I beſeech you take it with all faults , and connive . This I may ſay to my comfort , it was preached in a good day , and we that then made our Supplications for you , and with you , found not our prayers and yours fruitleſs,2 Sam. 23. 10. for the Lord wrought a great Victory that day ; By Weſtcheſier . a good encouragement to you to continue your days of Humiliation , of which you find ſo good effects . Often may you hear ſuch News from your Forces , that we may enjoy the benefit of your Ordinances in peace . Worthy Patriots , it was joyful tidings to us in all parts of the Kingdom , when we herd for certain , that there ſhould be a Parliament , and that Writs were out for chooſing Knights of the Shire , and it was and augmentation of our joy , when we herd of a Triennial Parliament ; that I thought would be fraenum or flagrum to all corrupt men , but when we underſtood that there was and Act for the continuation of this Parliament , we had greater cauſe of rejoicing , becauſe by this means ye have opportunity to perfect thoſe things , which other Parliaments could but propound & begin , being ſundry times broken up , before they could do any conſiderable ſervice for their Country . God forbid , that that high Court which is now eſtabliſhed by a law , ſhould ever be diſſolved by the ſword . Peace , 2 Chro. 12. 18. peace be unto you , and to your Helpers , your God helpeth you . He grant , that ye may proſper , and triumph in his Name and praiſe , until ye have finiſhed the work which he hath given you to do , which is and ſhall be the prayer of Weſtminſter , Octob. 30. 1645. The unworthieſt of your spiritual Servants , S A : GIBSON .