To all loyal-hearted Engliſh Proteſtants which ſincerely reliſh the power and purity of CHRISTS GOSPELL , and zealouſly deteſt the damnable doctrines of Antichriſt ; J. V. wishes the bleſſings of GODS right hand , and of his left ▪ the bleſſings of this life and of the life to come . THe richeſt rareſt mercies , daily ſent ( Right Chriſtian brothers ) to us of this land , From Gods overflowing grace , al-filling hand May be compared to th'Sun in firmament . Whoſe glorious rays all creatures hearts revive , Whoſe light enlightens all the world throughout , Whoſe heat does cheriſh plants that ſpring and sprout , Whoſe ſhine to want does us of joy deprive . Yet ſince , ſo daily , man does it enjoy , Who is't ( almost ) that valews it aright ? Who yields due praiſe to heaven for heavens ſweet light ? O few or none . Abundance does us cloy . From whence , we ( therefore ) justly may conclude , That Gods rich mercies , which we oft possess , Wherewith he daily , hourly does us bless , We all receive with great ingratitude . I need not stand exemplify the ſame , It is a fault too frequent , too rank grown , And yet to God , more odious , ther's not one , And which to Chriſtians brings more ſmart and ſhame . Of spirituall-bleſſings , our thrice blessed Salvation Wrought by our Saviour , bought with's precious-blood , Was moſt divine , gave man his chiefeſt good , Was more admired than was the world's Creation . But , of all temp'rall-bleſſings we enjoyed Since God did from the Earth and heavenly frame To our deliverance , never greater came , When Rome by powder , would have us destroyed . How thankful for the firſt , to God we are I'll tax nonce conſcience , but examine mine : But for the ſecond , how we do decline From giving thanks to God , I may not spare , To tell you all ( my Chriſtian brothers deer ) That , which if I ſhould ſilence , senseless ſtones , ( This to be fe • red ) would found with mournful groans ; Englands ingratitude is too-too clear . For why ? not only Popiſh Jebuſites , Already do begin ( as plain appears ) To buze , with brazen brows , into the ears And minds of their ſeduced proſelytes . Yea and persuade too-many Proteſtants That there was never any powder-plot , But , that ( we falsely ) ſtain them with that ſpot The Cath'likes to diſgrace with c • useless taunts . For this cauſe , therefore ▪ I have taken in hand , Again to ſing ( to Gods due praiſe and glory In this revived and moſt faithful Story ) How powerfully God to our Church did ſtand . Which , now , at laſt ( though , with much struggling ) I , ( By Gods aid , in our pious Parliament ) Have brought to public view , thus to prevent Our times dough-Hoſ . 7. 4 , 6 , 7. D. Baker a late moſt impudent Apoſtate , who would not licenſe this my History , becauſe , as he ſaid , we were not ſo angry with the Papiſts now a days ( though we never had greater cauſe than in theſe our days ) as they were 20. or 30. years ago , and one Mr. Croſfield a Senior fellow of Queens College in Oxford , could not ( as he endeavoured ) get it licenſed for the Press there . Nor could Mr. Daniell ▪ Cambridge Printer ( who would have printed it there ) get it licenſed at Cambridge , Dr. Brumrick being then Vicechan . O tempora ! O mores ! Bakers baſe malignity : Who , heated had their Oven , extremely ▪ hight , To burn-up in Oblivions ſmoakey-flame , The memory ( to our eternal ſhame ) Of this nefarious Popiſh Pouder-Plot . And ' gainſt which , though ſome temporizing-minde May scoff and ſcorn , in this my good intention , Though from Romes favorites , nought but reprehenſion And taunting terms I ſhall ( unjustly ) find , Though Room does curſe me with bell , book and candle And like a gal'd-backt-iade does kick and winch ; Yet I their ſores have laboured ſo to pinch , As in their nature , justly , them to handle . But , if to you ( my brothers deer ) I may For my poor labour kindly be reſpected , And from calumniators fangs protected I ſhall acknowledge this a rich repay . If I ( hereby ) may move and ſtimulate , Your Chriſtian hearts to zealous deteſtation Of Romes moſt impious foul abomination , And heavens rich mercies oft to ruminate , Chiefly , the great miraculous defence From this nefarious powder-plot of Room , Wherein our King and Kingdoms they did doom To dire deſtruction , fatal violence . Then , happy I ( maugre Romes worst despite ) That God , hereby , may have due thanks and praiſe , That this occaſion may men's hearts incite This fact , with fame to memorise always ; Read then ( kind Reader ) what's amiss amend , And kindly take the goodwill of thy friend , JOHN VICARS .