To my moſt Dear AND Newborn Babe Benjamin Herbert . Sweet Child , THou haſt ( by the Lords Grace ) this day received the firſt viſible Sign and Seal of his Covenant with us : thou haſt even now been Baptized with Water , and ( as I may comfortably conceive ) with the Spirit of God , who ( if thou canſt attain the years of diſcretion ) will ( I hope and pray ) aſſiſt thee with his effectual grace , to caſt off the old man , Adam , with his sinful affections and actions ; and put on the new , Chriſt Jeſus , with his whole Righteousness : renewing thy heart by degrees , and ſanctifying thy perſon ; thus begetting thee to himself , by the outward ſeed of his Word , and his inward lights and motives . This is my hope and prayer for thee . But becauſe this converting Word is not often preached ſo fully & diligently , as I wiſh ; our old men being commonly in many places of this Land , babes in knowledge , and Children in Chriſtian wisdom : leſt thou shouldst want that necessary food , for thy souls everlaſting life ; here is , my Love , here is a help , to know that God , to whom this day , thou haſt vowed Faith and Obedience . Here is a Confeſſion , made for thee in the Womb , and now preſented thee , for thy future inſtruction , conſolation and ſalvation . Receive it courteouſly , Dear Babe ; caſt on it thy mild looks ; take it with thy little fingers ; kiss it with thy ſoft , ſweet , ſucking lips ; and hereafter esteem it above all riches , & keep it as thy life . It's thine , & made for thee , although I ſay , it is likewiſe made for others , thy virtuous and beauteous Mother , thy witty and pretty Siſter . Thou mayest hereafter underſtand , Knowledge is like the Sun , which caſts his beams abroad , and yet looſes no light : Or like a Torch , at which millions may be lighted , without prejudice to any , or to it self : for , light and heat are common unto all bodies , and given all to all . In giving Inſtructions , that , which I give , remains with me ; and although all the world divide my gift , yet each man may receive it whole . Think not therefore this Book less thine ; becauſe compoſed for others : but rather endeavour , to make it truly thine , by diligently learning it , and heartily believing , boldly profeſſing , faithfully practiſing that found Faith , and thoſe pious Works , I have taught thee in it and in my Catechism , dedicated to thy fair and loving Siſter , which I give thee likewiſe . And when thus thou haſt made them thine , hide not thy light , my Dear ; bury not thy talon : but as a Sun , impart thy light and heat to thy friends , neighbours , yea all men , with whom thou ſhalt converſe . Let it be thy daily study & holy ambition , to do well to all men ; ſo behaving thy self , that by thy virtuous examples , Chriſtian inſtructions , and friendly admonitions , no man go from thee without gain . Convert ſinners from their ill ways : comfort the penitent and afflicted , in their ſorrow & griefs : relieve the poor , in their hunger , nakedness , misery's : inſtruct the ignorant , in honesty and religion : and as Peter , confirm thy brothers the faithful , in Chriſtian verities and religious duties . Do this , my ſweet Infant , do this diligently , having no other intention , then to pleaſe , ſerve , obey that God , who ſhall ( I hope ) give thee both the will & the deed , both the deſire and power to do ſuch noble things . And as that gracious God hath made me a good help , for thy greater and ſpeedier ability , to advance his glory ; study my Love , study by thy dutiful obſervance , to anſwer ( if I live ) the great affection , care and pains of me . Thy then happy Father W. HERBERT . Pointington . 2. of March , and the 13. day of thy Life . 1644.