TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE The Lord Maior , and Court of Aldermen , with other Citizens of the Renowned City of LONDON . I Doubt not but there are many amongſt you , Right Honourable and Worthy Citizens ; yea , very many who ſeriouſly ſet their faces towards Sion ; The whole Kingdom hath abundantly taſted the excellent fruits of your real forwardness in this good way . Travellers are uſually as glad of Guides , as of Companions , eſpecially in doubtful ways : And we are fallen among ſo many Queſtioniſts , and ſuch thick miſts of ſtrange Doctrines , obſcuring the good way ſo much , that we had need seek clear direction , otherwiſeMany miſts of new opinions which much puzzle Travellers . we may soon be at a loss . We hear of Antinomians who deny the Law , to be a rule of life to Saints : we hear of Socinians , who in a manner overthrow the Goſpel , denying the ſatisfaction of Chriſt : We hear of Arminians , who undermine the Covenant of Freegrace , that they may gratify Freewill : We hear of Anabaptiſts , who withhold Baptism the Seal of that Covenant from the Infants , even of ſuch as are in Covenant : We hear of others , who queſtion the Truth of our Church , and of our Miniſtry , in and by which ſo many thouſand souls have been new born to God : Yea , we hear of ſome grown to that deſperate height , that they ſay , there is no need of Miniſtry or Ordinances , flattering us with hope of new Apoſtles , & glorious diſcoveries by them . Hereby Religion is much mangled , and well meaning minds not a little diſtracted , which way to take . It is the Miniſters work to warn againſt enemies , to direct Ezek 33. 7. Matth. 5. 14 Joh. 5. 35. Pſal . 119. 105. againſt errors , to carry the Lanthorn and Candle of Gods Word , before people in the dark , that they may find the beſt way . What sparks of light this plain Sermon holds forth , were at firſt blown up by your deſire , and now by your importunity being made Public are kept burning . The good Lord ( who despises not the day of ſmall things ) quicken your Spirits hereby in Heaven-way ; I ſhall heartily rejoice if your attention in hearing , ſhall be ſeconded with intention in acting over that Counsel wh • changed was given you from the Word of God . This is the beſt commendation of a Sermon , to walk in the light and heat of it in your converſation ▪ what is wanting in the ſtrength and luſtre of this Diſcourſe , will in part be supplied by its seasonableness . In theſe times of Reformation we ſhould be often put in mind , to ſtand , ſee , inquire : As in building we beware of miſtakes in the foundation ; In Physic , of errors in the firſt concoction ; in both theſe they are dangerous , becauſe hardly corrigible ; So in journeys we ſhould wiſely watch againſt erring , both at our firſt ſetting out , and eſpecially when we come to a great turning , if then we miſtake the right way , we ſhall not eaſily recover . How careful was Ezra to seek of God a right way , when he was going from Babylon to Jeruſalem ? He proclaimed a Faſt for that purpoſe at the River Ahava , and that a moſt religiousEz • a 8. 21. ground , Ver. 22. We in England are now engaged in counſels of Reformation , that w • e may remove further from Babylon towards Jeruſalem . And by the good hand of God upon us , we are under his own Ordinance , and Aſſembly of Miniſters is called to diſcover the Scripture way . It is worth much importunity , in Faſting and Praying ; that being come to ſo great a turning , upon ſo grand a change in the Church of England , we may clearly find the good old way : we muſt expect SatanZach 3. 1. who ſtood at Joſhuahs right hand to reſiſt him , when he was about Temple-work , will now uſe all his methods to p • rplexe and to mislead us , to involve us in difficulties , and in angle us with errors : If he cannot wholly turn us out of the good way , he will endeavour to caſt ſtumbling-blocks in it , and by variety of opinions , to multiply diviſions about it ; yea , he knows how by fair pretences , and by good words , to cousin us into bad ways . New-England affords us a ſad inſtance of this policy . A worthy Divine of their own tells us , by what ſleights the Antinomians , Familiſts , and Libertines , infected the Churches there , As they would lift up themſelves , ( says he ) ſo alſo theirSee Mr. Well • Preface to a ſhort Story of the riſe , and reign , and ruin of the Antinomians , Familiſts , and Libertines which infected New-England . p. 4. opinions , by guilding them over with ſpecious terms of Free grace , glorious light , Goſpel Truths , as holding forth naked Chriſt , etc. and this took much with ſimple honeſt hearts , who loved Chriſt ; eſpecially with new Converts , who were lately in bondage under sin and wrath , and had newly taſted the sweetness of Free-Grace , being now in their firſt love to Chriſt , they were exceeding glad to embrace any thing that might further advance Chriſt and Free-Grace , and ſo drank them in readily . Yet be not diſcouraged , I beſeech you ; your wiſe and powerfullIſa . 9. 6. Saviour hath the Government upon his own ſhoulders ; heZach . 3. 2. can eaſily rebuke Satan , well knowing how to confute errors , reſolve doubts , and compoſe differences , he can conquer the greateſt difficulties , or remove them with advantage to his own Cauſe , and your Souls . Do not despair but Gods Counſels are ripening towards ſuch a time , when you may find reſt after your long motion , ſtability after your many ſhakings , and when you ſhall reap the harveſt of all the prayers and good endeavours you have ſown , and receive rich intereſt for all the blood and Treaſure you have expended in his Gospels Cauſe . Who knows but London , by the Free-Grace of God , after all theſe black and bloody clouds , may have cauſe to coin Money , ( as they did in worthy Mr. Farrells time , who hadS • ul • et . Annal . p. 384. 474. Poſt tenebras lux . Deus noſter pugnat pron •• is . been ſo much oppoſed and threatened in reforming Geneva and other Cities ? ) with this Posy on the one ſide : Light after a long darkness ; and on the other ſide : Our God fights for us ▪ You have had many viſible Providences , as well as precious promiſes , encouraging you to perſevere in the good way . He hath wrought wonderfully for you , and by you ; his good hand remain upon you , till he bring you to ervelaſting reſt . The Lord refreſh London with the comfort of thoſe goodZach . 2. 5. words he ſp • ke unto Jeruſalem : I will be unto her a wall of fire round about , and will be the glory in the amid of her . So prays heartily , Your Servant wherein he may promote your Souls in the good way , THOMAS HILL .