TO THE Right Honourable the Houſe of PEERES Aſſembled in PARLIAMENT ; Sitting at Weſtminſter . My Lords , GODS Providence hath caſt you into theſe times wherein there are very many of Solomons Puritans , Prov. 30. 12. There is a generation that are pure in their own eyes , and yet is not waſhed from their filthiness . Wherein Iudes Separatiſts ſwarm , ſuch mockers who walk after their own ungodly lustest , who ſeparate themſelves , sensual , having not the Spirit , Iude ver . 19 , 20. But I hope his Spirit is teaching you to be Pauls Separatiſts , acquainting you with ſuch a pure Separation from unclean perſons and things , as may well be the object of your thoughts , the matter of your Counſels , the sum of your Prayers , and ſcope of your Endeavours . It will be a very great addition to your greatness , to engage your ſelves fully herein . There are no men more miſerable then thoſe who are Gratius eſt no men pietatis quam poteſtatis . great and evil , none more happy then they who are great and good . It is nobleness indeed to have and heroical ſpirit for God : It is true high-mindedness to be heavenly minded , to have pure minds . This poor Church hath had her Autumn , her declining under many pollutions , and her Winter of Humiliation ; Bleſſed be the good hand of God , we ſee ſome hope's of a Spring , of pure Reformation , which will uſher in a Summer of deliverance . It is true , we are ſtill in the Wilderness , where we meet with many Amalekites , who do oppoſe us , and with diverse falſe ſpies , who raiſe and evil report of the promiſed Land , diſparaging by their tongues and pens our hoped for Reformation . The Lord keep us all from Wilderness ſins , from repining and quarreling at his diſpenſations : far be it from any to deſire ſuch Captains as would bring us back again to Aegypt . Your Lordship's have had the honour to be our Joshua's , to be our Leaders in ſeveral ſteps of the Reformation : ( which will ſtand upon Record to the everlaſting renown of the Houſe of Peers ) and I hope you have taſted ſome ſuch bunches of Grapes from the Holy Land , as will quicken your deſires after a more full ſeparation from all impurity . There are two taking words abroad , grown very familiar in our diſcourſes , Purity and Liberty . Let Purity and Library go hand in hand . Sweet words , precious things , it is pity they ſhould ever be ſevered . It is well worthy of your care to encourage ſuch a purity as will adorn and ſweeten Liberty , and withal to countenance ſuch a Liberty as will maintain and cheriſh purity . God forbid , that any ſhould expect countenance from you , for any thing like licentiousness , whereby purity ſhould be in the leaſt meaſure blemiſhed and betrayed . Sometime amongſt Phyſicians there is as much in the Method , as in the Medicine ; I believe Politicians may find the ſame . I doubt not but in your Treaty for Peace you will begin with Purity ; the wisdom which is from above , is first pure , and then peaceable ; and rather abate in any thing which James 3. 17. concerns your ſelves , then in purity , wherein the honour of God is ſo much interested . Ride on proſperouſly in all your Marches after Scripture purity ; If you meet with Mountains of difficulty in the way , be not diſmayed . Remember Lots Wife , what it coſt her who looked back only , though ſhe went not back . You well know , that Faith and Friendſhip are beſt tried in extremities , and in the heat of oppoſition . If the diſtractions ſtill continue without , labour to get and keep a calm within , no feaſt like that of a good Conſcience , which is Meat , Music , Welcome ; No ſuch Friend , who will be a cheerful Companion though alone , even in the worſt ſeaſons : be ye therefore doing much for your God in the cauſe of purity , always abouding in his work , foraſmuch as you know that your labour is not in vain in the Lord . Bee pleaſed to accept 1 Cor. 15. 58. this from a Remembrancer to Your Honours in the behalf of purity , and for your own Salvation , THOMAS HILL