TO THE HONOURABLE HOVSE OF COMMONS , NOW ASSEMBLED in PARLIAMENT . WHen I firſt herd that I was deſigned for this solemn ſervice , being conſcious of my own insufficiency to Preach to ſo awful and Aſſembly , I couldnot entertain it without trouble ; yet reſolved with Luther , rather to undergo others Inveniar ſanè ſuberbus etc. modò impit ſilcutii non arguar dum Dominus patititur . Luth. Ep. and Staup . cenſures , then to be reproved for ungodly ſilence , in ſuch times when the Lord suffers . And now I have as much reaſon to be full of bluſhings , to think that this plain Diſcourſe ſhould be expoſed to more public view ; but herein I muſt resign up my ſelf unto your diſpoſings , to whom I owe , & quod poſſum , & quod non poſſum , much more then my meaneneſſe can perform . This Sermon , ſuch and one as it is , I humbly tender to your Gracious Acceptance , who have adopted it ; I put it into your Honourable Protection , who have liſted it ; I commend it to your Practical obſervation , for whom I intended it ; heartily deſiring Gods Bleſſing upon your ſpirits in the perusal of it ; that you may read and act it , turning words into works , that you may repeat it over in your lives , which is the beſt repetition of Sermons . Our preſent breaches , call for a contribution from every one , for the repairing of them ; but much is expected from you , who are called to be public Counſellors , and thereby obliged to express a public frame of ſpirit ( which is the beauty and ſtrength of a Great Council ) , ſwallowing up your private intereſts , in the public Welfare . Not with Baruch , ſeeking great things for your ſelves , which is moſt incongruous to Stormy times , but rather reſembling Melancthon , who Ier. 45 ▪ 5. profeſſed , though he had many Domestical troubles , yet the public wounds of the Church moſt deeply afflicted him . England is more bemoaned , by many with that language in Auſtin over the poor man . Quomodo huc cecidiſti ? Alas how cameſt thou into theſe diſtractions ? She may anſwer as Aug. Ep. 129. the poor man there , ſtanding in more need of relief then diſcourſe . Obſecro cogita quomodo hinc me liberes . Think how I may be reſcued out of that • see troubles . Towards this bleſſed Work , I have caſt in my two mites , moving in the proper sphere of a Divine , as and Agent for the Truth , persuading you , who are betruſted by others , and have far engaged your ſelves in the Reformation of Religion , that with all your might , you would promote The Trade of Truth . It is not for me to ſuggeſt a Method in the execution of your counſels . He whoſe name is Counselor guide you ; yet I ſhall ſtill pray that in your Intention , the purging , the settling , Iſa . 9. 6. the advancing of True Religion may be moſt Dear unto you . It is one main end , and a precious fruit of government , that we may led peaceable and quiet lives in All Godliness and honesty . This is well worth peoples wrestling prayers , and your moſt active endeavours . The ſtabillity 1 Tim. 2. 2. of all our bleſſings muſt come by the True Religion , Gods preſence is the beſt ſecurity , who is moſt powerfully preſent where there is moſt power and purity of Religion . Would you have a flouriſhing Kingdom , advance the Kingdom of Chriſt in it . Let the State maintain Religion , and Religion will bless the State , could you ſettle all our State liberties , yet if the Ark of Truth be taken from us , Our glory is departed , we may write theſe mourning characters upon all our Comforts , ICHABOD , where is the glory ? 1 Sam. 4. 21 , 22. It is too high a compliment in the Lord Cordes , a French Commander , who often ſaid , that he would willingly lie Hollinſh . in Hen . 7. ſeven years in Hell , ſo that Callice were in the poſſeſſion of the French again . We bless God for that real ſelfe-deny all and activity you have expreſſed , abating ſo many personal and family contentment's , in your long attendance upon public affairs . Be not weary of well doing , in due ſeaſon you ſhall reap if you faint not . Gal. 6. 9. Never had any PARLIAMENT more work to do ; Ireland ſtill bleeds , the affairs thereof find unhappy obſtructions . To ſubdue Rebellion , to plant Religion there , are great matters . England is very much out of frame . The Church calls for Truth ; the State cries for Peace , they who ſowed in hope , reap in fear , out ſickles are turning into ſwords . Now to effect and happy correſpondence betwixt our Sovereign and his people , a bleſſed compliance betwixt England and Religion , heres work for the ſtrongeſt ſhoulders . Never had any PARLIAMENT greater oppoſition . As Nehem. 4. 17. our builders work with one hand , and hold a weapon with the other . Achitophels plot , Rabſhekahs rail , Sanballats mock . Yea ſince counsels of Reformation , there is a more malignant antipathy appears againſt truth in many places . As 2 Tim. 3. 13. evil men and ſeducers wax worſe and worſe , deceiving and being deceived . Yet be encouraged Worthy Sirs . Never had any PARLIAMENT ſo many Thundering Legions of praying Chriſtians , to aſſiſt them . when others inſult and blaſpheme , Iacobs poſterity are wreſtling with God for you , reſolving not to let him go till he bless you . And while you are purſuing peace , allow this plain Sermon that humble boldness as to whiſper you in the ear , beſeeching you ſtill to maintain your former zeal in the cauſe of Truth . When did your counſels proſper more , then when you were moſt active about religion . When you were building the Lords Houſe . For he built yours as Hag. 2. 19. from this day I will bless you . Be pleaſed therefore more and more to engage your ſelves for the Truth , ſo shall you engage God for you ; let your cauſe be His cauſe then his Attributes will be yours , his providence will work for you , his ſpirit will work in you ; then will you 2 King . 6. 16. have more with you then againſt you , though the Devil and the Pope combine . Do your own work , truſt God with his ; duty is ours , Events , success are his . Commit the keeping of your souls , of the Church , of the ſtate , to him in well doing as unto a faithful creator . Truth will yet Triumph , Babylon 1 Pet. 4. 19. and all her Crutches muſt down ; the fight of faith is a good fight , becauſe ſuch soldiers are ſure of the victory . 1 Tim. 6. 12. The kingdom of Chriſt ſhall prevail , though ſecond cauſes be impotent , yet the zeal of the Lord of Hosts will perform this . Iſa . 9. 7. When Hieruſalem is reſtored it will be a city of Truth Zach. 8. 3. O that all our Parliament worthies , might be ſo valiant for the Truth that England might become a kingdom of Truth ; following Chronicles will then give you a ſhare in that Honour of being the Churches Saviours , as Obad. v. 21. and God will put Zerubbabels high dignity upon you , making you as Signets . Hag. 2. 23. The Good Lord guide , unite , act and bless your counſels , And think upon you for good , according to all you have done , or ſhall do for his people . So prays He who deſires to be found , Your faithful ſervant for the Truth : THOMAS HILL .