TO The Honourable Houſe of Commons , now aſſembled in PARLIAMENT . I Have offered violence to my self to satisfy your deſires , in Preaching firſt , and next in publiſhing , theſe weak and courſe-ſpun meditations ; fitter indeed for a popular auditory then ſuch and awful and judicious aſſembly concerning which I may fitly ſay what Zeba and Zalmunna sometime did of Gideons brothers , each one reſembled the children of a King , Jud. 8.18 . or as Cyneas the Ambassador of Pyrrhus being asked after his return from Room , what he thought of the City and State , made answer 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , the ſame may I , with better reaſon , ſay of your Honourable Senate , It ſeemed unto me to look like a little Commonwealth of Kings . When firſt I underſtood you had deſigned me ( the unfitteſt in many reſpects you could have thought upon ) unto this solemn ſervice : I reſented it truly no otherwiſe than Jonah did his meſſage to Nineveh , with much trouble and emotion of ſpirit , not to ſay diſcontent : and as forward ſhould I have been as he ( had not a ſtrong band of reaſon and conſcience held me back ) to fly to Tarſus or any whither elſe , rather then undertake the Province you had called me to : Not out of any diſaffection to the work , or the Authority that ſummoned me to it , which I ſhall always honour , and next to that of Gods , esteem ſacred ; but being ſenſible of nothing more in all this world , then mine own defects : and knowing well how hard a matter I find it to satisfy my self , I held it impoſſible for me to bring forth ought that might satisfy others ( eſpecially ſuch a grave Court of great Stateſmen ) either in the Pulpit or the Press . However ſince you are pleaſed out of your ingenuity and candor , not only to own this worthless piece , but to over valve it ſo far , as to call it forth into the public light , having nothing elſe to ſway with me , beside the obedience I owe to your commands , I do therefore in all humility preſent it unto your honourable acceptance , ſuch as it is it glorieth to be yours , and were all the body of this ſimple diſcourſe , like Solomons Lineae aureae cum punctis argenteis , Cant. 1.11 . wrought with lines of gold and enameled with pearls , I ſhould not hold it too rich a preſent , for ſuch unparalleled Worthies , which have honoured God ſo much , and are ſo much honoured by him . Your exemplary zeal and piety , your Noble and heroical achievements , for the honour of our God , and the advancement of his kingdom , hath already ſtamped for you ſuch and Impreſſion of reſpect and reverence , in the eſtimations and thoughts of all the godly , that you seem to be as the ſtones of a crown lifted up , and as and Ensign upon our Land , Zech. 9.16 . Go on and proſper , moſt worthy Senators , in the great work which you have ſo happily begun , till you ſhall have fully crowned our hope's , and perfected your own moſt glorious undertakings . Never had any Parliament either ſo glorious a prize as you have to contend for , or ſo many potent adverſaries , oppoſitions , and difficulties , to encounter with : but this may ſerve as a more then ſufficient encouragement to hearten you on , that you have a good God , a Noble Cauſe , and Honourable Reward , and what could you wiſh more ? See what you have done already , and let your former , many and precious experiences of divine favour and aſſiſtance , animate you to wait upon God , with and unwearied patience , till he ſhall make all your enemies of the Synagogue of Sathan , to come and worſhip before your feet , and to know that he hath loved you . Conſider how many great and ſtupendious works God hath already made you inſtruments to bring about . How many mighty Nimrods have you cut down ? how many yokes of oppreſſion and tyranny have you broken ? how many dying Saints have you revived ? The Lord hath made darkness light before you , and crooked things straight , he hath leveled mountains , and raiſed valleys ; what enterprise have you taken in hand , which hath not in the Iſſue proſpered beyond your expectations ? You have ſprung a mine under the walls of Babylon , unsettled the Through of the Beaſt . Behold how the Antichriſtian faction languishes , the Pontifical chair reels , the Miters wither , the triple Crown ſhakes : that which the Lord threatened sometime againſt one of the worſt of the Kings of Judah , the ſame he seems to do now againſt the great Monarch of Babylon , Remove the Diadem , take away the Crown , I will overturn , overturn , overturn it , until he come whoſe right it is , and I will give it him , Ezek 22.26 , 27. Me thinks I ſee the proud turrets , and battlements of Rome falling , and Sion riſing up fair as the morning , clear as the moon , terrible as and Army with Banners . Howſoever this is certain , God hath promiſed , and he will no doubt in due time make it good , which we have in the Prophet . Eſay 24.23 . The moon ſhall be confounded , and the Sun aſhamed , when the Lord of Hoſts ſhall reign in Mount Sion , and before all his ancients gloriouſly . I hope the happy time is at hand , which God hath appointed for the full working out of his Glory and our deliverance , and that this dawning of our hope's may break forth into a perfect day of joy and triumph , It is and ſhall be the earneſt and conſtant prayer of Your moſt unworthy Servant in the work of Chriſt , HEN : HALL .