TO THE HONOURABLE Houſe of Commons aſſembled in the Parliament of England . I Could not have ſuch high thoughts of my ſhallow •• cogitations , as to deem them worthy to be produced before ſuch and Auditory , or preſented to the public view : Had not therefore consciousness of duty conſtrained , I had become and earneſt suitor to have been excuſed : but of actual obedience I had many , of excuſe-pleading I found no preſident . Your Injunction then made me to aſpire to the work which now humble craves your Patronage ; and whither ſhould the labours of this kind run , but to that honourable Society , which ( under Heaven ) is the fountain of theſe gracious opportunities ? If willing , no man , I ſuppoſe , hath more cauſe to be large in Apologie then I , having long ſince had my poor Library totally plundered , and my ſelf not able , uſque hunc diem , to buy one book of conſiderable valve . Beside , from the beginning of this war , until the laſt month , inter armaubi ſilent literae verſatus . But theſe things I account part of my chief happiness on earth , to have ſuffered much , and done a little good in the cauſe of Chriſt , and ſervice of the State : only I deſire , that •• nce it may not be thought ſtrange , that I tender a plain unpoliſhed Sermon , quite naked in it's Margin , and in which nothing is cited but the holy Text ; nor any author Ecclesiastical or Moral herd ſpeak . Seldom , if ever , hath there been offered to your hands ſuch a rude piece of all homespun thoughts ; nevertheless , they breathing the force of the Divine Spirit , I truſt ſhall find acceptance with your 〈 … 〉 and being stamped on with your approbation , they 〈 ◊ 〉 abroad in the world currant with all , not malignant or cenſorious . To encourage the progress of your abundant virtue , I need ſay nothing in my Epiſtle , ſince I ſpeak much 〈 ◊ 〉 that purpoſe in the Pulpit : the ſmalleſt hint is ſufficient to provoke ſuch zeal and willingness as ever reſideth in your breaſts . Go on therefore in pious and honourable undertakings : the hearts , the tongues , the Pe ••• of all good me • bless you ; how can it then be , but the God of heaven , who hath ſet you apart , as choſen inſtruments alſo 〈 ◊ 〉 , ſo universal good to his Churches , ſhould in due time crown our endeavour : with success ; and infinitely recompente your labours in a better world ? so prayeth Yours to be commanded in all true obſervance and duty HUM : HARDVVICK .