TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE LORD MAJOR and Court of Aldermen , with other Citizens of the renowned City of LONDON . THE Account that I make of my self and ſervice is this : For my self , the reaſon of my slowness in this work grew not from any undervaluing of your ſo honourable invitation , but from mine own diſtemper of body , which at the ſame time forced me to deprecate a greater ſervice to a greater Aſſembly , and to lay aſide this till it was too late to put it off . 2. For the works self , 1. in my choice , I had reſpect to custom and entreaty , and in the purſuance of that choice I looked upon the ſeaſon and Auditory : Jubet qui rogat , etc. Obligant qui impetrant , etc. You have now by your motion ( that is ) command , made it public , and it being your own , it is in your power to make it good : That is a good Sermon which does good , as that's good soil which mends the ground : that good food or Physic that helps the body : Some worth you have put upon it in your calling for it , and ſending it ready written to my hand ; if now you pleaſe to tranſlate it into practice , the work is done . And ſurely there lies before you the faireſt of opportunities ; never was there a fitter ſeeds-time for Prayer and Alms ; in the one the pooreſt may concur , in the other they cannot ; that's your happiness that you can give , and will be more yours if you do the thing . It was ſome comfort to me to hear ( ſo soon after my ſervice ) of a design for the poor , that news was to me what Jonahs Gourd was to him ; and my prayer is , that this may be more lasting then that : The poor are exceeding many , and their wants exceeding great , and it is not the leaſt of our griefs , that many of us in the Ministry can do no more ; we meet them hourly , and part but ſadly ; they ſighing becauſe they cannot receive , and we becauſe we cannot give ; and give we cannot , till we receive better anſwers then we do from more then enough : We know you not , we cannot , we will not , we may not ſupport ſuch a — I am not ( I confess ) well read in your Charter , I know not your bounds ; this I know , that this famous City hath been heretofore much honoured and bleſſed both by and for their Miniſters ; this I know , that magistrates by calling are Heirs of reſtraint , Judg. 18.7 . Neh. 13.17 . Rev. 1.20.41 . Prov. 29.18 . Jun. ad locum , & Shindler . Pentag . 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 ( ſc . 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , & quae ſequuntu • apud Soph. and that sin uncontrolled and unpuniſhed by them , will be ſet upon their heads , and beaten upon their backs ; Yea , and this I have read , that where viſion ( preaching ) fails , the people are naked , or ( ſay ſome ) idle and useless ; that where men grow high in ſin and scorn , the City is enſnared or fired , Pro. 29.8 . that where any City is divided , it cannot ſtand , Mat. 12.25 . This I am ſure of , and therefore my humble ſuit unto you is , that as you tender your ſelves , your ſafety , your City , your Poſterity , your Religion , your Chriſt , your All , do your utmoſt to restrain all deſtructive ways of sin , error , faction , etc. and to establiſh a settled Government , and ſincere Religion among you : Oh! let it not be free for any men at pleaſure to proclaim their Jubilees , to aſſert , to preach , to print , what ſeems good to themſelves , & under colour of Christian liberty & free grace , or I know not what new light , to cry down Magistracy , Ministry , Repentance , Obedience , ſay I ? nay Scripture it self , Chriſt himself in his Nature and Offices . My Lord , and worthy Senators , I'll trouble you no longer , the reſt you ſhall read in ſilence ; I commend your Perſons , your Employments , your honourable City , and all your public Concernments to the grace of our Lord Jeſus , beſeeching him to raiſe up ſtill amongſt you Magistrates of Jethro's mark , 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 Imports all men of might for wisdom , wealth , courage , men of truth ( whither for Theory or Practice ) but no men for self either ends or turns : So prays Your humble Suppliant and obliged Servant in our common Lord , Robert Harris .