〈1 page missing〉 privileges of Jacobs spiritual household , and to draw from you ( in theſe humbling times ) expreſsions of ſorrow moſt suitable to thoſe who walk ſo unsuitably to celestial favours ; ( many priding themſelves in and imaginary title to the beneficium Jer 7. 9. 10 Putant e • im Hypocritae ſi modo externas • u'tus divini cer ••• ni •• quaſ • and obſervent , tunc onnia tecte babere , quamvis ipſi in ſceleribus praefra • te per • gum it Oſ • and in loc . of the family , who are wholly neglective of the officium ) this being of concernment to all Chriſtians ( to whom — are alſo ſome directions hinted ) ſo chiefly to governors and all Reformers , that they partake not in other men's ſins . 1 Tim 5 22. 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 Ne que te participem conſtitue ali • rum peccat • • um . I have endeavoured to incite you who are Master's in our Iſrael , to improve your diligence in the diſcharge of that truſt and office in this family , wherewith above others you are honoured by God ; who having 1 Sam. 2 30. manifested his bounty to this houſehold no less , if not much more then to Exod. 10 23. • ſ •• . 8 19. pſul . 147 19. Act. 14. 16. thoſe our forefathers , in vouchſafing light to us , when others of our Allies fit in darkness blacker then Egyptian , is pleaſed to direct us to our work and walk by a pillar at his own charges , holding forth to us a light ſo much the more neceſſary , by how much the Princes of this world , who know not the Goſpel , crucify 1 Cor. 2. 8. to themſelves the Lord of glory : And as thoſe venomous ſerpents in Sardinia , Solin . poybiſt . cap 9. Accendunt quotidie lucernas , quib •• nulla lux eſt : illis counterfeit • petunt teſt imonis te • ebrarum . Te • tO . Apol 10. Igne • fatunm qui ſequmuntur in avia abducuntur & in pr • cipitia foſſa • que ſaepe numero run • tO . Kek Syſt . Rhyſ . lib . 6. mentioned in stories , either hate and fly the light , or like thoſe in Tertullia's time , bear a lantern profeſsion without light , or as another ſort by and ignis fatuus , are led into dangerous precipices and byways , and with Ixion in the Poet , embrace a cloud for the true Iuno , ſhadows in the room of orthodox and substantial truths . The ſcope of all is to undeceive you in pointing to that only light of truth which is able to led you to eternal light , and in the interim to afford direction in managing the whole business of this houſe , by which all other lights are to be examined , whereto if diſagreeing , it is Iſa . 8. 20. becauſe there is no light in them . Lo Cook . juriſdiction of Courts . According to which that you may act to the houſes welfare , Go • s glory ; and therein as your Noble predecessors , appear Doctum , pium & benedictum Parliamentum , and not otherwiſe , to your own comfort in the great day , when the great Biſhop and King of heaven and earth ſhall appear clothed with the robes of glory , as it is the endeavour , ſo the prayer of YoursRobert Iohn ſon .