To our very aſſured loving Friend , Maſter Lenthall Eſquire , Speaker of the Honourable the Commons Houſe of Parliament in the Kingdom of ENGLAND . THere hath been preſented unto us , a Remonſtrance of the deplorable eſtate of this Church of Ireland , and the lamentable Condition of the Clergy therein , occaſioned by the preſent Rebellion ; The Remonſtrants deſiring our Letters in the Repreſenting of the ſame to the honourable Houſe of Commons in England ; unto whoſe grave and wiſe conſideration they do apply themſelves . We ſhall not need to ſay much in a matter , ſo much ſpeaking it ſelf , and the experience we have of the true sense they have of this diſtracted State , gives us great aſſurance , that they will take to heart this our miſerable Church , and Gods ſervants therein , reduced unto unexpreſſable extremities , both Church and State being now involved in one common calamity . The bearer hereof , Henry Jones , Doctor in Divinity , is entrusted by the Clergy to negotiate in their behalf , and we have entreated him to solicit the cauſe of the poor robbed Engliſh , expreſſed in our Letters to you of the fourth of this month . We therefore do crave leave to recommend him in this employment to that Honourable Houſe , he being a Perſon who is able to ſay much in this business , having been ſome while a Priſoner in the hands of the Rebels , and obſerved much of their proceedings , and being entrusted with others , as a Commiſsioner to take the examinations out of which the Remonſtrance now to be by him offered to that Honourable Houſe , is extracted . As for himſelf , he hath ſuffered much in his private fortune's by theſe troubles , and in reſpect of his Abilities and Learning , and Painfulness in his Miniſtry , he deſerveth favour and encouragement ; Beside we have found him very diligent , and forward in attending all occaſions , for promoting the public ſervices here by timely and important intelligence given to us of Occurrences , during his impriſonment with the Rebels ; and ſince eſpecially in his information made to us of the approaches of the enemy to Drogheda , when we could not conceive they would riſe to that boldness , by which information ( amongſt others ) we had the opportunity of ſending thither the preſent Garriſon , without whom it might have been in danger of ſurpriſing ; And ſo we remain from His Majeſties Caſtle of Dublin the ſeventh day of March , 1641. Your very aſſured loving Friends W. Parſons , Jo. Borlace , R. Dillon , Ad. Loftus , J. Temple , Cha. Coote , Tho. Ratherham , Fran. Willoughby , Rob. Meredith .