TO The Religious , and moſt Worthy , Sir ROBERT HARLEY , Knight of the Bath . Sir THOMAS MIDDLETON , KNIGHT . Maſter IOHN GLYNNE , Recorder of the famous City of London . Eminent Members of the Honourable Houſe of COMMONS . And all other his worthy Friends and Countrymen , that either are , or ſhall be Members of the Parliament of ENGLAND . IF ever it was true , it is now , That Scribimus indocti , docti que So that it may grow almoſt a queſtion , whither now the Sword , or Pen is moſt busy ? or more effuſion of Ink , or Blood ? What here offers it ſelf to your view , comes from a modeſt and peaceable hand and heart , and merely relative to the good of thoſe Countries , whoſe happineſs I am confident you prefer before any particular intereſt . Conceptions of this kind I have not yet ſeen any ; and though ( praiſed be God ) our hands are pretty well reſtrained , yet that our hearts be wholly purged of the old poison , there is ſome ſlender endeavour to inform our Countrymen with the right underſtanding of the Parliament , and its principles , and clear demonſtrations of Gods special providence and goodness in its preſervation ; ſo that to harbour a thought againſt it , we muſt take heed we be not found To fight againſt God : Act. 5. I confess them but a rude heap of thoughts ; I have laboured to be Seneca his Scholar , and in writing to obſerve his rule , not ſo much the Quemadmodum , as the Quid , being aſſured None can be more eloquent , then he that hath well conceived a Truth ; It is with things of this kind , as with burdens of the womb that are teemed with perturbations and dangers , they prove less thriving ; and what is here might have appeared more comely , had they not been conceived at ſuch times and places , when and where indeed I durſt not ſcarce own them as Thoughts . Worthy Sirs , whatever they are , they implore your favourable acceptance , they court neither for praiſe nor preferment ; If the poor Author may not ſtill be under the inſultation of our old enemies , Mutato nomine , and enjoy but Common Justice , it is the Apex of his deſires : I would not be behind for my poor Mite to further the great work , which ( bleſſed be God ) I hope I may ſay is a finiſhing , wherein I , not unlike that Bird , ( that is fabled ) when the Kings of Aſia contributed great treaſures to the building of a Temple , it having no other wealth , went thither to preſent her Feathers . Truth was never without adverſaries , but never more mortal ones then now . You may ſee I have drawn in its quarrel : You are Gods champions , and its ; I humbly beg I may not ſuffer , but let your countenance and protection be at hand , and I ſhall humbly pray , that as He hath ſingled you to be Inſtruments of His glory here , you may ſo act , and honour Him , that hath ſo honoured you , that you be partakers of His glory and bliss for evermore . The Prayer of him who ever hath been , and will be ever really devoted to You in this great ſervice of GOD and his Country , JOHN LEWIS .