TO THE HONOURABLE Houſe of COMMONS Aſſembled IN PARLIAMENT . IF ever Sermon met with diſadvantages whereby it might be made unacceptable to and Auditory , this was it . For beside mine uttter diſabilities to prepare any thing fit for ſo learned and diſcerning ears and Judgements ; the two things that might spoil delivery when the child , ſuch as it was , was come to the birth , were come upon me , and thoſe were straitness of time , and perplexity of ſpirit ; for the ſear of ſtopping your other occaſions did ſo ſtill lie before me , and the fear of mine own poor Family in the inundation of the Enemy in the Aſſociation at that very inſtant , did ſo follow me , that in this ſtrait between theſe two , I ſtood your Orator at that time . Yet I ſee it is not in vain , but a comfort and happiness to labour to ſerve and obey you , ſeeing your acceptance cherishes and encourageth ſuch poor endeavours . The ſubject I fixed upon , I purpoſely chosen , that the Millenary Opinion , which I cannot but judge erroneous , might not go on altogether uncontrolled , and one man take it at another for a truth without gainſaying ; but that it might receive ſome check by the way , and it might be showed , that Poſſe vinci Hannibalem , that there is a fair poſsibility that that Opinion is but a falsehood . Errors sometime , and uncertainties often , do get the repute of undoubted truths by going too long uncontradicted . As I cannot but challenge that opinion which is ſo current and common , and hath ſo long run from hand to hand for and unqueſtioned certainty , that now it is become unqueſtionable , and that is , that the ſupper mentioned in the 13 of Johns Goſpel was the Paſſeover ſupper , and that Judas his going out after the ſop , was his departure away before the Sacrament : where as if it be not certain , which to me it is , and I conceive may be very well proved to others , that that ſupper was not the Paſſeover , but a common ſupper ; and that it was not at Jeruſalem , but at Bethany fifteen furlongs off , and that it was not on the Paſſeover night , but two nights before : If this I ſay , be not abſolutely certain at the firſt sighed , as to convince of its certainty , yet is it very well worth the weighing , and the contrary opinion not to be ſuffered to go unexamined , wh • changed among the moſt men it does . Your Honourable Houſe weighteth all things , the Lord hold out and reveal his will to you more and more , and crown all your Undertakings and Conſultations with all proſperity and success . Septemb. 12. 1645. Your ſervant in the Lord , Iohn Lightfoot .