TO THE HONOURABLE Houſe of COMMONS Aſſembled In PARLIAMENT . WHen Joſhua was by Jericho , there ſtood a man overIoſh . 5. 13 , 14 ▪ againſt him with his ſword drawn in his hand ; and Joſhua seems in a military way to examine him , Art thou for us , or for our adverſaries ? Nay ( says he ) but as Captain of the hoſt of the Lord am I now come . This anſwer makes him fallen on his face to the earth and worſhip ; acknowledging Him for Commander in chief , and humbly ſubjecting himſelf to Him as His Lieutenant General , ready to receive His Commands : What says my Lord unto his ſervant ? It is one of the greateſt ▪ honours the ſons of men are capable of here on earth , to follow the Ensigns of this victorious Captain of the Lords hoſt ▪ and to wait upon his triumphant chariot . If herein the Lord hath honoured You above many thouſands of your brothers , it concerns You much to imitate Joſhua ▪ Firſt , as he queſtioned the Son of God whom he knew not in that apparition at the firſt sighed ; ſo you knowing Chriſt to be that Captain of the Lords hoſt , who will ſubdue all things to Himſelf , ought in and holy jealousy to ſearch your own hearts , and to examine all your counſels and proceedings : Are we in theſe things for Chriſt , or for His adverſaries , for Him or againſt Him ? Secondly , I beſeech You be willing to lie low before him and to ſay , What says our Lord unto His ſervants ? You expect not His immediate voice , and therefore in all humility hear Him by His Ambassadors , when they ſpeak according to their Commiſſion , as if His mandates were delivered unto You by His own mouth . Admirable is that of Valentinian recordedTheod . • . 4. cap . 6. by Theodoret , when Ambroſe had freely reproved ſome things amiss in his government , ſaid the Emperor , I knew well thy zeal and courage , and therefore was ſo far from oppoſing , that I was forward to promote thine election to this pastoral charge : Go on therefore to cure the diſeaſes of our Souls according to the preſcript of Gods Word ▪ And it is reported of Albert Duke of Mickleburgh ▪ that when a flattering Courtier ſought to incenſe him againſt a Preacher for dealing roundly with him ; He told him , he loved the man ſo much the better , and willed him in his name to give him thanks for his pious Sermon ▪ If You follow Chriſt as your Captain , not turning to the right hand or to the left , who knoweth whither after ſix years compaſſing the w • ls of Jericho , they may not on the ſeventh fallen to the ground before You. The Lord Jeſus direct You by His Spirit , and gird You with His ſtrength , to endure unto the end , that no man take Your Crown . So prayeth Your unworthy Servant in the Lord , JOHN MAYNARD .