The Còpy of a Letter Written By Sir HENRY WOOTTON , To the Author , upon the following Poem . From the College , this 13. of April , 1638. SIR , IT was a ſpecial favour , when you lately beſtowed upon me here , the firſt taſte of your acquaintance , though no longer then to make me know that I wanted more time to valve it , and to enjoy it rightly ; and in truth , if I could then have imagined your farther ſtay in theſe parts , which I underſtood afterwards by Mr. H. , I would have been bold in our vulgar phraſe to mend my draught ( for you left me with and extreme thirſt ) and to have begged your converſation again , jointly with your ſaid learned Friend , at a poor meal or two , that we might have banded together some good Authors of the ancient time : Among which , I obſerved you to have been familiar . Since your going , you have charged me with new Obligations , both for a very kind Letter from you dated the ſixth of this Month , and for a dainty piece of entertainment which came therewith . Wherein I ſhould much commend the Tragical part , if the Lyrical did not raviſh me with a certain Dorique delicacy in your Songs and Odes , whereunto I muſt plainly confeſs to have ſeen yet nothing parallel in our Language : Ipſa mollities . But I muſt not omit to tell you , that I now only owe you thanks for intimating unto me ( how modeſtly ſoever ) the true Artificer . For the work it ſelf , I had viewed some good while before , with ſingular delight , having received it from our common Friend Mr. R. in the very cloſe of the late R's Poems , Printed at Oxford , whereunto it was added ( as I now ſuppoſe ) that the Acceſſory might help out the Principal , according to the Art of Stationers , and to leave the Reader Con la bocca dolce . Now Sir , concerning your travels , wherein I may challenge a little more privilege of Discourse with you ; I ſuppoſe you will not blanch Paris in your way ; therefore I have been bold to trouble you with a few lines to Mr. M. B. whom you ſhall eaſily find attending the young Lord S. as his Governor , and you may ſurely receive from him good directions for the ſhaping of your farther journey into Italy , where he did reſide by my choice some time for the King , after mine own receſs from Venice . I ſhould think that your beſt Line will be thorough the whole length of France to Marſeilles , and thence by Sea to Genoa , whence the paſſage into Tuſcany is as Diurnal as a Graveſend Barge : I haſten as you do to Florence , or Siena , the rather to tell you a ſhort ſtory from the intereſt you have given me in your ſafety . At Siena I was tabled in the Houſe of one Alberto Scipioni and old Roman Courtier in dangerous times , having been Steward to the Duca di Pagliano , who with all his Family were ſtrangled , ſave this only man that escaped by foreſight of the Tempeſt : With him I had often much chat of thoſe affairs ; Into which he took pleaſure to look back from his Native Harbour ; and at my departure towards Rome ( which had been the centre of his experience ) I had won confidence enough to beg his advice , how I might carry my ſelf ſecurely there , without offence of others , or of mine own conſcience . Signor Arrigo mio ( says he ) I penſieri ſtretti , & il viſo ſciolto will go ſafely over the whole World : Of which Delphian Oracle ( for ſo I have found it ) your judgement does need no commentary ; and therefore ( Sir ) I will commit you with it to the beſt of all ſecurities , Gods dear love , remaining Your Friend as much at command as any of longer dateHenry Wootton .