TO My deer Wife THE LADY STAPYLTON . My Love , PErhaps the Wits may be as much offended at men for writing to , as Walking with their own Wives : neither is in faſhion I confess , but ſure they would exceedingly well-become our Age . Indeed Gifts between Man and Wife , were prohibited by the Roman Legiſlator , yet he intended not to deſtroy Kindneſs by a Law , but to declare Community in Marriage , where both have equal Proprieties , in that which either is poſſeſſed of . And even in reaſon ( the ground of Law ) he that makes a Preſent to his Wife , offers and Injury in a Compliment : for he entitles her to that by his Gift , which is hers in her own Right . I will not therefore ſo much transgress , as to ſay , I give thee my Engliſh of Leander's Epiſtle and Hero's anſwer : for that were to imply , and expectation of receiving Thanks , for what was thy own as soon as mine . All that ( by praefixing of thy Name ) I pretend to , is first , to show the World how ſenſible I am of thy Love , expreſſed to me in both fortune's , the later being lively repreſented in theſe Letters , that passed between Husband and Wife divided by a Storm . In the next place , I show thee , how I ſpent part of that time , when I had nothing left but ( what Fortune could not take away ) ſome hours for ſtudy , wherein I enjoyed my self as much , as I could , in thy abſence . Laſtly , I do and honour to my Author , for I dare boldly ſay , the ſtricteſt and moſt rigid Modesty will not ſcruple to read a paſsion writ by OVID , where his name is placed ſo near to thine , which nothing unchaste durſt ever be ſo impudent to approach . And if my Augury deceive me not , the Goodneſs of the Times is ſuch , that the Lady I ſend to bear thee company , Hero , will be studied by thy Sex in general ; her virtue drawn into Preſident , and the greateſt Modesties diſcovered in the greateſt Beauty's ; teaching the bold Pretenders to their favour , to court them , not in lewd unmanly Verſe ( the new-ſickneſs of the mind ) but in Leander's primitive way of wooing , timorous bluſhes , noble undertakings , and gallant performances : but all of the virtuous ancient strain , ſuch as this , wherein Ovid himſelf preſumed not to uſe one laſcivious ſyllable : and if the Muſe of ſo incomparable a Wit , preſumed not upon a looſer Flight , when his ſubject was the fair dead Seſtian : how dare our puny Aretines draw a wanton line , when they write of Hero's yet alive ? I hope this Pattern will ruin their Design ; to which good purpoſe , if my poor Endeavours may conduce , I must account them ſeaſonably beſtowed . Howſoever I ſhall not repent me , ſince they are crowned with ſo deſired success , that they publiſh me , as I am , Thy moſt affectionate HUSBAND ROBERT STAPYLTON .