TO THE HONOURABLE HOVSE OF COMMONS Aſſembled in PARLIAMENT . THE Lord that now makes it his great work to built up Zion , and ſettle his Ark there , in its place , hath made it your great honour , that he hath taken you into a partnerſhip in ſo bleſſed a work ; He make it your happiness , that your Faithful endeavours being crowned with a bleſſed success , both the preſent and after Ages may deſervedly call you the Repairers of the breach , and reſtorers Eſa . 58. 12. of paths to dwell in . It is pity ſuch builders ſhould want either fair weather , or a ſure Scaffold to built on ; but you will not be diſcouraged , whilst you think how in great repairs , all uſe to lie on heaps , and remember , what the ableſt of Gods Maſter-builders in this kind have met with , it is enough that Jeruſalems Wall may be built in troublous times . God can lay the beams of Dan. 9. 25. Pſal . 104 3. Luk. 17. 6. his Chambers in the water , and Faith can plant Sycamines in the Sea ; it was a confuſed Chaos , without from and void , full of darkness , which this goodly Fabric of Heaven and Earth was at first made out of , and there were Evenings as well as Morning's all along in the Work , however it went on , each day adding diſtinction and beauty , and the laſt , perfection , ſo that God beheld all and ſaw it to be very good . It is the ſame creating God , that must order our preſent confuſions , and raiſe up our ruins , in which your humble and faithful Prayers , will be more useful then your ableſt Counſels . Moſes , Elias , our Saviour , the great builders and repairers of the Church , are every one of them recorded to have faſted forty days and nights , when they were upon that Work , it much commends Prayer and Faſting to all who are at any time engaged in a like ſervice ; that was your business , when this Sermon was Preached , which , if either in the delivery it did any whit help your Spirits then in prayer , or in the publiſhing , it may now or hereafter , engage you , when you moſt diligently look to your Work , more earneſtly to look up to God in it , it will be the joy , as it is the prayer of Your Servant in this great Work , STEPHEN MARSHALL .