TO THE •• IGHT HONOURABLE he Lords and Commons Aſſembled • n Parliament ; His Excellency the Earl of Eſſex , with the reſt of the Noble and Worthy Commanders : The Right Honourable the Lord Major , the Court of Aldermen , and Common Council of the City of London : The Reverend Aſſembly of Divines : The Honourable and Reverend Commiſſioners from the Church of SCOTLAND . THis work was too high for me , but as its now done by ſo weak and hand , is too low , for ſo many judicious eyes with any favourable reſpect to look down to : But 〈 ◊ 〉 own Children , though less beautiful , we can behold with •• we ; and even stoop to take them by the hand , that we may hold and led them , that cannot go or ſtand by themſelves : •• changed a weakling is this , that is now before you , the defects •• worser weakneſſes whereof , I acknowledge are mine , but the •• rth is Gods , and yours ; to him I humbly preſent it , for 〈 ◊ 〉 bleſsing ; and to you , for your acceptance and help , that may better go abroad ; while all ſhall know , that it is •• rs more then mine , and therefore to be diſpoſed of rather by you , then by my self . By your Command , ( for ſo I interpret all your requests to me ) it was Preached , and is now Publiſhed ; and this with the more boldness , becauſe with ſome confidence , that it will pass the better without others cenſure , becauſe it hath already paſſed your ſcrutiny with allowance and acceptance . But whatever the lot of it in that kind ſhall be , it will be abundant ſatisfaction to me , if the main end be attained by it , which by you and me was intended in it ; videlicet : the help of our ſelves and all , the more to adore the infinite wisdom , and power , and goodness of our God , who can make light to ſhine out of darkness ; diſcords intended 2 Cor. 4. 6. by enemies , to make up our more harmonious conſent , and diviſions of tongues that ſcatter the builders of Babel , Gen. 11. Acts 2. to help up the more compact building of his Church . He once turned the day of his peoples griefs and fears to the Eſter 8. ult . 9. 1. quite contrary , ſo that they had then joy and gladness , a Feaſt , and a good day , inſomuch that many of the people of the Land became Jewes for the fear of the Iewes fell upon them . Now he that hath wrought for us the like turn of things , be pleaſed in mercy to work a greater turn in all our Enemies hearts , that ſo now and ever , our Lord Ieſus may appear to be the wonderful Counſellor , the mighty God , the everlaſting Father , while thus , the Prince of his Peoples Peace : So prayeth , His and Your moſt Unworthy Servant . STEPHEN MARSHAL .