TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE The Lord Maior , & Court of Aldermen , of the famous City of London . Lukewarm Laodicea by ſome hath been made Englands Emblem , and suitably enough , not ſo much to the cold climate , and this cool evening of the world we live in , as to the tepid ſpring of our reformation at firſt , eſpecially to the decaying Autumn , which of late years we were come to . But as cold oft breeds and inflammation , ſo this hath enkindled Gods wrath , and it theſe ſad combuſtions , which we are already well-nigh conſumed with : what remains now therefore but that fire ſhould take out fire , the kindly warmth of holy zeal , the woeful heat of this devouring fire , that it may not come to everlaſting burnings ? Great is the honour that God in this kind hath conferred upon you , and great the bleſsings which he hath to this whole land conveyed by you : Your Engines not more admirable to quench fire in your City , then your care , coſt , and blood freely useful to the extinguiſhing of the general ſcare-fire of this whole kingdom : your zeal herein hath ſaved many , provoked more , hath under God been as a wall of fire about us , and will be for ever a more ſparkling Diamond in your Crown , then thoſe ſtones Ezek 24. 14 : of fire in the King of Tires Diadem . The Miniſters Lungs ſome make the Prophets Bellows to blow up a dying fire , I deſired Jer 6. 29. that mine in preaching this Sermon might help to blow up yours to a yet brighter flame ; and if this further publiſhing of it ( at your requeſt ) may any whit ſerve to keep ſtill alive this holy fire on the Altar of your hearts , while Incendiaries ſet on fire from hell , are every where ſhooting fiery bullets to ſet all into a further combuſtion , I am but ſubſervient to my great Maſter in his preſent work , who is now purging the blood of our Jeruſalem out of thee amid of it , by the ſpirit of judgement and burning ; Fervet opus , and then I know you will not cool . Iſa 4 4. Its reformation , work , and the examples of Phinehas , Elias , John Baptiſt , Luther , Knox , and thoſe other great reformers tell us it requires zeal . Baruch was a great repairer of Jeruſalems walls , but it is ſaid of him , that flagrante animo inſtauravit , Nehem 3 20. 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 he repaired faſt , but it was when he was hight upon it . It is Gods work , and they muſt be fervent in ſpirit that would ſerve the Lord , who had rather we ſhould let his work alone , Rom. 12. 11. then ſee us freeze at it , it is his zeal that muſt now do all for us , and therefore he expects that our zeal ſhould do what Hab. 97. 37. 32 we can for him . It is Chriſts work and cauſe , who is willing to redeem us , but that we might be a people zealous of good works ; he Tit. 2. 14. did not ſweat that we ſhould freeze , nor ſhed his blood out of his own veins , that it might congeal in ours . It is finally a great work , and the oppoſitions againſt it are greater , but as they ſaid to Joſhua , Only be courageous , ſo I to Joſh . 1. 7. you , Only be zealous , and then be not diſcouraged ; Hannibal by fire made his way over the Alpes , and you by zeal may make yours over greateſt mountains of oppoſition , which without running up with full ſtrength and ſpeed will not be got up to ; Palms are the Emblem of victory , but they love to grow in a hight soil ; be warm , and promiſe your ſelves the Palm ; nay God promises it , and that not only to Smyrna ( whoſe name ſmells ſweet of warm incenſe ) that if she will be faithful to the death , Revel . 2. 10. he will give her a Crown of life ; but even to our cooler Laodicea , that her , whom he was ready to ſpew out of his mouth while ſhe was lukewarm , he will be ready to come into and ſup with , Revel . 3. 16. with 19. 20. when ſhe ſhall once be zealous and repent : which is the humble and hearty prayer of your Servant for Chriſt , STEPHEN MARSHALL .