TO THE Reverend Aſſembly of Divines and Commiſſioners of the Church of Scotland now ſitting at Weſtminſter . Reverend Sirs , WHereas all of you in general are concerned , and ſome of you particularly nam in the Book I deal with , the world might happily have expected a joint endeavour , where there was a common interest : That I therefore ( while you are otherwiſe fully employed ) ſhould undertake this task , I deſire may not be imputed by you or any to and over weening conceit of mine own abilities : for had it fallen to ſome of your lots , I ſhould have hoped the Church of Chriſt might have reaped more fruit , then it is like to do by my poor and weak endeavours . But my personal engagement to aſſert that truth of God which I had held forth in a Printed Sermon , which my Learned Antagonist ( paſſing by other books written by other men on the ſame argument ) was pleaſed to ſingle out to combat with , and to lay out his ſtrength upon , hath called me forth to ſtand up in this controversy , not as your Champion , but as and affectionate friend to the truth , which we are all called upon earneſtly to contend for ; in which Jude 3. conflict as I cannot but fear that you will eaſily diſcover my weakness ; ſo I cannot but hope that you will not find me either ſo foiled by mine adverſary , or deſerted by God , whoſe cauſe I plead , as not to have ſufficiently anſwered that book , which hath obtained to be called in Print , The ſtrongeſt Shield and Mr. John Goodwins anſwer to Mr. Edwards Ga • gr . p. 20. Pſal . 76. 3. Buckler wherewith that cauſe was ever protected ; but in Salem God of old brake both Sword and Shield , and if he hath done the like now , the weak hand which he hath made uſe of , serves only to point at that mighty arm of his , which hath got himself the victory . Truth , triumph and the Churches peace I have had in mine eye , and have deſired to carry meekness and love even to him , whoſe opinion I fight with , all along in my heart and pen : what ever meaſure my former writing met with from him , I have endeavoured to look upon his with a neither bloodſhot nor lofty eye ; paſſion blinds the one , and pride makes the other ofttimes overlook that truth which a lowly eye sees clearly at a nearer diſtance : ſure I am , the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God , while James 1. 20. the meek he will guide in judgement , and teach his way . What herein God hath enabled Pſal . 25. 9. me to do , I willingly ſubmit to the Churches cenſure , and humbly preſent to you , not as any way worthy of you , but only as a public teſtimony of my reverence and gratitude for all the refreſhings of ſpirit , and that abundance of spiritual grace I have found from the hand of God , while I have had the happiness to fit among you ; for a yet more plentiful effuſion whereof upon you , to the happy settling at length of theſe diſtracted Churches in truth and peace , is the prayer of Your unworthy brother , and ſervant in the Lords work Steven Marshal . Aprill 2. 1646.