To the Honourable THE Houſe of Commons Aſſembled in PARLIAMENT . IN obedience to your commands , I here humbly preſent to public view , what you were pleaſed with ready affections lately to attend unto . In it is cleared how vain the attempts of all men are againſt the people and Cauſe of God ; and theſe ſeaſonable Mercies and Deliverances may help to confirm us in waiting for the full accompliſhment of all theſe promiſes . I confess for our unworthy walking , and little improving many like Mercies , we continue ſtill in a low condition , and lie under many heavy preſſures ; our times are like that day in Zach. 14. Neither clear nor dark , not day nor night , we are caſt down , but not forſaken of our God , no not Zach. 14. 6 , 7. Jer. 51. 5. though our land be filled with ſin againſt the holy One of Iſrael , God ſill appears in the mount of our difficulties : Methinks this his gracious dealing shows how willing he is yet to heal our backſlidings , to take away our iniquities , to do us good , and to preſerve and eſtabliſh us a people to himſelf . O! that God would now in the end teach this Nation to leave ſtruggling one againſt another for a curſe , and all to join together to wrestle with him for a bleſsing , and ſeek him in his own Goſpel-way . O! that God would persuade ſuch of this Nation who are engaged againſt the cauſe of God , to leave plotting and contriving of Designs , which ſhall not proſper , and in ſtead thereof join hands with thoſe who deſire to ſee the proſperity of Zion . And that all who are engaged in this Cauſe of God , would labour to manage it in Gods own way ; That they would remember their Covenant , what they have ſworn and promiſed ; and by his grace ſtudy to make it good , how abundantly ſhould we find the fruits of his loving kindneſſes showered down upon us ! That this may be the ſtudy and endeavour of you all who repreſent the whole Commonalty of this Nation ; is the humble and earneſt prayer of Your humble Servant in Chriſt , STEPH • N MARSHAL .