TO THE HONOURABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS Aſſembled in PARLIAMENT . THE Lord hath caſt us into times , in which the foure Winds Dan 7. 2. ſtrive upon the great Sea ; a great part of the World hath little leisure for any thing , but ſtorming of Towns and ſtrong holds , and taking in of Kingdoms and Countries ; in our Land of Peace , we alſo of late have cried out of VVar and Violence ; and although thoſe Hab. 1. 2. winds have ( through Gods goodness ) in a great meaſure ceaſed blustering , yet the Sea hath not left rolling ; Animoſities yet remain too great , Paroxysms very sharp , and purſuits of worldly intereſts , extreme eager : here like Jehu , we drive 2 Kings 9. 20 furiouſly , magno conatu nugas , we throw feathers with the whole ſtrength of our arm : vain men ! that lean too hard on a weak reed ; unwiſe builders ! who lay too great a weight upon a ſlight foundation ; make ſuch trifles our Masterpieces , that when we come to review our work , we muſt be enforced to ſay , Materiamſuperavit opus , that we have overdone it , laboured too hard for that which ſatisfieth not , and cauſed our eyes to fly upon that which is not , and therefore that we had been more wiſe , if we had been Iſa 55. 2. Prov 23. 5. less earneſt , and more happy , if we had not effuſiſſimis habenis , let out the ſtrength of our deſires and endeavours after thoſe things , which prove vanity and bitterness in the latter end . Odit Deus nimis vehements impetus , odere cives , gratior eſt moderatio . Becauſe Moral virtue is circa res medias , therefore the Philoſopher rightly placed it in a Mediocrity : ſure I am , the Grace of Chriſt persuades to a moderation , Phil. 4. 5. Pſal . 131. 2. a weanedneſſe , a remissness in ſuth things as theſe , in which we have not ſo much need of the ſpur as of the Bridle . But if the mettled horſe be ſo upon his ſpeed , that he cannot be held in , it would be a piece of our beſt skill to guide him in a ſafe way , and to turn the violent ſtream that cannot be stopped , into a right channel ; This was the deſign of my weak endeavours in this ſhort Sermon , to ſtay the man that runs ſo violently down the hill earthward and hellward , and ( if it might be , ) to turn his face and heart , that if he cannot with ſo much ſpeed , yet with more contention and earnestness , he may get u pthe hill heavenward . In which endeavour omne valde tuum , all thy might is too weak , all ſpeed tooſlow , and Deut 6. 5. greateſt earnestness too faint . Againſt ſin , all that carefulness , indignation , fear , vehementeſt deſire , 2 Cor. 7. 11. and hotteſt zeal , yea and revenge that the Apoſtle ſpeaks of , are not over much , but only malo nodo malus cuneus , a ſharper wedge for a knotty piece , which will require our beſt ſtrength to drive it in ſo as to pierce and hard heart . For Gods truth , and earneſt contending is not too impetuous . For the Iude 3. Church of God , & the rearing up of Ieruſalems walls , a Satagentia is not enough ; a Nehemiah's intenſe Nehem 4. 21 , 22 , 23. Luke 13 24. 2 Pet. 1. 5. 10 , 10. earnestness is deſervedly imitable . For Heaven , if by ſtriving to enter in at the ſtrait gate , & by giving all diligence , at last we come to have and abundant entrance , our labour will not exceed our reward . In this work of the Lord , if you abound , your labour will not be in vain in the Lord : and may my poor pains any whit herein quicken your endeavours , 1 Cor 15. 58. to get to heaven your ſelves , and by your help to have others go along with you ; to enter your ſelves into that Kingdom , and by your authority with a ſweet violence to compel others to come in , as Lycia 14 23 it is the prayer , ſo it will be the rejoicing of Your humble Servant STEVEN MARSHALL .