To the Honourable Houſe of Commons aſſembled in Parliament . THat which was preached by your command is now publiſhed , when the great voice says Come up hither , this and evil modeſty to hide among the ſtuff . In theſe busy times they are happy to whom God hath vouchſafed the ſhelter oſ and obſcure privacy ; yet upon a call we ſhould not conſult with our own eaſe & quiet . The times are violent and blaſting , & this poor endeavour is likely to undergo ſeveral miſconſtructions . But ( I thank God ) I am learning to pass through2 Cor. 6. 8 good report and evil report , and to diſvalue cenſure , when it seizes upon me in the way of duty , I have dealt freely and impartially againſt the miſcarriages of both parties , & happily my liberty may diſpleaſe ſome , others may look upon the things offered here as too low and trivial , & not weighty enough to reach the end of the deſign ; let them remember , the intent of theſe proposals is only to engage to a further conſultation about the matter , the entire diſcourſe were fitter for a Treatiſe then a Sermon ; and yet ſomething is offered , which by the bleſſing of God may be ſerviceable to reduce men from their violences & extremities to ſome better temper and moderation . Some poſſibly may diſlike the whole design , ſpirits now are very keen and exaſperated , men think it'll be a cooling of their zeal if we ſhould a little take off their edge and ſharpneſs ; fire will not be quenched without hiſſing . To theſe I ſhall only profess , that if I know mine heart , I abhor all ſuch moderation & compliances as will not ſtand with chriſtian zeal , and may diſadvantage truth and religion , what ever become of my own party I would be faithful and true to that intereſt . I know that as it's hard to be moderate without danger , ſo alſo without ſin , men of middle intereſts do always diſpleaſemen , and they ſhould be careful they do not diſpleaſe God , there are many counterfeits of Chriſtian moderation , a cold or at beſt a tepid indifferency ; lukewarm Chriſtians may eaſily middle it ; Carnally-wiſe neutrality , it's no wonder to ſee men that obſerve the times , neither hight nor cold . James 1. 8 A doubtful uncertainty , 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 are 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 double-minded men are unſtable , and their compliance is promiſcuouſly diſpenſed : ſome poſſibly may have ſo much of child and self in them , as to mind Church-peace only as a taking theam , & ſpeak for it rather from their brain then their heart ; Dan. 11. 23. others may ( like him in Daniel ) deal deceitfully , and preſs a league that they may become ſtrong with a ſmall people , mind moderation for their own advantage , ſome out of a deſire of their carnal eaſe and quiet , may be againſt ſtirs . I foresaw theſe rocks , deſired grace to avoid them , therefore I hope nothing will be found here to occaſion any ſuch prejudice & suspicion againſt this endeavour : however it ſpeedeth abroad you were pleaſed to honour it with acceptance , and to do ſomething upon it , which I hope you will revive again , when it ſhall comport with the times . I ſhall deſire God to guide you in that and other your great affairs ; the Wonderful Counselor be with you in all your straights , Eſay 9. 6. make you underſtanding men of the ſeaſon , careful to apply apt remedies to the diſtempers of it . 1 Chron. 12. 32. So prayeth your meaneſt ſervant in the Lords Work , THOMAS MANTON .