TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE LORDS Aſſembled in Parliament . Right Honourable , THis Sermon publiſhed by your Order , holds out and inſtance of what St. Paul preached 1 Cor. 1. 27 , 28. God hath choſen the fooliſh things of the world to confound the wiſe ; the weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty ; and baſe things of the world , and things which are deſpiſed hath God choſen ; yea , and things which are not , to bring to nought things that are . 1 Cor. 1. 27 , 28. What Creature ſo ſimple , weak , or baſe as a Worm , a creature which no man value's , loves , or fears ? yet here's a worm beats great Mountains to duſt , and makes the hills as chaff . What ſo shiftless and unable to defend it self , or offend and Enemy , as a Babe or Suckling ? yet behold here are Babes and Sucklings quelling and deſtroying the ſtrongeſt enemies , even the Enemy and Avenger . Your ears have not only herd theſe things preached , but your eyes do ſee them fulfilled in this our day : Oh that theſe things might persuade your hearts of theſe Two things ; 1 That it is better , more excellent and honourable to be one of Chriſts Babes , one of his weak , ſimple , and deſpiſed ones , then to be one of the Zanzummims , the Nimrods , or men of renown of the world . 2 That the greateſt ſupport and ſtrength to Families , Cities , or Kingdoms , proceeds out of the mouth of theſe Babes , that their hearts and tongues can do more then and hoſt of Men . The firſt would make you with Theodoſius , rejoice more in being the meaneſt Chriſtian , then in being the greateſt earthly Potentate . The latter would provoke you both to plant the Kingdom with faithful Miniſters , who are Father's to beget theſe Babes unto Chriſt ; and to encourage and cheriſh the godly party of this Kingdom , who with Mordecai will ſeek the wealth of the Kingdom , and as ſo many ſhields under God , defend this Nation againſt all its enemies , Theſe Innocents will deliver the Island , and it shall be delivered by the pureneſs of their hands ; Job 22. 30. Yea it would provoke you to get ſuch about you , and with David , Pſal . 101. 6. make your eyes ſet upon the faithful of the Land , that they may dwell with you , and ſerve you , and conclude that you and your Family ſhall be bleſſed in them . My Lords , I beſeech you let this be your choice , it is the earnest prayer of Your Honours moſt obliged Servant , STEPHEN MARSHALL .