TO THE TRULY NOBLE , and my ever honoured friend , Sir EDWARD SCOT , of Scots-Hall in Kent , Knight of the honourable Order of the BATH . SIR : HAving of late been deprived of the happiness to ſee you , I make bold to ſend to visit you ; and becauſe that the times are troubleſome , I have made choice of this meſſenger : who having obtained a licenſe to pass , fears no ſearching : he brings no news ( at leaſt ) to you , but that which was from the beginning , and muſt continue unto the end , which you have herd , and which ( for ſome part thereof ) you have practiſed out of the word of God . He hath no ſecret meſſages prejudicial to the ſtate of Church or Commonwealth ; neither I hope , will he entertain any ſuch comments by the way ▪ conſidering from whom he comes , and to whom he goes ; of whom , the one would disclaim him , and the other puniſh him . Ambitious I am not of any entertainment for theſe few sheets , neither care much what success they find in their travel ; ſetting them out merely in my own defence , to be freed from the continued ſolicitations of ſome honeſt judicious men , who were acquainted with their contents : being nothing , but and hours Country-diſcourſe , reſolved , from the ordinary pulpit method , into its own principles : when I firſt thought of ſending it to you , I made full account to uſe the benefit of the advantage , in recounting of , and returning thanks for ſome of thoſe many undeſerved favours which I have received from you . But addreſſing my ſelf to the performance , I fainted in the very entrance ; finding their ſcore ſo large , that I know not where to begin , neither ſhould I know how to end : only one I cannot ſuffer to lie hid in the crowd , though other engagements hindered me from embracing it , viz. your free proffer of and Eccleſiaſtical preferment , then vacant , and in your donation . Yet truly all received courteſies , have no power to oblige me unto you , in compariſon of that abundant worth , which by experience I have found to be dwelling in you . Twice by Gods providence , have I been with you , when your County hath been in great danger to be ruined , once by the horrid inſurrection of a rude godless multitude ; and again , by the invaſion of a potent enemy , prevailing in the neighbour County ; at both which times , beside the general calamity juſtly feared , particular threatenings were daily brought unto you : under which ſad diſpenſations , I muſt crave leave to ſay ( only to put you in mind of your self , if it ſhould pleaſe God again to reduce you to the like ſtraights ) that I never ſaw more reſolved conſtancy , more cheerful unmoved Chriſtian courage in any man . Such a valiant heart in a weak body , ſuch a directing head , where the hand was but feeble , ſuch unwearied endeavours , under the preſſures of a painful infirmity , ſo well adviſed reſolves in the amid of imminent danger , did I then behold , as I know not where to parallel . Neither can I ſay less in her kind of your virtuous Lady , whoſe known goodness to all , and particular indulgences to me , make her ( as ſhe is in her ſelf ) very precious in my thoughts and remembrance : whom having nam , I deſire to take the advantage thankfully to mention her worthy ſon , my noble and very deer friend C. Weſtrow , whoſe judgement to discern the differences of theſe times , and his valour in proſecuting what he is reſolved to be juſt and lawful , places him among the number of thoſe very few , to whom it is given to know aright the cauſes of things , and vigorouſly to execute holy and laudable designs . But further of him I chooſe to ſay nothing , becauſe if I would , I cannot but ſay too little . Neither will longer detain you from the enſuing Diſcourſe , which I deſire to commend to your favourable acceptance , and with my hearty prayers , that the Lord would meet you and yours in all thoſe ways of mercy and grace , which are neceſſary to carry you along through all your engagements , until you arrive at the haven of everlaſting glory , where you would be : I reſt Your moſt obliged Servaent in Ieſus Chriſt our common Maſter : JOHN OVVEN .