To the Worthy and Honoured Sir William Maſham , Sir William Row with the reſt of the Gentlemen of the Committee lately under impriſonment by the Enemy in Colcheſter , As alſo To the Honoured Sir Henry Mildmay of Wanſted , Col. Sr. Thomas Honywood with the reſt of the Gentlemen and Officers lately acting and engaged againſt the ſame Enemy . SIRS : THe righteous judgements of God , having brought a diſturbance , and noise of War , for our ſecurity , unthankfulness , murmuring , and devouring one another , upon our Country , thoſe who were entrusted with the power thereof , turned their streams into several Channels . Troublous Times , are Times of trial . Many ſhall be purified and made white , and tried , but the wicked ſhall do wickedly , and none of the wicked ſhall underſtand , but the wiſe ſhall underſtand , Dan. 11. 10. Some God called out to ſuffer , ſome to do , leaving Treacherous dealers , to deal treacherouſly . Of the two firſt ſorts are you . This honour have you received from God either with patience and conſtancy to undergo unvoluntarily a dangerous reſtraint , or with Reſolution and courage , voluntarily to undertake , a Hazardous engagement , to give and example , that Faith and Truth ſo ſhamefully deſpiſed in theſe evil days , have not altogether forſaken the sons of men . It is not in my Thoughts , to relate unto your ſelves , what ſome of you ſuffered , and what ſome of you did : what difficulties and perplexities you wreſtled withal , within , and without , the walls of your enemies , ( The Birds in the cage , and the field , having ſmall cauſe of mutual emulation ) for that which remains of theſe things , is only a Returnall of praiſe to him , by whom , all your works are wrought . It cannot de denied , but that Providence was eminently exalted , in the work of your protection and delivery : yet truly for my part , I cannot but conceive that it vails to the Efficacy of Grace , in preventing you , from putting forth your hands unto iniquity , in any sinful compliance with the enemies of our peace . The times wherein we live , have found the latter more rare then the former . What God wrought in you , hath the pre-eminence of what he wrought for you : as much , as to be given up to the Sword , is a leſſer evil , then to be given up to a Treacherous Spirit . What God hath done for you all , all men know ; what I deſire you ſhould do for God , I know no reaſon , why I ſhould make alike public . The general and particular civilities I have received , from all and every one of you , Advantaging me to make it out in another way . I ſhall add nothing then to what you will meet withal , in the following Diſcourſe , but only my Deſire that you would ſeriouſly ponder the 11th Obſervation with the deductions from thence . For the reſt , I no way fear , but that that God , who hath ſo appeared with you , and for you , will ſo indulge to your ſpirits , the preſence and Guidance of his Grace , in theſe ſhaking times , that if any ſpeak evil of you as of evil doers , they may be aſhamed that falſely accuſe your good Converſation in Chriſt , and glorify God in the day of Viſitation . For theſe following Sermons , one of them was Preached at your deſire , and is now publiſhed upon your Requeſt . The firſt part of the labour , I willingly and cheerfully under went , The Latter merely in obedience to your commands : being acted in it , more by your judgements , then mine own ; you were persuaded , ( mean as it was ) it might be for the Glory of God , to have it made public , where upon my Anſwer was , and is , that , for That , not only it , but my self alſo , ſhould by his Aſſiſtance be ready for the Press . The faillings and infirmities , attending the Preaching and Publiſhing of it , ( which the Lord knows to be very many ) are mine : The inconveniences of Publiſhing ſuch a Tractate from ſo weak a hand , whereof the World is full , muſt be yours ; The fruit and benefit , both of the one , and other , is his , for whoſe Pardon of infirmities and removal of inconveniences , ſhall be , as for you , and all the Church of God , the Prayer of Sirs , Your moſt humble and obliged Servant in the work of the Lord JOHN OWEN . Coggeſh : Octob. 5. 1648.