TO His Excellency Thomas Lord Fairfax , etc. SIR , ALmighty God having made you the inſtrument , of that deliverance and peace , which in the County of Eſſex , we do enjoy , next to his own Goodness , the Remembrance thereof is due unto your name . Thoſe who Honour him , he will honour , and thoſe who deſpiſe him ſhall be lighty eſteemed . 1 Sam. 2. 30. Part of theſe enſuing Sermons , being preached before your Excellency , and now by providence called forth to public view , I am emboldened to dedicate them unto your Name , as a ſmall mite of that Abundant thankfulness , wherein all peace-loving men of this County ſtand obliged unto you . It was the custom of former days , in the provinces of the Lubens meri toque . Roman Empire , to erect Statuas and Monuments of grateful Remembrance , to thoſe preſidents and Governors , who in the Adminiſtration of their Authority , behaved themſelves , with wisdom courage and fidelity . Yea inſtruments of great Deliverances and bleſſings , through corrupted nature's folly , became the Pagans Deities . There is ſcarce a County in this Kingdom wherein and not one from which , your Excellency hath not deſerved a more laſting Monument , then ever was erected of Corinthian Brass : But if the Lord be pleaſed , that your worth ſhall dwell only in the praises of his people , it will be your greater glory , that being the place , which himself hath choſen to inhabit . Now for a Teſtification of this , is This only intended ; beyond This , towards men , God pleading for you , you need nothing but our ſilence . The iſſue of the laſt engagements , whereunto you were called , and inforced , Anſwering , yea outgoing your former undertakings , giving Ample Teſtimony of the continuance of Gods Preſence , with you , in your Army , having ſtopped the mouths of many Gainsayers , and called to the reſidue in the language of the dumb ſpeaking Egyptian Hieroglyphic , 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , men of all ſorts know , that God hates impudence . • ut . de Iſide Oſir . It was ſaid of the Roman in the raising of their Empire , that they were , ſaepe praelio victi , bello nunquam ; So naked hath the Bow of God been made for your Aſſiſtance , that you have failed neither in Battle nor War. Truly had not our eyes beheld the riſe , and fallen , of this latter ſtorm , we could not have been persuaded that the former Achievements of the Army under your conduct , could have been paralleled . But he who always enabled them to out do not only others , but themſelves , hath in this carried them out , to outdo , what ever before himself had done by them , that they might show more kindness and faithfulness , in the latter end , then in the beginning . The weary Ox , treadeth hard . Dying bites , are often deſperate . Half ruined Carthage , did more perplex Room , then when it was entire . Hydras heads ( in the Fable ) were increaſed by their loss ; and every new ſtroke begotten a new oppoſition . Such ſeemed the late tumultuating of the exaſperated party in this Nation . In the many undertakings of the enemy , allwhich themſelves thought ſecure , and others eſteemed probable , if they had prevailed in any one , too many Reaſons preſent themſelves , to persuade , they would have done ſo in all . But to none of thoſe Worthies , which went out under your command , to several places in the Kingdom , can you ſay with Auguſtus to Varus , upon the ſlaughter of his Legions by Harminius in Germany , Quintile Vare red Legiones , God having carried them all on with success and victory . One eſpecially in his Northern Expedition , I cannot pass over with ſilence , who although he will not , dare not ſay of his undertakings , as Caeſar of his Aſian War , veni , vidi , vici , knowing who works all his works for him , nor ſhall we ſay of the enemies multitude , what Captain Gam , did of the French , being ſent to ſpy out their numbers , before the Battle of Agin-Court , that there were of them , enough to kill , and enough to take , and enough to run away , yet of him , and them , both he , and we , may freely ſay , It is nothing with the Lord to help , either with many , or with them that have no power . The War being divided , and it being impoſſible your Excellency ſhould be in every place of Danger ; according to your deſire , the Lord was pleaſed to call you out perſonally Kenned . Eſſex . unto two , of the moſt Hazardous , Dangerous , and difficult undertakings : Where beside the travail , labour , watching , heat and cold , by day and night , whereunto you were expoſed , even the life of the meaneſt Soldier in your Army was not in more imminent danger , then oftentimes was your Own . And indeed during your abided at the Leagure amongſt us , in this only were our Thoughts burdened with you , That self-preservation was of no more weight in your counsels and undertakings . And I beſcech you pardon my boldness , in laying before you this Expoſtulation of many thouſands , ( if we may ſay to him , who hath ſaved a Kingdom , what was sometime ſaid unto a King ) know you not that you are worth ten thouſands of us , why ſhould you quench ſuch a light in Izrael ? Sir , I account it among thoſe bleſſings of Providence , wherewith the days of my pilgrimage have been ſeaſoned , that I had the happiness for a ſhort ſeaſon , to attend your Excellency , in the ſervice of my Maſter Ieſus Chriſt . As alſo that I have this opportunity , in the name of many , to caſt in my 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 into the Kingdoms congratulations of your late ſucceſſes . What thoughts concerning your perſon , my breſtis poſſeſſed with all , as in their ſtorehouſe they yield me delightful Refreſhment , So they ſhall not be drawn out , to the diſturbance of your self-denial . The goings forth of my heart , in Reference to your Excellency , ſhall be chiefly to the Moſt-high , that being more then conqueror , in your Spiritual and Temporal warfare , you may be long continued for a bleſſing , to this Nation , and all the people of God . Sir , Your Excellencies Moſt humble and devoted Servant , JOHN OWEN . Coggeſhall , Eſſex Octo. 5. 1648.