TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE LORDS AND GENTLEMEN OF THE COMMITTEE FOR RELIGION . THe many ample teſtimonies of zealous reverence to the providence of God , as well , as affectionate care , for the privileges of men , which have been given , by this Honourable Aſſembly of Parliament , encourage the adorers of the one , no less then the Lovers of the other , to vindicate that alſo , from the incroachments of men . And as it was not doubtless without divine diſpoſition , that thoſe ſhould be the chiefeſt Agents , in robbing men of their privileges , who had nefariouſly attempted to spoil God of his providence : ſo we hope , the ſame All-ruling hand , hath diſpoſed of them , to be glorious inſtruments , of re-advancing his right , and ſupreme dominion over the hearts of men , whoſe hearts , he hath prepared with courage and conſtancy , to eſtabliſh men , in their inviolated rights : by reducing a ſweet Harmony , between awful Sovereignty , and a well moderated liberty . Now the firſt of theſe , being demandated to your particular care , I come unto you , with a Bill of Complaint , againſt no ſmall number in this Kingdom ; who have wickedly violated , our intereſt in the providence of God , and have attempted to bring in , the foreign power of and old Idol , to the great prejudice , of all the true subject's , and ſervants of the moſt High . My accuſation I make good , by the evidence of the fact , joined with their own confeſsions . And becauſe to wave the imputation of violent intruſion , into the dominion of another , they lay ſome claim , and pretend ſome title unto it . I ſhall briefly show how it is contrary to the express terms of the Great Charter of heaven , to have any ſuch power , introduced amongſt men : Your known Love to truth , and the Goſpel of Chriſt , makes it altogether needless for me , to stir you up by any motives , to harken to this juſt Complaint , and provide a timely remedy for this growing evil : eſpecially ſince experience , hath ſo clearly taught us here in England , that not only eternal , but temporal happiness alſo , dependeth on the flouriſhing of the Truth of Chriſts Goſpel . Justice and Religion , were always conceived , as the main Columns and upholders of any State , or Commonwealth ; like two pillars in a building , whereof the one cannot ſtand , without the other ; nor the whole fabric without them both . As the Philoſopher spoke of Logic and Rhetoric , they are Arts 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , mutually aiding each other , and both aiming at the ſame end , though in different manners : ſo they , without repugnancy concur , and sweetly fallen in , one with another , for the reiglement and direction , of every perſon in a Commonwealth , to make the whole happy and bleſſed : and where they are both thus united , there , and only there , is the bleſsing , in aſſurance whereof , Hezekiah rejoiced : Truth and Peace . And agreement without Truth , is no Peace , but a covenant with Death , a league with Hell , a conspiracy againſt the Kingdom of Chriſt , a ſtout rebellion againſt the God of Heaven ; and without Justice , great Commonwealths , are but great troops of Robbers : Now the reſult of the one of theſe , is civil Peace , of the other Ecclesiastical , betwixt which two , there is a great sympathy , a ſtrict connexion : having on each other a mutual dependence : Is there any diſturbance of the State ? it is uſually attended with Schisms , and factions in the Church , and the diviſions of the Church , are too often , even the ſubverſions of the Commonwealth . Thus it hath been ever ſince that unhappy difference , between Cain and Abel : which was not , concerning the bounds and limits of their inheritance , nor which of them ſhould be heir to the whole world : but about the Dictates of Religion , the offering of their ſacrifices . This fire alſo of dissension , hath been more ſtirred up , ſince the Prince of Peace , hath by his Goſpel , ſent the Sword amongſt us : for the preaching thereof , meeting with the ſtrong holds of Satan , and the depraved corruption of humane nature , muſt needs occaſion a great ſhaking of the earth . But moſt eſpecially , diſtracted Chriſtendome , hath found fearful iſſues of this diſcord , ſince the proud Romiſh Prelates , have ſought to eſtabliſh their hell-broached errors , by inventing , and maintaining , uncharitable deſtructive cenſures againſt all that oppoſe them : which firſt cauſing Schisms , and diſtractions in the Church , & then being helped forward , by the blindness and cruelty , of ambitious Potentates , have raiſed war of nation againſt nation , witness the Spaniſh Invaſion of 88. of a people within themſelves , as in the late Civil wars of France , where after diverse horrible Maſſacres , many chosen rather to die Soldiers , then Martyrs . And O , that this truth , might not at this day , be written with the blood of almoſt expiring Ireland . Yea , it hath laſtly deſcended to dissension , betwixt private parties , witness the horrible murder of Diazius , Sleid. Com. whoſe brains were chopped out with and axe , by his own brother Alphonſus , for forſaking the Romiſh Religion : what rends in State , what grudgings , hatreds and exaſperations of mind , among private men , have happened by reaſon of ſome inferior differences , we all at this day grieve to behold ; tantum Religio potuit ſuadere malorum : moſt concerning then is it for us to endeavour obedience , to our Saviours precept , of ſeeking firſt the kingdom of God , that we may be partakers , of the good things , compriſed in the promiſe annexed : were there but this one Argument , for to ſeek the peace of the Church , becauſe thereon depends the peace of the Common wealth , it were ſufficient to quicken our utmoſt induſtry , for the attaining of it . Now what peace in the Church , without Truth ? all conformity to any thing elſe , is but the agreement of Herod and Pilate , to deſtroy Chriſt and his Kingdom , neither is it this , or that , particular truth , but the whole Counsel of God , revealed unto us , without adding , or detracting , whoſe embracement is required , to make our Peace firm and ſtable . No halting betwixt Iehovah and Baal ; Chriſt and Antichriſt , as good be all Philiſtine , and worſhippers of Dagon , as to speak part the language of Aſhdod , and part the language of the Iewes : hence , hence hath been the riſe of all our misery's , of all our dissensions , whilst factious men , laboured every day , to commend themſelves to them , who sat aloft in the Temple of God , by introducing new Popiſh Arminian errors , whoſe Patronage they had wickedly undertaken : who would have thought , that our Church , would ever have given entertainment , to theſe Belgic Semipelagians , who have caſt dirt upon the faces , and raked up the aſhes , of all thoſe great and pious souls , whom God magnified , in uſing as his inſtruments to reform his Church ; to the leaſt of which , the whole troop of Arminians , ſhall never make themſelves equal , though they ſwell till they break ? what benefit did ever come to this Church , by attempting to prove , that the chief part , in the several degrees of our ſalvation , is to be aſcribed unto our ſelves , rather then God ? which is the head and sum , of all the Controverſies , between them and us : and muſt not the introducing and fomenting of a doctrine , ſo oppoſite to that truth our Church hath quietly enjoyed , ever ſince the firſt reformation neceſſarily bring along with it Schisms and dissensions , ſo long as any remain who love the truth , or esteem the Goſpel above preferment : Neither let any deceive your Wisdoms , by affirming , that they are differences of and inferior nature , that are at this day agitated , between the Arminians and the Orthodox Divines of the reformed Church , be pleaſed but to caſt and eye on the following inſtances , and you will find them hewing , at the very root of Chriſtianity . Conſider ſeriouſly their denying of that fundamental Article of Original ſin : Is this but a ſmall eſcape in Theology ? why , what need of the Goſpel ? what need of Chriſt himself , if our nature be not guilty , depraved , corrupted ? neither are many of the reſt of less importance ; ſurely theſe are not things , in quibus poſsimus diſſentire ſalva pace ac charitate , as Auſtin ſpeaks , about which we may differ , without loss of peace or charity , one Church cannot wrap in her communion , Auſtin and Pelagius ; Calvine , and Arminius . I have here only given you a taſte , whereby you may judge of the reſt of their fruit : mors in olla , mors in olla ; their doctrine of the final apostasy of the elect , of true believers , of a wavering haeſitancy , concerning our preſent grace , and future glory , with diverse others , I have wholly omitted : thoſe I have produced , are enough to make their abettors uncapable of our Church communion : the Sacred bound of peace , compaſſeth only the unity of that Spirit which leads into all truth . We muſt not offer the right hand of fellowſhip , but rather proclaim 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , Greg. Naz. and holy war , to ſuch enemies , of Gods providence , Chriſts merit , and the powerful operation of the holy Spirit ▪ neither let any object that all the Arminians do not openly profess , all theſe errors , I have recounted ; let ours then show wherein they differ from their Master's , Profitentur Remonſt . haſce ad promotionem cauſae ſuae arts adhibere , ut apud vulgus non ulterius progrediantur quam de articulis vulgo notis , ut pro ingeniorum diverſitate quoſdam lacte diualant , aliis ſolidiore cibo etc. Feſtus Hom. praeſtat ad ſpecimen Con. Bel. we ſee their own confeſsions , we know their arts , 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , the depths and crafts of Satan , we know the ſeveral ways they have to introduce , and inſinuate their Heterodoxies into the minds of men : with ſome they appear only to diſlike our doctrine of reprobation : with others to claim and allowable liberty of the will : but yet for the moſt part , like the Serpent , where ever ſhe gets in her head , ſhe will wriggle in her whole body ſting and all : give but the leaſt admiſsion , and the whole poison muſt be ſwallowed . What was the intention of the maintainers of theſe ſtrange aſſertions amongſt us , I know not : whither the efficacy of error prevailed really with them , or no ? or whither it were the better to comply with Popery , and thereby to draw us back again unto Egypt , but this I have herd , that it was affirmed on knowledge in a former Parliament , that the introduction of Arminianism amongſt us , was the iſſue of a Spaniſh conſultation : Hieron . Zanch. ad Holderum : Reſ . Miſcel . it is a ſtrange ſtory that learned Zanchius tells us , how upon the death of the Cardinal of Lorraigne there was found in his Study a note , of the names of diverse Germane Doctors and Miniſters , being Lutherans , to whom was paid and annual penſion , by the aſsignment of the Cardinal , that they might take pains to oppoſe the Calviniſts , and ſo by cheriſhing dissension , reduce the people again to Popery . If there be any ſuch amongſt us , who upon ſuch poor inconſiderable motives , would be won to betray the Goſpel of Chriſt , God grant them repentance ▪ before it be too late ; however , upon what grounds , with what intentions , for what ends ſoever , theſe Tares have been ſowed amongſt us by envious men , the hope of all the piouſly learned in the Kingdom is , that by your effectual care and diligence , ſome means may be found to root them out . Now God Almighty increaſe and fill , your whole Honourable Society , with wisdom , zeal , knowledge , and all other Chriſtian graces , neceſſary for your great calling and employments , which is the daily prayer of Your moſt humble and devoted ſervant IOHN OVVEN .