To my very noble Friend , Sir Paul Neale , Knight . SAint Paul cannot reascend to Heaven , before he gives you alſo a ſalute : My Lord , your Father , having been ſo great a Light , and a Star of the higheſt magnitude in the Firmament of the Church . If you pleaſe to go along with him in this his Progress , by the guidance of this Diſcourſe , you ſhall diſcover many things that are not vulgar , by a curious mixture of Church and State affairs : You ſhall feel herein the pulſe of Italy , how it beats at this time , ſince the beginning of theſe late wars betwixt the Pope and ſome Princes , with the grounds , procedure , and success of the ſaid wars , together with the intereſt and grievances , pretences and quarrels of every Prince againſt Rome . I muſt confess , my Genius hath often prompted me , that I was never cut out for a Tranſlater , there being a kind of ſervility therein : For it muſt needs be ſomewhat tedious to one that hath any freeborn thoughts , and genuine conceptions of his own ( whereof I have a few , though poor ones ) to enchain himself to the ſenſe of another . Moreover , Tranſlations at the beſt , ſpecially in Languages which have and advantage one of the other , as the Italian hath of the Engliſh , which may be ſaid to differ as Silk does from Clotb , the common wear of both Countries where they are ſpoken , though Cloth be the more substantial ( as the Engliſh , by reaſon it's ſo knotted with conſonants , is more ſinewy and ſtronger then the Italian ) yet Silk is the ſmoother and ſliker : I ſay , Tranſlations are like the wrong ſide of a Turkey Carpet , which is fuller of thrums and knots , and not ſo even as the right ſide . Or I may ſay , Tranſlations are like Wines ( as I speak elſewhere ) t'ane off the Lees , and poured into other veſſels , which muſt needs loose ſomething of their firſt ſtrength and briskneſſe , which in the powering ( or paſſage rather ) evaporates into air . Touching this preſent Tranſlation , I may ſay , it is a thing I did , when I did nothing ; 'twas to find ſomething to pass away the ſlow hours of this ſad condition of impriſonment , wherein I have been ſo long plunged . I pray take this as a ſmall token of the true reſpects I owe you , and to my noble Lady , whoſe hands I humbly kiss , wiſhing you both , as the ſeaſon invites me , with a good New-yeare ( which begins but now in Law ) a holy Lent , and a healthful Spring . Fleet 25. of March . Your much obliged and ready Servant , I H.