To the Right Worshipful Sir NICHOLAS RAYNTON , Knight , and Alderman of London : and to Mr. WILLIAM GIBBS , Alderman , and Sher • ffe of the ſaid City , and to all his loving friends who have been Church wardens aſſiſting him . As to the Right Worshipful Mr. Walter Rogers ▪ Mr. Robert Smith , Mr. Samuel Bridge , Mr. Thomas Soane , Mr. Henrie Geirie , Mr. Thomas • aton , Mr. Iohn Bludworth , Mr. Nicholas Cook , Mr. Anthony Cross , Mr. Ambroſe Brumskill , M • . Tobias Dixon , Mr. Iohn Niclas , Mr. Iaſpar Clayton , Mr. Andrew H • de , Mr. George Denham , Mr. Iohn Rogers , Mr. Spencer Vincent , Mr. • ohn Smith , Mr. Richard Kimble , Mr. Francis Pat • s , Mr. Peter Worſter , Mr. William Dev • nſh • re , and to all his other loving pariſhioners , and to his loving friends , and fellow labourers , Mr. Iohn Hopkins , and Mr. Iohn Davis . Old Ephraim Pagitt , Recto • of Edmonds the King in Lomb. wishes all happiness . MUnſter writeth that there are no Wolves in England , which is a great bleſſing , and in a manner peculiar to our Kingdom , in which our Shepherds may ſecurely feed their flocks without dread of thoſe ravenous beaſts , who are to sheep moſt miſchievous : The like might I have ſaid of Mystical wolves , for 40. year and more of my Paſtoral charge in which I had no dread of them : But now I live to ſee ( with grief of heart ) grievous Wolves broken in among us , not ſparing the flock . Therefore the counsel that St. Paul gave to the Preſbyters of Epheſus , I will put you in remembrance of ( that is ▪ To take heed to our ſelves and to the flock whereof the holy Ghoſt hath made us overseers . It is reported concerning the mother of Gregory Nazianzen , that ſhe dreamed when ſhe was conceived of that worthy light of the Church , that she had in her womb a white mastiff , which by his barking ſhould drive the Wolves from the sheepfold : And whereas ſome of you with many other pious Citizens , have erected ſundry Lectures in this City ▪ in which diverse Nazianzens now preach , who I hope with the aſſiſtance of our religious patriots aſſembled in Parliament , will drive away , not only the Romiſh , but all other ravening wolves from the Sheep ▪ fold of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt . For my own part , although by reaſon of my age , I cannot bark loud ▪ much less bite . Yet whereas about 60. years ago , I publiſhed in print 28. Sermons of Lavaterus upon Ruth ▪ Now not knowing how ſoon I ſhall put off this my Tabernacle , I publiſh this ſermon of my own , preached among you , when the plague of heresy firſt began among us , and this I dedicate to you , to whom I conf • ſſe my self much obliged : Moſt humbly entreating Almighty God to bless you with abundance of all gifts and graces in this world , and eternal glory in the world to come . Your old Paſtor , Ephraim Pagitt .