The Epiſtle Dedicatory . THou Royal Cross , with Age and Honour crowned , That standest i'th midst of the Kings Bath , renowned Both far and near , ſuch Cures thy Bath hath wrought , As thouſands unto thee for help have ſought , Who by thy warming Waters healed were , Whoſe Stilts there left thereof do witness bear , And to thy Honour , on thy top are placed , To show with what great virtue thou art graced : Near to thy Springs my agitating Muſe , Hath made a Book which does report ſome News As from thy ſelf : Her Book craves at thy hand It under thy renowned name may ſtand . And I the Author chooſe to make my moan Uuto thy ſelf . For why ? As senseless ſtone Moſt hearts are now become . Therefore from thee And equal good may well expected be , Through devious ways & ſundry sudden fears My Pilgrimage in this ſad vale of tears Hath passed , In Schools , Camp , and Court , poor I Have ſeen the change of times variety ; And learned to know world's beſt proſperity Is but a ſtate of wretched miſery . I then began my thoughts for to remove , From things beneath unto thoſe things above And then my heart all sweetening comfort borrows . From him who was a man of woe and ſorrows In this baſe world , which then I did forſake , And once again unto my books betake My ſelf , God then of his free grace did call Me to that War which is spiritual , And lawfully by Church-authority , I was admitted to the Miniſtry ; And being thus by Gods great mercy brought Unto his work , I have his Battles fought , Full fourty years , and never yet did ceaſe , Next to the Faith , for to preſerve the Peace Of holy Church , as did become a Son ; All her commads by me were juſtly done : And yet the heaps of followers did me wrong , I could not mended but all the way along , In the whole courſe of my poor Miniſtry , I was acquainted with adverſity . And did at laſt all means of living lose , That hope failed me which I to truſt did chooſe ; The Letters from , and Order of that Court Of High-Commiſſion ſhall of me report No thing but well , who pleaſe to ſee them may , And hear on my behalf what truths they'll ſay : But once grown poor from England then I went To Ireland , where I might with good content , Have lived but that Rebellious fatal curſe Drove me from thence , to a Rebellion worſe , And now poor man in this thy City Bath , I am alive as buried in my grave ; With grief I ſee the woeful miſery Of honeſt , poor , despised Poverty . The Prophet of his time did hit it right , That every one was found and Hypocrite . Yea , now that Hellborn sin does wound and ſtain . The greateſt number , who as yet remain Profeſſed Chriſtians without Charity : In ſuch I'm ſure ther's moſt Hypocrisy : And for this cauſe that Book does ſwiftly fly , Which lamentation , mourning , woe does cry To every Soul. This Truth though ſeen , and kown , The greateſt part from ill to worſe are grown . And ſeeing this , I have the world forſook , A help from thence it is in vain to look : Yet went I on with my well-meaning Book , From firſt to laſt with hardſhip undertook . And though the means appears despised & weak , And men may think it does but vainly ſpeak , To ſtop Rebellious courſe that's grown ſo ſtrong Joſhua . 6. 4. Seven Trumpets of Rams-Hornes . Judges 7. 16. G • deons 300. broken Pit hers . 1 Sam. 17. 49. Young , little , and unarmed David with a Stone and a Sling to overcome and ſlay the triple armed Giant great Goliah . By weaker means God hath destroyed the throng , Of ſtronger Enemies as you may ſee , In holy Writ recorded there to be . My ſelf , my Book poor and despised though thought Yet by ſuch means the mighty God hath brought Great things to pass , yea , works of wondrous fame . That glory might be given to his great name , A happy Peace that precious Pearl to gain . My Book with Gods aſſiſtance may obtain , Or further the Obtainment and not hinder , What may a Peace to King and Kingdom render . Kind Cross , I pray thou wouldſt accept it then , For thou art kind unto all ſorts of men . To Poor , and Rich , to the Leſſer , and the Great , To all thou doſt afford a warming Seat As is thy ſelf , my Book's a Bath for Health , To heal the Aches of the Commonwealth , If ſome therein to bathe will wiſely try , It would them heal of Treaſons Leprosy , And thus ( kind Cross ) I humbly take my leave Thou wilt not me of any hope bereave . And what thou art , I muſt reſolve to bear , My proper Cross is unto me my ſhare , Which I'll take up , and joyfully will kiss , So following Chriſt to my eternal bliss . R. P.