TO The High and Honourable Court of PARLIAMENT . MOſt Religious and Judicious SENATORS , I here preſent to your ſaddest thoughts and ſerious deliberations , and abſtract of ſundry moſt ſcurrilous , ſcandalous , ſeditious railing Libels , lately publiſhed to the world in Print , by ſome Anabaptistical Independent Sectaries , and New-lighted FIRE-BRANDS ; wherein the undoubted Privileges , Ordinances , juſt Proceedings of Parliament ; the Reverend Aſſembly of Divines ; our Brothers of Scotland ; the Church of England , with her Government , Miniſters , Worſhip ; the National Covenant , Directory , Presbytery ; profeſſed Defenders of the Parliaments Privileges , Ordinances againſt their Licentious Schismatical Practiſes , ( according to their Solemn Vow and Covenant ) are ſo audaciouſly affronted , oppugned , ſlandered , railed againſt ; and the Common people ſo earneſtly excited to mutiny againſt the Parliament Aſſembly , Presbytery , Government and Miniſters of our Church of England , that I am confident no former Age did ever produce ſuch Monſtrous Insolences , ſuch deteſtable virulent Libels , which neither the Honour , Justice , nor Wisdom of that Sovereign Court of Justice wherein you are Aſſeſſors , nor the Peace and Safety of our Religion , Church , State , nor your own personal ſecurity , nor the Nationall Vow and Covenant , ( engaging both your Honours and all others who have taken it againſt theſe pernicious Mutineers ) can any longer ſuffer you patiently to tolerate ( as hitherto you have done ) without exemplary proceedings againſt , and puniſhments upon the Authors , Printers , Publiſhers , Diſperſers of theſe moſt ſcurrilous and mutinous Pamphlets . Wherein they moſt injuriouſly and falsely revile , traduce all ſuch for Perſecutors , Fighters againſt Chriſt and his Kingdom , Enemies to the ways of Christ , pulling his royal Crown from off his head , his kingly Sceptre out of his hand , Oppugners of the moſt religious , conſcientious , Godly , beſt-affected Party ( as they Phariſaically and falsely term themſelves ) dividers between the Parliament and their beſt , their faithfulleſt Friends ; Profane Apoſtates , Popiſh Jesuitical Incendiaries , haters of Gods people , and the like ; who out of conſcience , ſolid Judgement and cordial affection to the ſafety , tranquillity of Religion , Parliament , Church , Kingdom , dare openly by word or writing , maintain the undoubted Juriſdiction of Parliaments , Synods , Magiſtrates in Ecclesiastical affairs , or oppoſe their factions , schismatical Independent ways and Innovations , deſtructive both to Magiſtracy , Ministry , Unity , Parliaments , and that bleſſed Reformation ſo much deſired . For my own particular , I have with much Patience and Contempt endured , without any Reply at all , their falſe unchriſtian Invectives againſt my ſelf , only for Writing in Vindication of the undoubted Ecclesiastical juriſdiction , directive and coercive power of Chriſtian Emperors , Kings , Magiſtrates , Parliaments , in matters of Religion and Churchgovernment , in my , Truth triumphing over Falſehood , Antiquity over Novelty , publiſhed with Your special approbation ; and my Independency Examined , ( which have much incenſed this waſpiſh Generation , unable to give any ſatisfactory anſwers to them ) and I ſhould have continued ſilence ſtill , had my own private intereſt only been concerned . But when I diſcerned them to be ſo audaciouſly licentious , preſumptuous , as To Pſal . 73. 9. ſet their mouth against the Heavens , to Exod , 22. 28. Acts 23. 5. revile the very Gods themſelves , and curſe the Rulers of the people ; 2 Pet. 2. 10. to deſpiſe Government and ſpeak evil of Dignities , to bring railing accuſations against , and 2 These . 2. 4. reſist the Higher Powers , publiſhing Libel after Libel , againſt the Proceedings , Ordinances , and Juriſdiction of the preſent Parliament and Aſſembly , yea with Antichriſtian pride , to 2 Pet. 2. 11. Rom. 13. oppoſe and exalt themſelves above all that is called God , or that is werſhipped ( as they have lately done , in the Pamphlets hereafter mentioned , and in the Nativity of Sir Iohn Presbyter , etc. freſhly publiſhed ſince the reſt ; every of theſe latter Libels being more ſeditious and pernicious then the former ) andMar . 15. 7. Barrabas like , to stir up ſedition and inſurrection among the people , againſt the Ordinances , Votes of Parliament , and that Ecclesiastical reformation and Pre-byteriall government You have reſolved to eſtabliſh ; Jer. 4. 19. My bowels ; my bowels were pained within me at my very heart , ſo that I could not hold my peace , nor keep ſilence any longer , becauſe thou haſt herd , Oh my ſoul , the found of theſe ſeditious Trumpets , and the alarm of this Schismatical Antiparliamentary war : Yea ſhould I now refrain from writing , the very ſtones themſelves would immediately cry out againſt their moſt infamous Libels and mutino • s preſumptuous Practiſes , oppoſite to all public Order , Government , Authority . And the rather am I neceſſitated to this ungrateful work , becauſe their very Libels , actions , ſpeeches proclaim a plotted avowed Confederacy among ſome furious Ringleaders of theſe Independent Sectaries ( though I preſume the more moderate are not guilty of it ) againſt the Parliament , Aſſembly , and all their Reſolves in matters of Religion or Church-Government , yea , againſt our very Church , Miniſters , and Tithes the means of their ſupport ; as their Libellous Paſſages againſt the Ecclesiastical Power , proceedings of the Parliament and Aſſembly ; their public oppoſitions againſt the National Covenant , Directory , the Ordinances prohibiting diſorderly & unlicenſed Printing of Libellous Sciſmaticall Pamphlets ; againſt Lay-men's preaching in the Army or elsewhere ; for due Payment of Tithes , etc. recited in the enſuing Sections , will at large declare . And that which further confirms me in this opinion , is : Firſt , the New Seditious Covenants which the Members of ſome Independent Congregations enter into ; To adhere , defend , maintain , to the utmoſt of their powers , and contend for , even unto blood , the eſtabliſhment of that Independent from of Church Government which themſelves have ſet up and ſubmitted to , and oppoſe the Presbyterian , in contempt of the Parliaments Authority : in truth mere Anti-covenants of the National League and Covenant , which they utterly refuſe to take , and rail againſt . 2. Their menacing predictions to the Aſſembly and Presbytery in their two laſt Martins Echo . p. 5. 6. The Nativity of Sir Iohn Presbyter , p. 5. 9. 10. 1 • . Libels ; wherein they print , That the time haſtens the people will call them to and Account , and repel and confound them by the ſword ; That the life of Sir Iohn Presbyter is like to be neither long nor good ; That he will brought to a ſudden untimely end , Perhaps HANGING . That Presbytery ſhall live but a ſhort time to do mischief , and then , THE COMMON PEOPLE will beg in to ſing , Her Toss , The Devil's dead ; Presbytery will quickly die , the Synod be diſſolved , the devil chained up : and therefore follow the advice of old Cat • ; Spem retine . Rejoice Oh heavens , ſing aloud Oh earth , clap thy hands for Joy , Oh England-poſt nubula ſoles ; thou ſhalt have a time of Quietness , of pence , of content , for Presbytery will have never a Child to vex thee , to Impriſon thy free Denizens , to suck up thy fat , devour thy good things and eat up thy bred out of thy Children's mouths , and himself is not long lived , as I showed before ; and then farewell perſecution for conſcience , farewell Ordinance for Tithes , farewell Ecclesiastical Supremacy , farewell Pontifical Revenue , farewell Aſſembly of Divines diſſembled at Weſtminſter , you ſhall conſult together no more , farewell Sr. Simon Synod , and his ſon Presbyter Iacke . Gens antiquaruit , multos dominata perannos , etc. Which paſſages , preſage and intimate nought elſe , but a plain conſpiracy , confederacy , againſt the Aſſembly , Presbytery and presbyterian party . 3. Some late ſeditious ſpeeches of two preaching Captains of this Schismatical Confederacy ; who being apprehended and queſtioned by Sr. Samuell Lukes Officers for preaching in Newport-Pannell , and other places near adjoining , in contempt of and Ordinance of Parliament made the 26. of April 1645. which ordains , That no perſon be permitted to preach who is not ordained a Miniſter ▪ threatening condign puniſhment to the offenders againſt it for their contempts ; enjoining Sr. Thomas Fairfax , the Lord Major , the Committee of Militia for London ; the Governors , Commanders , and Magiſtrates of all Garriſons , Caſtles , Places of ſtrength , Cities , Towns , Forts , Ports , and the reſpective Committees of each County , To ſee the ſame duly obſerved in the Army and places aforeſaid , and make ſpeedy repreſentation to both Houſes , of ſuch as ſhall offend therein . Theſe Captain preachers ; ( far wiſer then that devout Centurian Cornelius , who feared God with all his houſe , and prayed to God always ; yet never turned Preacher to his own Band , for ought we read , but by Gods own direction from heaven , ſent for the Apoſtle Peter to inſtruct him and his family , Acts 10. ) among other ſpeeches averred ; That they were illegally uſed by Sir Samuel in being apprehended ( for their contempt againſt this Ordinance ; ) moſt faſly and ſeditiouſly affirming , That the General & all the Colonels in the Army were deeply engaged . IN THEIR DESIGNE : That they would acquaint their FRIENDS IN THE HOVSE OF COMMONS of their bad uſage , that they had done nothing but taught the Word of God ; ( among other things , that we had no true Church not Miniſtry , and that the children of Believers had no more right to Baptism then thoſe of Infidels , etc. ) which they would justify , and thoſe friends likewiſe : That they had Commiſſion from the Parliament for what they did , etc. Whereupon one Capt. Oxford anſwering them ; That he was confident there were few or none in the Houſe would uphold them ( againſt and express Ordinance of both houſes ) and that the General and Colonels would not ſide with them in this caſe : The ſaid Pedicant Captains replied ; That ſhould be tried ſpeedily : For they were reſolved to make this business THE LEADING CASE OF THE KINGDOME FOR ALL THE GODLY PARTY : Note . adding ; That if the godly and well-affected party were thus perſecuted , they ſhould be forced TO MAKE A WORSE BREACH THEN WHAT WAS YET , WHEN THEY HAD DONE WITH THE KINGS PARTY : and telling Enſign Ratford and his Soldiers , that they were worſe then Cavaliers ; and that when they had made and end of the war with the Cavaliers , THEY SHOULD BE FORCED TO RAISE A NEW ARMY TO FIGHT WITH THEM . Certainly theſe ſeditious privy Covenants , Libels , Speeches , compared with the enſuing Sections , Letters , diſcover and portend no less then a ſtrong conſpiracy among ſome Anabaptistical Sectaries to oppoſe the Power , Ordinances and Proceedings of Parliament , to extirpate all other Governments but their own , and to ſet it up by the ſword , or popular commotions in despite of your Authority . And is it not then high time for your Honours , with all other well-affected Perſons to look about you ? to Vindicate your own Power , Honour , Juſtice , againſt theſe moſt ſeditious , audacious , contemptuous libellers againſt your Sovereign Authority , your moſt Religious Ordinances , proceedings in the deſired ways of Reformation ; and to make ſome of them Exemplary Monuments of your Impartial ſeverity , to deter others from the like unparalleled Insolences , not read nor herd of in any preceding Age , nor practiſed by any Generation of men , but theſe New furious Sectaries : who to engage all ſorts of people in their Quarrel , proclaim a free Toleration and Liberty of Conſcience , to all Sects , all Religions whatſoever , be it Judaiſ • e , Paganism , Turciſme , Arianism , Popery ; ( as all their Pamphlets manifeſt ) And to intereſt the female Sex , and draw them to their party , they ( contrary to the 1 Cor. 14. 34. 35. 1 Tim. 2. 11 , 12. Apoſtles precept ) allow them not only deciſive Votes , but Liberty of Preaching Propheſying , ſpeaking in their Congregations ; yea , power to meet in theirWhich they uſed in New port Pa •• ell , ( contrary to the Governors Command . Nocturnal Conventicles , without their Husbands , Parents , Ministers Privity , the better to propagate Chriſts Kingdom , and multiply the Godly party : Which , what confuſion and Ataxy it will ſoon ▪ produce in Church and State , if not prevented by your Honours extraordinary ſpeedy Diligence , Wisdom , Power , I humbly ſubmit to your deepeſt Judgements . I am certain your Honours have read the Sl • idan , Com. l. 5. 10. Gaſtius , de Anabaptiſt : Erroribus . Bullinger adverse . Anabaptiſt . Guil. de Bres C • ntr . Les Anabap •• ſtes . D. Featlies Dippers Dipped , p. 199. 200 , etc. The Hiſtory of the Anabaptiſts . Hiſtories of the Tragical Wars and Commotions of the Anabaptiſts in Germany ; whoſe Opinions wherever they predominate , are fatal to the Government , Magiſtracy , Ministry of all States , Churches , and bring in popular Tyranny , and licentiousness , the worſt of evils . O then let not your Honours Patience or Indulgence to ſuch Anabaptistical Libellers involve both you , us , our Realm , in like Germane popular Seditions , Devastations , and bloody Maſſacres , which they threaten : but if theſe New ſeditious Lights and Firebrands , will needs ſet up New Churches , Hereſies , Church-governments , and vent their new errors or opinions againſt your Power and Authority , let them do it only in NEW-ENGLAND , or other NEW-FOVNDLANDS , ſince OLD ENGLAND needs them not , unless it be to ſet her all on fire . As for thoſe furious Champions and Emiſſaries of theirs who have moſt preſumptuouſly oppoſed your religious Ordinances , by word , deed , and preſuming on the ſtrength of their Friends within your Walls , ( the opinion whereof , with your former Lenity towards them hath much increaſed their ſpreading Leproſy ] intend now at laſt to try this iſſue with your Honours ; whither your juſt Ordinances , or their wilful Contempts againſt them ſhall take place ; It is preſumed you will ſo proceed gainſt them , and the Authors , Printers , Publiſhers of the execrable Libels h • re preſented to your view , that they and all the world shall know , You a • e a Sovereign Court of Parliament ; whoſe privileges , Honour , you have all jointly Covenanted to maintain with your Lives , Power , Fortune's ; and to proceed againſt all ſuch ſecret Underminers or open Impugners of them , as Capital Delinquents : and theſe Mutineers experimentally know , that no one Member of your Honourable Aſſembly , will ſo far diſhonour himſelf , or violate his public truſt & Covenant , as to countenance ſuch audacious wilful offenders in the leaſt degree ; nor yet for Fear or Favour of any Faction , any Perſon how great ſoever , decline one hairs-bredth from that strait path of Truth and public Juſtice , [ the greateſt Security and ſupport of Parliaments , Kingdoms ] eſpecially in theſe Leading-caſes , wherein you are moſt concerned , and as much obliged to maintain your own Privileges , Power , Reputations , Ordinances , againſt Seditious Sectaries , as againſt Rebellious C • valeers : or elſe diſſolve , give over your intended almoſt-accompliſhed Reformation ; and ſo render your ſelves , with your Proceedings contemptible to all the world : which God forbid . If any ſhould Object ; Object . that the Puniſhment of theſe gross Libellers & Ringleaders of ſedition would diſcontent and diſengage the Independents , with all other Sectaries of their opinion , who are a conſiderable party now ; which might prove dangerous to the ſtate in this juncture of our public Affairs . I anſwer : Anſw . 1. That I doubt not all moderate and judicious perſons of that party will willingly disclaim , if not excommunicate , baniſh them their Congregations , and yield them up to public Juſtice , as perſons worthy the ſevereſt Cenſures ; elſe all the world will cry ſhame upon them . Secondly , Admit your executing Juſtice on them ſhould diſcontent their party ; yet thanks be to God ( for all their vapouring ] they are not ſo potent , ſo conſiderable as to overawe a Parliament from doing Juſtice on ſuch of their party , who Libel againſt , or affront their power & proceedings ; in which caſe , our whole three Kingdoms are ſolemnly engaged by public Covenant to aſſiſt you to the utmoſt , with their very lives and fortune's . Thirdly , The greatness of the Kings Power , party , hath not retarded you from executing Juſtice upon Strafford , Canterbury , Tompkins , & ſundry other delinquents : Shall then the less conſiderable Faction of Anahaptiſts and other Sectaries hinder you from proceeding againſt a few ſeditious Libellers and Delinquents of their party ? Fourthly , Either you muſt permit them to go on to libel and affront your Authority , Order , proceedings ſtill , without exemplary puniſhments , to your great diſhonour , infamy : or elſe proceed againſt them now , while your Ordinances , and their contempts againſt them are freſh , their party ſmall : elſe they will plead preſcription , and you will be less engaged , less able to puniſh them hereafter , in caſe they ſhould grow ſtronger and more numerous . Principiis obſtandum ; is ever the beſt policy . Fiftly , Let their party be as conſiderable , as potent as is falſely ſurmiſed by themſelves , yet I humbly conceive , it ſtands neither with the Majeſty , Honour , Power , nor Wisdom of a Parliament , to be afraid of doing Juſtice ( eſpecially in maintenance of their own Ordinances , Privileges whoever they diſcontent : In ſuch a caſe , Fiat Juſtitia , ruet Caelum ; is the ſafeſt Reſolution . Majestrates and inferior Judges ( much more then supremest Courts of Judicature ) muſt not Pſal . 56. 4. Iſa . 7. 4. Jer. • . • . 17 ▪ fear the faces nor Frowns of any Mortals in diſcharging their duties , but execute Juſtice and Judgement , what ever comes of it , and truſt God with the Event . Sixtly , The not doing Exemplary Juſtice in ſuch leading caſes of public Concernment , will render your Parliamentary Authority , Ordinances , Proceedings more contemptible to your own party , then ever they were unto the Kings : yea , animate the Country Club-men and every inconſiderable Sectary , not only to Jeat , contemn , diſobey your Ordinances and Commands , but at laſt to preſcribe Laws unto you , [ asSee 31. H. 6. c . 1. Iack Cade and his Confederates did to the Parliament in the 29. of Hen . 6. ] Which will by conſequence bring Parliaments into contempt , and ſo ſpeedy deſolation upon all our Dominions , after ſo many successful proceedings . Up therefore and be doing Juſtice upon ſome few chief offenders of this kind for the preſent , to prevent execution upon many others , if not ruin on us all , for the future , and God himself will no doubt be with you ; Pſal . 56. 4. You need not fear what fleſh can do unto you , or Sectaries speak or write againſt you : whoſe enſuing ſcurrilous Libellous Seditious paſſages will ſo publicly diſcover their uncharitable , unchriſtian , Libellous , ſlandering , tumultuous diſpoſitions , and hypocritical , falſe , froward , licentious tempers , to all the world , as will render them odious to all ſober minded , peaceable , conscientious , modeſt Chriſtians , if not to themſelves , and all ingenious perſons of their own Sects ; and ſo , through Gods bleſſing , reduce many of them to the bosom of our Church , from which they have formerly revolted . It is not my intention by any the premises to sour or exaſperate your Honours in the leaſt degree againſt any peaceable , Conscientious , Orthodox , or truly Religious Chriſtians , ſeduced by the Independent party ; or to ſtir up any kind of perſecution againſt ſuch ; whoſe conſciences will ( I doubt not ) in due time be fully ſatisfied , persuaded to ſubmit to that Presbyterial Church-Goverment and Diſcipline , which you have now reſolved to eſtabliſh in our Churches ▪ there being nought there in repugnant to Gods word , or which any well-informed Conſcience , can have cauſe to ſcruple at . Towards ſuch as theſe , it is moſt juſt and reaſonable , all Chriſtian Charity , meekness , long-ſuffering , brotherly love , and fitting liberty ſhould be Indulged for the preſent , till God ſhall further open their eyes and turn their hearts unto us . For whoſe better ſati • faction in the irregularities of their new concealed Independent way , I have hereunto subjoined ſome Letters and other Papers lately ſent me from the Summer Iſlands ; whereby they may diſcover , the faction ; arrogance , pride and Cruelty of the Independent Miniſters there , and that the Liberty of conſcience they plead for , & pretend they grant to Presbyterians , others ; and the peaceableness of their way , is but a mere fiction , contradicted by their practice ; and likewiſe diſcern , how they led their followers by a mere implicit faith ; impoſe upon them a Popiſh blind Obedience ; exerciſe a mere Papal Authority and unlimited dangerous Arbytrary power over them and others ; pretending and Utopian Government after the mind of Chriſt , which is no where written in his word ; nor in any classical Authors , Ancient or Modern , but founded only in their own Fancies , not yet fully discovered , nor ſet down in writing , nor agreed on among themſelves , nor publiſhed to others for their better ſatisfaction . The ſerious Conſideration whereof may happily reclaim our Independents here from the error of their separating deſtructive ways , and eaſe the oppreſſed Planters of thoſe Iſlands from that Independent yoke of Bondage under which they ſo much groan , as to cry out to You for relief of their soar oppreſſions in their Letters : which I ſhall beſeech your Honours in their behalf ( ſince they have made their addreſſes to your Tribunal by my mediation ) ſeriouſly to lay to heart , and ſeaſonably to redress . Thus humbly craving Pardon from your Honourable Aſſembly for my truehearted Zeal to do you faithful ſervice , by this unburdening of my conſcience , and preſenting You with this Freſh diſcovery of thoſe New Wandring-ſtarres and Firebrands who revile , oppugn your Ecclesiastical Juriſdiction , Proceedings , Ordinances ; diſturb the muchdeſired peace of Church , State , ( which we ſhould all earneſtly endeavour in theſe diſtracted Times ; ) I humbly recommend all your faithful undertakings for the ſecurity , tranquillity of both , to Gods own bleſſing with my devouteſt Oriſons to the throne of Grace , and ever remain , Your Honours , the Republics , Churches , moſt devoted Servant , WILLIAM PRYNNE .