To the Reader . Chriſtian Reader , I Who have been always hitherto a Cordial Deſirer , endeavourer of Peace , am here neceſſitated to preſent Thee with a Diſcourſe of War ; to justify The Lawfulness of the Parliaments preſent taking up of neceſſary Defenſive Arms . Which neither their Endeavours , nor my , with many others Prayers could ( with any ſafety to our Privileges , Perſons , Religion , Liberty , Realms , now forcibly invaded by his Majeſties Popiſh and Malignant Cavallieres ) hitherto prevent , or conjure down . To plead the Justness of a War , of and unnatural Civil war , ( the worſt of any ) of a War between the Head and Members , may seem not only a Paradox , but a Prodigy , in a Land heretofore bleſſed with and aged , uninterrupted Peace : AndCivilis Belli , l. 1. p. 1. Lucans Bella per AEmathios pluſquam civilia Campos , etc. ( now moſt unhappily revived among us ) being but Hiſtoricall , and Poetical ; may pass the world with less admiration and cenſure , than this harſh Piece , which is both Legally & Theologically ( like the Subject matter ) Polemical . But as the Apud veros Dei cultores etiam ipſa bella pacata ſunt ; quae non cupiditate aut crudelitate , said pacis study geruntur Aug. the diverse . Eccl. observe . 7. Gratian Cause . 23. queen . 2. cap . Apud . Albericus Gentilis de Iure belli . l. 1. c . 5. aim , the end of all juſt War , is and ought to be only future settled Peace ; ſo is the whole drift of this Military Diſſertation : not to foment or protract , but end our bloody Wars ; which nothing hath more excited , animated , lengthened in the Adverſe party , than a ſtrong conceit , ( if not ſerious belief , ) that The Parliaments Forces , neither would , nor lawfully might in point of Law or Conſcience forcibly reſiſt or repulſe their invaſive Arms , without danger of High Treaſon and Rebellion , ( which Bugbear I have here refuted , removed ) and the Inactivity , the much admired slowness of many of our Forces , in reſiſting , in preventing their vigorous Proceedings , which a little timely vigilance and diligence had eaſily controlled . It is a more thanPatriae deeſſe quoad vita ſupperat nefas eſt Livius , Rō . Hiſt . l 5. Barbarous Inhumanity for any perſon , not to put to his uttermoſt ſtrength , ſpeedily to cloſe up the mortal wounds of his bleeding , dying Native Country ; but to protract its cure , to enlarge , increase its deadly Ulcers , Stabs , Sores , and make a laſting trade of War , out of a ſordid , Militare non eſt delictum said propter praedam militare peccatum eſt . Auguſt . de Verbis Dom. Tract . 19. & Gratian . cause . 23. queen 1. sinful deſire of Gain , of Plunder , to raiſe a private fortune by the Republics ruins , ( a sin , of which ſome perchance are guilty ) is and unparalleled , moſt unnatural prodigious Impiety . It was thought a great diſhonour heretofore , for men of Honour and Eſtates , not to ſerve and defend their Country gratis , as our ownSee Littleton in his Chapter of Gran-ſerjanty , Knight-ſervice , Eſcuage , & Cook ibi . Lawbooks & Hiſtories plentifully manifeſt : and ſhall ſuch Perſons now turn ſordid Mercenaries ; stir neither hand nor foot without their Pay ; and be more diligent to get their wages , than diſcharge their Service ? God forbid . It is Numb . 32 Joſh . 1. 12 , to 18. Recorded of the Children of Gad and Reuben , after they had recovered their inheritance on this ſide Jordan , that they went all up armed before the Lord over Jordan , at their own free coſt , until they had driven out all the enemies in it before them , ſubdued the Land , and settled their brothers of the other Tribes peaceably in it . And ſhall not Engliſhmen of Eſtates do the like for their Brothers now , in theſe times of need , when money ( the sinews of War ) is almoſt quite shrunk up , by reaſon of former Diſburſements and want of Trade ? We read , Judge 5. 19. That the very Heathen Kings of Canaan when they came and fought in Taanach by the waters of Megiddo , againſt the Iſraelites , THEY TOOK NO GAINE OF MONEY , for their pains : Such was their Noble-generoſity , which Deborah regiſters in her Song for their eternal Glory . And we hear of diverse Lords and Gentlemen in the Kings Army , which ſerve againſt their Country gratis ; yea furniſh out ſundry Horſe and Foot , of their proper coſt ; of few or none ſuch there who receive any Pay . And ſhall theſe be more free , generous , active in ſerving , fighting againſt God , Religion , Laws , Liberties , Parliament and their Country ; than thoſe of like Rank and quality on the Parliaments party are in warring for them ? O2 Sam. 1. 20. let not ſuch anignoble , unchriſtian Report be ever once juſtly told in Gath , or publiſhed in the ſtreets of Askelon , leſt the daughters of the Philiſtines rejoice , leſt the sons and daughters of the uncircumciſed triumph . I know there are ſome Heroic Worthies in the Parliaments Armies , of whom I may truly ſing with Deborah , Judg. 5. 9. 18. My heart is towards the Governors of Iſrael , that offered themſelves willingly among the people ; and who like Zebulon and Nepthali , have freely jeoparded their lives unto the death , in the high places of the field . Bleſſed be their Endeavours , and their Names for ever Honourable : I ſhall now only wiſh that others would imitate their laudable examples , that ſo our long-lingering wars , may be ſpeedily and happily determined in a bleſſed , pure , pious , ſecure , honourable , laſting Peace . They are Tormentors , not Chirurgeons , Executioners , not true Soldiers , who deſire , endeavour not ſpeedily to cloſe up and heal their deareſt Countries bleeding , festering wounds ; for which I have prepared this Treatiſe , as a Sovereign Balm , to incarne and cicatrize them , not ulcerate , or inflame them . It was the Prophets Pathetic expoſtulation , Jer. 8. 20. 22. The harveſt is passed , the Summer is ended , and we are not healed : Is there no balm in Gilead ? Is there no Physician there ? why then is not the health of the Daughter of my people recovered ? It may be Englands and Irelands expoſtulation now : The Lord put it into the hearts of our great Physicians ( the King , Parliament , and Grandees of both Armies ) that they may now at laſt with bleeding , melting hearts and ſpirits , ſpeedily pour forth ſuch effectual healing Balms into theſe two dying Kingdoms deadly wounds , as may effectually cure and reſtore them to more perfect health and vigor than they ever formerly enjoyed , that ſo they may loose nothing but their putrid blood , their proud dead fleſh , their filthy ſanies and corrupt humours , by their unnatural ſtabs already received : Towards the advancement of which much deſired cure , if theſe my undigeſted rude Collections ( interrupted with ſundry inevitable interloping Diſtractions , which may juſtly excuſe their many defects ) may add any contribution , or satisfy any ſeduced , or ſcrupulous Conſciences touching this preſent War ; I ſhall deem my labours highly recompenſed ; And ſo recommending them to Gods bleſsing , and thy charitable acceptation , I ſhall detain thee with no further Prologue . Farewell