TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL JOHN KENRICK Alderman of LONDON , Governor of the Merchant Adventurers of ENGLAND . TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL ISAAC LEE , Deputy of the ſaid Company of Merchant Adventurers reſiding at Hamburgh . To all other Deputies , Aſſiſtants and Members of the ſaid Famous Company . Worthy Gentlemen : IF in this brief Argument ( which here treats of your Charters , and maintains your privileges ) there be any thing beſeeming and Advocate of yours : I deſire the entire advantage thereof may redound ſolely to your ſelves . For indeed the Merit of your Cauſe is ſuch , as would require and able Orator : and when I firſt applied my ſelf to ſerve you herein , I perceived your intereſt was the ſame as the Common intereſt of all Merchant's , and that could have no termination , but in the common intereſt of our Nation : But if there appear any Error , or Fayler in theſe papers : if the workmanſhip be found too unworthy of the stuff : I ſhall then deſire of all my Readers , that the blame may be only mine : and that none but my ſelf may ſuffer the leaſt diſadvantage by my defects , and diſabilities . I am certain all wiſe , impartial Judges will diſtinguiſh betwixt that which is mine in this weak piece , and that which is yours : and if they caſt ſome diſdain upon me for not pleading your cauſe , as I might : they will not proceed to a condemnation of your cauſe , for being no better pleaded here then it is . In Queen Elizabeths days a Tract to this very purpoſe was Printed by Mr. Wheeler ( a learned Gent : that preceded me in this place ) were that Tract now reprinted , perhaps our Times would be better ſatisfied in this Caſe . It came not to my fight , till after I had formed the lump of this , and given it all thoſe rude lineaments almoſt , which it now bears : and I was induced then to perſiſt in my reſolution of finiſhing this , and not of retroceding ; the rather ; becauſe I ſaw my style and method varied much from his : becauſe , the face of the times ( which has great influence upon the State and fate of Merchandise ) was not the ſame when He wrote , as it is now : , becauſe , his Tract was in bulk more then twice , as great as mine ; becauſe , He might give ſome light to me in ſome things , and I add ſome to Him in other things ; and ſo both might be more effectual for the ends propoſed by both , then either : becauſe , if He was more ſatisfactory in matters of this particular Company , I had ſome thoughts in my ſelf , that I was more proper for the affairs of Merchant's in general . Theſe reaſons kept from abortion this Eſſay of mine at that time : but for how long a ſpace it was reprieved , I cannot prognoſticate : nor do I much regard how ſoon its fatal hour approaches , ſo the business which it aimed at may ſurvive , and proſper . Gentlemen , my reputation in this caſe muſt run ſome hazard , and ſtand or fallen , as the vogue of this age pleaſes : yet my intention is to be judged of only by you ; wherefore let that only find your fair acceptation , and favourable conſtruction , and that ſhall be a ſufficient encouragement to Hamb : Decemb. 30. 1647. Your Worſhips obliged , faithful Servant , HEN : PARKER .