TO THE HIGH COVRT OF PARLIAMENT . Right Honourable , HAving had the Honour , through Gods aſſiſtance , to be a mean , though cordial Inſtrument , of Vindicating The Sovereign Power of Parliaments and Kingdoms , in all Civil or Military affairs which concern the State , in Foure several Volumes , againſt all Oppoſites whatsoever ; which they have ( for the moſt part ) ſatisfied , or put to ſilence : I expected a Quietus eſt from all other Controverſies , concerning the Jurisdiction of Parliaments , eſpecially in Ecclesiastical matters ; which moſt imagined had been put to eternal ſilence when our Lordly Prelates loſt their Votes and Seſsion in Parliament , by a public Law : But ( alas ) I know not by what evil Genius , and Pythagorean Metempſychoſis , the Antiparliamentary Souls , formerly dwelling in our defunct Prelates earthly Tabernacles , are tranſmigrated into , and revived in a New-Generation of men ( ſtarted up of late among us ) commonly known by the Name of INDEPENDENTS ; who , though for the moſt part really cordial in their Affections , Actions to the Parliament and Church of England , ( for which , and for their piety they are to be highly honoured ▪ ) yet ſome of them are of late become extremely derogatory , and deſtructive unto both , in their Anarchical and Antiparliamentary Poſitions : For which , and for their late gathering of Independent Churches , contrary to Your Parliamentary Injunctions , they are to be juſtly blamed , as great diſturbers of our public Peace and Unity . It is the obſervation of learnedSelect . Diſputat . de Quaeſt . in quibus fit Poteſtas Eccleſiaſtica . Theſ . 1. 4 , & 5. Voetius andDe Epiſcopatu Conſtantini Magni . p. 3. 4 , 5 , 6. Vedelius , That the Arminians in the Netherlands , for the advancing of their own Faction , and more facill accompliſhment of their private ill Designs , did before the Synod of Dort , and in the beginning thereof , exceedingly cry up the Power of the Civil Magiſtrate , and States of Holland , in Ecclesiastical matters , both by Writing and Preaching ; aſcribing to them the higheſt Juriſdiction and Power of giving ultimate Judgement in all Controverſies of Faith , and Ecclesiastical matters ariſing in the Church , as a Prerogative belonging immediately under Chriſt to them alone : And thereupon they appealed to the States , from the Ecclesiastical Claſſes , as the proper Judges of the Controverſies they had raiſed in the Belgic Churches . But at laſt , after the Synod of Dort had determined againſt their Arminian Errors , and the See Acta Synodi Dod • . p. 3 • 5 , 326 , 327 States eſtabliſhed their Determinations , prohibiting the Preaching or Printing of any Arminian Tenets , with the private Independent Congregations and Conventicles of the Arminian Party , they preſently altered both their opinions and practice ; crying down the Authority of the States and Civil Magiſtrate , as faſt as they had cried it up , both in theirApologiae . c . 25. See Epiſcopius Dispute . 32. Theſ . 4. Mr. Rutherfords , Due Right of Presbyteries . p. 343 , 344 , 345 357 , 358 , 359. Apologies and Sermons ; contracting , yea denying them that very power which before they had ſo liberally meaſured • ut unto them ; affirming , that the States had no power at all over their private Congregations : that it was not any right or part of their Office to oblige men , by their authorities , to the Decrees of Synods , however agreeable to the word of God ; and that they ought not to uſe any coactive Power or Authority in ſuch caſes , to oblige them to conformity . This Practice of the Arminians was , by Anti-apol • gia . p. 157 , 158. Mr Thomas Edwards , by way of prediction , applied to the Independents , in theſe very terms : And it may be feared , however theſe Apologiſts NOW to ingratiate themſelves , and being let alone in their Churchway , ſay , they give more to the Magiſtrates than the Presbyterial , and that they profess to ſubmit , and to be moſt willing to have recourſe to the Magiſtrates Judgement , and Cognizance , and Examination of Ecclesiastical Cauſes ; yet when they ſhall come once to be croſſed , and the Parliament , by the advice of the Aſſembly , to ſettle the Government of the Church , and by their Authority to bind them to things agreeable to the word , we ſhall ſee then what they will ſay of the Magiſtrates Power . There are too many ſpeeches already , ſince the Aſſembly , ( out of their fear how they may go ) which have fallen from many Independents , THAT PROGNOSTICATE , THEY WILL do BY THE PARLIAMENT , AS THE REMONSTRANTS DID AFTER THE SYNOD OF DORT BY THE STATES . Which Prognoſtication hath fallen out accordingly . For ſince that time our Independents having felt the Pulſes of the Aſſembly and Parliament bearing , but very gently , by way of debate , againſt their Anarchical and Anomolous New-Way , ( derived from their good friends , the See Lac •• Oſiander his 〈 ◊ 〉 Controverſiarum cum Anabaptiſtis . Germane Anabaptiſts and See Mr Rob •• ſons Apology Separatiſts , and ſupported only with their Arguments , as I am fully able to demonſtrate ; ) they have not only in Press and Pulpit cried up their Way , as the Only Way , Kingdom , and Sceptre of Chriſt ; and denied all oppoſition in word , deed , or thought againſt it ; as a direct See Mr. Iohn Goodwins Theomachia , and Innocencies Triumph . FIGHTING AGAINST GOD ; and promoted it publicly and privately with all their Induſtry , Policy , Power ; ſetting up New Independent Congregations in every corner ; but even with open mouth , pen , hand , ( contrary to their former Solemn Vows , Covenants , Proteſtations , which I fear they have overmuch forgotten ) cried down , and fought againſt the very Ecclesiastical Power , and Legiſlative Authority of the High Court of Parliament it ſelf , and Supreme Temporal Magiſtrates : proclaiming not only in their Mr. Iohn Goodwins Sermon , Febr. 25. 1643. Pulpits , but likewiſe in ſundry late Reply to A. S. Mr. Iohn Goodwins Theomachia : and Inocencies Triumph . And Anſwer to Mr. William Prins Twelve Queſtions . My Brother Burtons Vindication . p. 5. 6. etc. Pamphlets , wherewith they have filled the World , That every particular Congregation of viſible Saints , and Independent Church , is under the Government of Chriſt alone , as the ONLY Head , King , Governor , Lawgiver of it ; and ſubject TO NO OTHER IVRISDICTION , then that of Chriſt , his word and Spirit . That NO POWER ON EARTH , NOR EARTHLY LAW-GIVERS MAY , CAN , OR OUGHT TO GIVE LAWES , FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THIS REPVBLIKE , nor claim , nor exerciſe and Headſhip , or undertake the Government of this Body . That neither KINGS , NOR PARLIAMENTS , NOR SYNODS , have any Authority to preſcribe Laws or Rules for the Churches Government , to order the affairs of Chriſts Kingdom , or inſtitute the Government of his Churches ; or to make coactive Laws , in any Ecclesiastical matters , to bind the conſcience of any Church or Chriſtian to outward conformity , or inflict any mulcts or penalties for contempt or diſobedience ; Chriſt only being the Lord of men's conſciences , which ought to be left at liberty . That the Members of the Parliament are choſen but by a ſecular Root , by the Generality and Riffe Raffe of the world , Papiſts , Atheiſts , Drunkards , Swearers , Men void of the knowledge , fear , and grace of Chriſt : And therefore the Independent Brothers conceive as great AND IMPOSSIBILITY , that a Legitimate Ecclesiastic Power ſhould , according to the mind of Christ , be by them conferred upon any men , or that they ſhould have any Power or Authority from Chriſt to nominate or appoint who ſhall be the men , by virtue of ſuch nomination or election , to enact Laws and Statutes in matters of Religion , and to order under mulcts and penalties how men ſhall worſhip and ſerve God , as it is ( in Jobs expreſsion ) to bring a clean thing out of and unclean . That the Parliaments claiming or exerciſing any ſuch Ecclesiastical Power , or others attributing of it to them , is a means to awaken the eye of Jealousy upon them , and ſeven times more deſtructive and undermining of not only their Power , but Honour , Peace , and Safety alſo , than any thing that is found in the Independent Way , ſo ill entreated . That it is a claiming of the ſacred and incommunicable Royalties of Heaven ; and accounting it no Robbery to make themſelves equal with God ; and ſuch and high provocation in the eyes of the Moſt High , as IF CONTINUED IN ( by the Parliament ) will kindle a fire in the breast of him whoſe name is Jealous , which will conſume and devour . Yea , one of them puts this Queſtion , And Anſwer to Mr. Prynnes 12 , Queres . p. 24. & 2. If the whole Kingdom may deny obedience unto Popiſh Acts and Canons , or upon any other like juſt occaſion , and they themſelves be Judges whither the occaſion be juſt or no ; Whither MAY NOT INDEPENDENTS , a part of the Kingdom only , do the like in all reſpects ? Or , Whither ought they , becauſe a Leſſer part of the Kingdom , yield obedience to Popiſh Acts and Canons , becauſe a Major part approve of , and agree with a Parliament and Synod in approving them ? What if they ſhould be for Popery again , Judaiſme , or Turciſme ? this no offence to make a Quere , nor impoſsible to come to pass ; the greateſt part of thoſe that chosen our Parliament men being thought to be Popiſhly or Malignantly affected , etc. Putting diverse ſuch like Queries , deſtructive to the very fundamental Power and Being of Parliaments ; and as bad or worſe than the Popiſh Gunpowder Plot , to blow up the Sovereign Ecclesiastic , and Civil Authority of this High Court , in all ſucceeding Ages . Theſe , with infinite other Anti-parliamental , Anti-synodical , and Antimonarchical Paradoxes ( at which I profess I ſtand amazed ) have not only dropped from the Lips , but Pens of ſundry Independents , who have avowed them publicly in Print , with their Names affixed to their Books , even before the face of Your Right Honourable Parliamentary Aſſembly and Supreme Tribunal , in ſuch open affront and high contempt of Your undoubted Rights , Power , Privileges , ( which Your Honours and we all are obliged , by Late Solemn Oaths , Covenants , Proteſtations , to defend , maintain , with our very Lives and Eſtates ; and to diſcover , oppoſe all others who ſhall invade them , to our uttermoſt power ) as I am confident no Age , nor Hiſtory can ever parallel , in the leaſt meaſure ; the very Malignant Prelates , and Antiparliamentary Cavaliers , having not proceeded , in this kind , ſo far as they : which I speak with deepeſt grief of heart and ſpirit , out of Conſcience of that common Vow and Covenant , ( which binds me to diſcover , oppugn , reveal , abhor it ) and deteſtation of their moſt pernicious Aſſertions , not out of the leaſt malice or hatred to any of their Perſons . What the Independents end of publiſhing theſe deſperate Antiparliamentary Paradoxes ſhould be , unless to prepare their party and all others , as much as in them lies , utterly to reject whatever public form of Church-Government , Diſcipline , Reformation , and Directory of Worſhip , Your Honours by the advice of the Reverend Aſſembly ſhall eſtabliſh in our Church for the future , after all your ſerious conſultations , debates , pains , Prayers and Faſtings about it ; and to ſet up their own Anomolous Platform , ( whichReply to A. S. p. 111. Mr. Burtons Vindication . p. 54. 71. they aver is Chriſts Kingdom and Government ; and which may , upon probable and higher grounds than of reaſon , be thought in time to overthrow , and put down all other Governments whatſoever , and to ſtand up alone in their ſtead ; ſince Chriſts Kingdom ſhall ſtand up , when all oppoſite earthly Kingdoms , like earthen vessels , ſhall with and Iron Rod be daſhed in pieces : Which they cloſe up with a Faxit Deus & feſtinet , ) in despite of Your Authority , and all humane Power whatſoever , I cannot conjecture . And their own late printed Paſſages , withFeb . 15 1643. Mr. Iohn Goodwins Sermon , ( that it would be more easy for him , and he ſhould rather yield to be torn in pieces by wild horſes , than ſubmit to ſuch a Government which proceeded from a Parliament , choſen by the Riffraff of the world , etc. ) intimate and express as much . Which , what and high contempt it is againſt Your undoubted Power , and pious Ecclesiastical proceedings , in Reforming , settling the Doctrine , Diſcipline , and Government of our Church , ( the grand deſire and prayer of all well-affected ſpirits ) I moſt humbly ſubmit to Your ſaddeſt thoughts and deepeſt wisdoms , who have both Power and Authority in Your hands to suppress , incomparable Prudence and Providence to prevent , theſe growing , dangerous Insolences , before they become Masterless , or Epidemical , passed Your cure . Far be it from my thoughts , to exaſperate Your Power or Justice againſt any Delinquents of this kind ; ſome whereof are ſo near and deer unto me , that it is my heavieſt affliction to mention their extravagancies in this kind ; of which I truſt they ( and all their followers ) will be now aſhamed ; and a Brotherly Admonition to their Perſons ( though their Writings undergo the ſharper Cenſure ) will I hope induce them , upon ſecond thoughts , both to discern , lament , recant their forementioned Paradoxes , and abhor themſelves for them even in duſt and aſhes , ( as one of themMr . Goodwin in his Innocencies Triumph . p. 5. professes he will do , in caſe he be convinced : ) And then if they will not be reclaimed , Fiat Iuſtitia ; better ſome ſhould ſuffer , than all periſh . My only deſire is , that Your Honours would have a special jealous care of preſerving your own undoubted Parliamentary Rights and Privileges againſt theſe unparalleled public Violations , Impeachments of them , and of the tranquillity , ſafety of our Church and State , endangered by them . Towards the juſt defence whereof , I have ( with as much expedition as my many other diſtracting public and private Employments would permit ) contributed theſe my indigeſted Nocturnal Lucubrations , ( borrowed from the hours allotted to my neceſſary natural reſt ) in Vindication of the ancient and undoubted Ecclesiastical Power and Jurisdiction of Parliaments , Chriſtian Princes , and Magiſtrates ; ( which I have made good by ſundry Divine , Historical Preſidents , and Authorities , in all Ages ) and anſwered all the chief Pretences , Objections of Papiſts , Prelates , Independents , Anabaptiſts , Separatiſts , and all others who oppugn them ; in ſuch a manner as I hope will ſilence them for the preſent , and reform them for the future . It was my primitive intention and deſire to have publiſhed this Treatiſe complete at firſt ; but it ſwelling to a greater bulk than I expected , and my engagements in other public ſervices for the Commonweal retarding my ſpeedy progress herein , I have thereupon divided it into two Parts : the Firſt whereof I here humbly tender to your Honourable Patronage , till God and opportunity enable me to complete the Second ; of which there is less Neceſſity , ſince learned Mr. Samuel Rutherford , in his Due right of Presbyteries , and Mr. Thomas Edwards , in his Anti-Apologia , ( neither of them hitherto Anſwered by the Independents , and in truth unanſwerable ) with Gulielmus Apollonius and the Wallacrian Miniſters , Conſideratio Quarundam Controverſiarum , etc. quae in Angliae Regno hodie agitantur , newly publiſhed , will ſupply the preſent defect thereof ; and this Firſt Part ſupply ſome particulars concerning the Ecclesiastical Power of Parliaments , Chriſtian Princes , Magiſtrates , Counsels , which are wanting in them , and in laborious Sir Edward Cooks Fourth Inſtitutes ; who hath recorded little or nothing concerning the Juriſdiction or Power of Parliaments in Ecclesiastical affairs , and matters of Religion . Thus humbly ſubmitting theſe my diſtracted ſubitane Collections , and Lucubrations , to Your Honourable favourable Acceptation ; and imploring the God of Verity , of Unity ſpeedily to diſſipate all our Errors , and compromise all our unhappy Diviſions ( which threaten ruin to us , if continued ) by Your moſt Religious Care , Wisdom , and indefatigable Endeavours , that ſoRom . 15. 5. 6. we may be all like minded one towards another , and may with ONE MIND , and ONE MOVTH , ( in one Way , one Congregation ) glorify God , even the Father of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt : I ſhall with my ferventeſt Oriſons daily recommend Your Honourable Aſſembly , with all Your pious Endeavours for the Reforming , Settling of our Church , State , to his Divine Benediction ; and ever reſt , Your Honours moſt humble , devoted Servant , William Prynne .