To the Right Honourable , John Lord Roberts , Baron of Truro , Preſident ; Francis Lord Willoughby of Parham , Sir William Balfore , and Sir Philip Stapleton , Knights ; Colonel Sheffield , Col. Martin , Col. Ayſcough , Col. Coningham , Col. Thompſon , Col. Hoburn , Col. Carlton , and Mr. Engliſh Adjutant General : Colleagues and Judges in the late Council of War at St. Albans , at the Trial and Condemnation of Col. Nath. Fiennes . Right Honourable , Right Worshipful , and Worshipful : WE here humbly preſent you with a True , though late Relation , and Vindication of your impartial Juſtice , in the Trial of Nathaniel Fiennes , the Unfortunate Governor of Briſtoll , which hath been overlong traduced , miſreported , by the licentious Pens , the ſlanderous Tongues of him and his , which will not yet learn ſilence . It was his own vainglorious humour that firſt inevitably engaged us , by public Proclamations to be his Proſecutors , and now enforceth us to become the Regiſters of his deſerved Doom . Had his Tongue or quill been diſcreetly ſilent , and not miſreported his ignoble ſurrender of Briſtoll to the world , the memorial of it had been dead ere this , at leaſt our Lips , our Pens would have continued mute . And had he not returned to his former folly , in juſtifying himſelf again in Print , after your Honourable juſt ſentence denounced againſt him ( to the inſufferable derogation of your moſt upright Juſtice ) this Hiſtory of his Trial and Condemnation , ( truly collected out of our broken Notes and Memories , without any Sophiſtication of Additions ) had never ſeen the light : But his pertinacious inſolency , firſt in appealing privately from , and ſince in Writing openly againſt the Juſtice of your ſentence , againſt the Ordinances of War themſelves , as ſummum jus , yea ſumma Injuria , in his late Check to the Checker , to palliate or extenuate his own Cowardice and Treaſon , for which he was condemned to loose his head , hath now obliged us ( in point of honour , of duty , both to your Honours , the Parliament , Kingdom , Juſtice , and our ſelves ) to publiſh the real verity of all the proceedings in this public caſe , under your Noble Patronage : to whom as we both reſorted for Juſtice in the Trial of the Cauſe ; ſo we now appeal for the Truth of the enſuing Debates , Relation , Teſtimonies , as to the moſt equal Judges , who took Notes of all the Paſſages , Arguments , Depoſitions on either ſide , the true publication whereof will ſcatter all the miſts of Prejudices , Miſtakes , Miſreports , wherewith they have been hitherto clouded . Our deſire is , that your eminent Juſtice may ſhine as bright in this Relation of it , throughout the Realm , as it did in the Councell-Chamber at Saint Albans , in the pronounced Sentence : from whence the deſperate Malefactor ( who hath loſt his brain , or modeſty at leaſt in ſtead of his head ) I know not by what prodigious Chemistry endeavours to ( * ) abſtract Arguments of his Innocence , In his Check to the Checker . Integrity Valour , againſt all ſenſe and reaſon . If he will not henceforth learn better manners , and ſubmit himſelf to your public Juſtice , with humble acknowledgement , and Recantation of his former Calumnies , we preſume you will be ſo ſenſible of your wounded Honours and Integrities , as to make this ſtout affronter of Juſtice , and Cowardly Oppoſer of the common Enemy , a Preſident to poſterity in point of exemplary Execution , as well as of bore Conviction ; ſince others of better extraction and deſert then he , See here p. 118 ( as Van * Hemert , with two of his Captains by name ) have loſt their heads , for surrendering places of less conſequence and ſtrength then Briſtoll , after a longer , ſharper ſiege by far then it ſuſtained . Thus ſubmitting both our Cause and this unpoliſhed Relation to your Honourable , impartial Cenſures , We humbly reſt Your Honours , VVorſhips , and the Republics Devoted Servants , W : Prynne . Clement Walker .