TO The Right Honourable and Noble Lord , The EARL of LOVDEN , Chancellor of Scotland ; AND Chancellor of the Univerſity of St. Andrews , Grace , Mercy and Peace . RIGHT HONOURABLE , AS Jeſus Chriſt the wondered , the Iſa . 9. 6. Counſellor , the mighty God drives on his great State-deſign in the whole Earth , and now in theſe Kingdoms , to to ſave and afflicted people , to die his Garments in the blood of his Enemies , and to built the Tabernacle of God amongſt men , and cauſe the wilderness blossom as a Roſe , that theIſa . 35 1 , 2. glory of Lebanon , and the excellency of Carmel and Sharon may in a spiritual manner be given to Zion ; So he ſtill acteth in his own sphere of Righteousness , and all inferior wheels in their revolutions move towards his moſt eminent end ; for the Courtiers and Royal AttendantsPſal . 97. 1. of his Throne are Righteousness and Judgement . And he desires that the motions and ways of his people may be concentric to his own heart , andVel lubentes , vel vi attracti decreta Dei see quamur neceſſe eſt . move in the ſame Orb with himſelf ; we muſt either walk , or be drawn to the end of Jeſus Chriſt , his end cannot come down and comply with our policy . When men go with one head , and two faces , and two hearts , Providence can beguile them : we are then ſafe , and do ſail at the Haven of the Sea when we walk with God , and our way draws a ſtraight line to the heart of Jeſus Chriſt . Theſe two Kingdoms have before them and end ▪ the Covenant to be a people to God ; this we did Swear with our Hands lifted up to the moſt High ; the ſtones of the field ſhall witness againſt us , and the Sword of the Lord avenge the quarrel of his Covenant , if we dally with the Lord , as if the Vow of God , that the Lord may be one , and his Name one in both Kingdoms had been on us , when we were low only , and our Oath had a date only till the Year 1645. and then our Vow muſt expire , as did the Law of shadows , when the Body Jeſus Chriſt came . As success is a poor and waxy Calendar for Religion , ſo the low condition of our Kingdom , I hope , ſhall not move us to forſake the Lords cauſe , or to blame God , becauſe good cauſes have sometime ſad events ; for beſide that Heathens ſaid , that God cannot err , becauſe Marius ex culpâ gloriam reportavit , Marius was made glorious by ill-doing , and one hath a Cross , Ille crucem ſceleris pretium tulit , hic diadema . Juven . Saty . 10. another a Kings Crown for a reward of wickedness , we know that God , however it be , is good to Iſrael . If that which was intended for Union , ſhall by men's wickedness , turn to a ſad Diviſion between the Kingdoms , I ſhall believe , that the truly Godly of either Kingdoms , can ſcarce be capable of ſuch bloody intentions , as ſhall leave a Legacy of perpetuated blood to the Poſterity ; and ſure , though for the preſent guiltiness , ſtrength prevail , yet habent Deum ultorem , men on Earth cannot long be ſtrong againſt Vengeance from Heaven . As success does inebriate , ſo extremity of a low condition is a wicked Counſellor ; and evil Jealousy , as Hell , thinketh always evil . All whoſe bowels are moved for the Deſolation , Graves , multiplied Widows and Orphans of both Kingdoms will not dare ( Judgement from the Almighty being a terror to them ) to add affliction to the people of God already afflicted . Bleſſed ſhall they be of the Lord , who mediate for preventing of National ruptures , and for the continuance of the Brotherly Covenant . Chriſt Jeſus is a uniting Saviour , one God , one Faith , one Lord Jeſus , one Religion ſhould be , and I beſeech the God of Peace , they may be Chains of Gold to tie theſe tipo Nations and Churches together in uno tertio , that they may be concentered and united in one Lord Jeſus . O that that precious Due of Hermon , that ſhowers of Love and Peace may lie all the night upon the Branches of the two Olive Trees , that the warmness , heat , and influence of one Sun of Righteousness with healing in his wings , may make the Lily amongſt the Thorns , the Roſe of Sharon , that is planted by the Lord , the Spouſe of Jeſus Chriſt in both Kingdoms to spread its Root , and caſt its Smell , as green and flouriſhing to all the Nations round about . The Kingdom of God is Peace . The Lord is about a great work in Britain , why ſhould Diviſions that proceed from the lustest of men ▪ and the enemies of the Lord retard the wheels of the Chariot of Chriſt ? Let us not water the Lily with blood again . The Sons of Babel have ſhed our blood in great abundance , for the which does the Church of God in the three Kingdoms ſtand , and Pray and Prophecy in ſackcloth . The violence Ier. 51. 35. done to me and to my fleſh be upon Babylon , ſhall the Inhabitants of Zion ſay : And my blood upon the Woman arrayed in Purple and Scarlet , the Mother of Harlots and Abominations Rev 17. 3. 5. of the Earth , ſhall Ieruſalem ſay . Happy we , if we could for the ſecond Temple built , and the Lord repairing the old waſte places , and the Gentiles Iſa . 62. 1 , 2 ▪ beholding the Righteousness of the Elder Sister the Church of the Jews , and both as a Crown of Glory in the hand of the Lord , and as a Royal Diadem in the hand of our God . I ſhall not need , I hope , either of and Apology for Intituling this Piece , ſuch as it is , ( others can , and I hope will add riper Animadverſions to Eraſtus ) to Your Honours Name , or of a word of incitement , that Your Lordſhip cooperate with Your ſerious Endeavours , for a right understanding between both Kingdoms , and for the carrying on the work of the right arm of the Lord , the Lords creating of glory on every Aſſembly on Mount Zion , ( for we are witneſſes of Your Honours Travels for both ) that glory may dwell in our Land. Your Honours at all reſpective obſervance in the Lord , S. R.