TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE JOHN , Earl of Exeter , Baron of Burley , etc. Noble Lord , MAny whoſe eyes are upon your Lordſhip , do acknowledge the good hand of the Lord towards you , not in conferring eminency of honour upon you in your minority , ( as it were , before your time ) but in giving you a ſerious diſcerning ſpirit , far above your years , whereby they conceive great hope , and pour out many prayers to the Lord , that he may in due time bring you forth in public , as a choice Inſtrument in the hand of your God , to do worthily Ruth 4. 11 in Ephratah , and to be famous in Bethlehem . Among others the publiſhers of this ſmall Treatiſe , ( part whereof being the Meditations , of a pious young man , now with God , and the reſidue the labour of a reverend Divine ) to declare their great affection to your Lordſhip , have importuned me to recommend this Tractate to your Honour , conceiving , that under your Lordship's Name theſe Meditations not only may appear to the world with ſome acceſs of luſtre , but that the influence they may have upon ſome hereby may prove more available . The ſubject herein handled , is about the choice of that which ſcarce yet ever entered into your ſerious thoughts , yet it is wisdom to ſtore up good rules before you need to uſe them : Mariners learn their skill before they launch into the deeps : All Artiſts ſtudy the Theory before the Practice ; Wiſe men are long in contemplation , before they adventure upon actium : It's a known rule , Deliberation muſt be long , where Determination can be but once ; and where there is no admiſſion of ſecond thoughts to reverſe a former error , the firſt thoughts muſt be careful , that error be prevented . In the interim , before the Lord incline your heart to think of any choice that way on earth , be entreated to make your choice in heaven ; that the Lord Jeſus may be the guide of your youth , & ſo the God of your age , that God may ſay of you : I remember the kindneſs Jere. 2. 2. of thy youth , and the love of thy eſpouſals . Surely it can be no diſparagement , for the greateſt of men to betrothe themſelves to the great God , to contract spiritual alliance with innumerable companies of Heb. 12. 22 , 23. Angels and Souls made perfect , and to match with himEph . 3. 15. of whom the whole family of Heaven and Earth is called . Satan hath done his utmoſt to brand the ſervants of God with ignominy , and to deter men of quality from owning the way called holy . It is not long ſince ſome of our Nobility , eminentE . M. for piety , paralleled our age with the ſad times ofCogunt •• • ſſ • ma ••• 〈 ◊ … 〉 • ſſe v • les Sal ▪ de Prov. Salvian , wherein the complaint was , that great men were forced to be more sinful , that they might not be reputed to be less honourable . But God hath begun to take away the reproach of his people from off the earth ; and doubtleſs , will make his ſervants and eternal excellency , when men of carnal policies ſhall be made and abhorring to all ſ • . 66. 24. fleſh . You cannot make any choice higher , nor is it poſſible you ſhould begin too soon to love him , who hath loved you from all eternity . Love of all affections is moſt active , and in youth predominant ; It's restless till it fix , and if it fix any where below Chriſt , it debaſeth it self , and may eaſily be enthralled , but cannot eaſily be disengaged : What pity is it thoſe vital streams ſhould run in a channel that goes down to the Chambers of death ? I hope the Father of mercies is looking towards your Lordſhip , and ſaying unto you as once unto his Church , Surely , this is a time of love . Ezek. 16. 8. Your pious mother , whom I may truly call and Elect Lady , is to your Lordſhip as another Monicha to Saint Auguſtine ; You are the son of many prayers : and as Salomon was to Bathſheba , You are the son , not only of her womb , but of her vows ; Pro. 31 1. She hath learned to loveFilii diligend • ſunt in Deo , 〈 ◊ 〉 propter Deum . you in the Lord , and for the Lord : The longings of her soul , are for your ſpirituallQuid Chriſtus niſi Deum in nobis dilexit , non quem habebamus said ut haberemus , Lomb. l. 3. D. 27. and eternal good . It is one of her greateſt comforts on earth , that she hath ſuch a son to call her mother : But it will be far greater , even the Crown of her glory , to ſee you the adopted son of the eternal Father , and that God hath honoured you , even in your youth , to obtain and Inheritance among them that are ſanctified . You are left in your father's family , with your hopeful ſiſter , as the only branches of many , which have long ſince ceaſed from among men . And when the deſtroying Angel was ſmiting all , the Father of mercies looked upon you , and ſaid , Deſtroy him not , for a bleſſing Iſa . 65. 8. is in him . The Lord delight to fill you with all spiritual bleſſings in heavenly things , and make it every day more and more appear , that God hath reſerved you to be bleſſed , and to be a bleſſing to your family , to your Country , and to the Kingdoms . And when your Lordſhip ▪ ſettles in the world , you may begin with Joſuahs fixed reſolution , I and my houſe will ſerve the Joſ . 24. 15 Lord . And that you may show forth the grace of him that hath called you out of darkness , and the ſhadow of death , into his marvellous light ; that they that obſerve your Lordſhip may ſee , that greatness and goodness , as they are inſeparable in God , ſo they are not incompatible to the sons of men . That ſo you may rejoice above all greatness , that you have your name written in the Lambs book of life , and you may look beyond death ▪ and the grave , and ſee your greateſt portion in eternity ; which is the earneſt prayer of Your Lordship's ſervant , JER : WHITTAKER .