To the High and Honourable Court of Parliament . WHat others have done by the Law of your authority , Preſented before ye their advice in matters of Religion ; I ſhall , from the law of love to your Iuſt authority , preſent you , not my advice ( the Lord himſelf advice and counsel you ) but ſome things which concern the Lord Ieſus Chriſt , and the peace and proſperity of your Kingdom ; and that I may not be diſobedient to the heavenly viſion , 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . Act. 26. 19 or light of God revealed in me . There are two Principles in the world which have theſe ſad , and dark concluſions attending them , the two Principles are theſe : 1. That ſuch as conform not to the Doctrine , and diſcipline eſtabliſhed ; and yet as to the State are good Subject's , and peaceably affected , ſhall be proceeded againſt by fines , impriſonment , etc. 2. That ſuch as ſhall ſpeak upon the Scriptures , or open them , Publicly , or in Private , and are not ordained by the laying on of the hands of that preſent eſtabliſhed ministry of a kingdom , ſhall be proceeded againſt by fines , impriſonments , etc. The ſad and dark concluſions which follow , are theſe : 1. All the glorious diſcoveries of God , above , or beyond that System , or from of Doctrine etc. ſhall be judged , and ſentenced , as Heresy and Schism ; and ſo God himſelf ſhall be judged by man , which muſt needs be a ſin , bringing much deſolation ; unleſs they that enact ſuch Laws , were that very infallible Apoſtleſhip for Interpretation of all Scriptures ; as the firſt Apoſtleſhip was for writing all Scriptures . And is God , a God of the Iewes only , is he not a God of the Gentiles alſo ? Rom. 3. 29. 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 ? Pſal . 51. that is , is God limited to one ſort of men ? Thou thoughteſt ( says God ) that I was altogether , Pſal . 51. ſuch a one as thy ſelf ; that is , a God merely of one Image or figure : behold , the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him , Pſal . he dwells not in Temples made with hands , and where is his habitation , and who hath known the place of his reſt ? That is , what is man that he ſhould conceive that God is only in a place , or Temple , or from of Worſhip , or System of Doctrine of his form or making , ſince the time is come , that we do no longer worſhip in this Temple , Joh. 4. nor at Ieruſalem ; but they that worſhip , muſt worſhip in ſpirit and truth ; Joh. 14. which truth , is he only who is the truth . 2. Many thouſands of precious Chriſtians ſhall be under Delinquency , as to fines , impriſonment , etc. and under the scandal of Heretics and Schismatics ; becauſe not ſeeing by that one light , nor believing in that one Proportion of faith , nor receiving ſuch interpretations and Conſequences of Scriptures , for the very Scriptures themſelves ; and by ſuch perſecution , the civil power which is received from God , ſhall be turned againſt God , or againſt the more spiritual adminiſtration of God ; and ſo Gods Adminiſtrations daſhed one againſt another . Act. 9. Saul , Saul , why perſecuteſt thou me ? touch not Pſal . mine anointed , and do my Prophets no harm : not as having dominion over the heritage , orLordſhip over faith . 3. That were to ſet up the Church Polity of the Iews amongſt Chriſtians ; and not according to Gods divine appointment , but men ; for God in that firſt Polity of the Iews Church under the Old-Teſtament , joined to the Kings and Magiſtracy then , a Prieſthood with Urim and Thummim ; and Prophets anointed of God as a certain , true , infallible , directive power for ordering that way of adminiſtration ; but this way of Chriſtians now , without any ſuch warrant , or appointment of God brings back again the ſame Church Polity , under the New-Teſtament , which was typical as to Chriſt the King , and Prieſt , and Prophet , and joins to Kings & Magiſtracy now , a ministry leſs of God , leſs certain , leſs true , not infallible ; ſo as all texts , inſtances , and examples brought from the Old-Teſtament of the Kings , Princes , and Magiſtrates of Iſrael , compelling to the worſhip of God , without proving the continuance of the ſame Church Polity under the New-Teſtament ; and the like Prieſthood , and Prophets accordingly ſent of God to direct them , is all invalid , and of no effect as to ſuch proceedings . 4. The infinitely abounding ſpirit of God , which blows when and where it lists , and miniſters in Chriſtians according to the gift , and prophecies according to the will of the Almighty God ; pouring its ſelf out upon all fleſh , giving out the word and making the company great , Joh. 3. 8. Rom. 12. 6. Act. 2. 18. Pſal . 68. 11. 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . who publiſh it , even this Almighty , all glorious , infinitely abounding , diſpenſing , and revealing Spirit , is made ſubject to the Laws & Ordinances of men , to the pleaſures and wills , to the meaſures and forms of men , to outward ceremonies , as Ordination , etc. God muſt not ſpeak till man give him leave ; not teach , nor Preach , but whom man allows , and approves , & ordains . 5. This making laws for puniſhing all that conform not to the doctrine and diſcipline eſtabliſhed , destroys the true intereſts of all ſtates and kingdoms , excluding all ſocieties of men , but of one ſort and form , though never ſo peaceably affected , or obedient as men and Subject's , reſpectively to the State , and civil government thereof , and was never found in any State , or Church Polity by divine appointment , but in that one nation of the Iews , whoſe Polity , as to ſuch a from , God himſelf peculiarly made , owned and preſerved , and the Lord Ieſus himſelf fulfilled and diſſolved . For Heresy and Schism , I know you ought not to tolerate any , but to let them bear their own judgement , which is spiritual admonition , Church-cenſure , rejection , excommunication ; which if effectual , as all true , right , spiritual cenſures have been and are , is that juſt proportionable judgement for ſuch Goſpel-ſins , if not effectual ; then the inſuffiency , Tit. 3. 10. 1 Cor. 5. 5. 2 Theſ . 3. 15. 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . weakneſs , unprofitableneſs of ſuch as aſſume ſuch Church-power , and cenſures , will appear before you . And as to that point of the preſent Ordination , which ſome have ſo preſſed upon you , diſtinguiſhing to you , that their Ordination was from the Biſhops , as Miniſters , not as Biſhops . Right Honourable , conſider , that diſtinction cannot be , for there was no ſuch thing as Miniſters in the Church of Rome , or of England as to this ſucceſſively pretended Ordination ; but Prieſts , and Biſhops , or Epiſcopacy , and Prieſthood : and ſurely if Epiſcopacy does not , See Maſon . Fox book of Martyrs . Beda . yet Prieſthood does altogether evacuate the eſſence of Ministry now under the New-Teſtament as by ſuch Ordination : and how much more rational are their Arguments , who hold their Miniſtry lawful , from the lawfulneſs of Epiſcopacy ; then thoſe , who deny Epiſcopacy , etc. and yet have no Ordination but from them . For this Chriſtian-liberty , it is ſuch as preſerves not only the outward peace of Chriſtians who enjoy it , but the peace and proſperity of Kingdoms , and Magiſtrates , who establiſh it ; and the life , glory , and happineſs , deſtruction , and death of Kingdoms is wrapped in the Chriſtians life or death : Epheſ . 5. 30. Act. 9. 4. Mal. 3. Pſal . 105. 15. they are the parts and Members of Chriſt , the apple of his eye , his Jewels , his anointed , his Prophets , his Children . As therefore you look to be proſpered by this Spirit of God ; as you look for wiſdom from this Spirit of God to govern this State ; as you look for comfort from this Spirit of God in all your diſtreſſes ; as you look for gifts from this Spirit of God in all the adminiſtrations ; as you look for the ſweet spiritual breathings and refreſhment from this Spirit of God in all the several changes of this creation : love , preſerve , Indulge this Spirit ; quench not , oppoſe not , oppreſs not this Spirit : confine it not to one outward from or fellowſhip of men , which are not that Catholic Church , Thſe 1. 5 19. Act. 7. 51. Epheſ . 4. 30. that Apoſtleſhip of infallibility ; and they that are spiritual , live in that ſpirit & truth , which makes them free indeed , Joh. 8. 32 , 36. 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . and it is below that Spirit of God , to Petition liberty of conſcience in ſpirituals , from any men or Magiſtrates in the World ; becauſe God will make Ieruſalem a cup of trembling to all Nations , and a stone of aſtoniſhment ; and the spiritual Chriſtians will rather hold forth ſuch things , to bear witneſs to the truth , and to deſire all to forbear perſecution , as much for their own ſakes who perſecute , as for theirs who are perſecuted . And for that juſt power of Magiſtracy , I acknowledge it a Power Ordained of God , 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . Rom. 13. 1 , 2 , 3. for adminiſtration of Justice and righteouſneſs in the ſocieties of men , and nations ; a Miniſter of God for good , a terror to evil works ; and that we are to be subject to every Ordinance of man , for the Lords ſake ; and for this cauſe we pay tribute to whom tribute ; honour to whom honour : and all ſocieties of Chriſtians by no pretence of religion , or liberty for the worſhip of God , Rom. 13. 4 , 5. 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . are to reſiſt or diſturb the civil adminiſtration of this power : but as to that conſideration ; all Chriſtians are to ſuffer according to the will of God , ( all lawful ways for preſervation of States and Kingdoms ſtill excepted ) and all ſuch Magiſtracy are to preſerve their reſpective States , by all wholeſome , lawful , cautionary Laws and Ordinances in Peace ; ſo as while liberty or indulgency , as to the tender conſciences in Religion is ſpoken on , yet no leſs ſecurity of the State , no diminution to the juſt power of Magiſtracy ; no leſs preſervation of the Peace of the Kingdom is deſired by thoſe that are truly spiritual . And though many ſuffer under the name of Heretics and Schismatics before you , for not conforming to the preſent doctrine and diſcipline eſtabliſhed ; Right Honourable , conſider , whither this does not call in queſtion all the very preſent doctrine and diſcipline ſo eſtabliſhed ; for by this very thing of judging all Inconformity to the preſent worſhip and from of things to be Heresy ; by the ſame , all this preſent from of worſhip and confeſsion of faith is judged Heresy and Schiſm , to the late former government , and doctrine eſtabliſhed in the Church of England : this preſent Synod of men being no more that viſible Catholic Church , and infallible Apoſtleſhip , then the former were , ſo as the changing the former Articles of the Church of England into a new confeſsion of faith , the Epiſcopacy into Presbytery ; and ſo altering both the fundamentals in religion and the diſcipline , is equally new light and Heresy , As to the former doctrine and diſcipline : ( and if it be objected ) but this preſent Synod , are men of more light and Piety then the former , and ſo they eſtabliſh more truth , and bring in more Reformation ; if ſo , why is there not more love , more peaceableneſs , more self-denial , more power of godlineſs , then there was in the ſuffering Biſhops , and the Preaching Lay-Martyrs then ; who loved Chriſt in himſelf , and in one another . And now ( Noble Senators ) ſince very worthy things have been formerly done by you unto this Nation ; let not your Sun ſet in a cloud , nor your light ſhine upon thoſe that have loved you as the Moon once upon the Water , making it of the colour of Blood ▪ are you not come to the Kingdom in Peace ? Are not the gleanings of Ephraim in the Vintage ? Did not David ſay,2 Sam. 19. 22. ſhall any man be put to death this day in Iſrael ? The Lord enlighten you ( if it be his will ) more and more , in the knowledge of Ieſus Chriſt , and of the love of God , and of all who have any thing of God in them , and let you ſee thoſe things which concern your peace in this your day . Your Honours humble Servant , John Saltmarſh .