To the Right Honble , the Houſe of PEERS , Aſſembled in Parliament . Right Honble , I Have principally endeavoured in this Sermon to ſearch , What that is , to Which we may Truſt our Souls ; and What Foundation we are to Lay in our Religion . If we were once Eſtabliſhed in this main Point concerning the Next World , we ſhould Enjoy our ſelves with much more Settledness , and Security in This World . For how quietly ſhould we repoſe our Selves for this Outward , Short Life in the Body on that Power , to Which we commit the Care of our more Excellent , and Immortal Part ? What Difficulty would there be in Truſting to Him for our Preſervation from Death , to whom we truſt our Selves in Death , for Eternity ? Our Lord Jeſus ſeems to this End to be Shaking Heaven , and Earth , Church , and State , all Outward Powers , and Inward Principles in Both ; that the True Foundation of Heaven , and Earth may be Diſcovered . Saint Paul says , Other Foundation can no Man lay , than that which is laid , Jeſus Chriſt , 1 Cor. 3. 11. God Hath laid no other Foundation ; neither May we , neither Can we . On This alone hath God built the World , His Church , His Glory . He hath made All Things by Jeſus Chriſt , Coloſſ . 1. 16. On this alone muſt we built our Belief , and Obedience in Divine Things ; our Wisdom , and Power in the Things of Man. For All Power is given to Him in Heaven , and Earth , Mat. 28. 18. Whoever raiſeth any Outward , or Inward Frame of Things upon any other Groundwork , he makes a Lie , he works thee Works of the Devil , whoſe End is to be Diſſolved ; to Vaniſh into Air , or Periſh in the Fire . S. Paul Divides Man into Three Parts ; Spirit , Soul , and Body , 1 Theſſ . 5. 23. The Body is and Outward Image made of Duſt , Gen. 2. 7. God formed Man of the Duſt of the Ground . The Soul is a Breath of Life Enclosed in This Image , Clothed with It , and Giving Life to It : He breathed into his Nostrils the Breath of Life , and Man became a Living Soul. The Spirit is the Fountain of Life , which flows forth from God , to Feed , and Maintain the Breath of Life in the Body . When the time of Death Comes , This Spirit draws back to Their Head again Thoſe ſtreams of Life , by Which It went forth into the Body . Then the Outward Image falls to the Ground , and moulders away . Thus does the Duſt return to the Earth , as it was ; and the Spirit returns to God that gave it , Eccleſ . 12. 7. Now of Theſe Three the Higher lives In the Lower , and Above It. The Lower lives by the Higher . And the Higheſt of all Three , the Spirit of Man hath a Higher than That , by which It Self lives , even the Spirit of the Lord Jeſus , who is the King , and Father of Spirits . Our Saviour reaſons after this manner , Is not the Life More than Meat , and the Body than Raiment ? Mat. 6. 25. My Lords ! We are all well aſſured of This : that , Nothing can Give More , than It Hath . Theſe Bodies of ours , which have a more Noble Image , and Life , than any other part of this Outward World , in which they are ; cannot receive Either , or continue in Either by any Inferior , and Outward Thing ; but by a Soul , which dwells in the Body , as a Silkworm in her Work ; which lives in the Body , as a Fire in the Flame . Food , and Raiment may be the Fuel , by which the Soul maintains the Flaming Appearance of this Bodily Image . But the Virtue goes forth from the Soul . Our Saviour again teaches us ; that , Nothing , which comes from Without , can make the Soul Miſerable , or Happy ; Clean , or Unclean . This is done by that which comes from a more Inward , and Higher Principle ; from the Spirit of Man. In like manner this Spirit it ſelf derives Its Life from the Right , or the Left Hand of Jeſus Chriſt ; His Love , or His Wrath. From Hence our Spirits convey Life into our Souls , and thorough them into our Bodies . Thus our Bodies live not by Bred alone , but by that Virtue , which comes forth from our Souls . Our Souls live not by their Counſels , and Courages alone ; but by every Stream of Life , that deſcends from our Spirits upon them . Our Spirits live not by their own Eminencies ; but by Every Word , that comes forth from the Mouth of Jeſus Chriſt . S. Paul ſaid , The Head of the Woman is the Man ; The Head of the Man is Chriſt ; The Head of Chriſt is God , 1 Cor. 11. 3. So the Head of the Body is the Soul ; the Head of the Soul is the Spirit ; the Head of the Spirit is Jeſus Chriſt , as He comes forth to us in the Ministry of Angels . Therefore let us have a Covering over our Heads , a Power over our Souls , and Spirits , holding them in Subjection ; for theſe Angels ſakes , among Which , and By Which Jeſus Chriſt the Head of our Souls , and Spirits does now reign over us . Our Lord Jeſus calls Himſelf the Sun of Righteousness . O that men did once Know ; that there can be no Right Judgement made , no true Diſtinction , or Diſcovery of Things ; but by the Shining out of Jeſus Chriſt in their Hearts ! Are there not Inviſible Things , as well as Viſible ? Have not They alſo Their Sun ? The Sun , the Brighteſt Body , is the Foundation , and Fountain of all Light , Virtue , Form , and Being in this Globe of Bodily Subſtances . If the Sun be quite hid , all Shapes are loſt in and Utter Darkneſs . The Lord Jeſus among Spirits , and Spiritual Things is the only Foundation of Truth , Life , and Power . All Truth , and True Life is loſt in Doubt , Uncertainty , and a Spiritual Death , to thoſe Spirits , in which He withdraweth Himſelf . Why is the Heaven of our Religion darkened with Clouds of Diſpute , with ſo much Diverſity , ſuch Uncertainty of Opinions ; that he begins to ſeem the Wiſeſt among us , who is moſt of all a Sceptic , that is , a Scorner , or and Atheiſt ? How comes our Reaſon to ſuch a Loss , that She cannot Find , or Know Her ſelf ; She can give no Clear , or Conſtant Account of Her ſelf , in any One Man , or in any One Particular Thing ? Do not Theſe things manifeſtly declare not only a Negation , but a Privation of ſome Great Light , which ſhould by It's Immediate Preſence rule the Day of our Religion ; and by Its Beams falling upon our Reaſon , as the Less Light , rule the Night of of Nature , and Civil Affairs ? The Watchmen watch for the Morning , ſo does my Soul wait for the Riſing of the Lord Jeſus upon Her , and upon the whole Earth . He is the Image of the Invincible God ; the Light , that is Sown even in This our Darkneſs . But He ſhall break theſe Chains of Darkneſs . For it is not Poſsible , that He ſhould be Held by them . I have only One Thing more to ſay , which is this ; that , There are Some things , which I could not speak before your Lops , though I had prepared them . Theſe things I have now taken the Boldneſs to preſent to your Lops Eyes , together with thoſe , which I had formerly offered to your Lops Ears . That Jeſus Chriſt may diſcover Himſelf a Living Cornerſtone in your Hearts , out of which may grow up a Building of Eternal Peace to your own Perſons , and Preſent Peace to This Kingdom , is , My Lords , the Prayer of Your Honours moſt humble Servant in the Lord Jeſus , PETER STERRY .