To the Noble and right worthy Patriots , Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes Governor , Colonel Richard Cole , Colonel Alexander Popham , and to the reſt of the worthy Commanders , and Soldiers in the City of Briſtoll . AS it is a certain truth , that no events happen without God , ſo it is moſt certain that all events are ordered by Gods wisdom to excellent purpoſes . The utmoſt and meet end of all Gods actions is himself , that as all things are of him , and through him , ſo all things may be to him , Rom. 11. 36. The ſubordinate and nearer ends are many and various as the Almighty ſees conducible to his glory which is the utmoſt . And thus are we to conceive that in the ordering of the preſent commotions of this Land the Lord hath ſundry ends , whereby he will in fine show himself great in counsel , though as yet we can hardly discern whereto they tend . Among many other ends he hath , theſe two seem moſt apparent , the diſcovery of men , and the diſcovery of himself . For whereas on the one ſide the bloody minded Papiſts , the proud sensual Libertines , the juggling deceitful Prieſts and Prelates had got the reputation of honeſt men , and on the other ſide the ſincere , zealous and faithful Chriſtian ſuffered all indignities under the imputations of hypocrisy , covetousness , faction and ſuch like calumnies ; now by theſe preſent trials the integrity , faithfulness and courage of the one , the hypocrisy , falſehood , and wickedness of the other are made manifeſt . And whereas the frequency of profane oaths , and Atheistical perjuries , the scorn of Religion , deriſion of Piety , and contempt of holiness had worn out the apprehenſions of God , and emboldened men to play with him as a contemptible name , God hath begun to diſcover himself , and yet further will in time appear to be the great Lord of Hosts , and the protector of his deſpiſed , and oppreſſed people . In reference to the later of theſe forenamed ends God hath vouchſafed to diſcover many Plots , to give many deliverances , to do great things in theſe few years laſt passed for the vindicating of his own Name , the worth and innocency of his people ▪ and declaration of the malignity of ungodly ſpirits . Among which that which he did in preſerving of this city in the late deliverance hereof is not the leaſt , being in the apprehenſion of thoſe that know all the circumſtances and the concurrence of Gods providence therein , a very remarkable & memorable thing . In the commemoration and acclamation thereof it pleaſed God that by the appointment of one of you I ſhould have a part , having by Gods providence been driven hither for ſhelter againſt the unreaſonable & impetuous violence of ſuperſtitious people enraged by the inſtigations of bloody minded Papiſts , corrupt Prieſts , and lose Libertines . Since which time I have been solicited to publiſh theſe ſubitany Meditations : though the matter deſerves a more full diſcovery and and exacter commentary . Nevertheless that the remembrance hereof might not die , and that ſome light might be added to them that seek out Gods works as having pleaſure therein , I have yielded to their requeſt . And foraſmuch as the deliverance in the firſt place belonged to your ſelves as firſt deſtinated to ſlaughter , and my work in the TO • ankſgiving proceeded from you , I have conceived it meeteſt to tender theſe Sermons to you for your acceptance and uſe , praying the Almighty ſtill to preſerve your perſons and to direct your ways for the public good and your own ſalvation . In both which to ſerve you continueth Yours in all humble obſervance , JOHN TOMBES .