To the right worshipful my much honoured Auditors , members of the Honourable , Houſe of COMMONS , and Societies of the Temple . AFter other means duly but without success tried , for the public good , to wit the vindicating of truth , and conſequently for the preventing of the eſtabliſhment of and error and corruption of the moſt ſolemn ſacred rite of the Chriſtian profeſſion , and the oppreſſion of them that oppoſe it , I conſented to the publiſhing of two treatiſes in December laſt about Infant-baptism . It ſeemed good to ſundry perſons of note preſently to cry down my aſſertions , and to load me with unjuſt accuſations , which I take to be rather a baffeling of the Author , then and anſwering of his writing . Yet the truth hath got ſo much ground ( however ſome eminent men pretend otherwiſe ) that the Doctrine of the Directory is diſavowed by two of the moſt eminent of my Antagoniſts , as is showed § 9. page . 40. 41. 42. 43. 44. of this Apology , the chief argument of my prime Antagoniſt , is proved to be either nugatory or fallacious , § . 10. page . 44. 45 46. 47. 48. of this Apology , ſundry confeſſions are drawn from my Antagoniſts , which in my judgement , and I think in the judgement of any that knows what belongs to diſputes , do yield the cauſe , as thoſe that I mention § . 18. page 97. 98. 100. 101. 102. & § . 5. page 28. of this Apology . And as for the accuſations againſt my self , I ſhould ſleight them , were it not they had a great influence upon the cauſe , and therefore have been neceſſitated to vindicate my self ; and therewith the truth in ſome meaſure by this Apology . The great prejudice againſt me in Point of antiquity , I have alſo in this Apology endeavoured to dispel , ſpecially that from the teſtimony of Auguſtin , Serm. 10. de verbis Apoſtoli , tom . 10. which upon examination I find not to be and historical narration from good records , but a mere hyperbolical ſpeech , Rhetorically aſſerting a thing by conjecture from preſent uſe in a Sermon to the people , § . 15. page . 81. 82. 83. 84. of this Apology . And for the teſtimony of Tertullian concerning federal holiness , it is showed to be impertinent , § . 15. page . 84. 85. That the preſent Synod or reformed Churches are againſt me ſhould be no more prejudice againſt me , then it is againſt the Synod , and reformed Churches that they oppoſe the Doctrine of Infant-baptism , as it was taught by Cyprian , and his council of 66. Biſhops , Auguſtin , and many Synods , and Churches all along till the fifteenth century , and the Auguſtan confeſſion art 9. The danger of troubles upon a reformation of this corruption ſhould make men wary how they introduce them ; I think they that are bound by Covenant to reform , yet are not bound to do it with procipitation , and without prudence . But however men muſt take heed how they eſtabliſh and error and corruption by a Law , and oppress men for holding a truth , leſt they kick againſt the Prick . As for my own particular , the hard dealing I have fo • and does not alienate me from my brothers , nor I hope ſhall make a ſchiſm between us ; if it muſt happen , my endeavour is , that it may be neceſſary , not voluntary on my part . What hath happened I look upon it , however meant by men , yet as ordered by God for good , to wit the clearing of the truth , the trying and humbling of my self . That I ſuffer in the repute of men , or my outward peace moves me not . It's not to be expected children ſhould be born without travail , nor truth without ſuffering ; yet to leave ſo intelligent and Auditory , with ſo much advantage of the fruit of my labours , is no ſmall grievance . However I have choſen you for depoſitaries , in whoſe hands I may leave this Apology ; that you may not be ſtrangers to this business , nor forget him who is Your real ſervant in the things of Chriſt , JOHN TOMBES . From my ſtudy at the Temple in London , Auguſt 20. 1646.