To the deſervedly Honoured , Sir GILBERT GERARD , Baronet , and Sir JOHN FRANKLIN , Knight Knights for the County of Middleſex , in this preſent Parliament . Right Worshipful , THere is no condition whatſoever , can privilege a folded Arm : For if Idleness had been better then Labour , our firſt Parents had never been put into the Garden to dress it : but they muſt labour then in their innocent eſtate , becauſe they were happy : and ſo much more muſt every one of us in his sinful condition ; get up and be doing , that he may be ſo . The Church of God is a Garden encloſed , ſo Cant. 4. 12. otherwiſe called , the vineyard of the Lord of Hoſts , Iſaiah 5. 7. Now , Laberandum in vinea , Labourers are for this vineyard , where they ſhall ever find , never want work : they therefore which dare be idle and loiter here , are worthy to be caſt out . The Apoſtle compares the Church of God to a building , Ep. 2. 20. the beauty whereof hath ever been ſuch a great eyesore to all ungodly men , that their mouths of wickedness have ſtill extended themſelves wide againſt it , crying of it , as they of Jeruſalem , Pſa . 137. 7. Raze it , raze it ; and their hands of violence lifted up , to down with it , down with it , even to the foundation thereof . The caſe being thus , he is not worthy to be eſteemed a member of the Church of God , who labours not with the very utmoſt of his endeavours , one way or other , to uphold , defend , maintain , enlarge this building , to keep this vineyard from waſte , this Fabric from ruin , which could not poſſibly continue , were it in the power of men or devils to deſtroy it . And if ever Diſtractions , Dissensions , Diviſions , threatened the well-being of a Church and State ( as they always do ) the Church of God in this Kingdom , at this time , is in very much danger ; wherein a general liberty is taken , in matters which concern Religion , by people ( of what ſpirit I know not ) to do what they pleaſe , not what they ſhould . Our malady we ſee , and cannot choose but complain of ; and if there be not a ſpeedy cure thought on to apply unto our hurt , the whole Kingdom may ſhortly take up that ſaying , and make particular application of it , prudens , ſciens , vivus , videnſ que pereo . For my self being lately called to that public place where this Sermon was delivered , I thought it my duty to fallen upon ſome ſubject that might have relation to our preſent times and diſtempers . In which you may pleaſe clearly to behold the neceſſity of Government , as well in Church as State , Then , how generally it is diſaffected , and by whom : eſteemed the heavieſt of all burdens : who therefore do what they can to throw it off : which meditations , as they then paſſed through the ears ( as I fear ) of many who then herd them : ( for this I am ſure of , that abundance of this spiritual ſeed every where miſcarries ) ſo they now moſt humbly deſire leave to take the boldness , that through Yours , they may pass into the hands of others , that may conſider them at leisure and upon better advantage . Vox audita perit , litera ſcripta manet . That which we only hear may eaſily ſlip from us ; when as that we read , & may read again , in probability may ſtick by us . And the Lord in mercy make this thus successful . For ſurely there were never any people under heaven that enjoyed and wanted more inſtruction then we do : when we ſeriouſly conſider how that Almighty God hath laid wide open before us the Books of his revealed will , of his mercies , of his judgements : yet though we have been taught abundantly by precepts , we have not learned : been pressed upon by mercies , we have not regarded : and chastened too by the keeneſt , the ſharpeſt of all temporal judgements , we have not been taught ▪ Doubtless , the body of this Kingdom was exceedingly corrupted , when it could not live , unless it bled , as it hath abundantly done , and yet the cure is not perfect , nor ever shall , till Reformation make up that breach , which ungodliness hath trodden down . Now there is no Reformation to be hoped for , without Religion : and no life , no power of Religion , without Government , to order it , guard it , encourage it . Which Church-Government , that Great Council ( of whom your very worthy Selves are a part ) have reſolved ſpeedily to eſtabliſh . The City of London are ready to taſte , and like , and entertain it . We in the Country do exceedingly want it , and the preſent want of that moſt deſired iſſue of your great labours , is ready to fill us with as much impatiency , as poor Rachel expreſſed for want of children , Gen. 30. 1. Now the Lord ſend it , and ſettle it throughout the whole Kingdom , and make all thoſe that shall called , to act in this great work , like Joſhua , who when he was appointed to be a Leader and a Governor of the people , Deut. 34. 9. was full of the ſpirit of wisdom : And fill them full of the spirit of zeal too , for the houſe of God , that Gods glory in the increaſe of his Church , may be ever before their eyes , ever in their aim . And the Lord make us who are Miniſters of the Word , in a special manner to apply our ſelves unto all thoſe , with whom we ſhall have to deal in all love , and meekness , and tenderness , and prudence , that ſo good and ſo great a work , be not quite marred by and ungodly , indiſcreet or careless handling . And the Lord give us arguments to persuade thoſe that have long continued in blindness , and conſequently have been ignorant of the neceſſary truths of God , now to incline their ears unto wisdom , and to apply their hearts unto underſtanding , Pr. 2. 2. that they may be while they are in a capacity of help , entreated to ſuffer God through Jeſus Chriſt , to ſave their souls : and let God ariſe and have mercy in building up his Sion amongſt us , that after our Eclipſe , he may appear unto us in glory . There was never yet any good and great work carried on without much oppoſition . From which , if that work of Church-Government , ſo ſeriouſly and long debated by You , had been exempted , I ſhould have joined with thoſe that had moſt queſtioned it . But now a great and effectual door is opened unto you ; God having ſo bleſſed the way you have reſolved to go , that he hath given it a free entrance into the hearts of many of his people ; And you have many adverſaries ; and it cannot be otherwiſe , ſo long as there are ſuch a number amongſt us , who are like bad Wares , which are for Dark ſhops , or like unto Blear-eyes , that cannot endure the Light . Moſt worthy Sirs , I dare not flatter you , and I ſhall not , if I tell you that it hath been ever my thoughts , as the thoughts of very many more , who have beſt means to know you , that you have done your parts in this great work . The advantage of whoſe prayers , you ſhall never want to carry you on , in it , through it : and then whatſoever the success be , you may waſh your Hands . The Lord who only can , moſt graciouſly aſſiſt , and abundantly recompense the unwearied pains of you All. I have this only to add , in relation to your particular Selves , that if my deer and tender reſpects unto you , cannot , your pardon may excuſe him for this boldness , who is , Your Worſhips , in all Chriſtian obſervance Edward Terry .