TO The Right Worshipful Sir ROBERT SHIRLEY Knight Baronet , And to his virtuous conſort the Lady CATHARINE SHIRLEY , the Author wishes all happiness , external , internal , and eternal . Rt. Wor. HAd not the importunity of friends prevailed with me , I had never publiſhed this Sermon preached at the ſolemnization of the funeral obſequies , of your Noble brother , Sir Charles ) for I was never ſo well conceited of the product of my weak brain , as to deem it worthy public view . If Moſes the author of my Text , Exod. 4. 10. profeſſed that he was not eloquent , that he was ſlow of ſpeech , and unapt for ſo great employment as he was called to : I am ſure I have ten thouſand thouſand times more cauſe to disclaim eloquence and to acknowledge my own weakness , and unworthiness ; yet this is my comfort Innocentia melior eloquentiâ Quintilian . innocence is better then eloquence ; a good cauſe better then a good orator . This little Manual or Enchiridion I am ſure will be cenſured , and I fear more then practiced : Scrinia damagnis , me manus una capit . Mar. lib . 1. epig . 2. one perhaps will quarrel with the style , another with the method , and others with the matter , but let ſuch know that I seek not the ſuffrages of their praiſe or approbation , Candor in hoc ae •• oh in • ermortua • enc , Ovid • e pont . lib . 〈 ◊ 〉 . elig . • . 〈 ◊ 〉 non ego •• entoſae •• lebis ſuf •• ragia we •• or . Ho •• a. lib . 1. ep . 9. Lucian . who like ſummer • lies breath corruption on the beſt proviſion : the malignity of whoſe wit , can find fault with the beſt actions , not only of men , but of God alſo , as Lucians Momus , who being called to judge of the excellency of thoſe maſter pieces the gods had made , ( ſcil . ) a man , a houſe and a horſe , found fault withal three , with the horſe , that it had not horns for defence , with the houſe , that it had not motion , and with the man , that he had not a window to look into his breaſt : even ſo theſe malevolent cenſurers criticiſe with a froward curioſity upon the beſt and pureſt volumes , and often times fill and blot them with their own Aſtericks and errata's . And where a candid cenſure might of every thing make a good conſtruction , and take all in a fair ſenſe , there will they through miſconſtruction or ſome idle conjecture , though to the fulleſt perjod , add , a nonnulla deſiderantur , that ſomething is wanting , or that it might have been better done otherwiſe . Inſomuch that it is even a task for divinity to pleaſe man , 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . Non 〈 ◊ 〉 cun • this place • vel Jupi • ter ipſe Nec mi •• tens pluv •• am , •• retinens •• pluviam . not that this argues any weakness in God who is able to do all things , but a perverseness in men nature that will be content with nothing . If therefore ſuch find fault , it ſhall not trouble me ; if any be contentious , we have no ſuch custom , nor the Church of God . 1 Corin. 11. 16. The more ingenious , are more courteous , Unus Plato plus eſt quam Athenienſis populus . 〈 … 〉 , in vita • lat . together with whom , ſo your Wor. continues your approbation of it , I ſhall think my self happy in my labours ; magnum • oc ego • luco , • ood pla •• ui tibi , qui tu • pi • ecernis • oncſtum H • rat-Ser •• . lib . 2. 〈 ◊ 〉 . 6. and acknowledge your favour herein , to be far tranſcending my merit ; the beſt of whoſe endeavors cannot deſerve the influence of ſo noble a protector . It is a good rule that in dedicating books , we ſhould be ſure that the thing be worthy the perſon to whom it is dedicated . • e exhortor moneoque libel , ut docto placeas Apolli ••• . I will not ſay this is ſuch , Mart. lib . 4. epig . 87. Dam mihi • te placidum , ingenium vultu ſtarque caditque tuo . Ovid faſt . lib 1. • mmenſa ſubit cura ut quae tibi dicantur te digna ſint . • lin . praef in Him •• • at . 〈 ◊ 〉 Veſp . imperat . In hoc faci • unt ſlult quos gloria vexa • inanis . becauſe I am conſcious to my self of much weakness and unworthiness : yet you will the more magnify your own worth by receiving ſo ſmall a mite into your ſo noble patrociny . I ſhall forbear much Apologizing , for your protection of this enſuing Sermon , having had aſſurance thereof already from you , at your houſe in Staunton ; my humble suit is , that you will pardon my demerits , and at your beſt leisure peruſe it , and I truſt that as God hath endowed you with a great temporal eſtate on earth , ſo you may by theſe my weak endeavours be excited to labour for , and diligently ſeek after , and eternal inheritance in the kingdom of heaven . The motto adnexed to your coat of arms is , A Eterna prapon • caducis , a • worser indeed it is the ſ • mme of my exhortations , in the enſuing Sermon . Be pleaſed therefore to • emember what you in that motto profess . Prefer heavenly above earthly things , ſet your affections on things above , and not on things beneath ; take heed to your ſelves , and keep your souls diligently . But the volume is ſo ſmall , that I muſt make the preface ſuitable , leſt the City run out of the gates , as the Philoſophers jeered the men of Myndum . 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . • acrt . de • it . Philoſ . • ib . 6. I ſhall therefore conclude with that of Saint Paul to the Theſſalonians , 1 Ep. 3 changed . 12. & 13. ver . the Lord make you increase and abound in love one towards another , and towards all men , to the end he may eſtabliſh your hearts unbl • mable , in holiness before God our father , even at the coming of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt with all his Saints : which is and ſhall be the hearty and conſtant prayer of Your moſt humble ſervant , IOHN WILSON .