To the Honourable City of London , and all the Inhabitants thereof , who ſincerely ſeek and deſire a true reformation of the Church , according to the Word of God . GIve me leave , moſt famous and renowned City , and you the Right Honourable Lord Major , the Right Worshipful Aldermen , and religious Common-Councell and Commoners , to congratulate and rejoice with you , for that honour which the Lord hath laid on you in theſe days of great confuſion . You , under God , have been the guard of this preſent Parliament , by which ſo great things have been done for the ſafety and defence of three Kingdoms . Your free contributions of your wealth and ſubſtance , have been the ſinews of this war , undertaken for the defence of our Religion , Laws and Liberties . Few Counties in this Kingdom have been able to defend themſelves , much less to help others , except thoſe whom you have encouraged , and ſet on work by your example , and to whom you have been a bulwark againſt the enemies , who by you have been terrified from invading them . All the aſsociated Counties have cauſe to bless God for the vicinity and neighbourhood of London . And all the reſt of the Kingdom may ſay , If the Lord had not helped us by the Forces , Arms , and ſupplies of men and money from London , we had been utterly destroyed and laid waſte . But the chief glory beſtowed on you by God , is your courage for the truth , and true Chriſtian Religion ; your earneſt ſtudy , and conſtant endeavour for promoting and happy Reformation of the Church in Religion , Dostrine , Worſhip , and Diſcipline , according to the Word of God ; your zeal against Sectaries , Schismatics , Heretics , and Blaſphemers , who labour cunningly to corrupt your ſervants , to ſteal away the hearts of your wives and children , to pull many fair feathers out of your wings , and to draw Diſciples after them , and your ſtanding steadfaſt in the old paths , and walking in that good way , Ier. 6. 16. which the Lord Chriſt by his Apoſtles hath prescribed to the Universal Church ; In which all the pure primitive Churches of old , and all the beſt reformed Churches have walked from the days of your Father's , until this day . God hath enabled you wonderfully by his grace , to reſiſt the ſubtle temptations of the world and the Devil . I know when you were courted with offers of greateſt honours and privileges , to withdraw you from your purpoſe and reſolution , of ſtanding for the common weal of State and Church , and of ſupporting and upholding of the props and pillars of this Land , when it trembled , and was ready to be diſsolved . I cannot forget that ſad time , full of fears and dangers , when ( the chief command of your City , being in the hand and power of Malignants , who had alſo a strong faction , by which they attempted to overthrow you ) it was the opinion and profeſsion of ſome of the moſt faithful Patriots , and wiſe members of Parliament , that unless God did put into your hearts a reſolution to ſtand up for them , they had ſmall hope of ſaving either the Church and Kingdom from ruin , or our Religion , Laws , Liberties , and their own lives from deſtruction ; and in that juncture of time the Lord did put ſuch a ſpirit of courage , fortitude and holy zeal into you , who were the main body of the City , that you stood up , and appeared openly for the worthy Patrons of your Religion , Laws and Liberties , whereby they were animated to proceed vigorouſly in their wonted courſe of juſtice , to the terror and aſtoniſhment of all the enemies and diſturbers of our peace . After this you have been strongly aſſaulted by spiritual wickedneſſes diverse ways . Firſt , by cunning ſeducers , who uſurping the name and outward show of rare Saints , have stolen away the hearts of many , and with feigned ſanctity and large promiſes of a pure platform and model of Church-Diſcipline and perfect Reformation , according to Chriſts own inſtitution , have drawn them into Schism , and ſeparation from their own Congregations . But you , by your wiſdom have quickly ſmelled out their fraud , and vain boaſting of great things , which they can never perform and bring to pass . Secondly , you have been tried , ( when Scriptures failed them , and favoured not their model ) with bold pretences of new lights , which you have ſcorned , as wiſe men are wont to ſcorn , and not vouchſafe to look after thoſe ignes fatuos , wandering lights and night fires , by which fools , who follow them in the dark , are led into dangerous pits , bogs , ditches , and downfalls . Thirdly , they have repreſented unto you Presbyterian Government as a Bugbear , and cruel monſter , worſe then Popery and Prelacy , unto which if you ſubmit , you and your children are made ſlaves for ever , to the lust of proud , peeviſh , tyrannical Priests ; And although many credulous fools , and unſtable ſouls , are hereby terrified and scared out of their wits , and run wild after several dangerous ſects , and know not where to reſt : Yet you are no ſuch ſtrangers to the Goſpel , nor ſo little acquainted with the Scriptures of the New Teſtament , as to be moved with ſuch skarecrowes ; but rather by ſuch rabid railing againſt Government of the Church by Classical Presbyteries , you have been moved and ſtirred up ( after ſerious conſideration , and conſultation had with your godly Pastors , and Teachers , diligent ſearching of the Scriptures , and good aſſurance of underſtanding of divine truth gained to your ſelves ) to be more earneſt and importunate in promoting that Presbyterian Government , beside which there is no mention of any other in all the writing of the Apoſtles ; nor any other acknowledged or received , in any well reformed Churches in all the Chriſtian world . The Apostolical Church at Jeruſalem , conſiſting of many thouſands and ten thouſands of believers , and ſo many particular Congregations , was altogether governed by the Apoſtles and Presbyters , Aſſemblies , Synods and Presbyteries , as appears , Act. 11. 30. and 15. 6. and 21. 18. The Chriſtian Church of the Gentiles gathered unto Chriſt in several Nations , Countries and Cities by Paul and Barnabas , had every one their Presbyters , ordained to have rule over them in the Lord , Acts 14. 23. The Church of Epheſus , that great City of Aſia , had alſo diverse Presbyters , whom the Holy Ghoſt had made overſeers to watch in common over it , Acts 20. 17 , 28. And of them S. Paul ſpeaks , 1 Tim. 5. 17. ſaying , Let the Elders that rule well , be counted worthy of double honour . Alſo S. Paul left Titus in Creet , and appointed him to ordain Presbyters in every City , and ſuch overſeers as were fit to rule the Church , Tit. 1. 5. Peter and Iohn were Presbyters , and called themſelves ſo , as they with others governed several Churches , 1. Pet. 5. 1. John 2. 1. and John 3. 1. Wherefore , o London , thou that haſt choſen the beſt part , rejoice in the Lord thy God , who hath made his glory to riſe upon thee , and his light to ſhine upon thy grave Senators , thy religious Common-Councell , and all thy true hearted Citizens ; and hath led them into thoſe ways which be in Chriſt , which Saint Paul taught every where , and in every Church , 1 Cor. 4. 17. For the encouraging of you , worthy Citizens , in your conſtancy , and for the confirming of them that are weak and wavering , I have framed out of the Scriptures this brief diſcourſe , concerning that one uniform Church-Government , which Chriſt by his Apoſtles ordained , and appointed to be ſet up in the whole universal Church , and to be obſerved in all other Churches , members of the universal . Here you have the Heavenly pattern ſhadowed out in a ſmall compass , of that Government , for the eſtabliſhment whereof in this City and Kingdom , you have ſtood up and appeared openly at several times . If the Lord be pleaſed to bless you with courage for his truth , and with conſtancy and perſeverance till you obtain your deſire , which is the deſire alſo of all Orthodox faithful Miniſters in the Land , then ſhall London be called , The City of the Lord , the Zion of the holy one of Iſrael ; And they who deſpiſe her and ſtand up against her , to hinder the work of God in her hands , ſhall bow down at the ſoles of her feet , and her enemies ſhall lick the duſt , even lick up the duſt of her feet , for they ſhall not be aſhamed who wait for the Lord , Iſa . 49. 23. This is the prayer of your ſervant in the work of the Lord , and humble ſuppliant for your proſperity at the throne of grace . G. W.