To the Reader . CHriſtian reader , I will take it as a great favour from thee , if in reading this my Anſwer thou wilt judge me to be , as indeed , and in truth I am , and adverſary of the cauſe , and not of the perſon . He who is commonly reported to be the Author of the foure queſtions in hand , is one whoſe perſon I have , from my firſt knowledge of him , dearly loved , honoured , and admired , for his excellent parts , profitable pains for the public good , and his unwearied labours , and patient ſufferings in the cauſe of Chriſt . If he hath but once in all his life ſtumbled upon a bad cauſe , and pleaded for it , ( which is a common , and in ſome ſort a neceſſary evil , hardly to be avoided by men of his vocation : ) let not this blemiſh his great learning , nor his judgement , found in all other points , and leaſt of all his approved piety and zeal for true religion . His name , which was happily concealed , and not annexed to theſe foure queſtions , ſhall ever be precious with me , and I hope with all Gods people alſo , who truly fear the Lord , long for the peace of Zion , and unfeignedly ſeek the reformation of Christs Church , in all theſe three Kingdoms . It is no ſmall grief to me , that I am compelled to move my pen in writing againſt any paper , publiſhed by and hand ſo deer to me : But in the cauſe of Chriſt , and in a point ſo prejudicial to the peace and pure reformation of the Church , Who can be ſilent ? The neareſt relations of love which one Chriſtian can have to another in this world , muſt not hinder us , nor ſtay our hands , tongues or pens from performance of any duty , in which we all ſtand obliged to the Lord Chriſt our Redeemer , and to his Church our deer mother . And wherein can we be more neceſſitated to show our duty to both , then in reſisting with all our power whatſoever tends to the common and continual profanation of the holy Sacrament of Chriſts body and blood ? which cannot poſſibly be avoided , if the power of the keys , which Chriſt hath given to his Apoſtles and their ſucceſſors , with a promiſe to be with them to the end of the world , be taken , under any pretence , out of the hands of the Pastor's and Presbyters of the Church , and no power left unto them to put by any ſinners , openly ſcandalous and impenitent , from the holy Communion nor to exclude ſuch spiritual lepers , moſt loathſome and infections , from the ſacred meeting at the Lords holy Table . Who does not ſee that the main cauſe of the Schisms and ſeparations of diverse godly and zealous Chriſtians from our Communion , is the mixture of the profane among the pious and godly , and the admiſſion of perſons openly ſcandalous to the holy Sacrament ? This is that which hath moved many out of their blind zeal to proclaim our Church , a whore a ſtrumpet , a Synagogue of Antichriſt ; and our faithful Miniſters , Baals Prieſts , and limbs of the beaſt . All true Chriſtians , and moſt of all the Miniſters of the Word , are bound to put to their hands and ſhoulders for the removing of this ſtumbling-block and rock of offence out of the way : And I eſpecially more then others , by reaſon of that ſingular love I bear to this deer brother erring in this point , and leaſt I ſhould offend against that commandment , Lev. 19. 17. Thou ſhalt not have thy brother in thine heart : thou ſhalt in any wiſe rebuke thy neighbour , and not ſuffer ſin upon him , or bear ſin for him . His paper is gone forth in public , private rebuke will not hinder the hurt which it may do : It hath given ſuch public wounds , as cannot be cured but by a public remedy . The Lord , the great healer of souls , give a ſpeedy cure to the maladies of his Church , and all our soul-sicknesses : to him be praiſe for ever and ever .