TO THE LOVERS OF HONOUR & POESIE . GENTLEMEN , YOu whoſe conſtitutions are even and equal , not overbalanced with earthly and baſe metal , love Honour and Gallantry in any man , & virtus in host probatur . You who know God made all things by his own Rule of Proportion , ( in weight , meaſure and number : ) you who are friends to that Divine , Noble , and Royal Art of Poeſy , for what is it but well weighed words , made even by that Lesbian Rule of Proportion ? you can beſt judge of theſe fancies dedicated to you , as they are meant . The ſubject of my Poetry is noble , and the nobleſt of Gods creatures , Man , brave men , loyal men , who have died like Ionathan and his brother's , either with the King , or in his Cauſe , ( moſt of them ) the other were worthy a better Muſe as well as they . This way of ſervice to the memory of the dead wants not preſidents worthy our imitations , Kings and Prophets , and the greateſt Lawgiver , whom I will take for my firſt preſident of Poetry , even Moſes , who from Gods own mouth gave the Law to his own people : he compoſed ſuch a ſong , as the Lamb and Angels make uſe of it , ( Apoc. 15. ) which was his ſong of deliverance he left compoſed , and ſo firſt ſanctified Poetry , as Chriſt and his Apoſtles in the New Teſtament by the allegation of the Psalms and Prophets , who were both Poets and Vates . Alſo S. Paul ſanctified the Heathen Poets . David , vir ſecundùm cor Dei , that pious Prince , that martial King , that glorious man of God , truly deſerved that glorious Epithet , Princeps Poetarum . Solomon , the wiſeſt of men , compoſed his Songs and Canticles . David in this way of Poeſy made and 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 for Saul and Ionathan . And Ieremy made the 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 for good Ioſias . He that goes up to the mountain of God , ſhall meet the Prophets with musical raptures . The Jewes buried their dead with great ceremony , and had their Praeficaes , women ſingers , their 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , their ſongs of mourning and lamentation , their burning of Incenſe and ſweet odours for their Kings , and ſolemn mournings for their Princes . They mourned and faſted ( 1 Sam. 31. 13. and 2 Sam. 1. 12. ) for their Kings , they mourned many days , as for Moſes and Ioſhua , and ſo for Ioſias ; for whom ( as I ſaid ) Ieremy made the 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . The chief mourner at every reſting place ſung the usual 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 , or as we call it , the burden of the ſong ; like that in Ier. 9. 18. that our eyes may run down with tears , and our eyelids guſh out with waters . And this they did in hope of Reſurrection , as well as honour of the dead , for they comforted their friends with places of Scripture fulleſt of comfort , as that of Eſay 25. 8. He will ſwallow up death in victory , and wipe away all tears : And Pſal . 72. 16. They ſhall flouriſh and ſpring again as the grass on the earth . And they called the Churchyard , or burying place , BETH CHAIIM , Domus viventium , the houſe of the living . The Primitive Church uſed ſuch Ceremonies in this way , as would pass for Popery amongſt us now adays ▪ though it was in the pureſt times of the Church uſed , ( ſo much as it was by miſtake abuſed ) and turned to Idolatry . But if that were a juſt exception againſt lawful Ceremonies , it may ſtand as well againſt Doctrine as Diſcipline , for both have been abuſed , the one by Heretics , the other by Schismatics , and both ought to be obſerved , the one in ordine ad eſſe Eccleſiae , the other ad bene eſſe . So this kind of Poesy hath warrant beyond exception , and this ceremony of Burial : He who wanted it amongſt the Jewes was ſaid to have the burial of and Ass , ſo Ier. 22. Ieconia was ſaid to have ſuch a burial . Thus much I have ſaid to satisfy the curious , or rather ignorant concerning Poeſy , and the honourable mention and memory of the dead : And they who had it not in the Primitive Church ( if it could be had ) were ſaid to have inſepultam ſepulturam . As for my Characters and Tranſlations , they are fruits of Fancy , and were but as Salads are to ſolid diſhes , to ſharpen the appetite : ſo theſe to my ſerious ſtudies were , or as Davids Harp , to the melancholy thoughts of my impriſonment . I muſt acknowledge ( with thanks to God ) I found ſingular comfort in this way , and this ſufferance , and that it ſet and edge upon my overtired and dulled brain , and theſe Fancies were the fire warmed them . My wish is , they may be accepted of ſuch as know how to judge , and have ſo much honour not to miſinterpret good meaning , and my zeal to the Cauſe wherein I ſuffer . I thank heaven , God hath supplied me with a large meaſure of patience and comfort , as pledges of his favour , and ſo much charity ▪ I wiſh them rather a right underſtanding , then any ill ; and ſuch a proportion of inward comfort as may make them as happy in their Liberty as I am in priſon . Let them therefore with Charity read , what they find in this little Volume , and ſuch and encouragement may produce to the view of the world , my more ſerious Studies , to which theſe were but a preparative , and as I ſaid before , a ſalad to more ſolid diſhes , which I will promiſe you ſhall be ſerved up , if this pleaſe ; if not , I have not loſt my patience , much less the comfort of my fancy , ( which none can take from me ) and I can content my self with that Greek ſaying , which ſuits me as well as if it had been made for me , 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 . The Motto of my Family . AMICITIAS VOLO , INIMICITIAS SPERNO . I ſtudy my friends , and scorn my causeless enemies . This is the Reſolution of your Servant , Fr. Wortley .