To the Right Honourable ROBERT Lord BROOK . My Noble Lord , YOur Lordſhip being pleaſed to do the World that honour , to impart to it ſomewhat of Yours ( and therefore Honourable , ) it was My Happiness , amongſt the reſt , to be and Object of that Favour ; And yet my Unhappiness ſo far , as not in all things to fallen in with your Lordſhip : Like a Mariner at Sea , deſcrying within ken a fair Vessel under Sa • le , promiſing a rich Lading , makes up to her ; and underſtanding whence ſhe is , and whither ſhe is bound , deſires to view her Fraught ; but coming ſo near as to go aboard , falls foul of her ( as they ſpeak ) and is entangled , and perhaps may both have work enough to get clear . The •• ire Vessel I had in view , was your Lordship's Treatiſe , now under Sail , ( when made public ; ) which however directed ▪ to a Private Port or Sinus ( a Friends Bosom ) yet paſſes the Ocean to arrive at it : your Lordship's Name informs me Whence it is , and withal promiſes a Rich Fraught ; which the Bill of Lading tells me What it is , The Nature of Truth ; and blame me not if I were ambitious to ſee it , that I might adore it : If , by miſchance , I be entangled , I hope your Lordship's hand will help me to get clear . Our firſt father's , which had never seen Fire before , while every one was catching at that which ſhone ſo Bright , no marvel if he that firſt meddled with it , Burned his Fingers : The Beauty of Truth is likewiſe Bright and Glorious ; ſo Glorious , that ſome have found her Dazzle their Eyes , ( he might have ſaid , Others have Burned their Fingers , And I , perhaps , am one of them . ) Truth is a Glorious Object , a fit Object only for a Noble Hand : Yet Suitor sometime , though he preſume not to Better Apelles Picture , may yet find fault with the Shoe ; and that without blame , while he go not ultra crepidam . Your Lordſhip , sometime , in this Divine Treatiſe , for fear of Dazzling our Eyes , hath left us in a Want of Light . Naked Truth , which your Lordſhip had the happiness to Behold , is propoſed to us Clothed , and Guilded ( rather then Painted ) in a moſt curious Dress indeed , yet ſuch as hides the Body ; the Beauty whereof being ſo well worth beholding , we had rather have seen her ( as your Lordſhip did ) without her gown , without her crown , the better to have diſcerned her true Proportion . Rhetorical Embellishments being the ſame sometime in a Philosophical Diſcourſe , that varniſh on a fair Picture , which helps to ſet it off , but withal hides it , and preſents it more Gloſſy but less Diſtinct . For what the Orator uses to Illuſtrate , that the Philoſopher finds to Obſcure . And thus much perhaps , if no more , may be gained by the enſuing diſcourſe , that your Lordſhip taking occaſion from thence , may afford more Light to that which diverse deſire better to underſtand , and Unmask ſo Fair a Face . ( At leaſt thoſe who have once seen her Naked , may take the pains to Undress her . ) And perhaps having taken a ſecond view , through this a more thick Perſpective of not ſo high raiſed a Fancy , may give us a more Diſtinct Delineation of what its own Dazzling Brightness preſented at firſt more confuſed . I hope I ſhall need no large Apology to obtain Acceptance , at leaſt a Pardon from ſo Noble a Lord , ( to whom , I am told , nothing can be more grateful , and who promises the faireſt anſwer , ) if I Accept the Challenge : which it's like your Lordſhip would Perform , ( if at leaſt Encounters of another nature would give way to thoſe of the Pen . ) If I be demanded therefore of what I do , Why at all ? I reply , Becauſe , in your Lordship's name , invited : If why ſo late ? I have nothing to reply but this , Qui ſerò that , diu noluit . What was at firſt , in a few days , written to a private Friend , having lain ſo long in your Lordship's hands , is a ſufficient teſtimony that I made no haſte to publiſh it . I have but one requeſt to make , and kiss your Lordship's hand , that you would vouchſafe , if I have done well , to Accept , if otherwiſe , to Pardon Your Lordship's moſt humble Servant , IOHN WALLIS .