To the Right Worshipful Maſter Thomas Clarke , and Maſter Thomas Cart , Bailiffs of TEUKSBURIE : And To Maſter William Wilſon , Maſter William Crossed , Maſter Thomas Hale , Mr. Theoph : Alley Mr. Iohn Millington , Mr. Henry Lane , Mr. Thomas Clarke junior , Mr. Edward Phelps ; and to all the reſt of the well affected to King and Parliament there : Iohn Ward wishes true peace and freedom here , and eat ••• l felicity hereafter . RIght Worshipful , and the reſt of my friends and acquaintance , I here preſent you with a ſhort Relation of the taking of Wincheſter ; which is ( though eaſily accomplished , yet ) worth the hearing . I confess theſe are not times for men to ſpend in writing or reading Hiſtories : But this being matter of diſcouragement to the foe , and of great encouragement to us , I thought good to divulge : and ſo much the rather , becauſe I know it hath been publiſhed already by a falſe Copy , which mentions the enemies iſſuing out of the City to meet us ; which is no ſuch matter , and deſerveth a check rather then approbation . Worthy Gentlemen , the reſpect and duty that I owe to you all , does enforce me to make this Dedication to you , knowing you all to be Patrons to all virtuous actions , in the Town where I was born , and wellwishers to me : and therefore I preſume , that though it be but ſlenderly composed , ( the Subject being a known truth , and I your native Countryman as well in affection as by birth ) you will with the more tenderness pass by any blur committed in the penning thereof , and cenſure more favourably of my blunt and weak expreſſions . And no queſtion but that you ( ſetting Wincheſter before you for and example ) will with the more courage and unwearied reſolution defend your ( yet unplundered ) Corporation from the barbarous cruelty , and from the ambitious pride and inſolency of ſo deſtructive and enemy ; who if he once enters will leave you nothing to take pleaſure in , but the ruins of and once flouriſhing Corporation . Thus barring compliments , I remain your muſt affectionate and faithful friend , John Ward .