TO THE HIGH COVRT OF PARLIAMENT , There or elsewhere ſcattered , for the faith of the Church , and ſervice of the Gospel ; Grace and Peace be multiplied . LEt me crave your Honourable patience , while your eye runs over this Epistle and Preface : both as ſhort , as poſſibly I could make it . For the Book it ſelf , it cannot crave , haply it may command your eye and ear both , for this Reaſon . It is a CHRONICLE fully and wholly taken out of the Book of God . It treats of Kings and Princes , Prieſts and Levites too , of common-people alſo ; their several ways here on Earth , with several notes upon theſe ways , taken from Gods mouth too . I will take leave to tell you , how I fell upon this work . I herd a great cry , and I was one , who helped to make it greater ; we complained of the Times and of you , not a word of our ſelves , and thus we spoke unadviſedly enough after our manner ; our expectation is clean fruſtrate : we looked for good , behold evil : for peace , behold a Sword : Summer is come and gone , we are not delivered . Delivered ! never in worſe caſe then now . That we thought would do us good , hath done us hurt . Then , as that stubborn people , never well full nor faſting , called out Moſes , Moſes ( he was in all the blame ſtill ) ſo we called out upon you , and wiſhed ten times , as they did , that we were , as we were , in Egipt again . Thus we , poor ſimple ones , have done and doe , ſtanding all the while in the bottom and upon the level of our own Imaginations . By the good hand of God upon me , I did according to the charge , SEARCH THE SCRIPTURES ; they testify of the Lord Jeſus Chriſt , yes , and of all that ever was , is , or ſhall be done in the world , for , or againſt His Kingdom there , wherein theſe times are eminently , very infamous and very glorious both . I thank God , that I did ſearch the Scriptures : for now I can give a full and clear account of all the affairs now a days . 1. That they are what they have been , nothing NEW , that is now under the Sun. What is now irregular and our of Rule is not new , but as it hath been done by theſe , whoſe will was their Bias , ſo they run apace furiouſly , I had almoſt ſaid , but very directly to their own and their peoples ruin : And they that walked regularly after the line of Heaven , obtained the Sabbath and port of all their labours , were a bleſſing to themſelves , and to the place where they lived . 2. I can reprove my own folly now , and theirs , who are but a little wiſer , That we have not a faith to live upon , for we make haſte ; we ask and we have not , becauſe we asked amiss ; we expected , and our expectation is vain , becauſe we were too haſty , and expected without the book : we would have God go our way , and do things juſt when and how , we would have Him : as if wiſdom were with us , and we could tell the fitteſt time . Our complaints are as wild as our thoughts ; we complain as if ſome ſtrange and new things were done now , when indeed there is nothing now that is new ; Man was mad upon his Idols in ancient times ; he is but mad now . And when his Idols Ier. 50 38. were ſtruck-at , he would ſtrike too , and be in a rage ; he do's no more now . The Nations were angry , when Chriſt had taken to Himſelf power Reve. 11. 18. , then they made Tumults ; they do but the ſame now : And in proportion to their rage now , shall their judgement be anon , it ſhall reach unto Heaven , and be lifted up even to the skies . Ier. 51. 9. 2 Chron. 28. 9. They brake His bonds before and caſt away His Cords , They are not more like to Devils now . The Lord laughed at thoſe furious fools then ; He laughs now : He ſaw their day was coming Psalm . 37. ; we thank Him for His Eye ſalve , we ſee as much now . The LORD Chriſt has few friends , that will own His cauſe , that will ſtand by Him , and that troubles a few in the world : That is no new thing neither : Time was when all forſook Him , Diſciples and all : And then His Adverſaries wrought their will on Him , but then He wrought moſt gloriouſly , for from the Cross and the grave ( the Adverſaries thought Him ſure enough , they had their will on Him , when they had Him there , but from thence ) He hath brought life and immortality to light , through the Gospel . He is the ſame , and by the ſame 2 Tim. 1. 10. crossways and wills , can work as gloriouſly ſtill ; and there is nothing now that is new . 3. But that , which pleases me moſt of all , is , I have found a price , and I find it put into your hands , I mean , A way opened unto you , whereby to deliver a Nation , brought even to the mouth of deſtruction ; which you ſhall do , not by commanding the Sword to be ſtill , ( for it is the Lords Sword , and out of your command ; you are no more able to ſtop it in it's way , then you can the Sun in it's courſe ) but by ſtriking at the root , Idolatrous perſons and things ; by removing them from before the eyes of His jealousy : and by caſting them out : If not , the Lord has sworn , and He will not repent , that He will do with you , and with your Land ( for it is yours now , and not the Lords , ſo long as Idols are countenanced there , and they are countenanced , ſo long as they are not thrown out , whither perſons or things ) as you ſhould have done to the Idols there ; & as He hath done to Iſrael and Iudah , becauſe of thoſe Idols ; They did not caſt them forth from before His Eyes ; therefore they are caſt out of their own Land , and from being a Nation . Now the choice is easy ; you muſt caſt-out theſe abominations , else you and your Land muſt be caſt-out ; it is at your choice , choose you whither . You are about it , you will ſay , you have made and Ordinance againſt Idolatry , and we muſt be humbled for it , every man of us . Bleſſed be God for that , and His bleſſings be upon your ſouls . But do you conſider what and engagement you have laid upon your ſouls ; or do we ſilly ones conſider what it is , to be humbled for this high provocation ? To loath our selves , becauſe of our whoriſh hearts , and abominable Idolatries , wherewith we have broken the Lords heart Ezek. 6. 9. , as His Highness is pleaſed to express His loathing of that ſin ; This is to be humbled ; and then preſently follows a caſting-out , as we do that we loath , and our stomach riſeth againſt Eſa . 30. 22. . But herein you muſt led us the way , else , like Behemoths legs , we ſhall break before we bow ; we muſt ſee you humbled before us , as all the worthies of Iſrael , before the Lord for this thing ; but we ſhall never believe our eyes neither , till we ſee you , as you may ſee them , caſting-out Idols , and their ſervices , till they were all caſt-out , I mean all theſe abominations ; and ſo I met with a 4h thing . 4. The exacteſt pattern of poſturing a Kingdom that ever was looked upon ; the very work you are upon now . Shall it proſper ? The Lord knows , I cannot tell , and yet I have inquired of the Oracle . I can tell , it is your work , and woe unto you if you do it not ; but how you hand-it I cannot tell , nor by what line and level you go ; nor do I take upon me to judge thereof ; but till you make anſwer to God in that point , you will never be anſwered . Truly I cannot tell what to ſay to men or their work . The Oracle ( that is the word of God ) tells me , they are fickle , inconſtant , prepoſterous too , they begin where they ſhould end , and end where they ſhould begin , the manner of Men . This only I can tell , for ſo the Oracle tells me , that when the Worthies of Iſrael , Kings and Princes there , Priest and People too ( in the Nonage of their King ) fell upon this great work , the Poſturing their Kingdom , they began with and Ordinance againſt Idolatry ; That is the Land wasting ſin : nor did they mock God , for whosoever lifted up his hand to a ſtrange god , him they cutoff 2 Chr. 15. 13. . Then behold breaking , cutting , burning , drowning , caſting out of Idols , all , until they had utterly deſtroyed them all 2 Chro. 31. 1. . Nay they caſt down the taleſt perſon , and Image in the Land ; The Queen Mother's Image her ſon Aſa the King did not ſpare her , no not her . Then the work went on , and they proſpered . Now ( as was ſaid ) I take not upon me to judge by what line and level , the work is carried-on , if , as Iudahs work was , we can the more heartily wiſh your proſperity in the name of the Lord , for our lives , to ſay no more , the life of our lives is wrapt-up with it : if otherwiſe , and you work not as you have them for and enſample , yet the work of the Lord ſhall gone , that ſhall proſper ; He is working now , to make His Church a quiet habitation : and He will bring His work about through the ſtraits and by the cross ways and wills of men , though you ſhould deſert the work and withdraw your hands from ſhould ring up the Lord Chriſt to His Throne ( He calls for your hand to honour you , and woe to you if you withdraw , but I ſay , He needs you not ) He can ſet Himſelf in His throne without you , & His work ſhall gone in despite of Devils or men . As ſure as the Lord lives , His work ſhall go on . What a proud word is that from a men mouth ! Yes , if it were not from Gods mouth . Lift up thine eyes round about , says the Lord ; Eſa . 49. 14. now harken what we ſay ; what ſhall we behold , a company of Pillagers , Robbers , Spoilers ? It grieves our hearts to lift up our eyes round about and behold . The Lord give us patience , that we may ſtand ſtill and hear Him out , and wait till He hath done His whole work ; for harken what He says to ſtay the heart ; All theſe gather themselves and come to thee ; what to spoil , and rob the Church ? No , to adorn and beautify her ; The Church ſhall have many Ʋid calv . children ; they ſhall flock-in unto her , as the Chickens to the Hen , as Children to their Mother , and their graces ſhall abound , and there is the Churches ornament . But ſhall this be ? Yes the Lord hath sworn it ſhall be , As I LIVE , says the LORD , thou ſhalt ſurely cloth thee with them Eſa . 49. 19. all , as with and ornament , and bind them on thee as a Bride does : For thy waſte and thy deſolate places and the Land of thy DESTRVCTION , ( Mark that , this Land ſhall be glorious for all this , it ſhall rejoice over her enemies , the Land of thy destruction ) ſhall even now be too narrow by reaſon of the Inhabitants , and they that ſwallowed thee up ſhall be far away . As I LIVE , says the LORD . And this work in His Hand ſhall be perfected in His time . Our time is now , His time not yet , till His whole work be performed . Briars and thorns are now ſet againſt the Lord in battle . Eſa . 27. 4. As ſure as the Lord lives , He will go through them , and burn them together , in His own time , when theſe thorns have been to His people , as thoſe were to Manaſſeh , when they have humbled His people , been a ſanctified means to purge the iniquity of Jacob ( for that is the fruit of thorns to the ſervants of God ) when their hearts ſhall be thereby prepared for the great work of Reformation ; then the Lord will go through theſe Briars and thorns , there ſhall be no more fear of them . In the mean time , the Lord will help His people with a little help , ſo much as ſhall revive their hope's , when they be fainting , and keep up their ſpirits , in aſſured Confidence , That the work ſhall be done then , when Jacob ſhall moſt rejoice , and Iſrael ſhall be right 1 Kin . 8. 59 , 60 , 61. glad Psalm . 53. 6. . Amen .