

TO MY LORD the Chancellor.

My Lord,

I Have underſtood of your deniall, for the publiſhing of a Libell, lately fram'd againſt me. And though (perhaps) the harme that I ſhould have received thereby, would have been but ſmall, yet my obligation unto you, never ceaſeth to be great; and this argueth a ſpeciall care in you of my tranquillity, not to ſuffer that any, the leaſt noiſe ſhould diſquiet it. I know not (my Lord) if this be not to handle with too much niceneſſe and tendernes, a man that makes profeſſion of Philoſophy; it were enough

that publike Authority ſhould ſhelter me from the tempeſt, without exempting me from the wind and duſt, and that it would guard my Retrait from ſavage beaſts, without frighting away the flies alſo, and ſuch importunate Inſects. But (my Lord) the goodneſſe which you reſerve for me, extends farther then to ordinary juſtice. You take not only care for my repoſe amidſt the hurry and tumult of Europe, but you would have the world alſo ſhew a reſpect unto my retiredneſſe, and that being ſequeſtred from men. J ſhould be alſo placed beyond the levell and reach of Detraction. Yet this Fiend did purſue S. Hierome even unto the Grotts of Bethlehem, and to the foot of our Saviours cradle, there ſhe found him (as he relates himſelfe) although he had

thought to hide himſelfe. If this inſolent Thing had no regard of an admirable ſanctity, and a place guarded with Angels, me thinks a vulgar innocence, retired within an ill fortified village, muſt not expect any favourable treaty. But to paſſe from common conditions to the learned Tribe; If in all ages, there aroſe ſeditious ſpirits, that rebelled againſt the Chieftaines of Arts and diſcipline, and if in the memory of our fathers, it was ſpoken openly at Paris, that Ariſtotle was a ſimple Sophiſter, J think they deale courteouſly with me in this Country, if they be contented to call me a ſimple writer. That great blaſphemer of the name of Aristotle (my Lord) was D. Ramus, who afterward, though he was a Catholique, was taken for a Huguenot, at the maſſacre;

And indeed, ſome did believe that God permitted this to come to paſſe by a juſt judgement; and that the Tutelar Angell of good Letters, took the pretext of Religion, for to revenge the injuries that were done to Reaſon. There is one this day alive in Germany, a petty Tyrant in Grammer, an enimy of common and generall verities, and an accuſer of Cicero; who (not long ſince) hath put forth ſome obſervations, where he preferres a bill againſt his own Judge, and queſtions the precedency ever allowed unto that Prince of Latine Antiquity. So that (my Lord) the univerſall conſent of all the world, ſtrengthned by a preſcription of 18. centuries of years, is not a ſufficient title for to warrant the reputation of that Roman, againſt

the prevaricating quirkes of this Barbarian. Indeed, this is a buſineſſe of no good example, but yet ſince it is ſo, and that it doth litle availe Virtue, to be conſecrated by time, and to be crowned by the people, for to make it inviolable againſt the practiſes of ſome private Humors. There is no reaſon that I ſhould complaine before ſo many Worthies, that have bin ſo ill intreated themſelves, and that I ſhould be had in any conſideration, where Ariſtotle and Cicero are not in ſafety; an ordinary man ſhould not make moan, for ſuffering the ſame deſtiny, which extraordinary Perſonages have undergone; and I cannot with modeſty, deſire or expect from you, that you ſhould reforme the world for the love of me; nay, J know (my Lord) that this litle

diſorder, is of ſome good uſe in a common-wealth; and it were to be wiſhed, that malice would buſy it ſelfe thus, about things of ſmall importance, that it might not think of buſineſſes of higher conſequence. Thoſe that have hitherto beſtowed their pains, in depraving the ſence of my words, and in falſifying my works, had (perhaps) ere this time, forged mens Teſtaments, and minted falſe coines; And he that now deſires from you a priviledge, would have ſtood in need of a Pardon, it may be, if it had not been for me. It is better by farre, that injuſtice ſhould exerciſe it ſelfe upon my books, than that it ſhould vexe and implead againſt all that is good and ſacred in a civill ſociety; that unjuſt men ſhould rather toſſe and tranſpoſe words, invert and

pervert periods of ſpeeches, than remove the bounds of lands, or demoliſh their Neighbours houſes; To ſay the truth, this is the moſt innocent way that vice can imploy it ſelfe in, and I believe I have not a litle deſerv'd from the common-wealth, for keeping at worke theſe ten years, ſuch an infinite number of idle companions, who (certainly) would have been dangerous Commonwealths-men, if they had not choſen rather to have been ridiculous Cenſors. It is well, that the heat of their braines, is exhaled out this way, and that their intemperance takes this courſe; and that to prevent their fury, men give ſome ſcope and liberty to their folly. Permit them therefore this exerciſe (my Lord) they cannot chooſe but make uſe of their time, which they will

imploy farre worſe, if you doe not permit them to imploy it thus. Permit giddy Youth to ſpend their heat and fury upon a ſenſeleſſe ſubject, and a dead letter, which is not capeable either of joy or ſorrow. As long as theſe Pen-fencers only beg the Seale of your Authority, be no niggard of the Prince his grace and favour, and abate ſomething of your wonted ſeverity and rigour. If it were anew & unuſuall thing, it may be, I ſhould be contented to have the firſt Libell, which branded me with injuries be ſuppreſſed, but ſince there is now a pretty Library of them, I am in a manner well pleaſed it ſhould ſwell and increaſe, and I take a delight to build me a moniment with thoſe ſtones, which Envy hath hurl'd at me, without doing me harme. I account

it no diſgrace to be cenſur'd by ſome men, becauſe I account it no credit to be favour'd by them: I intend not to canvaſſe for voices, nor labour a myſterious ſecret, whereby I may gaine the generall applauſe of the world. I have obtained what I deſired, (my Lord) if I have obtained your approbation, as being derived from an un-erring principle, and from an Jntelligence moſt perfectly illuminated. God hath beſtowed on you, a ſoveraigne judgement, before the King had committed to your hands, his ſoveraigne Juſtice. And you were moſt powerfull in Reaſon, before you were ſo in Authority. J need not have recourſe to this, knowing that the other is no way againſt me, and I eſtime it more glory to me, to have pleaſed you, than I would

think it ſatisfaction to have my enimies proſcribed by you. Your ſpeeches of me upon every occaſion ſo full of reſpect, your own pourtraiture that you beſtowed upon me a yeare agoe, for a pledge of your Affection, your imparting to me the riches of your writings, I mean thoſe writings, that were animated with the ſpirit of the State, and were full of the greatneſſe of your Maſter, which ſeemed to me ſo farre to tranſcend the ſtrength and vigor of this age, and ſo nearly reſembling the Roman Majeſty. In a word (my Lord) each moment of that happy afternoone, which I had the honour to paſſe away within your cloſet, are priviledges, which I doe value above that which you denied a Fantaſme, or the Succeſſor of Philarchus. I dare not rehearſe

my other obligations, by which I ſtand bound unto you. You have herein injoyned me ſilence, and believe, that your favours would looſe ſomething of their purity, if my thanks ſhould ſtill attend them. Nevertheleſſe you muſt not ſtifle in me the intentions of an honeſt man, or ſmother the conceptions of gratefull thoughts; you have debarred me from divulging my acknowledgements, but you ſhall not debarre me from acquitting that ſecret part of duty, and from being, (at leaſt in my ſoule) and that while I live

My Lord
Your moſt humble, moſt obliged and most thankfull ſervant BALZAC.

From Balzac the
1 of Iuly 1637.


