


To my worthy friends, and Brethren the Captaines of the
trained Bands, Of the famous CITY of LONDON.


CAPTAINE.
Martin Bond.
George Wawker.
Marmaduke Royden.
George Langham.
Iohn Venn.
Edward Dichfield.
Thomas Covell.
Edmond Forster.
William Ge
•
re.
Samuall Carlton.
Tobias Massy.
Randolph Mo
•
wareing
Henry Sanders.
Nicolas Beale.
Robert Davis.
Mathew Forster.
Iohn Bradley.
Rouland Wilson.
Iames B
•
nce.



WORTHY FRIENDS.


MOst Certaine it is, that Warre hath bad its
Originall from the very foundation of Soveraignety, a
•
d thence was reduced to an
Art, confined within limited rules, and principles,
and may (in these our times) be said to be either forraigne or 

Domestique, and that either offensive, or
defensive, preserving, and upholding some Nations, and Countries, and
destroying, and ru
•
ning others; but
still the rule, and true scope of a lust Warre amongst all Nations, is
held to be a firme Peace, which as it is best obtained with the
Sword in hand, so is it best confirmed, by a prevalent
Victory, to compasse which many Authors have undertaken
to laie downe Rules, some through Military Discipline, some
through Valor and Policie, and most through
bloodshedd, yet such defects are found in many of their
precepts, that no positive rules can be collected
thence, which in all points can make good the same, for it
must be confessed, that they who frame to themselves, in their studies a
modell of le deing of an Army, to be come Victorious, find the same as
full of Errors, as of Rules, when the application is made for
a measure of Warre taken by booke, falleth out either too
long, or too short, when it is brought into the field,
to be put in practise, and somtimes such unlooked for chances, arest
even the best, and most experienced Captaines (though long
acquainted with the Warres) that their skill is  not
priviledged from casualties, nor their Iudgments, and knowledg▪
from Vaniety of accidents, because a minute produ
•
eth that in the field which an Age hath not
seene no n
•
r heard of before.
Notwithstanding these difficulties, and
uncertainties, I have indeavored for my owne recreation, to collect
the most certaine of these rules of Warrefare, being such as admit of
the least contradiction, and concluded the same in three Centuries,
which I have termed Military Observations, and are the most materiall
within the compase of a Soldiers & Captains knowledg,
either before the Warre begun, or in the prosecution thereof, or after
the Victory gained: the first is confirmed by the authority and aprovement of
Antient authors, and serves as a ground-worke to the second,
confirmed by reason, and experience, and both of these to
the third, confirmed, and made good by practise, and the
example of the greatest Captaines that have left their
memories registred in the bookes of honour behind them to posterity;
the two latter may hereafter see the light; if this former
find a fav
•
rable construction in
the  World, and a friendly acceptance from you, to whose
love in respect of our Vnited brotherly affection, and friendship, I have
presumed to Dedicate the same, & that in testimony of the
Obligement dew to your place from him that Intitles
himselfe


Your friend and Brother in Armes, L. ROBERTS
  Captaine.

