


TO THE WORTHY AND LIVELY Patterne of a good OLD-AGE, Mr. Doctor CHADERTON, all the blessed comforts of it: and after it, everlasting happinesse.

Reverend SIR:


THe Meditations here in this Treatise presented to you, are at their highest pitch of ambition, if they may obtaine, that your judicious eyes (at your convenient

leasure) shall passe over them. I suppose, it will be asked why they solicit you rather then any other, for this favour. It is, first for your many yeares with which GOD hath crowned you: and then also in respect of your experience in your owne particular, of what in this Tract is deliver'd: that is, of GODS freeing this age from the Imputations cast (in a generality) upon it: and his deyning you above many others, the blessed and comfortable priviledges, of which it is capable, and for which it hath the best helps, and most opportunities. I desire not to be made knowne unto you. It sufficeth, that to me you

are well knowne: and 
•…
hat, not by heare-say (though with that pretious ointment, a good-name Eccles 7. you are renowned) but cheefely out of my many observations, when I was a Student in the Vniversity, and for a long time, one of your Auditors. Every way you ratifie and make good this Encomium SENECTVTIS. And therefore yours it is, and to you it comes, both to bee corrected and disposed of, incase it may seeme in any degree, worthy your so much paines. And certainely, should I cause my thoughts to range abroad among the Worthies that are knowne unto me; none would be found that might

give so ample testimonie to what you shall heere reade, or be so living an example of it, as your selfe. This (I hope) will excuse my presumption, and prevaile with you for your paines in reading the Discourse, though it should not with your judgement for approving it. I beseech the ANCIENT OF DAIES, to continue and increase unto you, the good your many yeeres have possessed you of; that as they are found in the way of righteousnes, so they may be to you a crowne of glory, Prov. 16. and a crowne of righteousnesse, 2 Tim. 4▪


