



Mary Make-peace, of the Mannor of Allwell, in Northamptonshire, to all the Sisters of her Female Society, Health, Hearts-ease, and Happinesse.

Sweete Sisters,
ANd fellow Spinsters, (for the weakest of us is no worse, and the best no better) it is the Character under which all our Sexe is comprehended; I lovingly salute you all hoping you are in as good health of body, and in quiet

of minde, as I was at the writing hereof: These are further to let you understand, that it is come to my hearing; how by the course carriage of some amongst our Sexe; others, whose modesties are no way guilty of the like misdemeanour, are not privately bated, but (even in Print) publickly branded: & by such who consider not, that as there was a Maechael Helena, so there was a Matron-like Hecuba; and as a loose Lais, so a loyall Lucrese. Nor that we might as well retort upon them, that as there was an Hercules, so there was an Herostratus; and as a Salemon, so a Sinon.

But all this is to little or no purpose: you know my

name is Mary Make-peace, and have alwaies studied to make peace betwixt both Sexes: Then, though they raile at us, let not us revile them: for patience must prove our best preservative: For as the Grammer rule learnedly instructeth us: Foemineo generi tri
••
untur — propria quae maribus: which is, as I interpret it: Though the Feminine gender bee troublesome, let us seeke to please proper men, least they bring us downe upon our Maribones: which done, we shal prevent all prejudice and divert all disasters.
I confesse there is Tabitha Turbulent, of a terrible tongue; and Franke Froward, who though shee bee

given more to pouting than to prating, yet neither of them I hold to be necessary: Betrisse Bould-face doth all things without blushing: And Ellen Ever-heard makes too much noyse amongst her neighbours: And of the like quality and condition are Parnell Prate a pace, and Rachell Raile at him: Vrsula Vpsefreeze is condemned to for her uncivill carriage; as proov'd to be no better than a pot companion: As for Hannah Hit him home, and Ioaene Iowle him well, they are valued in the ranke of Vixens, and will be loud by no allowance: these hnmours I like not.
Marry againe, (for thats our womens constant phrase,

when we bury our husbands) There are on the contrary side, Grace grieve him not, a simple and good soule: Kate Kisse-well no cunning, but a conniving creature: Luce Lye-close no wanton, but a willing wench: Dorothy Doe-little not to be caveld at, because so cald: for you know the Proverbe, so said, so done, and little said soone amended: and for Sisly Sweet-lips my sister, and Margery Quiet my Cousen-german: if all the rest were of their simplicity, and modesty, men shonld not have such reason to cavell at us, nor wee such cause to complaine of them. Alas, why should not Ivory teeth bridle intemperate tongues?

and soft lippes conceale fullen hearts? or why should a faire face bee the betrayer of hidden faults? of all these things, as a Sister of your society, I thought good to advise you.

Given at our Mannor of ALL-VVELL.
MARY MAKE-PEACE

