

TO THE
RIGHT HONORABLE
ROBERT EARLE OF WARWICK,
AND
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE
WILLIAM Lord Maynard of Elton, Lord
Lievetenants for the County of Essex;
And to the right worshipfull the Deputie Lievetenants, and Noble
Captaines of the same.

RIght Honorable and right Worshipfull;God wins Rom. Ant. in the ancient Roman
Coyne the picture of Mars was usually stampt with
a Iavelin in one hand, a scourge in the other, and the
Portraict of a Cocke standing by him; The Iavelin intimated
Prowesse, the scourge Authority, and the Cocke
Vigillancie and indefatigable care: What was but ingraven
on that Coyne is vively expressed in all your Honours
and Worships actions, which doubtlesse moved that Royall
hand to conferre upon you the high charge of ordering
his martiall affaires in this County of Essex. Your high Authoritie and my service
under it hath moved me to present unto your viewes a Treatise of War; a subject in
these perilous times very requisite to be regarded, especially by men of this honorable
profession, since we perceive all doubts in adjacent dominions are now decided
onely by dint of the Sword: Proximus ardetucalligon; our neighbours house is of a
light fire, their Townes and Towers burne like Beacons: We know not how soone their
flame may catch hold of our owne buildings (War being in a neighbour Province like
fire in the next dwellings which can hardly be kept off, but by good helpe) No helpe
better to divert a warre then a skilfull Souldiery; for that enemy which dares doe
much against a numerous people unskilfull in the feates of Armes, will consider well before
he attempts any thing against those that be Warlike, though of far lesse numbers;
nothing makes a people warlike so soone as maintenance of Marshall discipline, nor doth
anything make the Common wealth more safe then that. This was one motive which
instigated me first to undertake this hard and difficult taske, and not out of any ambition
to teach, since it is well knowne that your Honours and Worships are well
verst both in the Practicke and Speculative knowledge of Warre: And inregard your
Noble professions are adorned with the truest rules adherent to these actions, it is in
a manner superfluus for me to commend these unpollisht Lines to your viewes, you being
no strangers to this subject; Yet as Mela sayd once in his discription of Italy:
De Italia magis quia ordo exegit quam quia monstrari eget pauca dicentur,

nota sunt omnia; the like I may justly say concerning this discourse of Warlik
discipline, it is so obvious to your sight that you neede not the spectacles of Letters,
yet something I must say rather for methods sake unto your Lordships then necessitie,
and I hope it shall not seeme impertinent unto your Honours, since your golden Spirits
cannot admit of such effeminizing as the Pithagorians which inhabited Amicle
a Towne in Italy, who often being terrified with a vaine rumour of their enemies
approach, promulgated a Law, forbidding all such reports, by which meanes their enemies
comming unawares upon them tooke the Towne, from hence grew the Proverbe
Amiclas silentium perdidit; therefore with Lucillius who was commanded to
he silent, I must returne this answer (to those that ure not verst in these martiall affaires
but are altogether submerge
•
in securitie) Mihi necesse est loqui, S
••
o enim
Amiclas silentio perijsse. It is not unknowne to your Honours and Worships who
are experienced, how farre both Officers and Souldiers are degenerated from former
ages, in which they made the use and practice of Armes their glory; but our age
makes it a burthen and a shame to use and beare that name which of all attributes and
titles is most honorable, if such would with Cicero consider to what end they were
borne, with him they would confesse Non nobis solum nati sumus sed etiam pro
Patria; Wherefore the noble profession of a Souldier is a thing of no small consequence,
when as true Religion cannot be maintained, the honour and safetie of our
gracious King cannot be safe, the possession and welfare of our kingdome cannot be injoyed,
nor the subduing of our enemies cannot be atchieved but by and under the shadow
of the well managed Sword: For indeede the infinite chances, hazards and events
of War are so doubtfull and dangerous (that as Iason sayd to Epaminondas) hee
is not wise that doth not feare them, seeing as I have sayd before the whole world is
in combustion, we ought to fit our selves and provide for the hardest: for certainely expert
commanders can easily conquer those that are Novices; and a battell once lost hath
an ill tayle or consequence, as the great Souldier and Statesman Commineus saith,
un Battaille perdu a maunaise queúe, for it redoubleth the hope and courage of
the victors, and discourageth and astonisheth the vanquished; it shaketh the fidelitie
of Subjects, it ministreth matter and opportunitie of conspiracie to Malecontents,
of revolts to Townes, and of Allienation to confederates, who commonly sway with
the good successe: And for this cause all Princes have beene very vigilant and carefull
to have their Commanders very expert and valiant, and their Subjects well exercised
in the use of Armes; that no sudden danger should dismay them, nor no Enemie
too subtill for them; for although a Nation be never so well verst in all Politick
Stratagems and most able to manage a Warre, yet there are many accidents that the
Engine of wit cannot evade, whereby mighty Armies may be dissipated and disperst,
and the greatest enterprises overthrowne; A
•
 sometimes it hath fallen out by the
death of some one man,
Pedro Mexia in Lodo

•••
 Bavaro, how by the death of Constructio the Emperour the designe against Florence was lost sometimes by the dissention of Leaders and Captaines amongst
themselves,
Paulus Emil. in Carolo by a schisme betweene Vrbat and Clement the Armie was ruined sometimes by mutinie of Souldiers,
Sigon de regno Itallico Anno 896. how Rome was surprised by Ar

•
ulphus the Emperour through a sudden fear. sometimes by meanes of a
Tempest or unseasonable weather;Paulus Em
•
l. in Ph
•

lipo secundo. sometimes by Plagues or other diseases in the
Campe,
Nauclerus in Cro
•

 the Christians overthrew the Soldan through a sudden feare. and as Guicchardine noteth in his second Booke, by mistake of a Commanmandement,
eyther not well understood or ill executed, by a little timerity or disorder
which may happen by some evill words or speeches even of the meanest Souldiers,
and as Commineus further relates,
Osorius in lib. 7. cap. 36. divers Battells lost by divers accidents. that be the Counsell never so well taken, and
the plot never so well layd, yet it is seldome or never executed in the field as it is ordayned
in the Chamber;
Guic. lib. 5. the French were overthrowne by a word mistaken what infinite care and paines therefore (my Lords) ought
every particular Officer under your Honours Commands take in preparing themselves
and fitting their Souldiers against the time of Service, that they may be able to
eschew these dangers,Titus Livius in dec. 3. lib. 2. & d
•
c 4. lib 7. and vindicate honour and triumph to themselves, that they may
seeme worthy to be crowned with the wreathes of victory,Pedro Mexia in vita Imp. Adolph. as Valer. Max. lib. 2.

reporteth that no Captaine was worthy to be honored with a Crowne of Lawrell,
Guic in lib. 8. what victories hath beene lost by Sun, wind and raine, &c. cloathed
in rich Purple, and mounted in the golden Chariot of Fame, unlesse he had fought
some notable battell against the Enemy, wherein above 5000. men at the least were
slaine; this victory begets such immortall honour and renowne to the name of Captaines
according to their memorable actions which hath eternized their houses of discent
by contrary names of glory and fame, as by the example of the Warlike Romans,
the three Metelli, whereof one of them (as Salust and some others write) because
he had overcome King Iugurthe conquering the Land of Numidia was surnamed
Numidicus; the second conquered the King of Macedon, and was stiled
with the name of Macedon
•
cus; and the third for conquering the Ile of Creete
was honored with the name of Creticus, and the like of divers others; and as the
Romans were curious in conferring honours upon true desert, so also they were severe
in punishing of base Cowardize or wilfull neglect, and stupid ignorance; for if
they lost honour in that kind where as by their owne indeavours they might have
atchieved it, they had as a duemerit the basest of punishment inflicted; as whipping
in the head of the Troopes untill the blood followed; or manacled together with
Irons: And for leaving of their Generall or Commanders in time of fight, they were
spitted upon Stakes, and divers other rigorous torments executed upon delinquents
for the like offence. Therefore with the Prophet David I implore his ayde (who
stileth himselfe the Lord of Hostes and a man of Warre) that hee would teach our
fingers to fight and our hands to Battell,Esay 42. 13. that wee may bee ready when the Sword
(which God in our time avert) shall come upon the Land,Psal. 18. 34. and the Trumpet bloweth
aud warne the people, we may then make a valiant resistance. But he that heareth
the sound of the Trumpet and will not be warned (saith the Prophet
Ezekiel) if the Sword come and take him away,
Ezek. 33. Ver. 3, 4, 5.
his blood shall bee upon
his owne head; for he heard the sound of the Trumpet and would not be
admonished, but hee that receiveth warning shall save his life.


Your Lordships and Worships
Humble Servant,
ROBERT WARD.

