


THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY. To the young, and vnmaried Catholike Gentlewomen of England.


WORTHY, and vertuous young Gentlewomen: My Penne for your ſpirituall good, is willing in theſe enſuing leaues, to ſpread it ſelfe. You are all Catholikes in Fayth and profeſſion, and therefore the more apt to receaue (if ſo Gods Grace be not wanting) the impreſſion of the Aduice & Coū
ſel, which in this Treatiſe is giuen.
My mayne proiect at this preſent

is, ſince you all (to whom I wryte) as yet remayne in your Chaſt and Virginall ſtate, & free from Mariage, to perſwade you (what in me lyeth) to abandone this Wicked World, and to imbrace a Votary and Religious life. A hard labour (no doubt) in your iudgments, but facile and eaſy to ſuch of you, who haue a feeling, & true apprehenſion of the ioyes of Heauen, and torments of Hell.
I do not ſpeake this, as if one in a maried ſtate could not arryue to Heauen, and auoyde Hell. Noe, God forbid; For I acknowledg with the Apoſtle, 
Hebr. 13.
Mariage to be honourable, but withall I hould Virginity to be more honourable. I here only propound the moſt ſecure way to come to Heauen, and eſcape Hell. And here I demand, if any of You were married, and after the death of your husbands,

were to enioy a great, and rich Ioynture, of a thouſand, or two thouſand pounds yearely; would you not be deſirous, that beſydes the common Courſe of making Ioyntures (which perhaps might be ſubiect to ſome danger) to take (by your learned Counſell) the beſt meanes for the ratifying and better ſecuring of your Right to your ſaid Ioynture? I know, you would be moſt ſolicitous herein.
You all pretend Title to the kingdome of Heauen; a kingdom infinitly ſurpaſſing in worth, all worldly Iointures that the whole Earth can affoard; and will you then content your ſelues to ſeeke by the common, and ordinary Courſe of a Secular lyfe, to obtaine this kingdome (in which ſtate, as I grant, many liuing haue gayned it, ſo incōparably far many more haue loſt it;) but that rather you

wil enter into that Vocation (how ſeuere, how ſtrict, how croſſe ſoeuer to flesh and bloud it shall ſeeme) which may giue you greater aſſurance, and more ſtrengthen your Intereſt, and Title to that moſt Bleſſed Kingdome?
This Treatiſe I haue compoſed in forme of a feigned Dialogue, as hoping that thereby you will be ſooner induced to the reading and peruſing it at full; then if it were written in one long continued ſpeach, without any viciſſitude, or change of Perſons.
In the Perſons here feigned by ſuppoſall, I haue thought good to incorporate all the Reaſons (as deliuered by them) chiefly mouing to a Religious & retired Life; as alſo ſuch obiections, as commonly are made againſt that moſt happy Courſe; as you may be more fully inſtructed by peruſing

the Argument, or ſubiect hereof next following.
And ſeing the chiefeſt barre, & 
•
et in women to a Monaſticall lyfe, is deſire of Mariage, & hope of children; I will (beſides what is treated therof hereafter) inſiſt heere a little, diſcouering the inſufficiency of this Motiue; shewing that the accuſtomed miſeries of a married lyfe, and of hauing iſſue, ought much rather to ſway with women, for their forbearāce of Marriage.
And firſt, whereas Lyfe is the deareſt thing to man or woman; yet we find, that beſides the certaine great paines of Child-birth, Lyfe it ſelfe in young married women, is for the moſt part, euery one, or two yeares greatly endangered to be loſt: witneſſe heereof is the daily experience of women dying in Childbed.
What true deſire then can a woman

haue to vndertak that courſe of life, wherein lyeth ſo great a perill of looſing that (I meane he
•

Lyfe,) which is moſt deare vnto her; and that her body thereby shall, before its prefixed tyme by God, become meate for wormes
Yf any one of you had a Iewels ſet with rich and Orient pearle, valewed at ſome hundreds of pounds, how carefull would you be in keeping of it? & how would your care be doubled from endangering the loſſe of it, at any tyme? And yet only for the enioying of a litle momentary pleaſure (attended after with multitude of miſeries) you can be content ſo often to hazard the loſſe of your owne lyfe, the moſt precious Iewell, that God & Nature hath beſtowed vpon you in this world. O fondnes of Iudgment!
But to proceed. Admit, that a

woman in bringing forth her Children, should be freed from all danger of death; yet to how many other inſupportable afflictions doth she become thrall, & lye open? For we obſerue (and this not ſeldome) that the Huſband becomes vnkind, withdrawing his loue and affection, from whence it is due, & placing it on others where it is not due. Againe, the Husband (I meane, no few number of them) doth oftentimes diſſipate and waſte his Eſtate and Patrimony in ſenſuality and riot, to the vtter ouerthrow or beggary (in the end) of Himſelfe, his Wyfe, and Children.
But ſuppoſe, the Husband be exempt from theſe diſorders; yet 
•
f the wyfe haue many Children, falleth it not often out, that the children through the negligence of their Father, are brought vp in

all liberty and diſſolution, to the inconſolable griefe of the poore Gentlewoman their Mother, & to the eternall Damnation of the Childrens ſoules? And what comfort then can that womā haue, to be an inſtrumēt of bringing forth that Child, who shall become for euer, an Heyre of Hell-fyre?
O how many wyues are there in England, who find by ouer late, & too dearely bought experiēce, all this to be true, which I here affirme, of the frequent dangers, griefes, and afflictions of mynd commonly accompanying Marriage? From all which languors of ſpirit, that woman deliuereth herſelfe, who forbearing marriage doth determine to leade a Religious lyfe.
In proofe of the Truth her ſaid, I appeale euen to the certain knowledge of diuers of your ſelues,

who, if you will but caſt your 
•
es vpon ſome of your owne 
•
yndred, and friends, (at leaſt of our acquaintance, that liue in 
•
ate of mariage) muſt needs confeſſe that all, or diuers of the a

••
re mentioned miſeries and calamities, do daily oppreſſe many 
•
f them. You are yet free; beware 
•
en of ſuch dangers. Nor will any further enlarge my ſelfe in 
•
his place vpon this Subiect, but will refer you to the ſerious peru

•
ll of the Booke it ſelfe.
Yf this Diſcourſe were a ſecond Syr Philip Sidneys Arcadia, reating of amourous Conceyts; with what a greedines would many of you read it? Cōdemne then your owne want of ſpirituall feruour in ſuch of you, as but only vouchſafe to caſt a curious eye here & there vpon theſe leaues; & yet it may be in part ſaid, that

this Booke in general diſcourſeth of the ſame ſubiect, of which the Areadia doth; to wit of Loue. But the Arcadia, of ſenſuall and 
Ʋayn
•
 Loue, attended on with ſinne, and Repentance; This, of chaſt, and holy Loue, whereby a Soule by ſolemne vow eſpouſeth herſelfe to Chriſt her Bridegroome: ſo verifying thoſe words of the A Preſent
1. Cor. 11.
you a chaste Virgin Ʋre
••
 Christ.

I only wish, that what Coſmophila (a feigned young Gentlewoman in this Dialogue) is ſuppoſed to do, you really, and truly would act her Sceene, in your proceedings: So might you by a mortifyed lyfe, not only auoyd all ſpirituall dangers both of foule and body; but infallibly purchafe to your ſelues, an eternall Crowne of Glory.
Yf any of you reape ſuch profit

by this my Labour, as by the 
•
eading heereof, to shake hands for euer with the vanities of the world, and happily to Cloyſter your ſelfes in ſome deuout Monaſtery; how fully should I thinke 
•
ny paynes to be recompenſed herein? And with this I ceaſe, inreating your remembrance of he (only for my intention at eaſt, and endeauour of aduaning your ſpirituall good) at the beſt tymes of your deuotions.

Yours in all Chriſtian Charity. N. N.

