


To the whole Congregation of Beleevers aſſembled at St.
Margerets Church in Weſtminſter, on Saterday December the 25. 1647 in the afternoone, Grace, Mercy, and Peace, from God the Father and the Lord Ieſus Chriſt.


Worthy Chriſtians,



I
 Had at the appointed time of preaching, the ſame judgment befell me which befell to Zacharias the Father of John Baptiſt Luke 1, 20. When I thought to have ſpoken unto the people that waited for mee, and marvelled that I tarried ſo long, I was ſtruck dumbe and not able to ſpeak. And could I conceive it had been done by an Angel I ſhould (as a cauſe of it) ſuſpect in my ſelfe the ſin of unbeleife. But, as it is, I am conſtrained to uſe Zacharias his way of expreſſing my meaning. On the day of your meeting in the Temple I could only becken but remained ſpeechles, whence you all perceived I had ſeene a Viſion in the Veſtry: and were not long in ſuſpence what kind of one it was. But whatſoever it was I was tranſported or carried away with it, and am yet dumb by it.
But as the Angell, though he ſtrooke Zacharias ſpeechleſſe, yet tooke not away his writing tables, v. 63. So I conceive by the tenour of that order which commands a conſtraint both of my Tongu and Heeles: I am not interdicted the liberty of Pen and Paper, but I may lawfully uſe both without contempt.

And ſo by this meanes I ſhal (ſaving my regard to authority) now acquaint you with that meſſage of God, I ſhould then [viva voce] have delivered in your hearing.
It is true▪ I in this Sermon repreſent as in a Sciagraph all the Ioynts of the Hiſtory of Chriſt: but inſiſt only on the bleſſed miſtery of the Vnion of the two natures (God and Man) in one perſon

without reaching unto his birth; or ſo farre as his conecption by the wholy Ghoſt. Nor indeede as it falls out is there any neede I ſhould put forward to ſpeake of his Nativity though that were properly opus diei the worke of the day, For all the circumſtances doe ſufficiently proclame the Nativity and are now newly revived. Was all tho World taxed, Lukt 2. 1. when the Meſſiah was borne? Alas for the day of the Lord! It is ſo now. Was their no roome for Chriſt in the Inne, Luke 27? There is none for him now in the Churches▪ Were there Wiſemen that ſought to worſhip him, and a Herod that under pretence of worſhip ſought to deſtroy him Mat. 2. 1? It was ſo now: there were that came to Church to worſhip Chriſt, and there were that came to apprehend his Miniſters. Was there a voice heard in Ramah, lamentation and weeping, and great mourning, Mat: 2 18. There is another Rachel whoſe child is not, if the newes of Cornehill be true, Doe theſe things cauſe a neceſſity of Chriſt his going into Aegipt the ſonnes of Iſrael's quondam bondage Mat: 2 18. There will I fear (but O the good God prevent that neceſſity) be ſuch another violence, to drive us to ſuch another flight, Laſtly was that Herod not longliv'd: Mat. 2 19? I propheſie no eternity to the men of his carriage: Pſalme 55 23.

But beloved, I muſt once more crave your patience, for I muſt leave you and waite upon the Committee. Whome as Gentlemen I reſpect as in Authority I Honovr: as my Enemies I love, bleſſe, and pray for: Mat. 5, 44: and (that I may performe all the duties I owe upon that ſcore) I ſhal labour to doe good to: I muſt tel them that I have read a ſtory of Tiberious the Emperour. That he (upon the relation which Pilate made unto him of our Saviour) had an intention and to that purpoſe ſignified his meaning to have Jeſus of Nazarath reputed and received among the Roman Gods. But the Senate of Rome withſtood it, becauſe that Honour had been given him by ſuch as never asked their conſents. But after this I provoke any Hiſtorian to ſhew me where that great Councel did ever any act either Honeſtly, Wiſely, or like true Romans: but were made the properties & inſtruments either of the Caeſars luſts, or Souldiers villanies. And now I wiſh theſe men ſeriouſly to adviſe how much ſhort this inſolence is of the former? When men may not Honor, Miniſters may

not preach Chriſt without their Licence under paine of impriſonment without Baile or maine priſe. I ſpeake not this out of Stomack for what I ſuffer, but as hartily as I would beg pardon for my ſinns doe I wiſh them a better exit, hoping yet they may acquire a better and more glorious concluſion then theſe diſtempers can promiſe or the Roman Councell had.
And now I return to give you an account of that which otherwiſe migh ſeem ſtrange. Which is that way of application you ſhal meet with all, reverſ'd upon my ſelfe. I confeſſe it is not uſuall; nor indeed proper for one that ſpeakes to others. But firſt, as it is the Miniſter of Chriſts part to appeare in innocence a Dove, Math: 10 16: So as the Doves feed their young ones with that which themſelves have taken down: ought Preachers to digeſt in their owne breſts, and be fore-taſters of that ſpirituall food they divide to others▪ and this I had laboured to do. Secondly theſe meditations being now to be read, not heard: I thought good ſo to diſpoſe them, that each Reader might as I have done ſuc
•
 in the juice and influence of them: and by reading as it were engage himſelfe upon the practicall part of them. Vnto both which no way ſo Organicall as prayer. And I doe humbly pray that every Reader may be alſo a Beleever, and have a heart open as well as an eye. For I conceive (with humble reverence) that the Goſpell if it go no further then the eye or eare is mortiferous and deadly, a killing letter. But if it be tranſmitted to the more noble and vitall parts it is Soveraigne, Food and Phyſick, Meat and Medicine. Chriſt in the Fleſh, may vouchſafe to accept the Stable and the Manger but comming in the Spirit he muſt have a Temple to entertaine him. And by ſo providing, we ſhall ſupply what was wanting not at Bethlem onely, but at Weſtminſter alſo. If any of you ſhould be ſo ignorant as not to underſtand what I would be at in all this. I muſt tel you that though I cannot aſſent to the mind of them that would have the obſervation of this feaſt ſuperſtition; yet you that give place to the Devill Eph: 4. 27. are more injurious to Chriſt then any, Sinne, ſinne, that is it muſt be taken downe, it was ſinne and the Devill that ſnatch'd this bread of life out of your mouths that ſent me to Priſon Revel. 2. 10. Can you (knowing what Chriſt is) think to honour Chriſt in commemoration

of the Nativity and at that ſeaſon ſo ſhufle the cards that ſinne ſhall be Trump in every dealing. Remember Iohn Baptiſt muſt be born before Chriſt You muſt Repent if the Kingdome of God be at hand It is certaine that that Spirit which confeſſeth that Jeſus Chriſt is come in the fleſh is of God, 1. Iohn. 4. 2. and ſo on the contrary the Non confeſſor therof is the 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 That Spirit of Antichriſt, verſ. 3. I remember St. Auguſtin, with a great deale of pains proves every Heretick to be a denyer of the comming of Ieſus Chriſt in the fleſh whatſoever his Hereſie be. But me thinks Origen with much more eaſe and plaineſſe ſhewes that the beſt way to confeſſe Ieſus Chriſt to be come in the fleſh, is by not committing of ſinne; unto which purpoſe he layes that text, 1. Iohn 3. 8. & 9. to the forementioned 4. c. 2. v. where in 4, Chapter to Be of God is the Predicate to this Confeſſion as the Subject. And in the 3. Chapter to be borne of God is the Subject and not committing ſinne is the Praedicate. So that not to commit ſinne is the remote (and but once remoov'd] definition of the confeſſion of Chriſts Nativiny, or comming in the fleſh. So that the commemoration or confeſſion by way of Obſervation of the Day to the end is not Antichriſtian (they were miſtaken that adviſed the Parliament ſo) But the Drunkeneſſe and Gluttony the Luxury & Ryot &c, Theſe are Antichriſtian, & ſo far Antichriſtian that where theſe are! Men (even when they would confeſſe) do deny Chriſt Ieſus to be come in the Fleſh. And of theſe ſince the ſecular magiſtrate diſtinguiſheth not it behoveth us Miniſters to be carefull. For though I know not what State arguments there may be to prove the Holly & Ivy ſuperſtitions: yet when theſe things ſhall be ſet up, ſooted and ſmoked with the ſins of Intemperance and Exceſſe, I ſhall think them fitter Trophees of a Chimney-ſweepers Birth day, then a Saviours, When we ſhall eat and drinke and riſe up to play, I muſt think theſe are Ceremonies fitter for the Golden-calfe which Aaron made in Horeb: then the lamb of God that taketh away the ſinnes of the world. And verily (let me be angry in it) I judge it a cauſe of greater feare and danger then a Priſon or a Goale, lined with a good conſcience, This therefore was my firſt intention to perſwade you all by renouncing ſinne to celebrate the feaſt of Chriſts Nativity for then we beſt teſtifie the

beleef of his comming when we moſt fear to offend him or his father. And in this way I would be glad to keepe Chriſtmas with any one Being very deſirous that all you which would have heard me that Day had been both almoſt, and altogether ſuch as I am, Except the Fleet.

Which I muſt confeſſe I take very pati
•
ntly; bleſſing God that it overtook me not in any evill deed, but in wel-doing or at leaſt the intention of it. Neither ſhall the errour of the Committee in ſending me to it, (And O that it were the greateſt they are guilty of) make me forget the Ioy of Chriſts Incarnation, or the Good will towards men the Angels ſung. They are Men ſo was my Redeemer, for whoſe ſake, and through whoſe Grace I can ſuffer greater wrongs then theſe and yet never hate the Men. Indeed there is ſomewhat in it that is not Man but Devill To make men Dumbe as to matters of Duty and Faith: that is the Act of the Uncleane Spirit Math. 12 22: It is that hath [in a ſence] made me lame ſo that I cannot walk. But if it hath made me Dumb and Lame. it hath made them Deafe▪
 and Blinde. And truly Without a Miracle I feare neither of us are like to recover. And becauſe my infirmity is but an appendant to theirs, I ſhall hartily pray for them, that they may receive their ſight even in this their day that they might ſee the things that belong to their, the Churches, and the Kingdomes Peace: That Chriſt would ſay Epphata: Be opened. That they that have eares to heare may hear What Chriſt himſelfe hath ſaid himſelf to them, to me, to the Parliament and all: Mat: 22, 21. Give unto Caeſar the things that are Caeſars; & unto God the things that are Gods. And then I doubt not (for I ſuffer but by ſimpathie) but I ſhal be able (with him Acts 38:) to walke and to praiſe God. Vnto which time whether it be the pleaſure of God, to prolong my dayes I know not (for it hath ſome analogie to that time whereof our Saviour ſpeakes, when he ſaith many Kings & Righteous men have deſired to ſee and have not yet ſeene.] but this I reſolve on: While I live not to ceaſe day and night, praying for the haſtening of it. For the time we live in now (I am confident) is part of that mentioned Mat. 24: 21: Except theſe days ſhould be ſhortened no fleſh can be ſaved: and the Promiſe which cloſeth the ſame verſe: it revives

me doubly in relation to the general with hope: to my owne particular with care: to give all dilligence to make my caling and Election ſure. 2 Pet: 1▪ 10. The Elect (that is they that adde to their Faith; Vertue, and to Vertue Knowledg, and to Knowledg Temperance, and to Temperance Patience, and to Patience Godlineſſe, & to Godlineſſe brotherly Kindneſſe, and to brotherly Kindneſſe Charity) have an intereſt in better times. For their ſakes theſe dayes ſhall be ſhortened. VVherefore God ſtir up your hearts to endeavour be of that Number & to increaſe it. Neither is this ſpoken by way of Phariſaicall impoſition to eaſe my ſelf but what ever others intend, it is my reſolution (and the good Lord Keepe it for ever in the purpoſe of my heart) to begin this only ſaving health in ſtead of all others, Pſalme 116 18. For beleeve it I am very ſenſible wee live in the worſt of times, and that I am one Chriſt Jeſus came into the World to ſave that is to ſay the Cheife of Sinners.


And
From the Fleet, 
Ianuary 8. 1647.

Your Debtor in this ſervice
N. BERNARD.

