


TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, IAMES Lord Archbiſhop of Armagh, Lord PRIMATE of all IRELAND.

May it pleaſe your Grace,


THeſe little Tractates, as they derive their being from your Graces command; ſo (like rivolets to the Sea) doe they returne to you againe. Accept them as the firſt fruits of your owne Induſtry upon the Authour; who muſt ever acknowledge he owes himſelfe alſo.

What Epiſt. 31.

Paulinus writes to St. Auguſtine, Os tuam fiſtulam aquae vivae, & venam fontis aeterni merito dixerim, cujus deſiderio ſitivit in te anima mea, & ubertate tui fluminis inebriari terra mea concupivit, was indeed the cauſe of my thirſting alſo, and the Load-Stone that gave mee a happy draught in your ſervice, many yeeres agon out of my native ſoyle into this Kingdome, which, me thinks, this yeer by your abſence hath ſuffered a great Ecclipſe, and yet wee cannot grudge the Church in this floting age, ſuch a Steereſ man, nor ſo pious a Prince, ſo pretious an Earering. That which is related of the fore-named Father, Eraſ. in Ep. ad Arc. Toled. an op. Auguſt & Poſſidō. de vit. Auguſt. In ipſâ menſâ potius diſputationem quam opulation
•
m d
•
lig
•
bat.

Menſam habebat hoſpitibus expoſitam, ſed frugiferis ſermonibus, magis quam exquiſitis edulijs

opipuram, ſemper de re quadam frugifera commentabatur, ut non minus animi convivarum reficerentur quam corpora, is ſo well knowne to bee your Graces daily practice, that it needes no further application, the offals of whoſe Diſcourſe carefully gathered up, were able to perfect a Divine to every good worke. In a word, 
Ibid. Quaſi Deus voluerit in Auguſtino tanquā in una tabulâ vividum quoddam exemplar Epiſcopi repreſeatare omnibus virtutum numeru abſelutum, &c.

Eraſmus his deſcription of him, by what S. Paul requires in a Biſhop, mee thought in the reading (mutato nomine) it was your owne Picture, by which if others in this age had beene drawne, I beleeve the office had never beene ſo much as queſtioned.
The very ſubjects of both theſe Diſcourſes were they wrote by whomſoever, could

not but claime an Intereſt in your Grace. The Converſion of Sinners, by a Conſtant Preaching, who (unleſſe a Stranger in Iſrael) but muſt acknowledge to bee your Character. Nay, this and much more, is no newes to Fred. Spanhemius Profeſſor of Divinity in Geneva (dubiorum Evangelicorum parte tertia) in his Epiſtle Dedicatory, largely P. Bertius in tabul. Geograph. Speaking of Dublin and the Colledge, addes this only, Fameuſe pour la preſence de Iacobus Ʋſserius Theologien honime de gran le crudition & piete, & ſur tout celebre par ſes eſcrits, natif. de Dublin. Ioan Selden, marmor Arundell in editionis cauſa, Reverend ſs Antiſtes Jacobus Uſſerius Archiep Armachanus, vir ſummâ pieta
•
e, judicio ſingulari, uſ



que
, ad miraculum doctus, & literis ſeverioribus promovendis natus, &c I
•
. Caſaubonus, Abrah Scultetus, Cambden: with divers others. By which, it is evident, that if ſome ſo advanced have miſcarried, the fault hath not bin (as the vulgar apprehends) in the ſoyle, but in the ſeed: Et hiſce commemorandis, nos vel utilitati publicae grat ulamur, vel divinae benignitati gratamur. Vt eſt enim modeſtiae, non agnoſcere laudes, ita gratitudinis, non tacere viros, per quos Deus tanta commoda largitur humano generi.
Strangers, whoſe large Relation from abroad may prevent any further from home, onely 'tis no flattery to atteſt it. Your continued Motto

of 1 Cor. 9 16.
Vaemihi ſi non evangelizavero, both in your Epiſcopall and Archiepiſcopall ſeals, is as worthy of memory, as imitation, where that Woe may light I know not, but ſurely S. Pauls
2 Cor. 4.8.
repoſita eſt mihi corona, will bee your portion. How little your Grace affects theſe kinde of expreſſions, I am not now to learne, And for my ſelfe, let this be my plea againſt any miſ-judgings in others, Egregia virtutis exempla veluti lumen in edito ponenda ſunt, ut omnibus praeluceāt, multoſq, ad aemulationem accendant.
Rare examples ought to bee ſet up like
Mat 5.15, 16.
lights, where they may be ſeene; and in the words of S. Paul, I wiſh it might bee a Rom. 11.14. meanes to provoke to emulation thoſe which are my fleſh, and might ſave ſome of them,
Lu. 10.37
Factu ſimiliter, is the onely intended morall: Be ſtill the Honor of your Nation, the ſacred firſt fruites of this Colledge, the

Prime light of this our Iſrael, where (according to Ioſhua's wiſh) you may like the Sunne ſtand ſtill in the Firmament of our Church, till all the enemies of it, be made its footeſtoole. So prayes many thouſands, and among them, as having moſt cauſe,

Your Graces moſt humble and affectionate Servant N. BARNARD


Drogheda

Aprill. 28. 1641.


