


TO HIS Excellency ROBERT Earle of ESSEX, Viſcount Hereford, Baron Ferrars of Chartley, Lord Bourchier and Lovain, one of His Majeſties moſt Honourable Privy Councell, and Generall of the Army raiſed by the Parliament, in defence of the true Proteſtant Religion, his Majeſties perſon, the Lawes and Liberties of the Kingdome, and the Priviledges of Parliament.

IT is a lovely thing (ſaith the Philoſopher) to 

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
. Ariſt. benefit one, but to doe good to a nation, it is a thing divine. Your Excellencies love to England, in not counting your blood, your life deare to preſerve it; the eminencyes in your perſon of vertue and valour, of courage and courteſie, of greatneſſe and goodneſſe, of mercy and meekneſſe, of admirable prudence, and unwearied patience, the worthy deeds already done unto this Nation, by your providence; all theſe obligeth all true Engliſh hearts, to beare a part in the National acknowledgment of your worth, and in accepting what is done by your Excellencie with all thankefulneſſe. Your noble candor may be pleaſed then, to pardon this preſumption of dedication, in a ſtranger to your knowledge, but an honourer of your vertues; the rather, becauſe the obſcureſt clot upon the fallow, reflects ſomething of the ſunne beames, as well as the mountaines, as the whole globe. Theſe enſuing meditations are now muſtered, to attend the Campe: and if the banner of your protection overſpread them, he ſhall be comforted, who by them deſires principally to comfort the Natio, yea the world. For if it be true as

Saint Auguſtine writes, that if one drop of the joyes of heaven ſhould fall into hell, it would ſwallow up all the bitterneſſe of it: Tanta eſt dulcedo caeleſlis gaudij, ut ſi una guttula difflueret in infernum totam amaritudinem inferni abſorberet, Auguſt Rom 5. 3. Rom. 8 37. Heb 10 35. Deut. 33. 26. 27. it may be hoped then, that a few drops of heavenly joyes, here preſented [under your Excellencyes countenance] to my Countrymen, ingulphed in an hell of outward miſeries, may availe to allay their bitterneſſe, and cleare their eye ſight (as Ionathans was after his taſting honey) to ſee thorough an hell of horror, their heavenly recovery. It is Englands preſent duty, to rejoyce in tribulations, to triumph under terrors, to confide under conflicts, to expect ſalvations, to veiw God by the eye of faith, as a refuge, as interwining us in his everlaſting armes of preſervation, as healing our breaches, as ſtanching our wounds, as preparing all rankes among us, to enjoy a perpetuall unity, peace, amity, joy and jubilee, in deſpite of hell and Rome. All this God will do for us in righteouſnes, but by terrible things. And during his pouring vialls of wrath upon the Antichriſtians, the Engliſh Church (with the other reformed) muſt ſtand on a ſea of glaſſe mingled with fire. She ſhall apparantly ſee (as in a glaſſe) Antichriſtian
Rev. 15. 2. 3. tumults, riſing like wave after wave, yet Chriſt calming them, and cauſing all attempts ebbe into emptineſſe, come to nothing. She ſhall ſtand on a ſea mingled with fire: enduring hot ſervice from inward contentions, and outward afflictions: theſe a while ſhall heat her, but not fire her; ſcorch her, but not roſt her; bruiſe her heele perhaps, in ſome loſſes, but they ſhall not breake her, nor crumble her, into a totall deſolation: for the ten Kingdomes muſt ſtand by an unalterable decree, to undo Antichriſt, Rev. 17. from the 12, to the end. though they a while may ſeeme to favour and fight for him. And ſhe ſhall ſtand with the harpes of God, ſinging the ſongs of Moſes ſongs of judgement, praiſes; for every new judgement upon her troublers, and deſtroyers: and ſinging too, the ſong of the lamb, ſongs of mercie, prayſes, for every new deliverance, vouchſafed her from on high. All bleſſings from the omnipotent Lambe (who warreth againſt Antichriſt, and will conquer) are craved for your Excellency, by all the reall lovers of this Nation, among Minimorum minimus Tertul. ad Trallian.
 whom I reſt the meaneſt of Chriſts miniſters, and to


July. 20 1644.

Your Excellencye moſt humbly devoted in all Chriſtian ſervice,
IOHN BEVVICK,

