


TO
THE HONOVRABLE THE
Committee of the Countie of Kent,
Ioſeph Boden wiſheth wiſdome from
above to diſcerne the frauds,
and
Chriſtian reſolution to reſiſt the undertakings
of the Babyloniſh brood; together with a full
recompence of all your labours for the truth, both with
an encreaſe of grace and peace in this world,
and eternall glory in the world to come.

Honourable and Beloved;


AS this Sermon came from you into the
world, ſo now it returnes from the
world to you again: your approbation,
and requeſt (which is command
enough) encouraged me to,
and in the publication; and your
Patronage ſhall be all the ſhelter I
will ſeeke, in caſe of detraction. I know the matter will
diſpleaſe many, becauſe here the Church of God is put upon
acting againſt the Antichriſtian Synagogue, and partie:
but I matter not theſe mens diſpleaſure: for I profeſſedly
ſeeke, and preſſe a diſappointment of their deſigne, and a
diſsipation of them, ſo farre as they drive it on wittingly,

and willingly againſt the Lord and his Chriſt. There is a
generation of men who pretend daily to pray (as they are
taught) Thy kingdome come, and yet their plots and endeavours,
are againſt nothing more, then the coming of
Christ his kingdome: ihe enlightning of theſe mens eyes,
or the binding of their hands is chiefly aimed at, in the enſuing
Diſcourſe: for the preſent therefore I am reſolved
not to waigh what they cenſure, becauſe I looke upon them
either as blinded, or wrong byaſed, and ſo neither a conſiderable
partie, nor indifferent Iudges. If the plainneſſe
of the ſtyle be either queſtioned, or blamed, my anſwer
is ready, it was choſen on purpoſe, that if any good do iſſue,
upon either, the preaching, or publiſhing of this peece, the
praiſe may be of, and to God, not the weake and unworthy
Inſtrument. Theſe notions found acceptance with you,
in the delivery, and therefore, though now they may want
that life and vigour which then they ſeemed to have, yet I
hope (for Gods not mans ſake) they will finde a proportionable
acceptation with your eyes, to that of your eares:
ſome enlargements of particulars which you heard in the
Pulpit are here poſsibly omitted, for memory may faile me
to gather up theſe fragments. All the materials are faithfully
laid together, only one uſe in the cloſe, (as proper to
the point, and neceſſary for theſe times) is briefly added.
If ſingularitie in point of offenſive Armes be laid to my
charge, I reply, that now men generally call for, and enquire
after newes, and though this may ſeeme to ſuit theſe wanton
wits in the publication, yet the Text cleares it, to be an
old truth; novell onely in caſe of diſcovery. And the
truth is, this beſt ſuits my genius, for I wholly deſire to be
the diſciple of old truths, and have no heart to tamper or
be taken with them, who affect to be maſters of new hereſies:
as there are too many (who through faire ſhews, but
without doubt, for baſe ends) doe trouble the Church with

their fond fancies, and new fangle toyes, in theſe turbulent
times: but I leave them to their juſtly deſerved cenſure,
with the Apoſtles wiſh,Gal. 5. 12. would to God they were even cut off
that trouble us, and to the Church of God with the ſame
Apoſtle I write thus.Rom. 16. 17. Now I beſeech you Brethren, marke
them that cauſe diviſions, and offences contrary to the Doctrine
which you have received; and avoyd them. Oh!
that whileſt we hunt thePſal. 
•
0. 13. Boares which out of the wood do
waſte the Lords vineyard, we would alſo have an eye to endeavour
the catching of thoſeCant. 2. 15 Foxes, thoſe little Foxes,
that ſpoyle the vines. For though they come to us in ſheeps
cloathing, yet inwardly they are ravening wolves. Shortly
thus, I ſee not but malignants of the new garbe in the
Church, may do as much hurt as thoſe of the old one, in the
State. Let me not for this be thought, an enemy to the endeavoured
Reformation, it is the deſire of my ſoule to ſee it
up, in its full beautie, and ſtrength, onely I would have old
Babylon broken down, and all new Babels kept down, that
whiles we have voted, and vowed out by-paſt ſuperſtition,
we may not be obſtructed, or burthened in the worke of the
Lord, with new Ieſuitic all plots of faction and ſchiſme, leſt
whiles men plead for libertie, they turne Libertines: and
after we have covenanted; ſincerely, really, and conſtantly,
(through the grace of God) to endeavour, that the
Lord may be one, and his name one in three kingdomes, we
be not found by every mans ſeeking, and ſetting up himſelf,
to neglect the keeping of the union of the ſpirit in the bond
of peace, and inſtead of advancing the Lord Ieſus, to be the
beginners and fomentors of confuſion, in all the Churches
of Chriſt. But from this occaſionall digreſsion Ireturne.
And if the needleſneſſe, or tardineſſe of my paines in this
ſubject, be laid in the way of that profit which might otherwiſe
be reaped hereby, I would remove this obſtacle thus,
although this be but to write Iliads after Homer, yet all

men either have not ſeene, or will not make uſe of, or cannot
underſtand the Labours of the more Learned: theſe therefore
may be uſefull to ſome, and I have my aime, if either
for condiction, or confirmation, I can benefit any, though
they be the meaneſt of the people for parts, or place. And I
might have been ſooner in print, if I durſt have thought
any thing the Lord had imparted unto me, worth publique
view, or any wayes able to ſtand up againſt a generall cenſure:
but ſince you worthy Patriots may not be non-ſuited
by him who is unexpreſsibly engaged to your, and the Countries
ſervice, and that I muſt out and abroad, among the
croud of other ſcriblers, theſe Lines through Gods mercie
may prove in good time for kent, (where they were bred,
and for which, they are chiefly publiſhed,) although otherwiſe
they be too late for Chriſtendome. I will not any longer
ſtand or ſtay to anſwer for my ſelfe, by a larger Apologie, I
muſt leave my defence in other things to you moſt induſtrious
Gentlemen; And I ſhall thinke my Lot very ſtrange,
if you (who under God) have been the Saviours of the Countie,
cannot ſhelter me among ſo many, eſpecially ſince (for
deſires to doe good) I feare not Tongue, if I can eſcape Gunſhot.
It will be happineſſe enough to me, moſt faithfull Patriots,
if upon the review of theſe my unworthy Labours,
your ſpirits be heightened into action againſt the enemies of
the truth; It is an honourable ſervice, for you to ſpend and
to be ſpend in. And by quickning you hereunto, my hope is
to ſee you every way ſucceſſefull, under Boaz his bleſsing,
of doing worthily in Ephratah, and being famous in Bethlehem.
In confidence whereof I make bold to ſubſcribe my
ſelfe,

Your ſervant in all offices
for Chriſt, againſt Antichriſt.
Ioſeph Boden.

