


TO THE MOST NOBLE LORDS, WITH THE HONORABLE KNIGHTS, CITIZENS, AND BURGESSES, Now assembled in PARLIAMENT.

IN Epistles Dedicatory, sometimes men render an account to the world, by what Principles they were Led to such a worke Sometimes they maintaine and strengthen, what they have done, by New Arguments. Sometimes

ad captandam Benevolentiam, they present their whole Designe, in a briefe Epitomy, that so they may invite the Reader. But I shall doe None of These.
The first I need not: For if the Ten Kings must hate the Whore, Eate her flesh, and Burne her with her fire; Will not every good Christian offer himselfe a ready Servant to This Worke, a Willing Souldier under this Standard?
The Second, I cannot; without questioning my owne Diligence, or (which is worse) my Readers Gentlenesse: Either of which every Writer carefully shunneth.
The third I will not, left I be injurious to my selfe: For, Humane Nature is ever Novorum avida; and the Soule of vast comprehension; the Booke therefore would seeme but Crambe bis cocta, to All that read the Epistle; and but create a nausea to Those that had already gathered all, by viewing the Breviate.
If it be the Glory of a King's Daughter to be clothed in Needle-worke; surely This

poore Birth will need more then Figleaves, to make it Beautifull. When it is Cloathed with its Best Robes, It will not be worthy to appeare in so Great a Presence. How much lesse then, when presented only in a bare and naked Sceleton?
The Worke then of These Lines, is to lay prostrate at Your Feet (most Noble Lords, and Gentlemen) the Retirements of Your Humble Servant in the Last Recesse.

If you shall aske mee, how I dare take the boldnesse to interrupt Your more serious Thoughts, with These Things of Little Worth: All I shall plead for my selfe is but This, the bow must be sometimes unbent; and if then This Pamphlet may be called for, it is all I aspire to. For, Your Protection, and Your Patronage, not Your Trouble, is My Request: Of which being no whit Doubtfull; with all Humility commending

This to Your Noble Favour; Your selves and Counsels to the Almighty; I crave le
•
ve for ever to remaine

Your most obliged and devoted Servant ROBERT BROOKE.

