


TO The Honourable Houſe OF COMMONS, Now aſſembled in PARLIAMENT.


Worthy Patriots,


GOD hath made you like the Brazen-Serpent; thoſe that have been ſtung with the Serpents and Dragons of Rome, have look't upon you and been healed. You have overcome, and ſlaine many

Lyons of difficulties that have beene in the way; yea, you have found honey in them.
The Church is not in her travels and labour, as thoſe ſtrong women of Iſrael, that could bring forth alone; Therefore God hath ſtirred you up to help her in her pangs; Bee couragious therefore, and languiſh not in this ſo great and neceſſary a work of Reformation.
All truth is ſweet, even naturall truth; therefore the Heathens in their Sacrifice to Minerva (their Goddeſſe of Arts) offered honey, crying out, 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
, truth is ſweet; but ſpirituall truths are ſweeter then the honey and the honey comb; And this is the truth, even that about Doctrine, Diſcipline, and the Worſhip of God, which the godly deſire above all their outward advantages, And above all thoſe works of Reformation you have in

hand; eſpecially provide againſt the generall ignorance in people by a ſolide and ſerious Catachizing; and againſt the prophaneneſſe of people by powerfull Diſcipline, that ſo the Sacraments may bee diſpenſed comfortably. As in this Kingdome, the Lawyer, the Phyſitian, the Tradeſman can goe comfortably in his calling, ſo provide that the Paſtor alſo in the Diſpenſation of Ordinances may doe it with joy, and not with griefe; The very Heathens were carefull about their Idoll Sacrifices, Procul, O procul eſte prophani: And wee read in Story, that the Prieſt being to ſacrifice, askt this queſtion, 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
; who was there? Anſwer was returned, 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
, good and honeſt men. And now in this work of Reformation, goe on exactly, conſult not with fleſh and blood, leave not in your Building any nailes or hookes ſtanding out, that may teare thoſe who goe

by. And that God may delight in your works, labour to reform your own lives, and Families, leſt you bee as the Torch or Candle that giveth light to others, but conſumeth it ſelfe.
The great God of Heaven goe along with you, ſtrengthen, ſettle, and eſtabliſh you.

Your humble Servant in Christ Ieſus,
ANTHONY BURGES.


