

To our dread Soveraigne Lord The KINGS moſt Excellent MAJESTY.

May it pleaſe your Majeſty,


WEE doe moſt humbly and thankfully acknowledge, that by Your Majeſties vouchſafing to this your Principality the truſt of a branch of Your Royall Mint, is an honour that neither our Anceſtors nor our ſelves durſt wiſh for; and we doe as humbly and as thankfully acknowledge and confeſſe, that by it you have not onely honoured us more, then any of Your Royall predeceſſors; but you have thereby offered us the means to enrich our ſelves, to the making of us happier then our fathers,

in freeing us from the cares and feares that hindred us from driving into theſe Mountaines that promiſe a maſſe of treaſure. For be pleaſed to know, that before Your Majeſty vouchſafed unto us this great favour, we were fearefull to adventure far into the mountaines, becauſe wee had far to ſend before wee could make the ſilver currant, that wee ſhould at charge recover. Nor was our care of carriage and recarriage the leaſt hinderance to our proceedings, from all which by Your Majeſties goodneſſe, and the endeavours of Your induſtrious and faithfull ſervant Thomas Buſhell, we are happily freed; for which favour, we whoſe names are hereunto ſubſcribed in the behalfe of all the inhabitants of this your Principality of WALES, doe render all humble and hearty thanks, and for them, and our ſelves, doe hereby promiſe to Your ſacred Majeſty, that we will doe our utmoſt endeavours, to finde out that meaſure, which we beleeve God and Nature from the Creation hath preſerved

for Your Majeſties uſe; that thereby wee may approve our ſelves Your Majeſties loyall and moſt obedient Subjects and humble Servants,




Thomas Milward Knight, Chiefe Iuſtice of Cheſter.


Marmaduke LLoyd Knight.

Richard Price K. Baronet.

James Price Knight.

Sampſon Eure Knight.

Iohn Lewis Knight.

Timothy Turnor Eſquire.

I. Littleton Eſq.

Walter LLoyd Eſq.

Thomas Price Eſq.

Robert Corbet Eſq.

Evan Gwin Eſq.

Morgan Herbert Eſq.

Iohn Ʋaughan Eſq.

Vincent Corbet Eſq.

Humfrey Greene Eſq.

Iohn LLoyd Eſq.

David LLoyd ap Reighnald Eſq.

Thomas Phillips Eſq.

Iohn Edmund Eſq.

Hugh LLoyd Gentlem.

David Rees Gent.

Iohn Bowen Gent.

William Watkin Gent.

Iohn Meredith Gent.

Iames Kegitt Gent.



