

To the right Worſhipfull Sir Dennor
Strut, Knight and Baronet, to the
right Worſhipfull William Heveningham a worthy
Member of the Honourable Houſe of Commons,
to the Worſhipfull Nicholas Bacon, and Henry North,
Juſtices of the peace, to the Worthy Thomas Baker,
Nathaniel Thurſton, and John Bayles, Eſquires, and
to Mr. John Mayhew, &c.


Noble Knight, and Worſhipfull, and
generous Gentlemen:

I being bound
to ſome of you in the bonds of affinity,
to all in affection but above all in duty;
I cannot but hold it my duty to
proffer you the beſt of my endeavours, and for want of
any thing worthy, I doe here perſent you my good will.
I preſume not upon your Patronage, but only beg your
acceptance; conſidering that if theſe my endeavours
be worth the accepting, they ſhall need the leſſe aſsiſtance.
But if any thing here brought forth be deformed,
it is ſure moſt fit that he which begot it ſhould father
it.
The world, peradventure, may wonder that I draw
ſo large a circle, and then turn it to a cypher▪ that I preſume
to ſtamp ſo many worthy Names in the front of
this my unworthy worke, and then ſpeake nothing of
the worth of your worthy perſons in particular:

But let the world know that it is not for want of worth
in your ſelves that I forbear the ſame for I doe ingenuouſly
acknowledge I may juſtly draw your vertues into
as large a Volume, as any other who have beene
moſt copious in that kinde. But I, for my part, do hold
it a labour little uſefull to paint over that to make it
paſſe for currant, which doth ſhine moſt perfect in its
owne colour. Beſides, I am reſolved your modeſt eares
would be rather offended, then fed, with the ſound of
your own prayſes though unfained.
But the chiefeſt aime of my deſires herein is to doe
you ſome ſervice; not flatter for aſsiſtance. Therefore,
if upon peruſall hereof (if your more ſerious imployments
will admit the ſame) you ſhall reap any benefit,
or at leaſt content, I ſhall, in this kind be ſufficiently ſatisfied.
Only I deſire that upon your judicious view hereof,
you would vouchſafe a favourable cenſure; of which
I am the more confident, becauſe I know you cannot expect
any thing poliſhed from a hand ſo uninſtructed.
But not to be too full in a Preface, to too empty a Sequell,
I implore your pardon, and deſire to be imploy'd, your
Servant in all humility.

Edward Calver.

