


TO
THE HIGH
AND
HONOURABLE
The LORDS and House of COMMONS
of England in PARLIAMENT
Assembled.

My Lords and Gentlemen,


ABout twelve yeares agoe there came
to my hand a little tract written in
Latine by one who stiled himselfe
JOHANNES CAMILTONUS,
and professed himselfe to have been
sometimes a Probationer in that
Colledge of Iesuites in Germany,
whereof JACOCUS DEL RIO, at that time Provinciall
was the Visitor: This booke, in the yeare 1607
was by him written and dedicated to the Protestant
Electors of Germany, as a Discovery before-hand of

those most damnable

〈…〉
 Society then
had in agitation against the people of Germany. The
title of this booke was, De studiis Iesuitarum abstrusioribus,
concerning the more secret and reserved practises
of the Iesuites: Whereunto had those Princes,
to whom this booke was Dedicated, given such timely

•
are and beliefe as they might have done, they had in
all probability prevented the greatest part of those unparallel'd
miseries, which since the beginning of the
warres there (and that was not till eleven yeares after
the publication of this booke) these 
Jncendiaries

of Christendome, have brought upon the Germaine
Nation, to the astonishment of all the world. But wee
see what hath since beene permitted to these fellowes to
doe, and what the neglect of a timely taking heed to a
seasonable warning hath brought upon those then flourishing
Princes and States.
That we therefore might learne by other mens harmes
to re
〈…〉
e our owne particular, I have endeavoured the
publication of this translation under your honours protection;
having taught this Discoverer to speake our
language, for the publique benefit of our English Nation,
against them, I dare boldly say, even your selves
being my Judges when you shall have read this small
tract, that the same course hath beene taken by these
common Incendiaries for breeding a disturbance, and
bringing all things into a confusion both in our Church
and State, that was then projected, and since then acted
upon Germany. Nor doe I thinke, but it is sufficiently
knowne to your Honours and grave Wisedomes, that
the same wheele of mischiefe, that wrought all the woes

of Germany since the yeare 1618. hath for some yeares
last past, bin set also at worke in England, Scotland, and
Ireland: witnesse all the factions and fractions in
Church and State, the disturbances and discontents
betweene the Prince and the people, the fearefull divisions
betwixt the Clergie and the Clergie, betwixt the
Court and City, and betwixt the King and his Commons,
yea, even betwixt the two Crownes of England
and Scotland, all which have received their birth and
breeding from the devilish designes of those sonnes of
division, the Society of Jesuites, and beene fomented
almost to a perfect flame by their Agents, and Adherents,
their deluded Disciples of this Nation, and
had undoubtedly broken out, and produced in short
time, the like effects among us, that they have done in
Germany, had not Almighty God in meere mercy to
this Nation, and in his Divine compassion to his poore
Church in England thus ready to perish, stept in to our
rescue, by his blessed hand of providence stirring up the
spirits of our noble Peeres to represent to his sacred
Majestie the eminent danger, and gratiously inclining
his Royall heart to hearken thereto, and so that we may
say with the Psalmist, Ps. 118. 23. This was the
Lords doing, and it is marvailous in our eyes. And
the same God, if it be his blessed will, in his owne time,
by his owne meanes, perfect that good worke of mercy,
which he hath so gracioussy begun for us of this Land
and Nation, by rooting out from amongst us that disloyall
brood of Inigo Loiola, that our eyes may see it,
and we may say, the Lord hath beene megni
••
ed upon
the borders of England. For assuredly, though the

Romish Factors, may now justly say, as EDOM did
in the Prophecye of Malachy, 1: 4. We are
impovverished, but we will retur
•
e, and build
up our desolate places, (for they cannot but be sensible
of their owne 
〈…〉
ets defeated both by Sea and Land,
by water in the yeare 1588, by F
••
e, 1605, and it
is not to be doubted that they apprehend a feare of the
miscarriage of their great and long intended plot of

〈◊〉
 begun to 
•
eake out this yeare 1641, all which
notwithstanding, they still retaine a resolution 
〈…〉
 and build up their desola
•
e places) yet I desire
them, to read and take notice of the words following in
the place before-cited, yet, thus saith the Lord of Hosts,
They shall build up, but I will destroy, and men
shall call them the border of wickednesse, and the
people with whom the Lord is angry for ever: And
your eyes shall see it, and men shall say the Lords name
hath beene magnified upon the borders of England.
And to speake truly what I thinke, I must confesse that
I have conceived an hope of a long time, that this yeare
1641. which compleateth the Century since that Society
had their Bull from the Pope, under protection whereof
they have wrought so much mischiefe, would shew unto
the world an apparant alteration in the body of that
Monster, the Society of Jesuites. A point which I am
the rather induced to beleeve, because I have been certified
as much in effect from a couple of their owne men
of eminent note for learning, the one, PAVLUS FLOR
•
NIUS
an Italian, the other CHRISTIANUS FRANKEN
a German, the former whereof was DIVINITY READER,
the other PHILOSOPHY READER in the Imperiall

Colledge of Iesuites at Vienna, both which, above
threescore yeares agoe, upon just grounds exprest in a
booke by them published, forsooke that Religion, and
became Protestants. That booke also is to be seene,
and if it please this Honourable House to command
it, shall be published also in English, for
I find it written in Latine. And, if their prediction
faile not more in the conclusion then it hath
done in the progresse hitherto. I am confident
that this mayprove a very fatall yeare to that Society
But I feare I hold you too long from the Booke it selfe
Humbly therefore commending you all to Almighty
God in my due and daily prayers. I leave
this Discovery to your consideration,
and rest

Yours in all the duty of a Minister
of Christs Gospell.
W. F. X. B.


