


TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE, THE LADY KATHERINE BROOK, Wife to Right Honourable, ROBERT, Lord BROOKE, Baron of Beuchampen-Court.

Much honoured Madam,


KING Solomon, the wisest of men, having tyred himselfe in seeking to obtaine happinesse by the studies of learning, and knowledge,

and at last, finding that hee that encreaseth knowledge, encreaseth sorrow, hee turnes himselfe another way, and seeing the knowledge of the creatures could doe him no good, he thought to try what delight the use of them could bring unto him; in the pursuance whereof, hee gave not himselfe over to brutish, and unmanly pleasures, but to the free use of such creatures, as the Lord hath bestowed upon the sonnes of men, for their refreshing and delight: amongst which hee reckons up gardens and Orchards stored with all sorts of fruits, and flowers: these hee might have enjoyed with much profit, and comfort, if hee had

used them aright, but seeking for happinesse in them, no such honey could be sucked out of the daintiest of those flowers; no such wine out of the fruitfullest of those grapes: and therefore hee concludes, looking upon all the workes which his hands had wrought, that all was vanity and vexation of spirit. Eccles. 2.11.

Now as the Lord afforded unto him such choise delights: so he hath bestowed upon your Ladiship a confluence of outward felicities; and amongst them Gardens (if I may guesse) not farre inferiour to Solomons: and those beautified, and inameld with variety of the choisest flowers, whose lively verdures, and

fragrant smels (if I mistake not) your Ladiship is much pleased with: yet herein I presume in a much different way from Solomons, as not seeking happinesse in them; but rather desiring by those objects to raise up your soule to such contemplations, as may truly further your eternall happinesse: and if your Ladiship shall find such heavenly odours in those flowers, whose purest matter is the earth: and whose freshest beauty is so fading: what will you doe in a Nose-gay of flowers, whose matter is divine; and whose smell, and beauty will never decay: Such anone I doe here humbly present unto your Ladiship: you

may use it summer and winter without feare of withering; yea, herein are flowers both for food and physick: for meats, and medecine. Length of time will no whit impaire, either the beauty or Vertue of them, and therefore they doe most transcendently excell all earthly flowers whatsoever: Indeed I must ingenuously confesse, that few of them grew upon mine owne soyle; yet before I could bind them together in this handfull, my labour was not small in walking through so many Gardens, out of which I have selected them: neither as I hope will it be offensive, or prejudiciall to the worthy Planters, and Owners of them (some of

which are with God, others now living) that I thus disperse them abroad, themselves having first made them common: If your Ladiship please to vouchsafe your favourable acceptance of them, I doubt not but they will take the better with others; and if God may receive the glory, and his People benefit by these my labours, I shall have mine end, whose ambition it is to to be esteemed.

Alcester. Septem. 20. 1641.


Your Honours humble servant, and remembrancer at the Throne of Grace. SAMVEL CLARKE.

