


To the Right Worshipfull, the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Councell, with the Burgesses of the City of GLOUCESTER.

Gentlemen,


SIlent and calme times, and an equall stream of secular Affairs are more acceptable to men of the present age, because they are times of injoyment; whereas the greater Changes and Confusions of the world do more delight Posterity, or such as survive the trouble of those Changes. For tis a pleasure to behold at such a distance the Risings and Falls of Nations and their Governments, as to see the raging Sea from the secure Land. And it doth not seldome come to passe that an universall Concussion, and the shaking of the pillars of the earth, doth cast it into better frame and settle it on a firme Basis: So that the men of the former Age doe labour,

and those of the later enter into their labours. Even so, tis the Calamity of these Dayes to be engaged in such a Warre and the wofull attendants thereof; yet their felicity to be engaged for the highest interests in this life, which will exalt them, whatsoever the successe be; and if prosperous, will make the faithfull in the land a perpetuall Excellency, and the joy of many Generations. The Action of these times transcends the Barons Warres, and those tedious discords betweene the Houses of Yorke and Lancaster, in as much as it is undertaken upon higher Principles, and carried on to a nobler end, and effects more universall. And in this you have acted not the least part for a particular Government to your owne safety and honour, and by a generall acknowledgement not a little to the preservation of the whole Kingdome. Wherefore out of abundant respect to my deare native place, having collected some Memorials of its fidelity and Industry, I humbly present them to your view, who were witnesses of, and bore a part in those performances. I remember my own thoughts when we were in the height of Danger, and ready to fall

into the depth of Misery, That I did seeme to refresh my selfe in the conceipt of the future joyous remembrance thereof, when we should out live those extremities. And you also must needs be abundantly satisfied in reminding those manifold hazards and exegencies which you by patience and perseverance have in good measure overcome. For which cause this Historicall Relation, though it tenders it selfe to the review of all serious men, yet unto yours chiefly, that your ioy might be yet more full. Neither ought we to be so iniurious to Divine Providence, as to bury or keep secret the influence and working thereof upon the endeavours of a willing people. Hitherto you have runne well, nothing remaines but perseverance, that the concluding part may be blessed and honourable. Let your City ever flourish and prosper under the protection of the Highest.

Gentlemen, Your humbly devoted servant, JOHN CORBET.

