


TO THE
HONOVRABLE,
and the true lover of all conſcientious
Covenantours, that ſtand up
for a through Reformation, according to
the word of our good God, in England, and
Ireland, CORNELIUS HOLLAND
Eſquire, a Member of the Houſe
of Commons Aſſembled in
Parliament.


SIR,



DAvid deſcribeth the godly
man, by his pleaſure, and by
his paines: Firſt, the pleaſure
of the godly man, in theſe
words:Pſal. 1. 2.
He delighteth in the
Law of the Lord. Secondly, the paines of
the godly man: And in that Law he meditateth
day and night; not only in the day
appointed for man to labour in, but in the
night alſo appointed for man to reſt: the
reaſon is, becauſe it is his meat and drinke,
to doe the will of his God. (Honoured
Sir) The Word of Chriſt being the Rule

of Englands Reformation; the good
Lord (that writeth his Lawes in his peoples
hearts, according to his new Covenant
of Grace: Heb. 8. 10.) put it into
my minde, ſeriouſly to conſider, What
Schiſme was, that I had covenanted againſt.
And ſearching the Scriptures, I
found it thus written, 1. Tim. 6. 3. If any
man teach otherwiſe, and conſent not to
the wholeſome words, even the words of our
Lord Jeſus Chriſt; and to the Doctrine
which is according to godlineſſe. Verſ. 4.
He is proud, knowing nothing; but doting
about Queſtions, and ſtrife of words;
whereof commeth envy, ſtrife, raylings,
evill ſurmiſings. Verſ. 5. Perverſe diſputings
of men of corrupt mindes, and deſtitute
of the truth; ſuppoſing that gaine
is godlineſſe; from ſuch withdraw thy ſelf.
Yea, and after a further enquiry, to underſtand
aright the things that are controverted
amongſt us; by the good providence
of the Almighty, I found two Texts of holy
Scripture, ſetting forth two ſorts of
men, Diametrally oppoſing one another,
as light doth darkeneſſe, truth doth falſehood;
the one th
•
s written: 1 John 5. 1.
Whoſoever beleeveth that Jeſus is the
Chriſt, is borne of God. And the other,
thus; 1 John 2. 22. Who is a lyar, but he

that denyeth that Jeſus is not the Chriſt,
He is Antichriſt, that denyeth the Father
and the Sonne. And when I thought to
underſtand the difference, it was to hard
for me, untill I went into the Sanctuary
of God; where the Father of glory, of his
good pleaſure, revealed to me (the moſt
unworthyeſt of all his ſervants) the truth
of that; which (I conceive) is the root
of all our Controverſies, and gave me to
underſtand the meaning of the Scriptures,
1 John 5. 1. Whoſoever beleeveth that Jeſus
is the Chriſt, viz. the eternall King,
Prophet, Prieſt of the Church of the new
Teſtament, ratified with his bloud, whom
the Father of glory hath exalted to bee
Lord and Chriſt, Acts 2. 36. and head,
Epheſ. 2. 20, 21, 22, 23. Is borne of God.
Seeing no man can ſay, (that is confeſt)
that Jeſus is the Lord but by the holy Spirit,
1 Cor. 12. 3.
Hence I find it written, Joh. 1. 11. Jeſus
came to his owne, but his owne received
him not, that is, for the Chriſt, that Meſſiah
which was to come: but onely for
the Carpenters ſonne; Matth. 13. 58. The
reaſon was, becauſe none could underſtand
that Myſtery: but they onely to whom the
Father of heaven revealed it, Matth. 11.
14. Hence, when Jeſus demanded of his

Diſciples? Whom doe men ſay that I the
Sonne of Man am? Peter anſwereth,
thou art the Chriſt, the Sonne of the living
God: Jeſus anſwereth, Bleſſed art
thou Simon Bar-Jona; for fleſh and blood
hatb not revealed this unto thee; but my
Father in heaven. And thou art Peter,
and upon this Rock (Jeſus the Chriſt,
whom thou haſt confeſſed) I will build my
Church, and the gates of hell ſhall not prevail
againſt it, Mat. 16. 16, 17, 18. Many for
fear durſt not in thoſe dayes confeſſe Jeſus
to be the Chriſt: Inſtance the Parents of
the blind man: Becauſe the Jewes had agreed,
that if any did confeſſe, that hee
was the Chriſt; He ſhould be put out of
the Synagogue, John 9. 22. But ſo many
as recived him (viz. to be the Chriſt) to
them he gave power to be called the ſons
of God; even to them that beleeve in his
name; which were borne not of bloud
nor of the will of the fleſh, nor of th
•

will of man, But of God, John 1. 12, 13▪
And as for that other Text of the holy
Scripture that doth univerſally oppoſe it
the heavenly Father gave me thus to interpret
it: 1 John 2. 22. Who is a lyar (viz

•
orne of the evill one, who is a lyar, and
the father of lyes, and abode not in the
truth, John 8. 14. But hee that denieth

that JESUS (whom hee confeſſeth
dyed for his ſinnes; and roſe againe
the third day, according to the Scriptures)
Is not the Chriſt, viz. the annointed
King and Prophet of his Church,
in all his outward adminiſtrations and inſtitutions,
in admitting of Members into
his ſpirituall Kingdome, according to his
royall Commiſſion, Matth. 28. 18, 19.
Mark. 15. 15, 16. (though he acknowledge
him to be his eternall Prieſt that ever
liveth, to make interceſſion to God
for him, Heb. 7. 25. He is that Antichriſt
(viz. an enemy and adverſary to Jeſus
the Chriſt) that denieth the Father and
the Sonne, He that denieth the Sonnes
Authority, to bee the eternall King,
and his Commiſſion to bee in force,
Matth. 28. 18, 19, 20. Mark. 15. 15,
16. and to be the eternall Prophet; and
his word to be the eternall rule for Doctrine
and Gouernement; aſwall as his
eternall Prieſt to reconcile him to God
Denieth the Father, that ſanctified the
Sonne, and ſent him into the World, John
10. 36. and raiſed him from the dead,
and exalted him to bee Lord and Chriſt,
Acts 2. 36. Hence it is (my Honoured
friend) Firſt, that in all my writings, I
have ſtudied to exalt Jeſus the Chriſt, it

being the Primitive. Faith once given to
the Saints, Math. 16. 16. Secondly, to
diſtinguiſh Jeſus the Chriſt from all others
named with the name of Jeſus in
Scripture Record: as Joſhua is called Jeſus,
Hebr. 4. 8. &c. others. Thirdly, becauſe
I find the Scriptures giving that Title
to him in divers places.

John confeſſeth, I am not the Chriſt,
John 1. 20. The Woman of Samaria
ſaid, I know the Meſſiah commeth which
is called the Chriſt, John 4. 25. Apollos
mightily convinced the Jewes, ſhewing
by the Scriptures, that Jeſus was the
Chriſt, Acts 18. 28. Now that I received
from the Lord, I could not but make
knowne to you, You being one of the
tender hearted Loyall Covenanters, a
Member of that High and Honourable
Court, under whoſe ſhade Conſcientious
Covenantours (that contend for the faith
of Jeſus the Chriſt, once given to the
Saints) find reſt.
Know (worthy Sir) that the departure
from the faith of Jeſus the Chriſt,
is a cauſe of ſo many Schiſmes, and Hereſies
maintained in the earth. Diſdaine
not therefore to read a little Treatiſe,
called the Difference betweene the Chriſtian,
and Antichriſtian Church, Deliniated

according to the Scripture Record,
though the truth therein contained (like
the Two witneſſes, Revel. 11. 3.) have
long mourned in Sackcloth: Yet if God
give you an heart to receive it, It will be a
Jewell ſurpaſſing all earthly Treaſure.
For if Ieſus the Chriſt bee your Prophet
to teach you, his heavenly Father will,
Matth. 17. 5. Acts 3. 22. 23. He will then
be your King to protect you, Matth 28.
20. Your Prieſt to intercede for you, Joh.
27. 20. Your Judge to acquit you, Joh. 12.
48. and if the love of Chriſt draw you to
keepe all his Commandements (though in
the world you meet with af
•
liction for
his ſake; yet in Chriſt you ſhall find peace)
for the Father, Son, and Spirit will dwell
in your heart, and take it for the Sanctum
Sanctorum, where they will abide to cheer
and refreſh you, Joh. 14. 23. And if you
confeſſe, him in this world before men: He
will confeſſe you before his Father, and proclaime
it to your eternall peace and comfort,
(Euge bone ſerve) Well done thou
good and faithfull ſervant, enter into your
Maſters joy. Matth. 25. 21.

Orpington in Kent▪
the tenth Moneth,
the firſt day, 1645.

Yours, who contendeth
for the faith of Jeſus
the Chriſt.
FRANCIS CORNWELL

