

TO THE FAITHFVLL WITNESSE OF CHRIST Mr.
Henry Burton.


Worthy Sir,


THE first draught of this Treatise, was conveyed unto you (attired in a borrowed garment) presently after, the matter therein contained had been preached in our Monethly Propositions, and publick meetings duly observed amongst us, according to the order prescribed in our Discipline, not unknowne unto you. The reason was because of the great interest you had therein; not onely in regard of the spirituall brother-hood, and former acquaintance; but especially in respect of the subject thereof. You being one of the eminent witnesses of Christ, that had suffered for the testimonie of his truth, according to the Prophesie mentioned, Revel. 11 7. &c. yet then lying unburied, in one of the publike places of the great Citie, Castle Cornet in Garnezey, (where some few yeares before two other Bretheren (and the Authour also, for a whole weeke of

moneths had beene unjustly imp
•…
oned, and unlawfully detained, for the same testimonie. (And though you were then overcome by the beast of the bottomlesse pit, who had made warre against you, and by her killed with that most uncivill and unnaturall death, I meane that close-confined Prison: yet that faithfull and true witnesse, the beginning of the creatures of God, had bounded and determined it, having faithfully promised by the said Prophet in the same chapter to raise you againe, at the ending of the limited time of three dayes and a halfe: whereof you were then, by the meanes of this Treatise informed and assured, some five or sixe Moneths before it came to passe. The application thereof unto you, being made as plaine, (as if it had beene already effected,) by that perspective, the Table of the Parallel of the 42. journeys and moneths (of both the Iewish and Christian Churches) of their wildernesses; set in view in the beginning of this book: And for the use of all such as are desirous to follow the footsteps, and understand with the booke of the Revelation, likewise the true period of time in which the notable Accidents of the Christian Church travelling through her said wildernesse, came to passe. And thus to observe her progresse all along the same. That is first her entrie therein, or the meanes and degrees by which shee came at length to fall into that vast and drie wildernesse of Idolatrie, a right shadow of Death; and so grosse, that all the former Pagans, could not parallel it. Then secondly how long shee hath continued under that blacknesse of darkenesse and ignorance, thicker and obscurer then that of Egypt. And lastly the very

time when God in his mercy began to bring, and leade her out of the same, taking vengeance by degrees, of all her persecutors. The said Treatise indeede at its first flight did but intend your particular comfort, and encouragement in your most undanted faith, Jonas-like during your said death. Whereof when you were risen, and ascended up in a cloud, to the heavenly Armagedon or Parliament calling you; it would needes take it selfe to its wings, being somewhat better feathered then at first, and follow you over-sea, there to observe more of its contents. Trusting by the former true events, to see a further accomplishment of many more, wherein it hath in nothing hitherto been deceived, having observed among many other wonderfull mercies of God, first the second tribe of the Christian Israel, passing over, & treading under foot that proudly overflowed Euphraticall Jordan. Secondly the Covenant of Circumcifi ōrenewed in Gilgal, (where I am sure that the twelve stones are set up for a monument to posterity of the drying up of the said Jordan) about the revolution of the 1641 yeare (being the first of the last tenth, of the last Moneth of the long tribulation, and the first also of the raising of the Church, (agreeing with the particular time of your forementioned raising, which was as is noted in the treatise, the first day of the last moneth of your death;) And the beginning of the conquest of the premices of the ten Kingdomes of the great Citie) or tenth part of them, which was to be the first consecrated to God, & to be brought under the yoke of the Lamb Iesus Christ. It observed immediatly after this the celebrating of the Christian

Passeover, the next Sabbath day following. Thirdly, the compassing about of the Citie Jericho by the three severall shouting Companies (having with them the Arke of the Lord) with the downefall of her walls and the sacking therof. It admired especially observing, that by the command of Joshua, Rahab the Harlot was to be put out of the campe, there to be (by the speciall charge thereof committed to you) prepared, according to the law, and thereby fitted, for to be shortly married to the Lambe, her promised husband: as soone as shee should be stript of her whorish Babylonish garment, as soone as the nailes of the Courts of her scratching persecution should be cut off; and finally as soone as all the Ceremonies borrowed haires of her alluring and enticing whoredomes should bee shaved off. The most part of which perceiving to be now effected, it could be contained no longer, but would needes scape out of my hands to fly abroad. God grant it a favourable entertainement, that it may returne againe with a safe conduct to its owner, to carry the good tidings of Reformation, most necessarie and wanting in the state both Civill and Ecclesiasticall of the Countrie of his aboade. The prosecuting and obtaining whereof I desire, that it may be by you, to your powered, further, whereby you shall oblige mee to continue for ever

Yours in the Lord I. D. L. M.

