


To the High Court of PARLIAMENT of
ENGLAND.
To the Aſſembly of DIVINES.
To the Chriſtian Magiſtrates, and
Reformed Churches abroad.

Honourable and Reverend,


ALL that shall be prefaced unto you, is
an humble ſute for your prudent conſideration
of the ſequele. For if I have
rightly collected; the opinion contended
with, repreſents you all guilty of
Schiſme againſt the Catholicke Church;
yea and of a higher crime, ſo many of
you as have with hands lift up to Heaven (of which
number my ſelfe am one) ingaged your ſelves in
materiall points of Reformation; not onely without
the Authority or endeavouring to have the minde
of the Catholicke Church; but have alſo concluded
and eſtablished contrary to what it hath determined in all
thoſe Aſſemblies which our Brethren ſtile the Repreſentatives
of it.General Councells. From which tranſgreſſion the truth here
pleaded doth in that reſpect abſolve you: in the comfort
whereof, I would here alſo leave you. But ſeeing there
are thoſe, who would not onely have the oppoſed Tenet
embraced for a fundamental truth in Church Government,
cap. 5. §. 3.
and propound it as a ground thereof; but that it should alſo

be conſtituted and eſtablished an ARTICLE of FAITH and
Confeſſion thereof; I crave leave to adde a ſupplication,
and with all ſubmiſſion, doe beſeech you, that the expedient
of a great man about theſe affaires, in his advice for
the reſtoring of peace in the Church may be diligently
weighed:Era
•
m. in praef. ad Hilarium:
The ſumme (ſaith he) of our Religion is peace
and unanimitie;
Summa Religionis noſtri, pax eſt & unanimitas, ea vix conſtare poterit, niſi de quam poteſt pauciſſimis definiamus, & in multis literum relinquamus ſuum cuique judicium, propterea quod nigens ſit rerum plurimarum obſcuritas, &c.

of which there is little hope, unleſſe thoſe
things that shall be injoyned as matters of faith, bee as
few as may bee; and that wee leave mens judgements free
in many things; by reaſon that the obſcurity in a number of
them is exceeding great, &c. How much leſſe then ſuch
opinions, as are not onely New (in the ſence now propounded)
and controverted, but moreover appugned
conſtantly alſo, by the moſt eminent of our owne
party, (and is as inconſiſtent with your Liberties, as Epiſcopacy,
which you have condemned.) Withall I preſume
you will not diſdaine the wiſedome and practiſe of
the moſt ancient Churches after the Apoſtles times: we
ſee all their confeſſion of faith in that briefe called the
APOSTLES CREED, and afterward the Nicene Creed;
made by the firſt Generall Councell, and for the explication
of the former; in how few words is it comprehended,
yea and the confeſſions of the Reformed Churches,
and our owne 39. Articles are but briefe and for
the moſt part cleere.
Auſtin ſaies The Rule of Faith is common to the weak and
to the wiſe.Ep. 57. ad Dardan.

Which Vſshers in the explication of one,
Regulum fid
•
i puſillis magniſque comm
•
nem, in Eccleſiam te
••
nt.
almoſt as great, upon it: inferring, that (therefore)
The Rule of Faith muſt containe ſuch truthes ONELY,


•
 Vſhers anſwer to the Ieſuite, page 418.
as are GENERALLY agreed upon, by the conſent of
all true Chriſtians, and without controverſie.
Many things should not be rendered of the ſubſtance

of Faith; for the denyall of which the crime of Hereſy
and Schiſme, and for the doubt whereof, the penalty
of rejection from the family, and worke of the Lord muſt
be inflicted.Rom. 4. c. 15, The great Apoſtle every where exhorts,
with all thoſe who hold in the maine the forme of ſound
words,1 Cor. 8. c. 10. and yet are in other things diverſly minded;Phil. 3. 15. to
preſerve the vnitie of the ſpirit in the bond of peace.
The Lord reſtore the Churches to their juſt freedomes
and keepe them from uſing their liberty as an occaſion
to the flesh, but by love to ſerve one another: And the
ſame God raiſe and uphold the ſpirit of all States and
Magiſtrates to be Nu
•
ſing Fathers to them: and continue
to returne this your work of Faith, and labour of love,
ſeven fold into your boſome.

So prayes
An unworthy Miniſter of
Chriſt, Son of the Church,
and ſervant of this State.
JOHN ELLIS. Jun.


