


TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.

WHen I read the Description of the Tumult in Ephesus, Acts 9. 32. (wherein they would have their Diana to be Jure Divino, that it

fell down from Iupiter) it appears to me the too Methodicall caracter of our present confusions. Some therfore cryed one thing, and some another, for the assembly was confused and the more part knew not wherefore they were come together. O the distractions of our age? And how many thousand know as li
•

tle why the sword was

drawn, as when it will be sheathed. Indeed, (thankes be to God) we have no more house burnings but many heart burnings, and though outward bleeding bee stanched, it is to be feared that the broken vaine bleeds inwardswhich is more dangerous.
This being our sad condition, I perceive controversiall writing (sounding somewhat

of Drums & Trumpets,) doe but make the wound the wider, Meditations are like the Ministrel the Prophet called for, to pacifie 

〈◊〉
 2 Kings. 3 15. his minda
•
liscomposed with passion, which moved mee to adventure on this Treatise, as the most innocent and inoffensive manner of writeing.
I confesse a Volumn of another Subject, and

larger Size, is expected from mee. But in London I have learnt the difference, betwixt downright breaking, and craving time of their Creditors. Many sufficient Merchants though not Soluable from the present make use of the latter, whose example I follow. And though I cannot pay the Principall, yet I desire such small Treatises may be accepted, from

me as Interest or consideration mony, untill I shal God willing be enabled to discharge the whole Debt.


〈◊〉
: 3

If any wonder that this Treatise comes Patron-lesse into the World, let such know that Dedications begin now adayes to grow out of fashion. His Policy was commended by many, (and proved profitable unto himselfe) who insted

of Select Godfathers, made all the Congregation Witnesses to his Child, as I invite the World to this my Booke, requesting each one would patronise therein such parts and passages thereof, as please them, so hoping that by severall persons the whole will be protected.
I have Christian Reader, (so far I dare goe, not inquiring into

the Syre-name of thy Side or Sect) nothing more to 
•
urthen thy Patience with. Onely I will add, that I finde our Saviour in Turtullian and ancient Latine Fathers, constantly stiled a
Seque

•
er.
Sequestrator in the proper notion of the Word. For God and man beeing at ods, the difference was Sequestied or referred into Christs his hand to

end and umpire it. How it fareth with thine estate on earth I know not, but I earnestly desire, that in heaven both thou and I may ever bee under Sequestration in that Mediator for Gods glory and our good, to whose protection thou art committed By

Thy Brother in all Christian Offices.
THO. FULLER.

