

TO MY REVEREND,
and much esteemed Friend,
Mr. JOHN DOWNAM.

Worthy Sir,


I Have now finished my Polemicall Tractate against
the Anabaptists; which had slept securely by me in
a whole skin of Parchment, had not the clamours
of the Adversaries awaked it, who cry downe Paedobaptisme,
and cry up Anabaptisme, not onely in the
Pulpit, but also from the
See A. Bar
•

his Treatise Dipping: F
•

 Cornwell his Pamphlet, entituled, The Commission of King Iesus: A. Ritter his Libell, calle
•

 The Vanity of Childish Baptisme: Ch: Blockwood, The storming of Antichrist, and the Confesse of the Anabap
•
ists, printed at London, 1644. Presse, to the great offence of godly minds,
and the scandall of the Church.
You will peradventure returne me an Answer in the words of the
Poet, Ole quid ad te? What doth this concerne me, whose Restraint
is a necessary Supersedeas from proceeding aga
•
nst these
presumptuous and daring Sectaries? And the unfurnishing me of
all Books, and helps of mine owne Notes and Collections lately taken
from me) furnisheth me with too just an excuse for not writing.
I confesse to my griefe it doth, but what will you have me doe,
Situ & otio torpescere? Such a rest would be most restlesse and
tedious; The lesse I doe, the more I must needs suffer; and the more
I doe, the lesse I suffer. And beleeve me, Sir, it is not an ambition
to be seene in the Presse, but a desire for the time to forget my unsufferable
pressures, which hath now set me on worke. As when we

have the world at will, and can give our Mind her vagaries at
pleasure, to fixe or thoughts on any certaine subject, is a kind of
incarceration of the spirit; so when our Estate is sequestred,
and our person confined, and no theame is given us daily to enlarge
upon, but the valuing of our unvaluable losses, and the present supplying
of our importunate wants, to divert our minds from commenting
upon our deplorate estate, and forcibly confining our meditations
to a more pleasant subject, is a great ease and kind of liberty
to immured thoughts.
But this is not all, for as S. Jerome thought wheresoever he
was, whatsoever he did, he heard the sound of the last Trumpet,
and the summons of the Archangel, Surgite mortui, & venite ad
judicium: So me thinks wheresoever I am, and whatsoever my businesse
is, I heare that Vae of the Apostle, Woe be unto me if I
preach not the Gospel: And preach the Gospel I can now no otherwise
then from the Presse, for both my Pulpits are taken from me,
and possest by others, and I cannot obtaine (though by my selfe and
friends I earnestly sough
•
 it) that liberty which S. Paul enjoyed
when he was imprisoned at Rome, to preach the Gospel to my fellow
prisoners. Now therefore sith I cannot lingua, I must be content as
I am able evangelizare calamo, to preach with my Pen; which I
can hardly dip into any other liquor, then the juice of Gall, in regard
of the malignity of the times, and the insolencies of the enemies
of the truth. As Adders, Efts, and other venemous serpents breed
in old broken walls: so all sorts of Heretiques and Schismatiques
breed and are exceedingly multiplyed by reason of the ruptu
•
es in
State, and distraction of the time. Among all these the Papists
and the Anabaptists are most dangerous and pestilent enemies, the
one to the Church, the other to the State; These above all others having
bestirred themselves, since the waters were troubled; and
they boast in secret of their great draughts of fish, the Papists of
20000. Proselytes, the Anabaptists of 47. Churches.
Si natura negat facit, indignatio versum.

As well Indignation as Zeale hath stirred up my drooping spirit,See Romar
•

 printed by Bourne at th
•
 old Exchan
•


and encouraged me, though (as I said before) unarmed, to fall upon
both; the former, in my Answer to a Popish Challenge; the latter, in
this my Catabaptistarum Catacrisis. Jerom comforting a young
Hermite, bade him look up to heaven, & Paradisum mente deambulare,
assuring him that so long as he had Paradise in his mind,
and heaven in his thoughts, tamdiu in eremo no eris so long he
was not in the wildernesse. So verily it seemes to me, so long as I can
draw the sword of the spirit, and pursue freely the enemies of the doctrine
and discipline of the Church of England, and beat them out
of their trenches, so long me thinks I am not in bonds. The Lord
in mercy look upon the Convul
•
ions in the State, and Distractions in
the Church, and turne our Baptisme of blood into a Baptisme
of tears: in which we may and ought all to be Anabaptists. This is
the hearty wish of him, who loveth the truth for it selfe, and you for
the truths sake,

Dan: Featley.

