


TO THE MOST
NOBLE LORDS,
WITH
THE HONORABLE KNIGHTS,
CITIZENS and BURGESSES
Now Assembled in PARLIAMENT.

THe bright burning Taper of Geneva,
Cal. praef. ad Reg. Gal. Est hic divini verb
•
 quasi quidam genius, ut nun quam emerga quieto & dorm
•
 ente Satana. as
warme in his Devotions, as cleare and
lightsome in his Disputes, truly observeth,
that the pure doctrine of the Gospel
never appeares as it were above the water,
but Satans watchful eye is upon it, and he
casts an envious gloate at it, and hath his
Tobiases and Sanballats either to jeere or fright the sincere
Professors out of the powerfull preaching thereof. In which
regard it is, that as the Jewes in their edifying the materiall
Temple, so you in the repairing of the Spirituall,Neh. 4. 17. Wi
•
h one of his hands he wrought in the work, with the other he held a weapon, have a weapon
in the one hand, and a toole in the other; and you have hitherto
more imployed the Sword then the Mattock or
Spade, by reason of the great opposition on all hands: and
after you shall (through Gods blessing) have laid the roofe

on this sacred building, and gratefull posterity put a garland
of glory upon your heads for it, yet still there will be use of
an arming sword, not of War, but of Justice, to cut off Superstition
and Idolatry on the one side, and Profanenesse and
Sacriledge on the other: Heretiques with one edge, and
Schismatiques with the other. For as in the beginning of
the Reformation, so now in the endeavoured perfection
thereof, the mortall enemie of our immortall soules sets on
work all sorts of Heretiques and Schismatiques to hinder, disturbe,
and (if it were possible) destroy this excellent work.
The Heretiques he employeth to pervert the Catholique
doctrine, the Schismatiques to subvert the Apostolike discipline
of the Church: the Heretiques endeavour to shake the
foundations, the Schismatiques to make breaches in the
walls: the Heretiques to rot the maine timber, the Schismatiques
to pull in sunder the rafters of this sacred structure.
Now of all Heretiques and Schismatiques the Anabaptist
in three regards ought to be most carefully looked unto,
and severely punished, if not utterly exterminated and banished
out of the Church and Kingdome.
First, In regard of their affinity with many other damnable
Heretiques, both Ancient and Later; for they are allyed
unto, and may claime kindred with, 1. The Millenarians in
the first Age, proclaiming Christs Temporal Kingdome upon
earth for a thousand yeares, before the day of Judgment.
2. With the Marcionites in the second Age, who denyed the
substance of Christs humane body made of a woman.
Gal. 4. 4. 3. The
Catharists or Novatians in the third Age, who denyed Repentance
and restitution to the Church thereupon, to those that
fell in time of persecution. 4. With the Donatists in the
fourth Age, who re-baptized all those that had received
Baptisme before in the Catholique Church. Lastly, with

a rabble of Heretiques in the latter Ages, namely, the Apostolici,
the Adamites, the Enthusiasts, the Psycopannychists, the
Polygamists, the Iesuits, the Arminians, and the Brownists; of
all which and their Errours, I have set downe a particular
Catalogue, Chap. 2. As it was said of Caius Caesar, In uno Caesare
multi Marii; and as Cicero saith of the Familie of the Bruti,
that it had in it multorum insitam at



que
 illuminatam virtutem: so
in one Anabaptist you have many Heretiques, and in this one
Sect as it were one stock, many erroneous and schismaticall
positions, and practices ingraffed, and as it were inoculated.

Secondly, in regard of their audacious attempts upon
Church and State, and their insolent acts committed in the
face of the Sun, and in the eye of the high Court of Parliament.
Whereas other depravers of the Doctrine, or disturbers
of the Peace of the Church, whether Papists, Socinians,
or Arminians, who in the later times have braved it
and set up their top and top-gallant, yet since Argus with his
hundred eyes hath pryed into every corner of this Kingdome,
and severall roomes in the great Ship of the Church,
have bestowed themselves under the hatches, and layne close
in obscurity: these with the forwardest of the Brownists
strut in the upper deck, and discover themselves with open
face, 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
, and upbraid the State with their merit in
hazarding their estate and persons in this present War, and
boast with swelling words of vanity that they expect somewhat
more then a toleration.See The compassionate Samaritane, p. 75, 76. that the Parl. will stop all proceedings against them, and for the future provide that as well particular and private congregations as publike, may have publike protection; that all Statures against the Separatists be reviewed, and repealed; that the Presse may be free for any man that writes nothing scandalous or dangerous to the State; that this Parliament prove themselves loving Fathers to all sorts of good men, bearing respect unto all, and so inviting an equall assistance and affection from all. They preach, and print, and
practise their Hereticall impieties openly; they hold their
Conventicles weekly in our chiefe Cities, and Suburbs
thereof, and there prophesie by turnes; and (that I may use

the phrase of Tertullian) aedificantur in ruinam, they build one
another in the faith of their Sect, to the ruine of their soules; they
flock in great multitudes to their Iordans, and both Sexes
enter into the River, and are dipt after their manner with a
kind of spell containing the heads of their erroneous tenets,
and their engaging themselves in their schismaticall Covenants,
and (if I may so speak) combination of separation. And
as they defile our Rivers with their impure washings, and
our Pulpits with their false prophecies and phanaticall enthusiasmes,
so the Presses sweat and groane under the load
of their blasphemies. For they print not onely Anabaptisme,
from whence they take their name; but many other most
damnable doctrines, tending to carnall liberty, Familisme,
and a medley and hodg-podge of all Religions. Witnesse the
Book printed 1644.Pref. p. 
〈◊〉

 called The Bloodie Tenet, which the Author
affirmeth he wrote in Milke; and if he did so, he hath
put much Rats bane into it, as namely, That it is the will and
command of God, that since the comming of his Sonne the Lord
Iesus, a permission of the most Paganish, Iewish, Turkish, or Antichristian
Consciences and Worships be granted to all men in all Nations
and Countryes; That Civill States with their Officers of Iustice
are not Governours or Defenders of the Spirituall and Christian
state and worship; That the doctrine of Persecution in case of
Conscience (maintained by Master Calvin, Beza, Cotton, and
the Ministers of the New English Churches) is guilty of all the
blood of the soules crying for vengeance under the Altar: Witnesse
a Tractate of Divorce, in which the bonds of marriage
are let loose to inordinate lust, and putting away wives
for many other causes besides that which our Saviour only
approveth, namely, in case of Adultery. Witnesse a Pamphlet
newly come forth, intituled, Mans Mortality, in which
the soule is cast into an Endymion sleep, from the houre of
death to the day of Judgement. Witnesse a bold Libell offered

to hundreds, and to some at the doore of the house of
Commons, called The Vindication of the Royall Commission of
King Iesus, wherein the brazen fac'd Author blusheth not
to brand all the Reformed Churches, and the whole Christian
world at this day, which christen their children, & sign
them with the seale of the Covenant, with the odious name
of an Antichristian faction.

Thirdly, In regard of the peculiar malignity this heresie
hath to Magistracie; other heresies are stricken by Authority,
this strikes at Authority it selfe, undermineth the powers
that are ordained of God, and endeavoureth to wrest the sword
out of the Magistrates hand, to whom God hath given it for
the cutting off of all heresie, and impiety; and if this Sect
prevaile, we shall have no Monarchie in the State, nor Hierarchie
in the Church, but an Anarchie in both. It grieveth
a Religious eye to see other vermine corrupting other Flowers
of Paradise, as our sweet Violets, and fragrant Roses, and
fairest Lillies, and various Iulyflowers, and blushing Emmenies,
and beautifull Tulips: but most of all to see this heresie, like
a venemous serpent, lying at the root of the Crown-Imperiall,
which if it be not killed, will so poyson it, that the leaves
will fall off by degrees, and the stalke it selfe shortly wither.
We read in the Prophecie of Zacharie of two staves, the
staffe of beauty, and the staffe of bonds, which supported the
State and Church of Israel. By the staffe of beauty or comlinesse,
the Lawes of every Kingdome and Common-wealth
may be understood, which beare up the State, and preserve
decent order and comlinesse among men; By the staffe of
bonds the covenants and oathes whereby the members are
firmly tyed to their head, and one to another. If the staffe of
beauty be broken, there will be a down-fall of all good order
and government: if the staffe of bonds be broken, all things
will be at a loose end. Me thinks I see these two staves shining

in the golden Maces borne before you; the staffe of beauty in
that borne before the House of Commons, in which the
Legislative power and the beautifull order of the severall Estates
of this Kingdome are conspicuous; the staffe of bonds
in that which is carryed before the House of Peers, in which
the power of Iudicature, even to bonds and death, principally
resideth. Now because these heretiques alone professedly
teach the exautorating all Christian Magistrates,

•
 Bloody 
•
net, p. 2. and in expresse
termes deny both the Legislative power in the Commons
to propound or enact Lawes in matter of Religion,
and all coercive power in the house of Peeres, or any other,
to inflict civill punishment for the violation of them, and so
as much as in them lyeth, they endeavour to break both these
staves of the Prophet, they deserve the smartest stroak from
both.

•
dec. 1. l. 10. 
•
irius cum 
•
ates Sam

••
n galeas 
••
os



que
 insig

••
 armorum tratus vi

•
t, multa de 
•
enti hosti

•
vana magis 
••
e quam ef

•
i ad even

•
 disseruit: 
•
nim cri

•
vulnera fa-
•
 & per pi

•
 & aurata 
•
 transire anum pi

•
 & cando

•
tanicarum 
••
tem



que
 a

•
ubi res geratur, 
•
tari.

With these Heretiques I enter into Lists in the ensuing
Tractate, and without any flourish of Rhetorick at all fall
upon them with Logicall and Theologicall weapons, weilded
after a Scholasticall manner; for it is most true which Papirius
Cursor sometimes spake in the head of his Troops,
advancing on in their march against the Armie of the Samnites,
more glorious in shew then formidable, as consisting
of men more sumptuously then strongly armed, encouraging
his souldiers after this manner: Feare not this Pageant
rather then Armie; their large feathers and imbroydered
scarfes give no wounds; their rich belts, and painted targets,
and thin gilt breast-plates will not endure the push of
the Roman pike. It is not beauty, and gorgeous apparell,
but strength, and valour, and Armour of proof makes a Warriour.
And therefore that brave Commander of the Trojans,
Hector, deservedly checkt his brother Paris, a Paragon
of beauty, and an excellent Carpet Knight, in the flower of his
age,

•
er. Il. for undertaking a single combat with Menclaus, saying,




〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
,


〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
,

Pickt phrases and witty conceits and ornaments of Rhetorick
doe well in Panegyricks, & Paraeneticks, but they are of
little or no use in Polemicks, in which thus Ennius informs
us, Vi geritur res: Spernitur orator bonus, horridu' miles amatur.

But why doe I trouble my selfe with these new upstart
Sectaries? There is a learned and reverend Assembly of
Divines attending on you, who will take care nequid Ecclesia
detrimenti capiat. Who prest me for this service? My Answer
hereunto is as ready as true, That though I were not
pressed, yet I was challenged to it. And if I had declined
this Combat, as others did, the Adversary would have
growne most insolent,Theod. hist. l. Gast. de Ana
•
 l. 1. Quoties 
•
 ve publice, s
••
 privatim congrederemur cu
•
 Anabaptistis, semper vict
•
 abibat verit
•
 quae a nobis stat. and all the City and Borough rung
of their vaunting brags, and confidence in their cause, and
our diffidence in ours; therefore I gave them a meeting at
the time and place appointed. And though I were but one,
and they many, yet they were not able to withstand

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
, the irresistible and all-conquering force
of truth: neither did they after that send any more challenges.
And I had then pursued the combat with my pen, had
not the more necessary functions of my Pastorall chargeSee Romarue
••



hindered me. But now being discharged against my will,
Solin. pol. his
•
 c. 9. Fons est i
•
 Sardin. qui con
•
tra venenum S
•
 lifugae (est eni
•
 animantis ej
•
 morsus mortifer) a summo omnium opific in remedium conditus est; u
•
 oritur malum ibi quo



que
 invenitur prompt
••
 remedium.
of preaching at my Cures, and having lately published an
Answer to a Popish Challenge: I could not think of any
fitter employment for the present, then to perfect the notes
taken long since in that Disputation, and to supply whatsoever
might seeme lacking to the fuller confutation of those
erroneous tenets, & to commend both to the publike view,
that the Antidote might be there ready, where the infection first
brake out. As Solinus writeth, that in Sardinia where there is
a venemous Serpent called Solifuga, (whose biting is present
death) there is also at hand a Fountaine, in which they

who wash themselves after they are bit, are presently cured.
This venemous Serpent (verè Solifuga) flying from, and
shunning the light of Gods Word, is the Anabaptist, who
in these later times first shewed his shining head, and speckled
skin, and thrust out his sting neere the place of my residence,
for more then twenty yeeres: And if these Disputations
and Writings of mine may prove like the Waters of
the Fountaine in Sardinia,


•
etron. Arbit. 
•
nde datum est 
•
ulnus, contigit 
•
de salus. soveraigne against the sting and
teeth of this Serpent, I shall account my paines well spent;
and whilst I endeavour to free others from spirituall thraldome,
forget the tediousnesse of my corporall, and possesse
my soule in patience, till God shall send deliverance; to whose
gracious direction, and powerfull protection, I commend
you, beseeching God to crowne your sincere intentions, and
religious endeavours, for the Reformation of Church and
State, with such successe, that this your meeting may be like
to that in the 25. yeare of Edw. 3. which is known to posterity
by the name of Benedictum Parliamentum, the blessed
Parliament.

Yours in the Lord Iesus,
DAN: FEATLEY.

From Prison in the Lo: Peters
house in Aldersgate-street,
Ian. 10. 1644.


