


The Epiſtle DEDICATORY TO NEWCASTLE upon Tyne.



NEWCASTLE, though not the place of my birth, or much of my breeding (for I have herein been more beholden to other parts of the world) yet none may challenge from mee more intereſt in this Dedication. Newcaſtle, famous for thy mocking and miſuſing of Chriſts Meſſengers, and ill entertainment of his Servants, ever ſince our Reformation, witneſſe that famous Knox, great Reformer of Scotland, his Sermons preached there: witneſſe learned 
Ʋdall, thy faithful Monitor, whoſe innocent blood cryes yet from the ground, whom for writing againſt the Prelates, thou proſecuted as a Traytor to bonds, impriſonment, and ſentence of death, under which he died before execution; witneſſe Reverend Balmford, whom in like manner thou expulſed, though thou couldſt not touch his life, thou pricked his ſides (as well as Chriſts) in his hearers, with the reproach of Balmfordian Faction and Schiſme; witneſſe Alder, Jenniſon, Murton, all godly Miniſters, expulſed by thee: witneſſe others of Chriſts ſervants, ill entertained of

thee, yet alive to witneſſe all that is alledged againſt thee, and much more; and laſt of all, hee that ſends theſe things unto thee, his wife and children, who have received their birth and breathing in thee, make up that long and blacke roll of bitter things writ againſt thee from heaven. O Newcaſtle! how hath God dealt with thee, by his divine waterings of his Word many yeeres? how has God ſpoke aloud to thee by his judgements and forewarnings of ruine and deſolation after thou hadſt refuſed all inſtructions from his Word and Meſſengers? haſt thou forgot how loud God ſpake to thee in that great plague, Anno, 1636. when there died in half a yeere about ſeven thouſand, which made thee almoſt deſolate, thy ſtreets growne greene with graſſe, thy treaſurie waſted, thy trading departed, as thou never yet recovered it; thy wounds increaſed thy madneſſe; thou wenteſt not to heaven for a perfect cure: What thinkſt thou was the meaning of that ſtrange fire brake out 
Nota, This fire brake out in the evening of that day after their conſultations were ended wherin many antient Records were burnt up and conſumed. (none ever knew how) in thy ſecret chamber of thy Townes houſe, or Common hall, where the next yeere after that great plague, thy Rulers, like Wolves of the evening, were lurking all that day in plotting the new project about Coals & Salt, to devoure thy poore inhabitants, and alſo new devices to ſuppreſſe ſound preaching, and ſtrave your ſoules. How is it, after many more warnings, too large to recite, that thou art ſtill hardned, and the cry of thy ſinnes like Sodome is come up to heaven: in thee is found the blood of the Prophets, the blood of the Saints oppreſſed & baniſhed, and hunted to death: in thee is found the blood of thy inhabitants oppreſſed and impoveriſhed, by unlimitted authoritie, and arbytrarie government, ſo court-like, as an Aple is like an Orange. In thee is found the uncleaneſſe of Sodome,

Adulteries, and Fornications in thy Rulers houſes: thy filthineſſe in thy skirts, tranſparent to ſtrangers round about thee; in thee found drunkenneſſe and exceſſe, with melodie, to ſee the Church laid deſolate: in thee is found the two grand ſins, that will ſincke a whole ſtate, a whole kingdome without repentance and reformation: ſuperſtition in worſhip, and oppreſſion in government, which has brought upon this Land that bloodie ſword, which now threatens to devoure thee (I meane, thy wicked Magiſtracie and Rulers, who have wreſted all thy power into their own hands, and all that wicked crue of their confederacie) O Newcaſtle! when wilt thou learne the dialect of heaven, ſpeaking loud in thine eares? O Newcaſtle, Newcaſtle! wilt thou not be made clean, when ſhall it once be? Jer. 13. 27. If thou wilt not hearken to heavens counſell, heare thy ſentence, Thou art defiled with blood, and cannot be cleanſed, but by the blood of them that ſhed it, Numb. 35. 33. O Newcaſtle! what ſhall I ſay to thee? what hath inraged thee againſt him that writes this complaint againſt thee? whom have I wronged of you? bring forth your evidences, and plead your cauſe; I hope ere long, wee ſhall have a faire and free hearing and juſt proceedings, not at the barre of your Court Law of hanging, Excom. impriſonment and baniſhment; but at a bar of right judgement. I have ever ſought thy good in ſpiritualls and temperalls, even to my owne hurt and loſſe; I have ſeene ſometimes thy plagues a farre off, and wept inſecret for thee, (as the place of my habitation, though my Meſeck and Kedar, the place of my ſorrow, and never of my joy, how oft have I aſſayed to have left thee in thy rebellion againſt God, but heavens counſels did not favour mine) when the great plague began, Anno 1636. Conſider what might be Gods mind, to make mee

one day weepe bitterly over thee, riding alone about a mile from the towne, with many ſad thoughts, and when I lookt up, and ſee Newcaſtle before mee, my heart burſt out with grief, with the ſame words bo
••
ing within me, wherewith the Lord Jeſus wept over Jerualem: O Newcaſtle, Newcaſtle, would God thou in thy dayes had remembred the things belonging to thy peace, often revolving theſe thoughts with me: but when I came to the next words, with many reaſonings within mee, ſhall they be hid from thine eyes, ſhall thy habitations be laid deſolate. My heart was like to burſt within mee, for a good ſpace, aſſuring my ſelfe to heare ill newes, (for I had been in the Countrey) and comming to towne, I heard preſently of the increaſe of the plague, and that the night before ſome ſix and thirty died of it; and from thence it daily increaſed to foure hundred a weeke, till it had ſwept away about ſeven thouſand at leaſt, in ſeven or eight moneths time. O Newcaſtle, before thou hadſt recovered this blowe, which I mourned to ſee comming upon thee, what ailed thee to begin to plot the ruine of me and my wife and children. I had ſeen many habitations laid deſolate, though I returned ſafely to my owne, with all my family, praiſe to my God, often ſtrangely preſerved from that deadly infection; was it that thou grudged me thy corrupt ayre to breath in, that thou ſought my life, and purſued my wife and mee both as traytors, till thou drove us out of the kingdome. God made mee require thy malice with the like pitie as before, that morning I eſcaped thy malicious deſigne againſt me, as I paſſed the gates in the darke of the morning, and being a little paſſed from the walls, the towne being ſtill in my ſight, God made me weepe over thee, the ſecond time, in the ſame manner as before, and with ruminating and reaſonings

within me upon the ſame words of Chriſt over Jeruſalem, and how ſoone after was the bloody ſword drawne, which has waſted thee not a little, and well if the worſt be not yet behinde. What haſt thou got now by all thy diſcourteous and harſh dealings with mee, who has ever ſought thy good? I have ſerved thee divers yeeres in a publique office, wherein, though I could doe thee little good, (the ſtreame run ſo ſtrong againſt mee) yet I have ſometimes kept out ſome evils from over-ſpreading thee, untill thou began to ſtretch out thy necke againſt God, in the Scottiſh Cauſe, and then, ever ſince, how 
〈◊〉
 an inundation of all evills overwhelmed thee, and God, I feare, left thee to ſome fatall fall. Repent, repent, O Newcaſtle, leſt the Lord depart from thee, and ſend a revenging ſword to avenge his quarrell againſt thee; if ſo, take heed of what was threatned to a wicked Citie: Afflicton ſhall not come the ſecond time, which the Lord avert, and give thee a heart to repent and turne to him, that has long ſmitten thee, that hee may repent him of the evill which otherwiſe will befall thee; For all the ſtrength and power of man wherein thou ſtill doſt boaſt and glory, I have thought it my dutie, to preſent thee with a briefe view of thy harſh uſage of mee and mine, to ſee if at any time God may give thee an heart to repent, which ſhould be to mee greater joy then to ſee thee laid deſolate, when theſe papers I now ſend thee, ſhall be as a flying roll through thy ſtreets and dolefull habitations, filling your fainting hearts with errors and ſhrikings to think of all your wickedneſſes; and amongſt the reſt, your bloodie plots and practiſes againſt one that has ever ſought your good,

John Fenwick.

