


TO The Right Honorable ROBERT RICH Baron of Leez in Eſſex, and Earle of Warwick, abundance of ſpirituall bleſings in Jeſus Chriſt.


PAul being upon a propheticall wing (for the Lord had powred upon him,
This know alſo (ſaith he) there's the infallible certainly of it.
not onely an Apoſtolicall but a Propheticall ſpirit) doth foretell in the 2 Tim. 3.1. That in the laſt dayes perilous times ſhall come, Thoſe who are full of carnall ſelf-love

and unthankfulneſſe will, much increaſe the danger of this laſt Age of the World. (The Lord roote up all ſuch weedes out of our hearts.)
God hath I hope given Your Honour ſuch a meaſure of love to the publique, and ſo active a ſpirit to do good to others, as will helpe to leſſen the danger of theſe evill times. And I would be ſo thankfull for favours received, that I might not be ranked among this diſhonourable Catalogue which here Paul ſums up of ſuch as make bad times worſe.

It is your Honours happineſſe and advantage (as it was once ſaid of the Duke of Guiſe in France, that hee 
〈◊〉
 put obligations upon all) that you can ingage very many, and amongſt the reſt, I muſt

ever acknowledge my ſelfe one, who in one of the greateſt turnings of my life, by the good hand of God upon mee in your free conſent and noble bounty have had ſo much comfort in the neareſt and deareſt relation,
Prov. 30.10 11, 12, &c. that I never envied any other, but finde matter of everlaſting praiſes to God for his goodneſſe to my ſelfe therein. And being under ſo great obligations, when I can produce nothing of my owne worthy your acceptance; I take leave to act the part of a Midwife to this happy Birth which may call your Honour Father, as will appeare by the following Letter, that it was ultimately intended for your ſpirit
•
 all advantage; And it were 
〈◊〉
 a kinde of ſacriledge to keep
•

that holy iſſue from you that is ſo

much your owne. It joyes the ſoules of mee and many more of your praying ſervants that they have ſo much occaſion to prayſe their God on your behalfe, for ſo many able and faithfull Miniſters of the Goſpell of the firſt, ſecond and third magnitude, that your prudent, fatherly care hath fixed, where you, as Patron, have beene truſted.


2 Kings 13 14.Oh the many Chariots and horſe-men of Iſrael, that your noble Father and you have brought triumphantly into Eſſex (herein you did happily Patrizare) the Lord continue the like care to build and repaire his houſe in theſe who ſurvive you from Generation to Generation, that ſo your houſe may ſtill bee honorably ſupported.



Eccleſiaſticall ſtory ſpeakes of one Henricus Auceps,
Vid. Simpſon. Eccl. Hiſtor. l. 3. cent. 10.
 when hee did fight againſt the Hungarians, made this vow to God, That if the Lord would give him victory againſt his enemies, hee would purge his Country from Simony, which at this time mightily abounded therein. Wee want men of ſuch an heroicall zealous diſpoſition in England.

Oh that all Patrons were more mindfull of their high truſt; then they would not ſo often betray the ſoules of people by putting off a friend &c. with a living to ſome unworthy Chaplaine. Doubtleſſe there is many a damned creature roaring in Hell, curſing covetous Patrons as well as unfaithfull Paſtors;1 Pet. 4.5. For whoſe Bloud (in part at leaſt) they

muſt bee accountable to the Father of ſpirits and Judge of the quick and the dead. A moſt heavy reckoning,
Note.
when the ſins of ſo many Congregations, to which Patrons are acceſſary by ſending ignorant and ſcandalous Miniſters amongſt them are made theirs; whereas the leaſt of their owne ſins unrepented of will ſucke them eternally.


God who is faithfull will not forget your labour and coſt of love to the truely Reverend man of God Maſter Hooker (who is now ſinging Hallelujahs in Heavenly Manſions) when hee was perſecuted by the There are many of great reading, who wil undertake to make it appeare that as Heathiniſh feaſts Bacchanalia et Saturnalia & were turned into Chriſtmas & ſuch other Feaſts hoping thereby to to win heathens to Chriſt; ſo were Archi flamines & Flamines ch
•
nged it to Archpraelates, & praelates o
•
 of a good intention.
Archi flamen of Canterbury. Hee will pay abundantly for the protecting and nurſing his Children, Heb. 6.10.
I know not how better to

expreſſe my deepe ſence of your moſt reall favour (the comfort whereof I dayly enjoy) then by taking the humble boldneſſe, to beſeech your Honour to adde one thing more, which indeed is, the 

•
num neceſſarium, whereby you will gaine that better part which ſhall not be taken from you;Luk, 10.42 Namely;Rev. 1.20. & 2.1. that you would ſtudy and pray that you may walke in the light, and heate of that glorious Goſpell constellation (for Miniſters are Starres and the
So acknowledged by by the Tranſlators in the contents▪ of the ſecond Cha. of the Revelation. They it ſeemes did not thinke theſe Angels to be Praelates.
Angells of the Churches) which you have endeavoured to fix in your Orbe. Your Honour hath beene often at Sea, and there beholding the wonders of God in the deepe, have beene taught to wrestle with him for mercy. It is an old ſaying, hee that would

learne to pray let him goe to Sea. Beſiege Heaven with your unwearied importunities,Qui neſcit or are diſcat navigare. Jonab. 1.5.
 that the Arke of the Goſpell, which you have provided for thouſands, may be your owne everlasting Sanctuary. And that you feaſting upon their danties, may bee fat and flouriſhing in your laſt dayes
▪ ſtanding ſtedfaſt in theſe ſhaking times, and immoveable, keeping Faith,
Phil. 29.14
and a good conſcience, (which too many having put away concerning Faith,
1 Tim. 1.19.
have made Shipwracke) more and more abounding in the Worke of the Lord,
1 Cor. 15. Laſt.
foraſmuch as you know your labour is not in vaine in the Lord,

This through the grace of Chriſt ſhall be the earneſt Prayer, of him who is My LORD,
Your Honours moſt obliged ſervant. THOMAS HILL.


