


TO THE HONOVRABLE, Collonel John Downes ESQUIRE, One of the Members of the Honourable House of Commons in Parliament, Justice of Peace, and one of the Deputy Lievtenants of the County of Sussex, and Auditor to the Prince his Highnesse of the Dutchie of Cornwall. E. F. wisheth the true knowledge of God in JESUS CHRIST.

Most Honoured, SIR:


ALthough I doe observe that new Editions, accompanied with new additions, are somtimes published with new dedications, yet so long as he who formerly owned the subject, doth yet 
〈◊〉
, and



hath the same affectiou
•
 towards it, I conceive there is no need of a new Patron, but of a new Epistle.
Be pleased then, most honoured Sir, to give mee leave to tell you, that your eminencie of place did somwhat induce me, both now and before, to make choise of you for its Patron, but your endowments with grace did invite me to it, God having bestowed upon you speciall spirituall blessings in heavenly things in Christ: for it hath beene declared unto me by them that knew you, when you were but a youth, how Christ met with you then, and by sending his spirit into your heart, first convinced you of sin, as was manifest by those conflicts which your soule then had, both with Satan and it selfe, whilst you did not believe in Christ. Secondly, of righteousnesse, as was manifest by the peace and comfort which you afterwards had, by believing that Christ was gon to the Father and appeared in his presence as your Advocate and surety that had undertaken for you. Thirdly, of judgement, as hath been manifest ever since,



in that you have been carefull with the true godly man, Psal. 112.5. to guide your affairs with judgement, in walking according to the minde of Christ.
I have not forgotten what desires you have expressed to know the true difference betwixt the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace, and experimentally to be acquainted with the Doctrine of free grace, the mysteries of Christ, and the life of faith. Witnesse not onely your highly approving of some heads of a Sermon which I once heard a godly Minister preach, and repeated in your hearing, of the life of Faith, but also your earnest request to me to write them out faire, and send them to you into the Countrey: Yea, witnesse, your highly approving of this Dialogue, when I first acquainted you with the Contents thereof, incouraging me to expedite it to the Presse, and you
•
 kinde acceptance, together with your cordiall thanks for my love manifested in dedicating it to your honoured name.
Sith then, worthy Sir, it hath pleased the Lord to enable me, both to amend it,



and to enlarge it, I hope your affections will also be inlarged towards the matter therein contained, considering that it tends to the cleering of those forenamed truths, and through the blessing of God may be a means to root them more deeply in your heart. And truly, Sir, I am confident, the more they grow & flourish in any mans heart, the more will all heart corruptions wither and decay. Oh! Sir, If the truth contained in this Dialogue, were but as much in my heart, as they are in my head; I were a happie man, for then should I bee more free from pride, vain glory, wrath, anger, self-love, and love of the world then I am, and then should I have more humility, meeknesse, and love both to God and man then I have, oh! then should I bee content with Christ alone, and live above all the things in the world, then should I experimentally know, both how to abound and how to want, and then shall I be fit for any condition, nothing could come amisse unto me, oh! that the Lord would be pleased to write it in our hearts by his blessed Spirit.

And so most humbly beseeching you still to pardon my boldnesse, and to vouchsafe to take it into your patronage and protection, I humbly take my leave of you, and remain

Your obliged Servant to be commanded, E. F.


