


To the Right
HONOVRABLE,
ROBERT, Lord Bruce, Baron of Byfleet,
and onely Sonne to the Right Honourable
Thomas, Earle of Elgin.
Eleaſar Gilbert wiſheth all poſſible Happineſſe.

Right Honourable,


I Have placed you here in the Frontiſpiece of my Dedicatory, firſt becauſe
you have a chiefe place in my affections as one whom God hath
graced with a more than ordinary portion of his Image, for (to ſpeak
without Flattery) what Grace? what Vertue? what endowment, either
of body, mind, or fortune? Finally, what Perfection or Excellency
can make men truly Honourable on Earth, and eternally happy
in Heaven, which doth not ſhine in your Lordſhip, in the fulleſt lustre,
ſo farre as your condition and yeares can be capable of? inſomuch that
if it pleaſe the Lord, to addc yeares unto your life, as hee hath gifts
unto your perſon, a ſtarre more radiant then your ſelfe, I conceive, in
our age will ſcarcely appeare in our Brittiſh Firmament: moreover,
your Lordſhip may juſtly challenge the firſt fruit of my publike labors,
becauſe I had the firſt encouragement tomy miniſterial ſtudies in
your Honourable Familie, under your Right Honourable, moſt pious,
& never without much Reverence to bee mentioned, Grandmother,
Magdalen, Ladie Bruce, where I have beene an eye-witneſse of your
vertuous education ab imis, as I may ſay, incunabulis, from your
very infancy, and where I have often obſerved, the moſt vigilant and
religious care of your Right Honourable Parents, in your vertuous
education, which to this day doth moſt ſpectably appeare, as a pattern
of imitation to all the Nobles in the Land.


Goe on therefore moſt Noble and hopefull Lord, good luck have
you with your Honour, continue that courſe, in theſe paths of Vertue,
w
•
ich you have begun to tread, eſpecially ſeeing you have already made
ſo good a progreſſe, for Dimidium facti, qui bene coepit, habet.

And you ſhall find, that although the way bee thorny, yet the end
ſhall be Honourable, that paines which you now take, and have taken
to pleaſe and ſerve God, and your right Honourable Parents, ſhall
produce unto you at length, not onely the favour of God, the love of
your Soveraign, 
•
ōmendation of your equals, & praiſe of all good men,
but alſo contentment to your mind, peace unto your conſcience, protection
to your perſon, a bleſſing unto your eſtate, and a ſweet reliſh to
all the houours, wealth, and pleaſures which you ſhall afterwards enjoy.
Which that you may doe, I ſhall never be wanting in my beſt devotion,
to implore the gracious aſſiſtance of that Father of lights, the
Watchman of Iſrael, to double his ſpirit upon you, and whereſoever you
goe, for good to be preſent with you, to guard you by his Providence,
guide you by his counſell, and when he hath here ſatiated your Lordſhip
with honours and pleaſures temporall, bring you at length unto
ioyes and happineſſe eternall. So prayeth he, who deſireth to bee reputed
as he is

One of your Lordſhips moſt ancient and
affect onately devoted Servants,
Eleazar Gilbert.
From my Study in St. Mary-Axe,
this 8. Decemb. 1641.


