


TO THE
RIGHT HONOVRABLE
THE
House of LORDS, and
THE
Honourable House of COMMONS
Assembled in
PARLIAMENT at WESTMINSTER.

THE Lord Jesus Christ, whose name is wonderfull, hath reserved
for this last age of the
World, wherein hee intends to
do great things for his Church
and against his enemies, the
accomplishment of many precious promises, and
the discovery of most glorious providences. Amongst
all other your State observations, I hope
you treasure up the experiences of his wonder-working



hand for you since this happy Parliament
began, that so you may grow eminent as well
in Christian, as in state-wisdom. Never had any
Assembly of Counsellors in England, greater
reason then you, to say with the Psalmist, Psal.
139. 17. How precious are thy thoughts unto
mee, O God: how great is the summe of them!
It were well worthy your wise care, to take some
course, what ever it cost, by a discreet and faithfull
pen, to preserve the story of Gods providence
about you since these troubles began, that so
his honour might live therein, when you are
dead.

Its true indeed, the Lords dispensations have
been very various towards you, and the method
of his counsels, past finding out; As the Israelites
in the wildernesse, were sometimes not far
from Canaan, and then cast back for a long time;
so you sometimes begin to think your selves got
neere the shore, and to discover the Land, some
hopes of a gracious issue, then a new storme arises
and drives you into the main Sea again: witnesse
your present straites, your renued perplexities.
Amongst other reasons hereof, this may
bee one; It may bee God will not finish your state-affaires,
till you are more vigorous in his Temple-work.

Who knows how soon poore England, yea
and all the three Kingdoms, might become gloriously
happy, could you remove such obstructions,
as interrupt the building of Gods house? Your
selves are not a little concerned in the expediting
this great businesse of setling the Church; opinions
of most dangerous consequence begin now to
spring up amongst us. The controversie is not
now onely betwixt congregationall and classicall
Divines, (who are called Independents, and
Presbyterians) in point of Church government;
(There seemes to bee some good hopes of a faire
accommodation betwixt them) But with such
others also who vehemently cry down not only the
power of Ecclesiasticall Synods, but likewise
the Authority of the Civill Magistrate, in
matters of Religion,

See Bloody Tenent. thereby at once opening a
doore to all licentiousnes in opinion & practice,
even for Iewes, Turkes, and any whomsoever.
The Good Lord stirre up your hearts who have so
great a share in the managing, and in the successe
of the great work in hand, to do what becomes
you in such times as these are; When so
many of your own Ranke (the Lord humble them
for their unfaithfulnesse) have deserted their
Trust, You have obtained this great mercy, this



high Honour, to be employed in Temple-service.
I hope you often consider, who hath made you to
differ,
1. Cor. 4. 7. and what he at this time expects from you.
You will please to allow mee the boldnesse to put
you in mind of Davids carriage, who, when the
three mighty men brake through the Host of
the Philistims, and drew water out of the
well of Bethlehem, 2 Sam. 23. 16. He would
not drinke thereof, but poured it out unto
the Lord: and hee said, Bee it farre from mee
O Lord, that I shall doe this? Is not this the
blood of men that went in jeopardy of their
lives? therefore hee would not drinke it, ver.
17. The tranquillity and many sweet refreshings,
the liberty and opportunity of doing Service
to Church and State in the Parliament which
you enjoy; Is it not the blood of very many
men? How often have your Noble and couragious
Generall with other VVorthies of the first
Magnitude, jeoparded their lives in the High
places of the field to secure you in your Houses, in
your employments? How much trouble and
hazzard have our deare Brethren of Scotland
undergone to themselves and Kingdom, to keepe
You from the danger of popery and slavery?
yea how many thousands, some of all rankes, (it



may make us bleed with sorrow to number them)
have already shed their dearest blood, that you
may possesse your lives and estates? God forbid,
bee it farre from any of you, that what is purchased
at so deare a rate, should bee prostituted to
your own selvishnesse, or any ignoble service.
Let all you have, rather be powred out to the Lord,
and consecrated to his service in building him an
House,Isa. 43. 4. who hath loved you so much and given
so many men for your lives.

It was an high strain of couragious Rhetorique,
in one of the City Souldiers at Newbury
sight, (as it is related from good hands) who,
when hee lay bleeding under mort all wounds, breathed
out this admirable expression: O that I had
another life to loose for Jesus Christ! O that
I had another life to loose for Jesus Christ!
Let this speech live in you after his death. Bee
willing at least to sacrifice the improvement of
your Lives, which cost the precious blood of
Christ, and many of his deare members, in lifting
up his Name, and advancing his Temple.


Nehemiah, when hee would incourage them
in building the wall of Ierusalem, notwithstanding
all the scoffes of the adversaries, after hee had
armed the Labourers, Nehem. 4. 13. 14. Hee



said unto the Nobles, and to the Rulers, and
to the rest of the people, Bee not afraid of
them, remember the Lord which is great and
terrible, and fight for your brethren, your
sonnes and your daughters, your wives and
your houses. The Lord in mercy turn your fighting
into building, and rebuke your enemies, that
you may have more liberty to build his House.
Herein I can rise higher then Nehemiah; you
build not onely for your Sonnes and Daughters,
but for the Lord, who is the Husband of his
Church, the Prince of Peace, the King of Glory,
that hath prepared an house eternall in the
heavens, for all that sincerely build his house here
on Earth.1 Chr. 22. 16.
Arise therefore and bee doing, and
the Lord bee with you. Which is the hearty
prayer of him, who,


Though most unworthy,
desires to serve you faithfully
in the advancing Temple-work.
THOMAS HILL.

