

To the right Honourable, HENRY Earle of Mancheſter, Lord Privy Seale, and one of his Majesties moſt Honourable Privie Councell.

My moſt honoured Lord,

SEeing it is a Maxime of divine and humane Law, moſt infallibly true, Suum cuiq. reddere, I hold my ſelfe obliged in Obedience to it, to dedicate unto your honourable Patronage the enſuing Tract, moſt truly and humbly acknowledging Tam me, quam omne meum, to be your Lordſhips Creature, made fortunate by the Rayes of thoſe ſweet Influences which have iſſued from your Lorſhips ever Candide Aſpect, which Bounty (my inability wanting means of any Requitall or other Retribution) doth claime this my poore Infant-worke, together with all other Services, both as a duty of Tribute unto your Lordſhips high Merit, and as a ſignall or teſtimoniall Badge of that ever bounden Gratitude and Recognition which my Heart and Tongue rendreth unto your Lordſhips goodneſſe. Your honourable Greatneſse [as able] and your gracious Benignity (as willing) to protect it, hath Encourag
•
d my humble Boldneſſe, to beſeech your noble acceptance of it. I neither will nor can preſume it worthy your Lordſhips Peruſall, not daring to arrogate ſo high as to invite ſo great a Iudgement to diſcend beneath it's proper Spheare, to behold A thing ſo meane and low: It's ſufficient that your Lordſhip vouchſafe the loane of your honourable name, to give it credit unto others of
the leſſer Orbe. For though this Tract (as I am ſomewhat confident) containes in it nothing but what is juſtifiable by the evidence of Truth; yet it is likely to meet with oppoſition, Quia veritas odium parit; but it being quitted from harms by ſuch as are Friends to the vertue of truth (ſplendent as light radiated from the Sun) it may ſerve ut fragmentum in Cophinis Chriſti,
Mat. 14.20. Marc. 12.42. or otherwiſe, ut minutumi: Gazophylacio Eccleſiae: how ever your Lordſhip and the world may find, that Inter res ſeculares, I have ſpared ſome time for ſacred deſignes, taught to doe ſo well by the rare Preſident of your Lordſhips divine Enchyridion de contemplatione mortis et immortalitatis, a piece of ſuch admirable excellence, as would exſe (without your honourable name or dignity) protect it ſelfe. But my Modicum (leſſer than a meere ſhadow to that perfect ſubſtance) implores both your honourable regard to the Author and worke, and alſo Fronte ſerena to entertaine this humble duty of him, whoſe perpetuall ſuit unto the Supremeſt is, for all ſucceſſefull bleſſings on the Perſon and ſtate of your honourable Lordſhip, and noble Poſterity both in ſtocke and branches, as well for health and life, to be happily lengthned here, as for Eternity, to be enjoyed hereafter; & for ſome manifeſtation of his Cordiall meaning (the ſoule of verball expreſſions) he really wiſhes for ſuch Imployment as may teſtifie him to bee


Your Lordſhips moſt faithfull and humble Servant; PEDAELL HARLOWE.

