


To the Christian Reader.


REader, The number of bookes is without
number, the Presses are daily oppressed
with them. Yet (though the world abound
with unprofitable, may perniciousI may say of some writers in these daies as Tully of the Philosophers, that there is nothing so absurd which is not m
•
intained by some of them. Pamphlets)
there are many excellent subjects
which are either not handled, or not sufficiently.
There is a great variety in mens fancies as
well as in their faces; and bookesLibri quasi liberi. (the fruit of mens
brains) are as various as men themselves. Some books are
to be tasted onely,Sir Francis Bacon in his Essayes. some chewed, and some swallowed. That
saying of Stanchar the HeretickeRainoldus de lib. Apoc. tomo primo praelect. 4th.
 doth exceedingly
please the Papists, Plus apud se valere unum Lombardum,
quam centum Lutheros, ducentos Melancthones,
trecentos Bullingeros, quadringentos Martyres,
quingentos Calvinos. That onePetrus Lombardus propter eminentem int
•
r Pontificios authoritarem magister sententiarum nuncupatus est. Rainoldus de lib. Apoc. Petrus Lombardus, quem omnes The
•

l
•
gorum schola singulari quadam venerationis excellentia magistium sententiarum appellant, & in cujus Theologiae compendium innumerabilia disputationum volumina eruditissimi clariss
•
marum tot
•
 Christiano orbe Academiarum Theologi celebrarunt. Sixtus Senensis Bibl. Sanct. lib. 4▪

Lumbard was more
esteemed by him, then 100 Luthers, 200 Melancthons,
300 Bullingers, 400 Martyrs, 500 Calvins. Focanus
contrarily, saith thus of the Schoolmen, that one Austin
among the Ancients, and one Calvin (in his Institutions
of Christian Religion) among the moderne Divines, will
afford thee more solid Divinity, then all the School-Doctors



of the Popish Church, with all their vaine disputations,
jejune distinctions, quodlibeticall questions, and
foolish speculations, with which (saith he) Thomas,
Scotus, Lombard, Bonaventure, Molina, Vasquez,
Suarez, à Soto, Bellarmine, and other Doctors of the
Romane Church are full, even ad nauseam. But the Bible
is indeed the Booke of Bookes, it signifieth in the Greeke
Tongue, A Booke in generall; and was sometimes taken
so largely,So Scripture signifieth writing in generall, but by an excellency the Word of God. yet by an Antinomasie or excellency it is now
taken for the Booke of the Holy Scripture, and is all one
with Gods Booke. We told you before how much the Papists
magnified Peter Lumbard the father of the Schoolmen,
calling him the Master of the sentences, and preferring
him before hundreds of ours. The next Schoolman
after him Alexander of Ales is called Doctor Irrefragabilis
Thomas Aquinas after him, Doctor
Angelicus. John Scot the last, Doctor Subtilis. Yet
a learned Doctor
De Prideaux Hinc Sementiariorum, Quaestionistarum, Quodlibetistatum ingens turba, qui pro solida Theologia spinosas & rixosas disputationes in Christianorum scholas invexerunt. of our owne saith of the Schoolmen,
Scholastici vel hoc nomine non tanti sunt à nobis faciendi,
quia in Justificationis articulo vix quicquam
tradiderunt solidi. The Papists themselves note twenty
Articles, in which their great Master Lombard erred;
so that that is ascribed to them, hic magister non tenetur.
But now Paul (the great Doctor of the Gentiles) of
whom Chrysostome writes severall Homilies, is indeed
an Angelicall, Subtill, Irrefragable Doctor. Austin desired
three things:Revetendissimus Episcopus Vsserius De Christianarum Ecclesiarum successione & statu. c. 9. to have seen Christ in the flesh, Rome in
its glory, and to have heard Paul preach. What he
speakes is true as Gospell, and we can not apply to him
what the Papists doe frequently to Peter Lumbard, hic
magister non tenetur. We may exercise our judgement
Solis Canonicis debetur fides, coeteris amnibus Judicium. Lutherus.
upon the writings of men (there being few that write



much and contradict not themselves) but we must believe
the Divinely inspired Writings.
Lambert in his perambulation of Kent. Se▪
Speed in William the Conquerour. p. 42. There is a Booke
in the Law called Liber Judiciarius, or Doomesday-Booke,
because (as Matthew Paris saith) it spared no
man, but judged all men indifferently as the Lord in that
great day will doe. The Bible is the true Liber judiciarius,
or Doomesday Booke.
John 12, 48.
The word that I have
spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day. I
shall now in a few words discover the usefulnesse of this
threefold Treatise. Having been in these times of spoile
unhappily plundered of my Bookes and Manuscripts,
(which I esteemed as a precious treasure) recovering
this twice with some others, I did resolve (for preventing
any future dammages in that kind) to transcribe it faire
for the Presse, which was the worke of a whole yeere. I
know first the subject is very necessary for all Christians
to search into, and I have perused all the best writers I
could find, that I might handle it fully common-place wise,
according to the excellency of the Theme. I have made
use also of some Manuscrips of threeM. Pemble my learned Tutor, Master Wheattly my Reverend Pastor, M. Ball my worthy friend. worthy men, now
with God, (whose memory I shall ever honour) for the
compleating of the worke. I have gleaned a few observations
from some of the worthy Lecturers in Westminster,
from M. Ley of Budworth in his Lectures in the
City, and from divers others of the Assembly, in their
printed Sermons. This worke I conceive may be
beneficiall for these purposes: Chiefly for setling and
establishing of Christians in some maine principles of
Divinity, viz. that there is a God, against the Atheists
of these times; that the Scripture is the Word of
God, against the Anti-Scripturists; that Christ is God,
against all Arrians, Socinians, and other Heretickes



ejusdem farinae, vel potius furfuris; that the so▪

〈◊〉

of man is immortall, against such who in these dai
••

deny the same. 2. For enabling a Christian to all d
••

ties,
prayer, meditation, holy conference, catechizing
his family. For example, suppose a Christian desire to
instruct his family in the principles of Religion, and
would make use of M. Bals Catechisme for that purpose
(for I know not a better yet extant) he may by the helpe
of this worke open the heads of Religion, from the
beginning of that Booke to the Fall of man. I would there
were the like out on the whole body of Divinity. But lest
I trangresse the bounds of an Epistle, I commend the
worke to Gods blessing, and desire thy benigne interpretation
of my labours, still resting

Thy faithfull friend
and hearty wel-wisher,
EDWARD LEIGH

