


TO
THE HONORABLE
the Houſe of Commons, now Aſſembled
in PARLIAMENT.


THe God of Heaven hath called you to a work of the
greateſt Honour, and greateſt Difficulty, that lies
upon any number of men, throughout the whole
world at this day:
Obad. ver. laſt.
To heal the wounds of Zion,
and be her inſtrumentall Saviours; the Repairers of
the breach,
Eſay 58. 12. and the Reſtorers of paths to dwell in;
and to build up the old waſts, and lay the foundations, even of many
generations; To ſave and reſcue two Kingdoms, (as you have helped
to do a third already) from moſt desperately-endangering ruin;
and make way,Revel. 11. 15.
in them, for that bleſſed Proclamation of the ſeventh
Trumpet, Now are the Kingdoms of this world, become the
Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Chriſt!

To ſtrengthen your hearts, and hands in this ſacred imployment,
as this Sermon, by your call, firſt preſented it ſelf to your attentive
ears, ſo by a ſecond command of yours, it is now tendred to your favourable
eye; and withall expoſed to the publike view of all, whether
friends, or foes to the Peace and welfare of our Ieruſalem, or
Neuters. In it I have laboured ſo to speak to every ones conſcience,
that did hear it, or ſhall read it, as to make them 1. Senſible of
what they ſhould have done, and what they have done; and then
2 Apprehenſive of what God hath done, and means to do with the
generall, and with them in particular, according to both his threatnings,
and promiſes; and 3. by all, Zealous for God and his Church,
and confident of his grace to his Church, and all her faithfull helpers.



In the mean time, ſince it hath pleaſed him, who is the onely wiſe
God, and the ruler of all things; All whoſe paths are mercy and
truth, to ſuch as keep his Covenant, and his Teſtimonies; to exerciſe
your humility, fidelity, faith, and patience, by tidings unexpected
from divers parts of the Kingdom; And you have ſo far apprehended
his purpoſes in it, as to call us all, in and about the City, with
your ſelves, to a ſolemn and extraordinary publike Humiliation,
before the Monthly day comes about: I truſt, there is, and will for
ever, be written upon your hearts, that holy care which I was bold to
recommend unto you, to enquire where the cauſe is, why God at any
time expreſſes his diſpleaſure; and that not onely in reference to the
Nation generally, or any particular perſons in it, but even to your own
ſelves, and that as a Body; that ſo you may thereby be both directed,
and excited to fulfill the will of God, according to whatſoever you do,
or ſhall finde amiſſe in any.


In all which, give me leave once more, to beſeech you, in the Name of God, and his Churches, to make us and your ſelves at once happy.
You are our Healers, and while you ſubſiſt, as we ſhall not be altogether
miſerable, ſo neither without your ſpeciall faithfulneſſe,
and zeal, can we attain to any ſetled proſperity. I ſhall not now inſtance
in any other particulars, having touched upon divers in this diſcourſe,
which you are now pleaſed to make one of your spirituall Remembrancers.
In it, I have taken the freedom of others, to inſert a
few things, which either ſtraits of time, or ſhortneſſe of memory, forced
an omiſſion of in the delivery.
Whereof the chief are ſome enlargement, of our dangers in the firſt Uſes, and of the Uſe of examination, about our helping the Church, and the inſertion of the Catalogue of ſins againſt the ſeverall Commandments in the Uſe of Humiliation.
The God, whoſe truth it is, ſanctifie
You and us all by it, as by all the reſt of his Word of truth
•
, So
ſhall the Truth make us and you free from all our dangers and
fears, of all kindes, temporall, and spirituall, and finally, glorifie us
all, in and with him, who is the eternall Truth, and eternall Life, the
Lord Jeſus Chriſt; In whom I am ever


Your moſt humble, and
Devoted Servant
HERBERT PALMER.

