

TO
HIS EXCELLENCIE
ROBRT Earl of ESSEX, &c.
Lord Generall of the Forces raised by the Parliament
•

for the defence of the Kingdome, King, Religion, Laws,
Liberties, against the Popish and Malignant Party, who
by force of Armes invade them, and intend
their utter ruine.

Right Honourable,


THeAlberius Gentiles, & Hug
•
. Grotius de Jure belli. lib. 1. Hen. Bocerus de Jure pugnae, l. 1. c. 5. Georgius Obrectus de Belli Principiis theses 50. to 82. Hen. Ranzo. Bellici. Commentarii, l. 1. c. 4.

goodnesse of the Cause for which Armes are taken up,
is the Generals, Souldiers, greatest encouragement: where
Religion and Iustice are the reall Causes, Victory and Successe
will certainly be the effects of War. That these are
the true unfeigned grounds of the Parliaments and your
Excellencies defensive Armes, is sufficiently manifested
to the world by sundry late Printed Discourses; but by none more perspicuously
cleared then by these Collections, which upon this consideration
especially I humbly recommend to your Honourable Patronage.

The extraordinary presence and admirable Protection of God, with
that victorious successe, which hath accompanied your Excellency in two
Signall Battels, at Edge hill and Newbery, wherein the Enemy (by reason
of their many advantages) assured themselves of a full and totall Conquest,
are an undubitable evidence, that you are the Generall of the Lord of Hosts,
and the Cause you fight for His. ThereforeIsa. 54. 17.
No Weapon that is formed
against your Excellency in this quarrell shall prosper; and every malicious
tongue that shall rise against you in judgment (for fighting in this just cause)
you shall condemn.
Acts 5. 38, 39.
This work is not of men, but of God; therefore the very
gates of hell, the Antichristian adverse power of the Romish Malignant
Party,Mat. 16. 18.
shall never prevail against it, can never overthrow it.


Your Lordship and our Reformed Church (now really Militant) resting
upon this Rock of assurance, may, in expectation of future successes,
confidently take up these triumphant speeches of the Heroick Psalmist:
Thou artPsal. 44. 4, 5. our King, O God, Command deliverances for Jacob:
Psal. 46
•
 11.
through thee we will push down our Enemies, through thy Name shall we tread
them under that rise up against us. The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of
Jacob is our refuge.Psal. 37. 20. But the wicked shall perish, and the enemies of the Lord
(now in Armes against our Church, Parliament, Religion, Laws, Liberties,

Properties, Lives, Estates) shall be as the fat of lambs, they shal consume,
into smoak shall they consume away. Yea

〈◊〉
 83
•
. 3. 
〈◊〉

 though they have taken crafty counsell
together against Gods people, and consulted against his hidden ones: and
have said, Come and let us cut them off from being a Nation, that the Name of
Israel (of Puritans and Protestants) may be no more in remembrance: through
the tabernacles of Edom and Ishmaelites, Moa
•
 and the Hagarens, Gebal,
Ammon, Amaleck, the Philistines, Tyre and Assur, be now all confederated and
joyned together to destroy them; yet God shall do unto them as to Sisera
and Iabin at the brook of 
•
ison, which perished at Endor, and became as dung
for the earth: he shall make them like a wheel, as the stubble before the wind:
he shall persecute them with his tempest, and make them afraid with his storme.
They shall be troubled and confounded for ever; yea they shall be put to shame
and perish, that men may know, that he whose Name alone is JEHOVAH, is the
most High over all the earth. And in regard of the former Victories atchieved
by your Excellencies incomparable valour and prowesse, we may
all sing this gratulatory Song of Moses and the Israelies, after the overthrow
of Pharaoh and his host at the red Sea.
Exod. 
•
5. 6, 7, 9, 10, 11. Thy right hand, O Lord,
is become glorious in power, thy right hand, O Lord, hath dashed in pieces the
enemy. And in the greatnesse of thy excellency thou hast overthrown them
that rose up against thee; thou sentest forth thy wrath, which consumed them
as stubble. The enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil,
my lust shall be satisfied upon them; I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy
them. Thou didst blow with thy wind, the sea covered them, they sank as lead
in the mighty waters. Who is like unto thee, O Lord, amongst the gods? who is
like the
•
, glorious in holinesse, fearfull in praises, doing wonders! To this
great Lord of hosts, and
Exod. 15. 3. man of war (of whose omnipotent Protection
Our present Parliament and your Excellency have had many adorable
experiments) I shall in my dayly Prayers recommend your Honours Person,
Forces, and Military proceedings, till through his blessing on them,
Isa. 2. 2, 3, 4. the
house of the Lord shall be established in the top of the mountaines, and exalted
above the hills; the Kingdome and power of Romish Babylon (notwithstanding
all the confederated domestick, forraign, Popish Forces now united
to support it) utterly subverting throughout our Dominions; and
thereupon our swords be beaten into plowshares, our spears into pruning 
•
ooks:
And one part of our Nation, Kingdome, shall not have any cause to lift up a
sword against the other, nor to learn nor exercise a civill destructive war any
more, but
Rom. 16. 16. 1 Pet. 5. 14. mutually imbrace each other with an holy kisse of Charity and Peace.
Which that your Excellency, by your successefull Armes, may
speedily accomplish to your eternall Honour, shall be the prayer,


Of Your Excellencies devoted servant,
W. PRYNNE.


