


To the most Reverend and Gracious Father in God, my Lord Primate of IRELAND.



MY LORD,


IN a discourse lately written concerning Puritans, I had occasion offred me to declare my opinion against the Divine right of Episcopacie. Those reasons which I then urged, seemed weak to your Grace, as I have heard, which was a great discouragement to me: but I thought it not fit to desert so well a seeming cause, and to resigne my judgement presently upon a meere discouragement. I have since summoned up some more deep and retired thoughts, that I might gain a more just cause to retract my error, or to cleere the truth, and persist in my assurance. The question of Episcopacie, I think, I have now rightly stated, and if I am not deceived, I have let in such light upon it, that judicious men will now more easily ransack the profundity of it. Certainly the matter of it self is of great difficulty, and of great moment in these times, and it was not any confidence in my own wit that first ingaged me in it, but the knowledge of my candor, and freedome from private respects. No man living, I conceive, can be more dispassionate, or more disinteressed in this case then I am, The heat of my own mind could never yet thrust me into any faction, or make me

turbulent in the world, neither has any impression from without either by hope of gain, or fear of dammage stirr'd up sleeping passion in me. Of my selfe I rather wish well then ill to Episcopacie, because it is so antient a government; and for my own interest I have found more friendship then enmity from Bishops, so that I am certain, there is nothing but the simple love of truth, as it is truth, is the bias of my actions at this time. As for the Presbyteriall discipline also, I have so laid open my opinion concerning that, that if I have erred therein, I am sure the world can charge me of nothing else but error. Had all men which have formerly treated of this subject, been as unswayde by private interests as I am, this controversie had not bin so long protracted as it is; but your Grace knowes well, that scarce any but Bishops have maintained Bishops hitherto; nor scarce any opposed them, but such as have found some opposition from them; My Lord, I now begge your gracious favour to lay aside your Palle, and to put on the same impartiall man in perusing these papers, as I now am whilst my pen is upon them: for I know there is none has a more cleere Spirit, and lesse liable to the grosse dampe of worldly respects then your self. Let this my humble addresse be a testimony at this time that I am not a prejudging, factious enemy to all Bishops, and let your gracious acceptance of the same be as strong a crisis that your Grace is not a prejudging factious enemie to all which maintaine not Bishops.

Your Graces in all observance most humbly devoted, H. P.




