


TO THE HONOURABLE House of COMMONS assembled in PARLIAMENT.

IN obedience to your Commands, I here humble present to your view what you were pleased with patience and readiness of affection lately to attend unto. I considered, that though the Choiceness of the Auditory might require the exactest preparation; yet both the condition of the Times, and the nature of the Duty did call upon us to lay aside our Ornaments. And therefore I speake with such plainness, as might commend the matter delivered rather to the Conscience of a Penitent, then to the fancy of a delicate hearer. The King of Nineveh was a King as well in his Sackcloth,

as in his Robes: And the truth of God is indeed fuller of Majesty when it is naked, then when adorned with the dresse of any humane contribution, which many times takes from it, but never addes any value unto it.
I looked upon you in your double Relation, both Common as Christians, and Speciall, as men intrusted with the managing of those arduous and most pressing difficulties under which this distempered Kingdom is now groaning.
And for the quickning of those endevours which belong to you in both those Relations, I presented you both with the bottome of a Nations unhappiness, which is sin; and with the top of their felicity, which is Gods free grace and favour: That by your serious cares to purge out the one, and to procure the other, you might, by Gods blessing on your Consultations, dispell that black tempest which hangs over this Kingdom, and reduce the face of things unto calmness and serenity again.
When the Children strugled together in the womb of Rebekah, she was thereupon

inquisitive, If it be, Why am I thus?
Gen: 35, 22. and she addressed her self to God for a resolution. Surely this Nation is become like the womb of Rebekah, the children thereof strugling in their mothers belly together, and when God hath mercifully freed us from forain Enemies, Brethren are become enemies to brethren, and by their enmities likely to tear and torment the bowels of their mother, and to ruine themselves.
And what have we now to do, but to inquire the Cause of these sad cōmotions, Why are we thus? And surely the Cause is chiefly where the Disease is, within our selves. We have been like the womb of Rebekah, a barren Nation, not bringing forth fruits of so many mercies as God hath filled us withall. So that now it is no wonder, if God cause us to be in pain within our own Bowels, and to feel the throwes and struglings of a Travelling woman,
Hos. 13.13. ready to bring forth her own Confusion, a Benoni, or an Ichabod, a son of Sorrow, and of Shame, to this hitherto so peaceable and flourishing a Kingdom.
All that we can comfort our selves with in these pangs and qualms of distemper is, that

there are some Iacobs amongst us.Gen. 32.24. Hos. 12.3, 4. who insteed of supplanting their brethren, will wrestle, and have power with God. The people have often Petitioned, sometimes his sacred Majesty, sometimes this Honourable House, which are his great Councel, many overtures, & endeavor of Accommodation have been tendred,Isa. 26.17, 18. & yet we cry out in our pangs, & have, as it were, brought forth wind, neither have we wrought any deliverance in the earth.

I have here therefore presented a new Petition, dictated & drawn up to our hands by Gods own Spirit, unto which both King and Parliament, Peers and Prophets and People, must al subscribe, and offer it with prostrate & penitent hearts unto him who stands in the congregation of the mighty,
Psal. 82.1.
& judgeth amongst the gods, that he would take away all our iniquity, and receive us into favour again, and accept of a Covenant of new obedience.
And this Petition God is pleased to anticipate with an answer of grace in the consequent parts of the chapter whence the Text is taken, and that particularly to every branch of the Petition. He will take away iniquity. His Anger shall not punish, His Love

shal heal our backslidings, the greatness of our sins shall not hinder the freeness of his Grace. He will do us good, and give us life, by the dew of his grace reviving us: and Glory clothing us like the Lilly of the field, with the beauty of holiness: and stability, fixing us by his grace, as the Cedars of Lebanon are fastned upon their Roots: and growth or enlargement as the branches spread forth themselves, and continual vigor & plenty, as the Olive tree, which is always green and fruitful, and glorious comforts by the sweet savor of the knowledg of God,2 Cor. 2.14. which like the spice trees of Lebanon shall diffuse a spiritual perfume upon the names, and into the consciences of penitent converts.
He will prevent us with the blessings of Safety, as well as of Sanctity and Comfort, we shall under his shadow finde shelter and protection from all our fears. Though like Corn, we be harrowed under the Clods, though like a lopped vine we seem naked, and reduced to lowness, though like crushed grapes we lie under heavy pressures: yet he will receive, and enlarge, and comfort us again, and when we are in our own eyes as fatherless children, He

will set his eyes upon us as a Tutor and Guardian, He will hear and observe, and answer, and pity us, enabling us to make good our Covenant by his grace, and causing the fruits of his loving kindness to be found upon us. Thus God is pleased to borrow the various perfection of other things to adumbrate the united and calumniated mercies which he promiseth unto a converting and petitioning people.
You have the Petition sent you from God, and his Answer preventing you in all the members of it with the blessings of goodness. I have nothing else to do, but to beg of you, and of all this great people whom you represent, the Subscription of your hearts and lives unto this Petition: and to beg of God that he would graciously incline the hearts of this whole Kingdom, rather to wrastle with him for a blessing, then to struggle and conflict amongst themselves for a Curse. With which prayer I humbly conclude. Commending your persons and your weighty affairs to his grace; and rest,


Your most humble Servant in Christ, ED: REYNOLDS.
From my Study in Braunston
August the 8. 1642.


