


To the Right Honourable, and his
very good Lord, ROBERT Earle of Warwicke,
Baron of Leez, &c.
The AUTHOUR of this TREATISE
wiſheth all Health, Honour,
and Happineſſe.

Right Honourable:


WHen I was firſt intended this Diſcourſe
(being ſome yeares ſi
•
ce) me thought
I felt in my ſelfe a deſire of ſome intermiſsion
from former Arguments
of deeper exerciſe, and more ſpirituall
nature: as conceiving that a
Morall Theme might, another while,
both revive my wearied ſpirits, and
perhaps delight the Reader with variety. Hereupon I conſidered
wh
•
t Object in this kinde might moſt fitly ſort with
my thoughts; and 
•
fter ſome inquiry, both the many complaints
of the married, and daily queſtions moved unto mee
by ſuch as inte
•
ded marriage
•
 as alſo ſecondly thoſe notorious
errours and corruptions which (through ſin and Satan)
have inſinuated, nay pierced the very entrals of this State;
and laſtly (which is worſt of all) thoſe infinite pollutions of
body and minde, in all degrees of men both naturall and unnaturall,
moved me with reſolution to faſten upon this Argument.
But notwithſtanding the pregnancy of theſe inducements,
the Theme ſeemed ſo weighty, that I was forced to

ſearch what furniture I had ſtored up for ſuch a worke. And
at laſt I found the caſe to ſtand with me, as it doth with two
friends, who through diſcontinuance, or abſence, have waxen
ſtrange each to other; untill by ſome faire occaſion of meeting
they h
•
p to renew their acquaintance. So ſtood the caſe
betweene my ſelfe and theſe Meditations, which gave the
firſt draught of the Treatiſe enſuing; which ſince my firſt
preaching thereof lay long by mee, as halfe forgotten; but
now ſeemed to preſent themſelves to my view with double
appetite and ſavour, as promiſing to be materiall and uſefull
for the bettering of publique manners, and helping to redreſſe
the corruptions of the time. Accordingly therefore ſhaking
off the duſt and ſoyle of my Papers, I have beſtowed ſome
paines to contrive them into ſome ſuch order and expreſsion,
as might (if not ſatisfie the curious, yet) profit the deſirous
of cou
•
ſell and reſolution in caſes of this nature.
You ſee (Right Honourable) how bold I am to draw you
from your deeper occaſions, to liſten a while to theſe private
notions of mine: which I preſume (out of your facility to
give beſt conſtruction to things) you will not diſdaine to doe.
To proceed then: Alas! How evident is it, by mens practice,
that although all confeſſe they ought to be religious (and who
now adayes is otherwiſe?) yet few will admit the yoake of
God upon their necke, in the wiſe undergoing of thoſe relations
wherein they ſtand obliged? Among which this of
marriage is a rooted and fundamentall one, as being in order
before the reſt; and ſuch an one as either affords influence
and ſap to them (both Family, Polity, and Church) or elſe
inferres a blemiſh and aſperſion upon them all. So that, if
men would derive the ſavour and power of godlineſſe into
this eſtate of life, ſeaſoning it with the graces of ſelf-deniall,
and faith, and holineſſe; they ſhould (doubtleſſe) enjoy it in
a farre more ſweet and contentfull ſort then now they doe,

while they detaine this truth in unrighteouſneſſe, ſeparating
the thing: which God hath united.
Men tell us, they will heare Preachers (while they keepe
their bounds) while they teach them onely faith and repentance;
but if they will 
•
eeds meddle with a more cloſe and
neare ſearch of their l
•
ves and relations their callings, companies,
tradings, liberties; or if they will pry into their more
retired wayes, their cloſets, chambers and marriages, then,
as he who raged againſt Eliſha for the diſcovering and defeating
of his plots to the King of Iſrael:2 King 6. 13. ſo theſe recoyle at
the Miniſter, and threaten they will give him over. They
tell him they can teach him as good paſſages and rules of experience
as himſelfe can. So far are they from ſtanding to
Gods Bar in theſe points▪ and ſay, They knew them ere hee
knew what his Bookes meant; they are neere a kin to that
laſcivious Poet,Catull. Epigr. Caſtum eſſe decet, & pium Poetam, Ipſum: verſic
•
los nihil neceſſe eſt. who being told of his unchaſte Epigrams,
anſwered thus, Its true indeed, its meet that the Poet him
ſelfe bee chaſte, but as for his verſes, let them have their
courſe, to ſhew the Authors wit and skill, it matters not what
they be. So ſay theſe, We grant all, that we muſt bee honeſt
folke, but that our marriage actions ſhould run in the ſtream
of Religion we deeme it nice, and more then needs. Subtill
men (we ſay float a oft and dwell in univerſals, but bring
them to the particular,Camerar. fab. 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
. ſhew them Rhodes, and the ſtage
whereon they ſhould dance, and then they are at a ſet, their
great skill ſuddenly failes them.
Howbeit, if wee looke into the Scriptures▪ we ſhall meeet
with ſome whoſe very marriages have beene caſt into the
mould of obedience. Not to urge the rules which Paul gives
to husbands and wives, both for their entrance upon, and cohabitation
in that condition;Luc. 1. 6. we read of Z
•
chary and Elizabet,
both which were juſt, walking before God in all his
commands without reproofe: that is, they practiſed piety,

righteouſneſſe, and ſoberneſſe, in the ſtate of marriage. How
could they walke in all Commands, b
•
lking the fifth, which
urgeth Religion in our particular ſtate of life? But what ſay
men to this? Surely as the Papiſts tell us, 
•
ſſurance of ſalvation
belongs to Peter a
•
d Paul, and ſuch as had ſpeciall
revelations, but its no ordinary mans caſe. So ſay theſe,
ſuch as Zachary and Elizabet were eminent perſons▪ maſter-pieces,
above the common ſize: objects of admiration,
rather then imitation. But alas! This miſt is not th
•
cke enough
to eſcape in: all of us under the Goſpell are under the
ſome law which they were, wee are a royall Prieſthood tyed
to as ſtr
•
ct a rule as ever they were, of chaſtity and holines.
I doubt not 
•
Right Honourable) if the queſtion might bee
decided by your voice but you are of this minde; and deſire
to be of the ſame practice Now yet why I devote this Treatiſe
to your name, many may wonder, as deeming many other
ſubjects more worthy and proper to preſent your Lordſhip
withall. But (my good Lord) ſuch is the eſtate of fra
•
le
fleſh in this vaile or miſery that there is no condition of l
•
fe,
whether Miniſtery, Magiſtracy, ſingle or maried ſtate wherin
counſell may not doe well for the rectifying of ſuch errors
as through humane infirmity breake into all. Each ſtate
hath his ſeverall temptations, and a well ordered courſe in
marriage (as long experience of a double marriage can
te
•
ch you) is no eaſie Theme. 
•
gaine that ſweet and mutuall
accord which God hath vouchſafed twixt your Honour
and your worthy Conſort, may ſerve to turne my Ded
•
cation
into a Gratulation.

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
. And indeed, though the Booke be much
under the value of ſuch a perſonage as your ſelfe (a m
•
n not
onely of Noble deſcent but of great and deſerving acts both
for our Church and Commonwealth both formerly and of
late) yet I preſume,Act. 24. 2. that if a draught of muddy w
•
ter preſented
in the crowne of a hat,Nunquam bibi
•
ſu vio em, &c. was ſo welcome to a potent

Monarch: then doubtleſſe your honourable ſpirit will not reject
a Schollers Mite, offered with as deepe reſpect unto you,
as that was: you will not deſpiſe ſmall things, ſince there
may be a bleſsing therein.Scal. de arte Poetic. Not alway in a great thing there
is good, but in a good there is ever great, and that which may
agree with greatneſſe,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
. as one tells us out of a Greeke Poet.
All helpes ſhall one day ceaſe, yet every booke of uſe may
ſerve as a little walking-ſtaffe to further us in our travell
home.
Moreover it may become the beſt Scholler of us all to
learne that leſſon which Paul,


〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
. and from him my Booke urgeth;
The time is ſhort (wrapt and folded up,1 Cor. 7. 29, 30 Eccleſ. 3. 1. &c. 5. as the Text
is) Let them that poſſeſſe, be as if they poſſeſſed not,
ſuch as weepe, as if they wept not, ſuch as rejoyce, as if
they rejoyced not, ſuch as marry, as if they married not,
ſuch as uſe the world, as if not uſing it: for the faſhion of
it paſſeth away.
Matth. 22. 30. A time for all things, and ſo a time for
the married to embrace, and a time to bee far from embracing.
Seeke therefore that place where all theſe relations
ſhall ceaſe, (for ſo I thinke, though ſome thinke otherwiſe:)
where there ſhall be no marrying, nor giving in marriage,
for the Spouſe ſhall be wholy ſpirituall, like her husband, at
leaſt like the Angels of God. In which deſire I reſt, craving
a bleſsing from heaven upon your Honour, your vertuous and
Noble Lady, and poſterity: as alſo upon the peruſall of this
your Booke: and ſo humbly take my leave, reſting

At your Honours command
in the LORD,
DANIEL ROGERS.

