


TO THE
HONOVRABLE
And truly Noble Lord, Earle
of Lindsey, Lord JOHN PARBROTH,
&c. one of his Majesties Honourable
Privy Councell.

Grace, Mercy and Peace, &c.



COnsidering (my Lord)
your Lordships good
minde and constant fidelity
and care in advancing
this blessed Reformation,
and fending both
your shoulders to hold up
the Kingdome of our LORD JESUS, and also
your singular respect and reall affection to this
famous Vniversity, and the faculty of Divinity
in this Society, I thought it rather a matter of
debtfull necessity, then of arbitrary election and
choise, that this little peece that pleadeth for



the Government of the Church of Scotland,
should thrust it self through the thick and throng
of many worthier monuments of Learning, under
the honourable Patrociny of your Lordships
name. I am not ignorant that two blocks closeth
the passage to many of greater parts and abilitie
then I am, to adde (I may have leave to borrow
the word) to the Presses child-birth
•
 travelling
with no end of making many books,
Eccles. 12. 12. and these
be the opinions of men, and the event of Printing:
I may say of the former, that Opinion is
a Witch and a great Inchantresse, while men
call for Bookes, as nice banqueters call for dishes
to the Table, for they make such wide oddes
betwixt taste-pleasant and goodnesse of meat, as
if they were sworne to the roofe of their mouth,
rather then to health and life; so that it is much
more obvious to please few, and gratifie none,
then to satisfie all. And for the event, it is not
unlike dicing, for it is doubtsome if Fame be
not a lost prize in writing, and if the game goe
not crosse the Authors haire. And such is our corruption,
that the ayre or figures of a printed name
is a peece of our self, and as our skin wherin our
flesh and bones are kindly inchalmbered, and so
were most tender of one penny breadth of this



hide, or of letting one droppe of bloud of this
kinde fall to the Earth. Notwithstanding of
these prejudices, I have, howbeit most unable,
dared to appeare also in the Presse, to say
somewhat in way of a peaceable defence of our
Church-government in Scotland. The pens
of the worthy Reformers of the Christian Churches
have beene so blessed in the conscience, if
not in the evill eye of envy it selfe, that they
have cleared the Scripture way of the Government
of CHRISTS Kingdome to
lye in a midline betwixt the Popes and Prelates
lawlesse Church Monarchy, and the unorderly
confusion of Democracie. It is not
unknowne, the savoury perfume and honourable
name that this poore Church hath gained,
partly by the whole hoast of Protestant Writers
and ancient Fathers, who have unanimously
put downe in print, what wee have done
in practice, according to our Nationall Oath,
partly by the testimony of the blessed Lights,Beza epist. 79.
and faithfull Witnesses of IESUS.
Brightman. I might
name Reverend Beza,
Revelat. of Apoc. ch. 3. 7. learned Brightman,
that manly and stout Witnesse of CHRIST
M. George Wishart,
History of the Church of Scotland p. 108, 109 the body of the Confessions
of Faith. And it is as well manifest



to the world (Sunne and Moone being
Witnesses) what Prelates have attempted against
Presbyteriall Governement, but one said
well,Corpus Confess fide
•
, p. 6.
I beleeve IESUS to be a good man,
and the Evangell blessed, because Satan,
malice and Persecutours have done so
much against them both with fire and
tortures. What dust of late have they raised
against it? in Church, State, Court, Parliament,
three Kingdomes, in Rome, in the
heart of King and many others, in Campo
Martio,
Esa. 23. 24. in open field, yea in the Sea, that
the Sea should speake contrary to that stile
of the Prophet,Cant. 6. 10.
I travell in birth, I bring
up children, and nothing could be the reason,
but they saw the Woman looking foorth as the
morning,
Ps. 48. 4.
faire as the Moone, cleare as
the Sunne, terrible as an Army with banners,
and when they saw Mount Zion beautifull
in situation, they marvelled, they
were troubled and hasted away.
3 Ioh. v. 9. And what
daring insolency is this? when the Prelate
could not finde his Father, and thought shame
of his native Father Diotrephes,

Halls Remonstr
•
nce to the Parliament, an. 1641. that one
D. Hall and others have put him in the line
of the blood royall, and printed him an office,



jure divino, by divine right; Their Predecessours
were content of the good old, jus humanum.
Yet I hope, put the Prelate in the
Calendar of well-borne officers, bastard as he
is,Senec. sent.
yet many must die ere he be here. This
boldnesse putteth me in minde of the saying, Laus
nova nisi oritur, vetus amittitur, except Prelates
grow in new honour they loose their old
honour. But why may we not hope that both
they, their god-father the Pope, and their
god-Mother Rome shall loose both new and
old. God hath fetched as broken a Ship to
land, and yet they will be of Divine Right:
Is it not true that the Learned said of necessity?
Necessitati quodlibet telum utile est? Any
clubbe is a sword good enough for poore necessity,
or then it is true, Necessitas egentem
mendacem facit: Necessity turneth the poore
man in a lyar, or which I rather thinke; Necessitas
quod poscit, nisi das, eripit. If you
give not willingly to necessity, what it suiteth,
it must take it by strong hand and club-law.
CHRIST hath fairely begun to his Vniversall
conquest.Ps. 45. 3, 4.
Gird thy sword upon thy thigh
ô most mighty; and blessed shall all ages to
come call all these Nobles who have shoulders



to carry one stone to the raising of the
wall of this Temple, and to build the Citie
whose name is the LORD is there.
Ezech. 48. 35. And in
this course (my Lord) live, flourish and grow,
and JEHOVAH build you a sure house, which
is the prayer of

Your Lordships obliged servant
at all respective obedience
in CHRIST
SAMUEL RUTHERFURD.

