


To his deare Friend, Mr
W. Greenhill.


Sir,


MAny struglings I have had about publishing these Notes: I have looked up to God, and at last been perswaded upon these grounds:
1. The many desires both of friends and strangers, both by private speeches and Letters, which I thought might be the voice of Christ.
2. Some good (as I heare) those which are already out have done, and which the rest

might doe, which I have looked on as a testimony of the Lords acceptance of them.
3. I knew not what the Lords meaning should be to bring to light by his providence without my privity, knowledge, or will, the former part, unlesse it was to awaken and enforce me (being desired) to publish the rest; our works I thought should resemble Gods works, not bee left imperfect.
4. I considered my weake body, and my short time of sojourning here, and that I shall not speak long to children, friends, or Gods precious people, I am sure not to many in England, to whom I owe almost my whole

selfe, whom I shall see in this world no more; I have beene therefore willing to get the wind, and take the season, that I might leave some part of Gods precious truth on record, that it might speak (oh that it might be to the heart) among whom I cannot (and when I shal not) be. I account it a part of Gods infinite grace to make me an instrument of the least good to any. If the Lord shall so far accept of me in publishing these things, it is all that I would desire; if not, yet I have desired forgivenesse in the blood of his Sonne, for what ever errors or weaknesses may be in it, or are in my self, which may hinder successe, and frustrate

its end; only what I have in much weaknesse beleeved, I have written, and sent it unto you, leaving it wholly with your selfe, whom I much love and honour, that you would adde or detract any thing you see meet, (so as it be not crosse to what I have writ) and if you then think it meet for publike view, you see upon what grounds I am content with it; but if you shall bury it, and put it to perpetuall silence, it shall be most pleasing to him who thinks more meanly of it then others can,

Tho: Shepard.

