


To the Beleevers of ſeverall Opinions for outward Ordinances or diſpenſations, ſcandalouſly called Independents, Presbyterians, Anabaptiſts, Seekers.

Brethren,


I Have fairly ſet down how far each of you have attained in the Myſtery of Truth; and ſurely we are all ſhort of the glory which ſhall be revealed in the Temple or Church of God; and there are ſuch clouds rolling about each opinion, that may darken it, or ſomething of it, So as things are not ſo cleare as they are commonly taken by each of us; If any man think he knoweth anything, he knoweth nothing yet as he
1 Cor. 8. 2.
ought to know: So as the common ignorance and infirmity amongſt us, may be a riſe for a common Ʋnity amongſt us: and ſeeing we all come out of Babylon (though in ſeveral waies) to the glorious Temple or Tabernacle which God hath ſent down to be with men, and walk thus diverſly thither; yet our ſeverall and diſtinct goings are but like ſo many Travellers to the City of London; ſome travell from the North, ſome from the South, and from the Weſt, ſome from the Eaſt, yet all thither; though too, there may be ſome miſtaking of the way in each, becauſe of the little light that is abroad. The gathering of the Saints into the Heaven, or Kingdom below, in this day of Revelation, is like the gathering at the laſt day, which ſhall be all into one glorious Body, though the gathering ſhall be from the four winds or ends of the Earth, by the ſeverall Trumpets or Angels.

One thing I have more. Let us ſeek for the Spirit of wiſdom and revelation, to open to us the Myſtery of the Scriptures called The Revelation; for in that Book is the Prophecie of the Churches laid up, and the ſeaſons and times for Truth revealed. Let us ſearch and ſeek out by the Spirit of Ieſus, even that Ieſus which was in the Viſion, and gave it out to Iohn; for there is none found worthy to open the Book with Seals but the Lambe. Surely in the Myſtery of Angels, Vials, Sea of glaſſe with fire, Temple with Smoke, the Angell with the everlaſting Goſpell, the Angell enlightning the Earth, the Whore in skarlet and pretious pearles, the Cup of abomination, the Beaſt like a Lamb, the Image of the Beast, the Horus and Kings of the Earth, the marke in the forehead and in the right hand, the buying and ſelling, the Tabernacle of God with men, the firſt and ſecond Reſurrection, the Ihron
•

 of God, the pure Chryſtall River of water, the Holy Ieruſalem deſcending from God, &c. In theſe is much of the glory wrapped up, and from theſe ſhall the Truth we contend for, appeare to our further enlightning.


Yet one thing more. We that are thus contenders for Ordinances, for the Temple and the Veſſels in it, let us take heed we forget not him who is greater then the Temple; for one greater then the Temple is here It would be ſpiritually conſidered, that while we ſtrive for the Veſſels and Cups, we ſpill not the Wine.

And it ought to be ſo carried by all of us, that▪ becauſe we are ſo much in opinion, we may not be thought to place Religion there, as I feare too many do, making a Chriſt of the very Ordinance of Chriſt, and preſſing ſome outward Ordinances of the Goſpell ſo legally; as ſome hearing ſuch a power of Salvation put into them, and finding an outward diſpenſation more eaſily got then the ſpirituall, make haſte thither only, and then ſit down as ſaved under a meere outward Ordinance. The Lord grant that we may neither undervalue an Ordinance nor the leaſt Inſtitution of Ieſus Chriſt, nor raiſe it up into a Ieſus Chriſt, and ſet up the Law above or beſide the Law-giver. We muſt now learne to know Ieſus Chriſt leſſe after the fleſh, and not to embody ſalvation in a meer outward diſpenſation, and ſo incarnate Ieſus Chriſt over again from the glory and ſpirituality he is in.
Brethren, farewell; For my part, I am fully aſſured from Scriptures of the Church of Chriſt here, or Goſpell-fellowſhip of the Saints; and unto this
If any man wi
••
 do his will, he ſhall know of the Doctrine, Ioh. 7. 17.
fellowſhip with the Father and the Son, I endeavour; and I have one way to reveale Truth to me which I cannot conceale, nor yet cannot practice as I would, and that is this;
To ſee Truth by living in the power of Truth, and by firſt obtaning Jeſus Chriſt to live in us in the power of his ſuffering, death, and Reſurrection; for ſurely Jeſus Chriſt muſt do all (though more gloriouſly and ſpiritually) over again in his, which he did in himſelfe.
If Jeſus Chriſt the Light be in us, the light by which every outward diſpenſation is ſeen, will flow in; for where the Sun is, there will be every beame with it.
