

To the Right Honourable, the Lord Maior,
Aldermen, and the Common-Councell of the
City of LONDON.

Right Honourable,


MAny who call themſelves Miniſters and Prophets of God accuſe
us of Hereſie and Schiſm before ye. But I hope ye will
take notice they are but men as we are, and of like paſſions
with us; neither Apoſtles, nor Prophets of the firſt Baptiſm, or
gifts of the Spirit. Yet if the Prieſts and Elders, or any Oratour, as
Tertullus▪
 accuſe Paul to Feſtus or Agrippa, he cannot but a
•
ſwer
for himſelfe.
I have but few words to ſpeak to ye (Noble Citizens) That ye would
in that Spirit which is of God, judge the Doctrines of Men, and
ſingle them from Traditions, Cuſtomes, Councels, Synods, Intereſts.
Ye are bid to try the ſpirits whether they be of God▪
 or no.
Try whether it be according to God, for ſome Miniſters, and thſe
not Apoſtles, to call others Hereticks who beleeve not as they beleeve:
What will become then of the ſtrong and weak Chriſtian,Rom. 15. 1. 1 Iohn 2. 13, 14. of the
children, fathers, and young men?

Trye whether they ought to p
•
ea
•
h to ye to ſuppreſſe all but themſelves;
ſince they are not infallible, but may erre; and where is the
Remedy then, if they erre? Who ſhall judge the Iudges?
Try whether this make for unity of ſpirit, to allow no more fellowſhip
nor brotherhood then in forme and practice. And what will
they have ye do if Formes ſhould alter? For States may change: England
hath done ſo.
Try whether this make for the glory of Chriſtians, to perſecute or
baniſh (as they would have ye) all but themſelves. May they not as well
tell ye that God hath made England only for men of the Presbytery
or one opinion to live in, and worſhip in: And where find they that?
Trye whether ſome by their daily Invectives from Preſſe and Pulpit

againſt Independents and others, bring not in the Popiſh Deſigne
in another Forme, to divide the godly party, both Presbyterian
and Independent, and ſo to ruine all.
Try if all ſuch Doctrine as they commonly preach and write to
ye, reſolve not it ſelfe moſt into their own intereſts, profits, place power:
And what doth the Scripture and Hiſtories tell ye of that?
And now I have done; praying for ye,
That ye may be ſtill a free City, and not diſputed by the miſcelany
of Logick and Divinity of ſome, into bondage.

That ye may be ſtill populous, and not your ſtreets growing with
graſſe through any unneighbourly Principle of Perſecution, which muſt
needs loſe ye many, and much reſort from this famous City, under the
name of Hereticks, not letting ſuch live beſide them.
That ye may be a peaceable City, and not raiſed up and daſhed by
any breath of men againſt the other and greater part of your ſelves, the
Parliament. England hath long enough broken it ſelfe againſt its own
walls: let it now be our ſtrength to ſit ſtill, and to ſtand ſtill and ſee
ſalvation.

And ſince the Lord hath let the most of the ſucceſſe of the Presbytery,
which is ſo much deſired, come thorow the hands of thoſe and
that Army whom they have told ye over often were Hereticks; let
this be but taken notice on by ye, what God hath told ye in the ſucceſſe
of that Army; and I truſt ye will never regard the Meſſengers by
whoſe hands the Presbytery in a kind came, by beating them out of
doores. Thus reſts he,

Who would rejoyce in your
Peace, Proſperity, and
GOSPELL-unity,
JOHN SALTMARSH.

