


TO THE HONOVRABLE, THE Knights, Citizens, & Burgeſſes of the Houſe of COMMONS In PARLIAMENT.

Honourable,


I Here preſent you with ſome Notions of the Brethren of the Presbyterian Way, which were preſented to your HOUSE ſome foure or five yeares ſince; wherein they doe in much ſtrength and piety, as it ſeems to me, open the way and ſecrets of Spirituall Tyranny, and Conſcience-yoaks; there is ſome occaſion now of reminding the Brethren of theſe, becauſe the ſtraine of their preaching and printing ſeemes to have forgotten theſe principles: Spirituall▪ Yo
•
ks and Burdens being taken off from us (through the hand of God upon ye) the memory of them ſeems to be gone off too from ſome; ſome have forgotten that they were ſtrangers in the Land of Egypt; the Lord hath ſeemed to forgive the formerly Nonconforming Brethren all their debt, becauſe they deſired him: And now the Queſtion is, Whether they ſhould have compaſsion on their fellow ſervants as he had pity on them?

The Controverſie now before ye, is of all your Faithfull ones, and therefore it cals for the tenderſt judgement: Fathers may better beat ſervants then children out of doores; the one ſort 
••
 I miſtake not) contend that they may rule with ye▪ the oth
••


•••
t they may be ruled by ye in the things of your owne Kingdome

and in that of the Kingdome of God, that Ieſus Chriſt may rule both ye and them: how juſt, how ſpirituall, this latter plea is, will appeare from the choyceſt Reaſonings of ſome in reputation with ye, which I have awakened.
The things I preſent ye, I would not preſume to make too poſitive, becauſe I would not conclude a wiſdome of your latitude under any notion of mine, (though I ſee private men take too much liberty in that way towards ye) though it is your indulgence not to know it.
I here preſent ye things only to be conſidered, to be quaered, in the behalf of truth, and the advancement of your State, to which I am covenanted; and I am the bolder and freer, having ſold ſomething that I had for that pearle, for which we are bidden to ſell all: I ſhall adde ſome Conſiderations here to the reſt:
1. Conſider whether under Popery the myſtery of the Nationall Prieſthood was not rather held up by the power of Princes and States, then States themſelves by ſuch a way of power; and whether the myſtery of the Nationall Miniſtery be not rather held up by the power of States now, then the States themſelves in ſuch a way of power; and then, whether all the Pretences and Conſequences to draw
•
 in States and Kingdomes for the Churches intereſt (if clearly diſcuſſed) be not rather a way of Antichriſtian myſtery▪ then of zeale to Religion, or the power of Magiſtracy?
2. Conſider whether in the Kingdome of Jeſus Chriſt any other Scepter ſhould be lifted up then that golden one of his own, and whether if there be a Kingdom of God, if Ieſus Chriſt be the Lawgiver, and the Spirit of of Chriſt the interpreter of thoſe Laws, and this Kingdom of God within the throne of that King of Kings, and Lord of Lords the Lord Ieſus, any other power ſhould rule, any other Scepter▪
 any other Laws, or any other ſit down in that Throne, which is only the Throne of the Son of David▪ whoſe Throne is for ever, the Scepter of whoſe Kingdom is an everlaſting Scepter?

3. Conſider whether there be not an Heatheniſh or Gentiliſh world, and an Antichriſtian world, or a world of many called Chriſtians and beleevers in Chriſt, and yet a Church of Chriſt which is neither of theſe; and if ſo, whether is all this

Kingdom of England that Church of Chriſt, or not rather much of it that part of the Antichriſtian world, over which one part of the myſtery of iniquity hath ſat long, and is yet upon it? And if ſo, then is there not room in England both for Presbyteriall Churches, and Believers of other waies to live in that part of this Kingdom which is the world, and not that Church? And if ſo, ye may be rich in people, rich in peace, rich in the praiſes of the people of God. Honourable, go on to do worthy things▪
 for our Nation, as worthy things have been done by you▪ and may ye be as the wings of a Dove covered with Silver, and her feathers with yellow Gold.

So praies,
Your humble faithfull Servant,
IOHN SALTMARSH.

