


The Epiſtle.


I
 Send you here (my Lord) that Diſcourſe enlarged, which frighted the Lady into a cold ſweat, and which had like to have made me an Atheiſt at Court, and your Lordſhip no very good Chriſtian. I am not ignorant that the fear of Socinianiſme at this time, renders every man that offers to give an account of Religion by Reaſon, ſuſpected to have none at all: yet I have made no ſcruple to run that hazard, not knowing why a man ſhould not uſe the best Weapon his Creator hath given him for his defence. That Faith was by the Apostles both highly exalted, and ſeverely enjoyned, is known to every man, and

this upon excellent grounds; for it was both the eaſiest and beſt way of converting: the other being tedious, and almoſt uſeleſſe: for but few among thouſands are capable of it, and thoſe few not capable at all times of their life, Judgement being required. Yet the beſt ſervant our Saviour ever had upon Earth, was ſo far from neglecting or contemning Reaſon, that his Epistles were admired, even by thoſe that embraced not the Truthes he delivered. And indeed, had the Fathers of the Church only bid men beleeve, and not told them why, they had ſlept now un-Sainted in their Graves, and as much benighted with Oblivion, as the ordinary Pariſh-Prieſts of their owne Age.
That man is deceivable, is true; but what part within him is not likelyer then his Reaſon? For as Manilius ſaid,

Nam neque decipitur ratio nec decipit unquam.


And how unlikely is it that that which gives us the Prerogative above other Creatures, and wholy entitles us to future happineſſe,

ſhould be laid aſide, and not uſed to the acquiring of it.
But by this time (my Lord) you finde how apt thoſe which have nothing to do themſelves, are to give others trouble. I ſhall onely therefore let you know that your Commands to my Lord of Middleſex are performed; and that when you have freſh ones, you cannot place them where they will be more willingly received, then by

Bath, Sept. 2.

Your humble Servant,
John Suckling.


