

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD WILLIAM by Divine providence LORD ARCH-BISHOP OF CANTERBURY His Grace, Primate of all England, and Metropolitane, CHANCELLOUR of the University of OXFORD, and one of his MAIESTIES most Honourable Privy Councell. My most Honourable good LORD.
May it please your GRACE,

IT was obedience to my Superiour that ingaged me upon this last Anniversary commemoration of the great Goodnesse of God Almighty to our King and Country in the discouery of the most damnable

Powder-Treason. It was a blessing which no tongue could expresse, much lesse mine, which had scarce learn'd to speake, at least, was most unfit to speake in the Schooles of the Prophets. Delicata autem est illao bedientia quae causas quaerit. It had beene no good argument of my obedience to have disputed the inconvenience of my person, and the unaptnesse of my parts for such an imployment. I knew God, out of the mouth of Infants, could acquire his praise, and if my heart were actually as Uotive as my tongue should have beene, it might bee one of Gods Magnalia to perfect his owne praise out of the weaknesse and imperfection of the Organ. So as I was able, I endeavour'd to performe it, having my obedience ever ready for my excuse to men, and my willingnesse to performe my duty, for the assoylment of my selfe before God; part of which I hope was accepted, and I have no reason to thinke, that the other was not pardoned.
When I first thought of the Barbarisme

of this Treason, I wondred not so much at the thing it selfe as by what meanes it was possible for the Divell to gaine so strong a party in mens resolutions, as to move them to undertake a businesse so abhorring from Christianity, so evidently full of extreame danger to their lives, and so certainly to incurre the highest wrath of God Almighty. My thoughts were thus rude at first; but after a strict inquisition I fond it was apprehended as a businesse (perhaps full of danger to their bodies, but) advantagious to their soules, consonant to the obligation of all Christians, and meritorious of an exceeding weight of Glory, for now it was come to passe which our dear Master foretold, men should kill us, and thinke they did God good service in it. I could not thinke this to be a part of any mans religion, nor doe I yet believe it. For it is so apparently destructive of our deare Master his Royall lawes of Charity & Obedience, that I must not be so uncharitable as to thinke they speake their owne minde truly, when they professe their beliefe of

the lawfullnesse and necessity in some cases of rebelling against their lawfull Prince, and using all meanes to throw him from his kingdome, though it be by taking of his life. But it is but iust that they who breake the bonds of duty to their Prince, should likewise forfeit the lawes of charity to themselves, and if they say not true, yet to bee more uncharitable to their owne persons, then I durst be, though I had their own warrant. Briefly (Most R. Father) I found amongst them of the Roman party such prevailing opinions, as could not consist with loyalty to their Prince, in case hee were not the Popes subiect, and these so generally believed, and somewhere obtruded under perill of their soules, that I could not but point at these dangerous rocks, at which I doubt not, but the loyalty of many hath suffered shipwrack, and of thousands more might, if a higher Starre had not guided them better, then their owne Pilots.
I could not therefore but thinke it very likely that this Treason might spring from

the same Fountaine, and I had concluded so in my first meditations, but that I was willing to consider, whether or no it might not bee that these men were rather exasperated then perswaded, and whether it were not that the severity of our lawes against them might rather provoke their intemperate zeal, then religion thus move their setled conscience. It was a materiall consideration, because they ever did and still doe fill the world with outcries against our lawes for making a rape upon their consciences, have printed Catalogues of their English Martyrs, drawn Schemes of most strange tortures imposed on their Priests, such as were unimaginable, by Nero, or Dioclesian, or any of the worst and cruellest enemies of Christianity, endeavouring thus to make us partly guilty of our owne ruine, and so washing their hands in token of their owne innocency, even then when they were dipping them in the blood Royall, and would have emptyed the best veynes in the whole Kingdome to fill their Lavatory. But I found all these to be

but Calumnies, strong accusations upon weake presumptions, and that the cause did rest where I had begun, I meane, upon the pretence of the Catholique cause, and that the imagin'd iniquity of the Lawes of England could not be made a vaile to cover the deformity of their intentions, for our Lawes were just, Honourable, and Religious.
Concerning these and some other appendices to the businesse of the day; I expressed some part of my thoughts, which because happily they were but a just truth, and this truth not unseasonable for these last times, in which (as S. Paul prophecyed) men would be fierce, Traytors, heady, and high minded, creeping into houses, leading silly women captive, it pleased some who had power to command me, to wish me to a publicatiō of these my short and sudden meditations, that (if it were possible) even this way I might expresse my duty to God and the King.

Being thus farre encouraged, I resolved to goe something further, even to the boldnesse of a dedication to your Grace, that since

I had no merit of my own to move me to the confidence of a publike view, yet I might dare to venture under the protection of your Graces favour. But since my boldnesse doth as much neede a defence, as my Sermon a Patronage, I humbly crave leave to say, that though it be boldnesse, even to presumption, yet my addresse to your Grace is not altogether unreasonable.
For since all know that your Grace thinks not your life your owne, but when it spends it selfe in the service of your King, opposing your great endeavours against the zelots of both sides who labour the disturbance of the Church and State, I could not think it 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 to present to your Grace this short discovery of the Kings enemies, 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
, and proper to your Grace who is so true, so zealous a lover of your Prince and Country. It was likewise appointed to be the publike voice of thanksgiving for your Vniversity (though she never spake weaker then by so meane an instrument) and therefore is accountable to your

Grace to whom under God and the King we owe the Blessing and Prosperity of all our Studies. Nor yet can I choose but hope, that my Great Obligations to your Grace's Favour may plead my pardon, (since it is better that my Gratitude should be bold, then my diffidence ingratefull) but that this is so farre from expressing the least part of them, that it layes a greater bond upon me, either for a debt of delinquency in presenting it, or of thankfulnesse, if your Grace may please to pardon it.
I humbly crave your Grace's Benediction, pardon, and acceptance of the humblest duty and observance of

Your GRACES most observant and obliged CHAPLAINE IER. TAYLOR.

