


TO THE INCOMPARABLE, SOVERAIGNE PRINCESSE, HENRIETTA-MARIA OF FRANCE, QVEEN OF GREAT BRITTAINE, FRANCE, AND IRLAND.

MADAME



I
 Preſume not novv, to approach to your Maieſties preſence, vvith deſigne to begg your Fauours, (though this, vſe to be the caſe of euery Creature) but to pay your Maieſtie a Seruice, and that, a great one, for the many Princely benefitts, vvhich I haue receiued already, from your gratious hand. For heer, I come to offer your Maieſtie a meanes, of magnifying your ovvne naturall greatnes, by your

avovving, & protecting, and enlargeing the glory of an incomparable Saint, S. Tereſa. To vvhome, as I haue vvell vnderſtood that already, yovv carry an extraordinary deuotion; and not only deuotion to her ſelfe, but affection alſo, to the holy Religious vvoemen of her Angelicall Order; vvhereof, the English Nation (vvhich novv enioyes the honour, to be alſo, yours) hath a Monaſtery at Antwerpe, vvhich needs not, perhaps, be ashamed, to appeare neer any other of the vvhole vvorld, vvhether it be, for their great, & entire contentment in Recollection; their inſatiable, yet moſt delightfull thirſt, after Perfection, & Vnion vvith our Bleſſed Lord; or the euerlaſting Feaſt, of Joy, & Iubily, vvhich they ſolemnize, both in the harty, & high reſpects, vvhich they carry to their Reuerend Mother Superiour, and their true, & moſt tender

loue, to one another: ſo, it vvill not be vnvvorthy, either of your ovvne greatnes, or goodnes, that, vvhen there is queſtion of conſidering the vertues, & perfections of the Glorious S. Tereſa, and the celebrating her praiſes, and the ſtudying her Life, (J meane that Life of hers, vvhich she vvrote, vvith that moſt holy, & vviſe hand of her ovvne, vvhich I heer preſent) your Maieſtie vouchſafe to march at the very head of that vvhole Troope, vvhich may addreſse it ſelfe, to the imitation of her Heroicall actions, and to the admiration of thoſe incomparable Graces, and Fauours, vvhich the God of Heauen, and Earth, thought fitt to infuſe, vvith his enamoured hart, and omnipotent hand, into that moſt happy Soule. For, vvho can euer, be more fitt, to patronize ſo great a Saint, as she is, then ſo great a Queen, as your Maieſtie;

vvho, beſides your Birth, and renovvne, vvhereof (to ſpeake after the manner of men) yovv haue ſo much occaſion to bragg, haue alſo (in order to Heauen) shevved ſuch conſtancy, in the vvay of Religion, and pietye, as may iuſtly, (all things conſidered) giue cauſe to the reſt of your owne most eminent Ranke, at least, to shrinke, if not to blush. For my ſelfe, to begg your Maiesties pardon, for this apparance of preſumption, vvere novv, to acknowledge ſome ſuch fault, as vvhereof, J acquitted my ſelfe, before. I vvill therefore, rather by this meanes, hope to obtaine a Suite for this Seruice; yea and that, of the moſt ſauory kind, of all other; & it is, That yovv vvill vouchſafe to imploy the Sacrifice of my vvhole Life, in obedience to any of your Maieſties leaſt commands. God make, & keep your Maieſtie, as healthy, & as happy, as this vvorld can

tell hovv to vvish; yea, and as the other, can tell hovv to graunt; & I moſt humbly aske leaue, to doe your Maiestie all Reuerence, at your Royall Feet.

Your Maieſties moſt humble, moſt obedient, moſt deuoted, & moſt obliged Seruant
M. T.

