

To the Worll. my very worthy friend,
and much honoured Patron,
Mr. RICHARD CAMDEN.

Sir,


SAint Augustine and divers reverend Fathers
of the Primitive Church, because
there were many hereticks in their time,
writ themselves and advised others of competent
ability to write against Heresie. We
have alike reason in these our dayes, and, if the mouthes of
our grave Ecclesiasticall Worthies could breath through
the iniquity of the times, might from them too assuredly
have alike encouragement to preach against Schisme. My
apprehension hereof first incited me to a rationall discussion,
which at length concluded in this resolution, That
my silence (how inconsiderable soever) should not intitle
me to the least interest in betraying the Church to either
of her two homebred prevalent enemies, Blind Ignorance
or Obstinate Malice. The successe which my
endeavours herein found by this Academicall performance
(if my friends tongues translated aright the language of
their hearts) being as beyond its desert, so, I truly and ingenuously
confesse, beyond likewise either my expectation
or hope, could be but a mean, if any incentive to this my

farther publication of it; whereby it may meet with a
different character from that which their charitable impression
at first afforded it. For I'll not go about so to captivate
the judgements of my candid auditours, as to
chain them to their first conceiv'd opinion. I know the eye
is a lamp which often lights the understanding to the discovery
of some errours formerly lost in the labyrinth of
the eare. Things approv'd when heard may undergo a
contrary most just, because more deliberate, censure in
the reading. What motives soever I had (such, it may be,
as imposed rather a kind of necessity then gave me satisfaction)
I desire to conceal. The reason of my dedication
to your self (my many and great Collegiate obligations
engaging the choycest of my future endeavours in a higher
discharge) needs runne no hazard of your various conjecture,
being my desire to imploy it as a thankfull acknowledgement
of your first Christian grace vouchsafed
me at the Font, seconded by your pious most carefull performance
of that charge the Church there gave you of my
non-age, and still continued by your most frequent ample
accumulation of favours, which shall hereafter upon the
emergence of any farther occasion be most duly commemorated
by

Your ever-obliged servant
and dutifull Godsonne,
RI. WATSON.

