


To the High, and Mightie,
CHARLES
By the Grace of God, Prince of Scots, and Wales,
Duke of Cornwal and Rothesay, Heire
of Great Britaine, &c.

LOw and humble (Most High, and Mightie
Prince) doeth Your Montrose addresse
himself to Your Highnes presence:
not He himself, in his full aequipage,
no, nor a moitie of him, and in truth
Scarse a mean scantling of that matchles worth.
Who, though unpolished and rude, and, in this his
Roman dresse, ill deck
•
, rough, and uncomely; yet
shal be not feare the publike view, if You daigne
him that favorable aspect, and grace, which You are
wont to vouchsafe even forraigners, and strangers
that court You. And he thinks, he may, upon
better grounds then they, presume to entreat this, he
being no alien, but a lawful native of your Royal Fathers

haereditarie Kingdome: and no otherwise, then
by the fatall calamitie of those times, exposed, bred,
and fed in a strange land. Nor doth he want lively
characters, and marks imprinted in him, to evidence
from what land, and father he is descended: That,
Your own Scotland, wherein one hundred and nine
of Your Progenitors have raigned; all whose Royall
blood runs in Your veins, and divine souls breaths
in Your breast: Him a free, born, and bred native,
of that most ancient Kingdome; a loyal servant of
Your dearest father, his most Gracious Lord, and
faithful follower of his, in despight of all the casualties
of fortune.
Which arguments, if they be not sufficient to conciliat
the sweet gale of Your Grace, to inspire health,
and life, in this tender birth, otherwise readie to expire:
yet let me beseech Your singular clemencie, to
lend it so much of Your countenance, as to observe in
it (though drawne with a rude pencill) some lineaments,
and shaddows of it's first patterne; and even
for those resemblances sake, vouchsafe it so much of
Your countenance, as may give it some life and being,
if not immortalitie. For, who would despise that only
Pourtra
•
cture that were of Scipio, Caesar, Alexander,
or of Your Royall Grandfathers, exstant, Iames

the Peaceful, or Henry the Great, because the work of
some obscure, and perhaps, unskilfull craftsman? I can
wel divine, Montrose will not long want an Apelles,
or Leucippus to paint him out, and limbe him to
the life; nor an Homer perhaps to sing his praises: only
(most Gracious Sir) be pleased to use a while these
my poore endeavours, till those more worthie show
themselves to the world. And looke not on the harshnes
of my stile, but bend Your high and generous
thoughts upon the actions, truly Roman, that's to say,
Noble, High, Heroik, Great, and farre transcending
meane and vulgar spirits. And, if You wil impute (as
is fit and just) the blemishes and errours, which herein
may occurre, to the weaknes of my wit and judgement,
and no wayes, to my Patterns Genius, I dare
boldly undertake, that your Montrose shall prove
neither unpleasant, nor unprofitable.
For, what can be more pleasant to a Prince, second
to none on earth, but his Father, borne in that eminent
dignitie, bred in that condition, and from his
infancie trained up in those wayes, which resent nothing
but Heroicall deeds; then to have alwayes before
his eyes, that worthie, whom (be it said without
envy) no man in his time goeth beyond, to embrace,
caresse and cherish him, and coppie out his actions,
and observe,


How he behaves himself, how brave and goodlie,
In Martiall feats, manhood and Chevalrie?

Who taking up arms to serve the commands of the best
of Kings, your most Gracious Father, and leading the
dance, as it were, to usher in Your Valour, which now
waxeth to ripnes and strength apace; hath performed
such exploits, as strikes the present times with admiration;
and gratefull posteritie shal ever preserve in
memorie. For, though envy presse hard upon true
glorie, and tread upon her heels; yet that short lived,
and self destroying furie, shall never overtake, nor
ecclipse her solid and immortall lustre.
In the meane time (most Gracious Sir) we present
You here with no smoothe fables, or Romanses.

Antiphates, and Scillaes gulf are not my theme,
Swallowing Charybdis, devouring Polypheme.

No gyants, or glorious wonders; yet enemies, as
like gyants, and Victories obtained over them, as
like wonders, as may be. For, what did ever lying
Greece faine of the proud attempts of their old gyants,
which these conspiratours, the sons of the earth,
have not dared to doe against God, religion,
faith, loyaltie, and right, in all their dealings, with
Your Royall Parents, Your self, and all Yours? who
heaping up mo intains, upon mountains of lyes, calumnies,

and slanders; reared up those bulworkes, from
whence, with horrid violence, they have fought against
the Gods. And what did they imagine done
by Apollo, by Pallas, or Mars, to overthrow those
monsters; which our Montrose did not with like courage
undertake, and successe performe? And now that
having vanquished, he did not finally, and totally
triumph over them; we must impute it to the force of
Your Fate, which would not permit the Genius of
Your countrey, to owe so glorious a deliverance, to
any others valour, but Your own. Nor indeed, seemed
it convenient, that any other should thunder
downe Enceladus, with those other Titans, to Hell; but
the sonne of him, whose father those gyants kept in
chains.
And then (Great Sir) when You intend those
courses, to which the lawes of God, and man oblidge
You; the vindication of Your Father, and countrey,
from that most savage bondage; what can be more
profitable, then to have Your eyes stil on him, as the
guide, and leader of Your way, who first of all discovered
the counsells, plots, and treacheries of these
traitors, and, as I may say, alone did show the way,
how to lay their intollerable pride, and breake their
power, though growen verie great, before it was perceived.

For You shall find him a body, without a
soul; for being no more valiant in arms then wise
in counsell and managing affairs, he advised 
•
mously
(and would to God his counsell had prevailed)
to strangle that monster in the cradle, aswell as when
it was growen strong, he had crusht it, but that Your
growing vertue, was not to be defrauded, of so large
a field, for purchasing renowne. So that besides his
singular valour, and militarie skill, You may find in
him choise instructions of civil prudence, and politik
wisedome; which though (through the sad fatalitie
of the times) they were but ill believed, yet such as
may perhaps be usefull to Your self, and after ages.
And this is seene clearly, in that advise, to prevent
betimes, the purposes and practises of these traitors,
who had built their hopes upon the sweet disposition
of our most Gracious King. His clemencie to wickedst
rebells, his trust in unworthie persons, his bountie
to ingrate men (for such most of them proved)
and great compassion on all; more then on anie
strength, or power of their own: and to compasse, and
quell them, by the force of just armes (since they had
left no other way) before their forces, with too long
delay, should bulk, and grow too puissant and great.
And if but this had beene put in execution (to say nothing

of what else befell us) our Britaine had never
become the bloodie stage of this unnaturall war;
the glorious Temples of our Lord had never beene so
vilely, so wickedly prophaned; our streets had never
so swame with the innocent blood of our best Nobles,
and Churchmen; Your Royal Father, and Brothers
had never beene detained in so unworthie
bonds; Your Gracious Mother as a widow, and
Your self, as a banished exile, had never beene forced
to live beyond seas; though in an hospitable, and
friendly, yet strange and forreigne land.

Who is't, that can such stories tell,
And his dry eies, with tears not swel?

And seing in al these exploits (even above envy it
self illustrious) the Almightie most evidently kithed
his own immediat hand; so that to God alone the
whole and solid glory is duly to be rendred: yet withall,
who can but acknowledge, honour, admire, love,
and set forth his worth, whom that Great God
thought good to depute his instrument of so glorious
atchievments? For, had our Montrose beene only to
graple with open enemies in the fields, perhaps these
might seem matters of lesser moment: That he was
never pursued, with lesse then two, somtimes three
armies at once, in the front, the rear, and flank; and

the least of those, for number of souldiers, choice of
weapons, and abundance of all warlike provision,
farre exceeding all the forces that he could gather; yet
did he still free himself of them all, with equall resolution
and successe: That, he had never other Magazin
of arms, powder, shotte, or instruments of warre,
but what by force he tooke from his conquered enemies:
That, in the space of one yeare, he obtained six
compleat victories, in sett battells in the fields; and
chased the conspiring Lords quite out of all Scotland:
That he endured the winter, in a most bitter
frostie cold countrie and Climate, without Garrison,
without tent, or hutte, or boothe; for most part under
the open Canopy of Heaven: That dry, he quenched
his thrist with cold water, and that such, as from the
melting snow came dropping down these mountains:
That, without bread, or salt, with beife alone, and
that often scarse, stale, and leane, he sustained hunger;
and all such other inconveniencies of warre.
But his master-piece, and hardest taske was, to
wrestle with those, who would seeme the sharpest avengers
of the wrongs done to the King; and patrons
of Majestie: with some of their dull, heavie, and stupid
sloth; others intolerable pride, some of their base
couwardise, others their sordid avarice, some of their

horrible perfidiousnes. So that had not his constancie,
and courage been undanted; and that loyall flame
of zeale, which in his heart did burne towards
his dearest, and most dread Soveraigne, beene unquencheable;
he had never been able to bear out, endure,
resist, and rectifie all those severall unruly passions,
and humors of men. For, by severe laws of militarie
discipline, or other punishments (as Commanders
in chiefe are wont) Montrose neither ought,
nor could restraine his souldiers; who received no pay;
but took up armes freely, of meere loyaltie to their
King, and goodwill to him their Generall: and who
could easily have turned to the rebells side, so soone
as ever they had but seemed to themselves to be provoked
by the sleightest injurie, or branded with the
least note of disgrace▪ men, for the most part, headstrong,
turbulent, factious, and readie to revolt, upon
the meanest irritation and pette. So that to preserve,
at once his own authoritie, with the good liking of
his souldiers, was the most difficult taske in the
world. Nor was there any thing that more violently
exercised his wit and judgement, then that it behooved
him to square out his counsells and actions,
to the measure of other mens capacities, or at least,
seeme so to doe. But he, that he might advance the

Kings service, made no account of, and despised, as
things farre under him, all the hatred of his enemies,
the envy of his emulous rivalls, the back-byting of
Court-sycophants, the complaints of his friends, the
reproaches of the people, and (which was of all others,
most terrible, and most affrighted the superstitious
minds of the simple multitude) all the execrations;
and anathemaes of their fierie and furious Ministers,
Verilie, He, a Generall worthie of a nobler
command, and more happie times then these.
And now (most Excellent Prince) this same Your
Montrose, will plainly show that which I hope will
most of all conduce to Your affairs: That all Your
Scots have never made defection frō their most Gracious
Lord and King. Which, while some unjust enemies
of our good name, too bitterly, and malitiously
strive to rubbe upon us; they are no more undeservedly
injurious to us; then indeed unfaithful, and treacherous
to Your Royall Father, and Your self. Because,
they goe about only to render Your best and fastest
friends, servants, and subjects suspected, and odious,
and consequently uselesse unto You, and unprofitable:
of whose loyaltie, and valour, they themselves
(the worst of evill counsellours) have just cause
to be jealous; least by their means, it be brought to

passe, that one day they may receive the just punishment
of their treacheries. But, let no man unworthily
upbraid us, that this reflects upon the most renowned
nation of the English, as if we did neither think,
nor speak aright of them: which is a crime that we
abhorre from our very souls. And to the contrary we
doe confesse, applaud, magnifie, and congratulate to
their immortall glorie, that many worthies of that
nation have showne themselves most loyall, brave
and gallant, and done rare, and glorious deeds for
their King. Only this we entreat for, that with the
same ingeniousnes, and candour they would deal
with us; and not lay the guiltines of any one faction,
though never so powerfull and prevailing, to the
charge of the whole nation: nor do to others what
they would not have done to themselves. Neither let
them deny, but that there are, and have been Scotsmen,
eminent personages, of everie degree, and qualitie,
who in these most disastruous times, have been
readie and willing to shedde their dearest blood, for
asserting and vindicating the Royall Majestie, from
the combinations of most pernicious rebells in both
Kingdomes.
And this is so evident, and cleare; that these Scots
may (without all boasting) boldly affirme, That they,

being hired with no pay, nor expecting other reward;
but meerly moved by a good conscience, and faith,
and pietie towards their most Gracious Soveraigne;
have suffered for him greater losse, according to the
condition of their fortunes, and done the rebells greater
harm, and obtained more noble victories over
them, then others; who, having drained and exausted
the Kings Exchequer, reduced him to that extream
penury, & want of al things, that in the end he was
necessitated, to render up his Sacred Person into the
hands of the conspiratours. But, ô how much better
had it been (in our weak judgments) if it had pleased
God, that his Majestie had retired himself to his own
Scots: not those, who then were armed against him, for
the English rebells; out these loyall, trusty, faithful,
and valiant ones, who fought for him under the conduct
of Montrose. Assuredly, to those, who under the
command but of his Lieutenant, and Leader of his
Armies, durst so gallantly attempt, and did so happilie
atcheive, what in this book we have most faithfully
recorded, nothing could have appeared too arduous,
and difficult to compasse, had they been encouraged,
and animated with the presence of so dear a
pledge. Nor can any doubt, unlesse he be altogether
ignorant of the Scottish affairs, but that, if his Majestie

had come among them, he would have easily
drawn to his party, the hearts and affections of his
native subjects; who wholly enclined to him, of their
own accord. But this being too to well known to the
leaders of the rebellion, their speciall care was, that
he should find no entrance to his native countrie,
when he was in their hands, not fourtie miles distant
from the borders of it.
And truly the Scots in generall, though (cheifly
at that time) sorely opprest with the heavie yoke of
those usurping tyrants; yet were they not afraid to
curse, with bitter maledictions, the authours, and abetters
of that shamefull deed, of delivering up their
King to the hands of the English. And even
those, who formerly went along with the conspiratours,
in all things else, did openly, and not without
danger of life, talke thus aloud: That, the single Kingdom
of Scotland, had of old sufficed his Majesties
ancestours, to mantain their just rights, and Royall
dignities: That their own forefathers had been sufficiently
able, to defend and fight for thē, against their
fiercest enemies, cheifly the English, of whom they had
purchased manie, great, and glorious triumphs, while
they opposed them for their Kings. That, though
they had warred often and long with sundries, as

well inhabitants of the same Island, as of other countreys,
with various successe of uncertain warre;
yet could they never be reducted to those straights, so
sleightly, and as it were perforce, to deliver up their
Kings to the arbitriment of others. And that they
should not now consent to doe it the verie ghosts of
their fathers (they said) the most sacred name, and
Majestie of a King, their faith, alleagiance, loyaltie,
reputation among stangers, example to be derived to
posteritie, all right, all lawes of God and man did
withstand. And moreover (they added) that it did
plainly contradict, and fight against their own verie
covenant; wherein they had invoked, as both witnes
and judge the immortal God, that they would maintaine
and defend their King, the safetie of his person,
his dignitie, crowne, and greatnes, against all
men living, with their lives and fortunes to their
last breath.

So that, beside those seditious and sacrilegious persons,
(who first raised that armie by wicked means,
and then got the command of it in their own hands,
and with the dreadful terrour therof overawed their
poor countreymen, unarmed, unprovided for warre,
without any head, or cheistaine) beleeve it, most of
all the Scots, desire no greater happines then an occasion

to testifie their fidelitie, obedience, and love
to their drearest King, and to seal it with their blood.
Nor is it to be questioned, but that they, being now
so trampled on by most barbarous tyrannie, would
gladly return to their wonted subjection, under the
just and easie government of their most Gracious
Lord and King: so soone as ever Your Royall Fathers
most wished for presence, or Your own shall
appeare or shine in their Horrizon, like a blessed
starre, or influence from heaven.
It behoveth You then (most Gracious Sir) to employ
all the power and force You can, of body and
mind, to succour Your countrey, and Father, both
in extream danger at this instant. All, to this end,
pray, implore, expect Your help; and promise theirs.
This undertaking, by the law of God, and nature, and
prerogative of birth, belongs unto You: and the eyes
and thoughts, not only of Your owne, but of all the
world are upon You. And all men of honour, and honestie,
heartily desire, that by Gods help, and with
their best wishes, and assistance, You may goe about
this glorious enterprise, of restoring the Church of
God, now sunck, and drowned in the stinking puddle
of so manie vile, and odious sects, to her former luster,
and puritie; of re-establishing Your Fathers

throne and Kingdome; of recovering Your countreyes
wonted felicite, and happie conclusion of all,
in a solid, lasting, and much desired order and peace.
And so, in a good time, may that most ancient
Kingdom of Europe, acknowledge, fear, love, and adore
You, as their only highest Lord, and Soveraign:
and so may this happines befal from time, to time,
world without end.

To You and to Your offspring evermore,
To them, and those, who from them shall
be bore.

VVherfore (Most High and Mightie Prince)
vouchsafe to raise up Your Montrose in Your
thoughts, to cherish him with Your countenance, to
employ him in peace, or warre, as a counsellour, or
Captaine, a worthie, of whom (I hope, and dare promise)
so Great a Prince shall never be ashamed.


The first of October
In the yeare of our Lord.
1647.


