


To the most High and Illustrious Charles Prince of GREAT BRITAIN.


SIR,


YOu set back the Clock of my age and make it day-spring, when it is past the mid noone of my life. I court my fancy in my observations of you. My first Love, my first Master, your Vnkle Prince Henry, whose name is, and ever must bee sacred to Mars and the Muses, whose memory is still precious to the World, justly was the Rivall and Competitour to Honour, with your glorious Grandsier Henry the Great, of France the greatest. In you deare Sir I finde the Character of them both, as if you were sole heire to both; and it joyes my Soule to see it. I had the Honour to gird the first sword about you, with this wish, that you might use it

in peace, like our Northern Solomon King Iames, and drawn, as that Boanerges the sonne of Thunder, the glory of France, your Grandfather. When your Father (whose goodnesse makes him glorious) shall be gathered to his Fathers, his Titles must as your Birthright descend on you; amongst the rest that which is 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
, Defender of the faith. This, as it is well worthy observation, was given by him who they say could not erre in Cathedra, plenario Consistorio & pleno Concilio, to him who as some of his Successors say even in that gave him the lye, who gave him the title; tis true twas an unkind requitall, but there was Digitus Dei in it, for it was like the selling of Ioseph into Egypt, faelix scelus in eventu, guided by that hand which cannot erre. It was a worke of great and high daring, a voyage wherein many of his Predecessours had suffered shipwracke, and Sir Walter Rawleigh observes the worke suited the man, and the man was made for the work: as Nebuchadonezar was for Tyre. Sure it is strange that out of the ruines of good workes faith should spring, & disorder set all the Church in order, Sed Deus est qui fecit, & est mirum in occulis

nostris. Sir, the Title is the most glorious your Royall father hath, and his Second is, that he is the best Friend living. It was a promise of the Prophets, that Kings should bee Nursing Fathers, and Queenes Nursing Mothers to the Church. And believe mee Sir, the words are Emphaticall, for the Fathers wisdome and power should provide for the childe ad extra, the mothers care ad intra; The fathers is and should be protegendo, instruendo, promovendo, corrigendo; The mothers in her Oeconomicks pro victu & amictu, Necessaries and Decency, and all with a▪ Nurses affection. And I am so much Irish, that as they love, the Children the Nurse, and the Children their Nurses, and foster brothers as much or more then their own: such mutuall love wish I betwixt the Prince and the Church, and as that habit is acquired partly, and partly infused, So may God infuse that into your heart, and by many mutuall reciprocall actions may it become habituall. So shall the Church be happie in future, and you shall be glorious in your timely reigne, and blessed in your Succession, as your Father is in you, and the Prayers of the Church attracted as the Dew and Exhalations,

by the glory and heate of the Sunne above, shall bee returned in rich showers of blessing upon you and yours.

Poets are Prophets, or at least would be;
If I be one this is my prophecie:
Your name's no stranger to the Imperiall seate,
Our turn comes next, wee must have Charles the Great.


Your highnesses most humble servant,
FRANCIS WORTLEY.

