

To the Honourable Houſe of Commons Aſſembled in PARLIAMENT.

WHat I had to ſay unto you, I expreſſed my ſelf at large, in that which I now preſent you, with ſome fillings, which the time then permitted not to tender: I ſhall now onely adde a word of excuſe, and caution. Excuſe I muſt, Becauſe all that ſpeak to you do ſo; my ſelf much rather; Becauſe hearing of this ſervice, but ſome ten dayes before the Faſt, in the midſt of ſorrow for the loſſe of an onely parent; I could not with that freedom of ſpirit, as I ſhould, attend this buſineſſe. But your pietie hath I hope herein ſupplyed my deficiency, in receiving the matter with all readineſſe of minde; leaving the manner of handling to thoſe weak ſtomacks that cannot ſavour wholeſome food, without a great deal of curioſity in the dreſſing, Care, and Cleanlyneſſe, and Concoction we commend: The work of the Lord is not to be done negligently; Too much diligence we decline; for that argues ſuſpition, either of the food, or of the gueſt. We would have your faith and godly affection, ſtand, not in the wiſedom of words, but in the power of God. I muſt alſo caution, Touching thoſe words in the entrance of my diſcourſe, [In a ſetled Church, the Miniſtry is to be puclikely admitted to that imployment.] I would not have it underſtood as an approbation either of any unlawfull office, or undue ordination in any particular Church; but in generall of all ſetled Churches. And that firſt in reſpect of order, That every man be not at his own diſpoſing, but abide in that calling, whereunto God by the ordinance of man ſhall deſigne 
•
im. 2. Of advantage to his Miniſtry; that he may have

more boldneſſe with them, who have acknowledged him as appointed to that imployment. Which call (as I conceive) lies chiefly in theſe particulars. 1. The inward ability, and upright intention of the heart, to do Chriſt ſervice in that imployment. 2. In the publike approbation of ſuch abilities after tryall had, by the Church, both Miniſtry and people of God, that are indeed able to diſcern. 3. A ſpeciall call by ſome particular people to be their officer in that kinde (or an after approbation from them) or elſe a more generall commiſſion from the Church, to a more univerſall imployment that way; ſuch as was the ſending of Paul and Barnabas, by the Church of Antioch


•
 Act. 13.. All which is to be underſtood eſpecially of the adminiſtration of the Sacraments and diſcipline: For, as for preaching, it is a more common work; which yet no man is to do to the ſcandall of the Church wherein he lives, nor ordinarily without calling thereunto, if it be done in a publike way. Which calling (as other Church affairs,) that we may have more agreeable to primative purity; we implore your aſſiſtance; as you can not effectually obtain the vigour of yours, without our ſervice. Magiſtracy and Miniſtry, though they be not immediate relatives, yet do ſe mutuo ponere & tollere. So, as you are Gods hands to us; ſhall we labour to be his mouth to you, and for you
Iſai. 45.17.. To you; that no Councell deviſed againſt you, ſhall ſtand, ſo long as you make the advancing of This man, the Lord Chriſt, your aym: No weapon framed againſt you ſhall proſper
Iſai. 9.6.. And for you; That having ſuch promiſes, you faint not, but proceed to the finiſhing of the work with power: and be like your Maſter, the great and wonderfull Councellor and Prince of peace
Iſai. 9.6., who when he begins, does uſe alſo to make an end Iſai. 66.9.: That you may not be weary of weldoing, for in due time you ſhall reap if you faint not
Gal. 6.9..

So prayes Your meaneſt ſervant In the Lords work.
John Ellis, Junior.


