


To the Right Honourable the Lords
of the Councell, and others His MAJESTIES
Commiſſioners for the Government of the City
of OXFORD, Lionell Gatford wiſheth increaſe
of honour, and the bleſſing of
Peace, Temporall and Eternall.

BEing unjuſtly forced from that Cure,
whereunto God had called me, as the
moſt of my▪
Profeſsion are, that will not
turne Mountebancks and poyſon the People)
and not ſuffered▪ upon His Majeſties
gracious Exchange, (after ſeaventeene months impriſonment
in London, without any cauſe ſhewen in all
that time) either to returne to that Care or to practiſe any
where elſe with ſafety (though licenſed for all parts of
this Kingdome) I was neceſſitated to repair to this City
made happy in the midſt of miſeries by your Vigilancy
& Gods bleſſing thereupon. I had not beene long here,
but I ſaw and partooke (prayſed be the Lord for it) of
one of the greateſt mercies (let others value it as they
pleaſe) that ever this City was bleſſed with: A vaſt, and
in their owne opinion, an invincible Army ſurrounded

us,2 King 18. and 19. as ſometimes the Aſſyrians did Jeruſalem: Their
Tartaris, their Rabſariſes and their Rabſakehs opened
their mouths wide both againſt our religious Hezekiah,
and againſt all his loyall Subjects then attending his ſacred
Perſon, thinking (as their own bloudy Pamphlets
did intimate) inſtantly to have devoured them all.
And without doubt, If the Lord himſelfe had not been on
our ſide.
Pſal. 124.
If the Lord himſelfe had not beene on our ſide, when
thoſe men thus roſe up againſt us, they had ſwallowed us up
quick when they were ſo wrathfully diſpleaſed at us: But bleſſed
be the Lord, he did not give us up as a prey unto their teeth;
but put his hooke in their noſe,
2 Kings 19▪ 28.
and his bridle in their lips,
and turned them back by the way, not by which they came,
but by which they became the object of their Soveraign's
tender mercy and compaſſionate pitty, whom
they then purſued with their Rebellious malice and
mercileſſe cruelty. This unſpeakable mercy of God to
this City, or rather to this whole Nation, was attended
upon (whether for our unthankfullneſſe, or for our other
ſinnes, or for both! with that formidable judgement
of Plague. Upon the increaſing and ſpreading
whereof, obſerving, that your Honours, in your extraordinary
care of this place, had commanded certaine
Phyſicall directions in time of Plague to be publiſhed, I
was encouraged to beleeve, that Hyper-phyſicall directions
for ſuch a time could not want your patronage,
And therefore finding none other of my calling,
though farre more able, to have prevented me, I preſumed
to preſent you with theſe: Knowing withall,
that without your helpe and aſſiſtance, both Phyſicall
and Hyper-phyſicall preſcripts, how excellent ſoever, will
be but of little benefit or profit to the moſt of men; all

men being naturally prone to reject, at leaſt to neglect
that adviſe which would do them moſt good: and unleſſe
the Magiſtrates make them know that they beare not
the ſword in vaine, but will proceed to ſevere correction
where wholſome inſtructions are deſpiſed, the Divine
and Phyſitian both may preſcribe till they are weary,
and all to no purpoſe.Numb. 16▪ 46. We reade of an Aaron needing
a calling upon from Moſes to do what belonged to
him in the time of a Plague.
Numb, 25. 8. But as the Plague may be
(and, for ought any man knowes to the contrary, this
Plague may be ſuch) the Magiſtrates actuall exerciſing
their power in the execution of juſtice upon ſome provoking
Offenders may be ſo neceſſarily required, that
the raging contagion will not ceaſe without it. This
I am confident of, and not without good grounds:
That would your Honours be pleaſed but to revive the
execution of ſome of your owne Lawes againſt that
one horrid crying ſinne of ſwearing and blaſpheming
Gods name, which ſo raignes in our ſtreets and houſes,
the Plague of God would not rage ſo much in them, as
now it doth.Exod. 20. 7.
The Lord (ſaith the Commandement)
will not hold him guiltleſſe that taketh his name in vaine
'Tis ſwearing (ſaith one of the Prophets) that brings
the flying rowle of the curſe into mens houſes,
Zach. 5. v. 3, 4. and makes
it to remaine there, till it have conſumed both them and
the very timber and ſtones thereof. And 'tis for ſwearing
amongſt other foule crimes (ſaith another Prophet)
that the Land mournes.
Hoſe 2 4, v. 2, 3. As therefore ye tender particular
mens perſons, that have jeoparded their lives, for
you, as ye regard the welfare of this City, wherein God
hath preſerved you, and as ye love this whole Land,
wherein God hath highly honoured you, ſuffer not the

ſacred Name of that gracious and glorious God, who
hath wrought theſe and other infinite mercies for you,
to be diſhonoured and profaned ſo as it is by curſed
Oathes and blaſphemous Curſings. Let ſome ſharpe
mulcts againſt Curſing and Swearing be duly inflicted
and required, that if the dread of that Name do not terrifie
men from ſo abuſing it, yet the feare of that Power
wherewith God hath intruſted you, and their owne
juſt puniſhment for diſregarding both, may make them
affraid to uſe that Name in vaine, which you have found
by ſo often experiment not to be in vaine to thoſe that
honour and rely upon it: ſo ſhall your names be precious
in Gods account, your freinds and ſervants that
fly hither for ſuccour be ſolaced and confirmed in
their expectation thereof, your enemies mouthes be
ſtopped in one of their lowdeſt clamours, and all both
freinds and foes, that viſit this City, be conſtrained to
acknowledge, that the ſtreets and ordinary places of
concourſe, under your Government are ſweeter and
better kept, then the Churches and Pulpits under the
Rebells Tyranny. Pardon me (I humbly beſeech you)
for Pleading thus earneſtly in this cauſe. The King's,
your Honours, and this whole Kingdomes hopes of deliverance
from thoſe ſore judgements, under which they
ſtill groane, (as well as thoſe miraculous deliverances
that have beene vouchſafed us) depend wholly upon
that great Name. And therefore if not my zeale to
Gods glory, yet my loyalty to my Soveraigne, my duty
to your Honours, and my love to my Nation, may excuſe
my boldneſſe in minding you of a ſpeedy vindication
of the honour of that Name. I know there are
many other crimes amongſt us, that cry alowde for

your more then ordinary care and diligence, zeale and
courage,Hom. 3. ad pop
•
 Antioch. in chaſtening and correcting the daring actors
of them: but (as Chryſoſtome once-ſpake) I conceive
this to be the beſt way of correction,


〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
.
to beginne firſt
with one part of the Law, and ſee that that be obſerved, and
then to go on to the reſt. And with what part ſhould ye
begin firſt, if not with that, which is moſt tranſgreſſed,
and (if it be rightly conſidered) eaſieſt to be amended:

Ʋp, then in the name of God, and ſanctify the People by
purging out from them this ſpreading ſinne of curſing
and ſwearing;
Joſhus. 7. v. 13 and proove the Lord whether he will not,Malach. 3. 10.
upon your baniſhing the Plague of God, and other raſh
curſes and oathes out of mens mouthes, baniſh that Judgment
of the Plague it ſelfe and other Judgements from
this City; The forementioned Father was bold to ingage
his word & credit to the Citizens of Antioch, that
upon their abſtaining from ſwearing God would free
them from that great Calamitie which was then upon
them.

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
, &c. I dare not undertake ſo farre; but it were well if
you would pleaſe to make tryall, whether God would
do ſo much, or not. This you may be aſſured of, for
you have Gods owne word and promiſe for it, whether
the Plague ſhall thereupon be removed from others
dwellings or not,Hom 3. ad Pop. Antioch. That love of yours to his name
ſhall keepe you and your owne dwellings ſafe.Pſal. 69. 36. & Pſal. 91. As for
your Honours obſerving theſe Directions your ſelves, it
were too preſumptuous a thought in me to expect, that
any adviſe of mine ſhould be hearkened unto by you
who have ſo many learned and renowned Doctors to
conſult upon all occaſions: yet where you find that I
ſpeake home to the purpoſe and God himſelfe ſpeakes
the ſame, though not for my ſake, yet for his, daigne

it the hearing, I and the following too, if you love your
owne ſafety. Howſoever if you ſhall but tolerate
and approve theſe Directions ſo farre, that others under
your preſent charge, who cannot, many of them have
acceſſe to thoſe that are more learned and better able
to counſell them, or rather are affraid or aſhamed to
appeare to ſuch, how willing or ready ſoever to receive
them, may by that your toleration and approbation
(the Reverend Doctors not diſſenting be fully ſatisfied,
that there is nothing herein preſcribed, but what
is good and wholeſome, and will, through Gods bleſſing,
conduce much to their health and preſervation,
this will be ample honour and encouragement to

Your Honours moſt humbly
devoted Servant L. G.

