


To the choicest of my Noble Friends, Sir—D. Knight.


SIR,


AMongst many other Barbarismes which like an impetuous Torrent have lately rush'd in upon us, The interception and opening of Letters is none of the least, For it hath quite bereft all ingenious Spirits of that correspondencie and sweet communication of fancie, which hath been alwayes esteemed the best fuell of affection, and the very marrow of friendship. And truely, in my judgement, this custom may be termed not onely a Barbarisme, but the basest kind of Burglary that can be, 'tis worse then picking of a lock, or breaking into a roome by violence for he who doth so, robs us peradventur of some outward pelf or baggage offortune; but he who breaks open ones private letter or seale, may be said to plunder his very brains, and rob him of his most precious meditations. We are reduced here to that servile condition, or rather to such a height of slavery, that we have nothing left which may entitle us free rationall creatures; the thought it self cannot say 'tis free, much lesse the tongue or pen. Which makes me impart unto You the traverses of these turbulent times, under the following fables. I know you are an exquisite Astronomer. I know the deep inspection you have in all parts of Philosophy, I know you are

a good Herald, and I have found in your study sundry books of architecture, and Comments upon Vitruvius. The unfolding of these Apologues will put you to it in all these, and will require your second, if not your third Thoughts, and when you have concocted them well, I beleeve, (else I am much deceived in your Genius) they will afford you some entertainment, and doe the arrand upon which they are sent, which is, to communicate unto you the most materiall passages of this long'd for Parlement, & of these sad confusions, which have so unhing'd, distorted, transvers'd, tumbled and dislocated all things, that England may be termed now, in comparison of what it was, no other then an Anagram of a Kingdom. One thing I promise you, in the perusall of these Parables, that you shall find no gingles in them, or any thing sordid or scurrilous, the common dialect and disease of these times. So I leave you to the gard and guidance of


GOD and Vertue, who doe still advance
Their Votaries, maugre the frownes of Chance.



Your constant servant,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉



