


To his dearely beloved Brother, Mr. VVilliam Neale at Tours in France, or elsewhere these.

IF all men in a manner (most dear Brother) applying themselves unto any action of consequence, may seeme to need, a Counsellor and director: much

more certainly may hee want this ayde, which wandereth through uncertaine passages, and walketh through the unknown wayes of an unstable conversation. And since (as it seemeth to mee) that man hath good, and propitious lucke, which in his doubtfull extremities may have the opportunity to flye unto wholsome and grave counsels: there can nothing be more happily assigned unto an ingenuous, and well educated nature, then some path or learned direction, which may be rather signed with the lively pourtraicture of eloquence, then with lime or chalke-stone. This noble facultie,

I must confesse, I cannot boast, because it is both unseemly for a teacher of naked truth, to use the adulterate flourishes. of Rhetorique, and also, because it is so meanly apparant in mee, that it will presently decay, if it should bee brought before, the judicious lights of these times: only my chiefe ayme is in this Treatise, to shew and breath forth the ingenuous candour of my minde; and my brotherly affection towards you; if those rules, which in the following subject bee proposed, may by

you bee received with the like kind inclination. There are some (I perswade my selfe) of a light and brain-sick condition, which (being also not few in number) desire to borrow no directions from the store-house of learned Philosophie: and so much contemne the rules of contemplation, and the demonstrations which are deduced from our solitary thoughts, that they suppose these Canons, but meere ridiculous, and crasie fansies, and the vaine blasts of swelling Ayre. But how much you contemne

the sottish opinion of these men, and dislike of this most pernitious tenet against all vertuous proceedings I am very well acquainted: having in your childish yeares, heard your labotious Essayes, most elegantly for that age employed, in the praises and commendations of contemplative men; for there is no man without all question, which desireth (with Ennius) to live the life of a reasonable creature, but doth cordially admire learning, and desireth to salute those

sweet flowers of Science, from whose fragrant beds, sundry ohoyce compositions of elocution doth arise, whereby ordinary things, may bee understood with delight, and obscure things may bee made easie by industrie. So generall and learned a mistresse is Theory, joyned with the discreet practise of things, that from this store-house for all uses, will not be wanting matter and workmanship, to supply the richnesse of our wits, for intention, judgement, or the finall ends of our enterprises.

Those things therefore (dearely 
•
steemed brother) which I deduce from this Magazine, and in the subsequent Tract, doe propose unto you; I entreat you not to undervalew, untill the second consideration, the third reading over, and the fourefold more acurate knowledge (then yet your yeares are capable of) of humane subtleties and affaires, may convict men in these present directions, an importunate affecter of trifling observations, or a bringer forth of such productions, which

are obscure, and erroneous from that round Cylind
•
r of vertues peregrination. Neither can I conceive, that you spend your pretious time amisse, when you cast your eyes, and your most serious faculties upon learned discourses, as though that these were but employments for idle times, and hinderances to affaires of consequence; thinking it a childish practise, (as many doe,) to meditate, or write out any learned Contemplation. Beleeve me, those follies which they that affect this lazinesse, commit, are

meere frivolous ravings, and oftentimes, not valuable in the right scale of reason, to turne downe the weight of a crackt nut-shell. Avoid them; for rightly doth Homer instruct you, in his first booke of the learned Travailour; under the person of Telemachus;


It fits thee not (now age more wisdome brings)
Still, for to follow those same childish things.


Dated at Warneford
Aprill 3. 1638.


Farewell.
