


TO THE
RIGHT HONORABLE
THE LORD MAIOR,
To the Aldermen and Common-Councell
of the City of LONDON.

GIve me leave to joyne You together in an
Epiſtle, and may it be a pledge of Union in
all things that tend to an happie and ſpeedie
eſtabliſhment of Truth and Peace. The Kingdome
is very ſenſible how conſiderable You are in the
welfare of it, eſpecially as it now ſtands. And according
to the influence you have upon the publick good
or evill are the endeavours of the Enemies of our reformed
Settling to diſtract and divide you, for they ſee
no other means to deſtroy you, and thoſe with you,
whoſe welfare is bound up in yours. And in this you
are a reſemblance of the Kingdom of whom a great Politician
ſaith, that it is Magnum Animal ne



que
 interit
niſi a ſeipſo: and according to this Axiom have the
Enemies of our Religion and State framed their deſignes.
The zeal of Spaine and Rome carried them on indeed
at firſt to furious attempts, as in 88. and Powder
Treaſon; but when they ſaw they were not able to prevail
that way, they put on the Foxes skin, and have moſt
ſtudiouſly raiſed and fomented jealouſies and differences
betwixt the King and Parliament, betwixt the Parliament

and Kingdom: not to mention thoſe ſubdiviſions
lately ſtirred, which I would not be ſo far guiltie
of keeping alive as to name them. So hath it fated with
your renowned City, you have been to the Reformation
and Liberty of this Kingdom, what this Kingdom
hath been to the Proteſtant Religion in other parts, a
great ſupport. The oppoſing party as impatient of ſuch
an adverſary (you know) directed the firſt fruits of
their ſtrength aud malice againſt you they were indeed
interrupted in their way by the battell at Edge-hill, but
as ſoon as they were recruted and recovered, how eagerly
they purſued their former purpoſe, Brainford can
witneſſe: but the next day when the City appeared ſo
unanimouſly, and heartily, for their own and the Parliaments
defence, they ſaw it was neceſſary to take another
courſe, and try if they could become your maſters
by deſigne and fraud, and bring you to a cheaper ruine
by making you deſtroy one another. To this purpoſe
ſeverall courſes have been taken, and not altogether
without effect. But ſo long as there was a Common
Enemy appeared, there was a diverſion of the humors,
which ſince our late ſemblance of Peace have broken
out into violent and ſtrange diſeaſes, which have alreadie
diſtempered the health, and go on to endanger the
life of that famous City. The beſt expedient to remedie
this great evill, were doubtleſſe a reconciliation of
thoſe perſons and parties who are now diſtant, but were
in the beſt eſtate of the City affectionate and unanimous.
This is not onely policy but piety, as by a ſerious
peruſall of Jam. 3. from the 13. ver. to the end may
appear. Experience witneſſes the hard task and fate of
reconcilers, who lye betwixt the extremes as corn betwixt
the Milſtones: But yet I muſt profeſſe my ſelf
one of them, and I had rather they grinde me then one
another.


To the accompliſhing this great work, a ſpeciall portion
of the wiſdom that is from above, which is mentioned,
Jam. 3. ult. is very neceſſary, which let us beg
on the behalf of all Chriſtians, eſpecially thoſe whoſe
influence into publick affairs requires a greater meaſure.
A probable expedient hereunto may be this, that extremities
on both hands be layd aſide, and perſons that
drive them on. For of each party there are ſome parts
ſo heterogeneous, that there is little hope they ſhould
ever mingle together, neither is it beneficiall that they
ſhould while they ſo remain, for they tend to diſtraction,
that is, to deſtruction. And give leave to him that
hath many faults to complain of one: That is, that thoſe
who have and might have agreed, have put ſo little
truſt in God, and ſo little mutuall confidence in each
other, that they have choſen rather to ſupport and
ſtrengthen their factions (for that it's come to) with
perſons leſſe deſiring their welfare then themſelves of
one another. And therefore whatſoever perſons▪ principles,
or practiſes tend to bring us under old revenges,
or new confuſions, ſhould carefully be avoided.
There is hardly any man who is not in reaſon convinced,
that the continuance of this diſtance and oppoſition
betwixt good men will certainly expoſe them
to the power and revenge of them who equally hate
both, and yet how few are there whom paſſion or faction
will ſuffer to act accordingly. You will pardon
the mention of this odious word Faction, it is of miſchievous
conſequence, and deſerves to be branded, for
it will undoubtedly ruine both ſides, eſpecially when
there is a third to wait the advantage, and the iſſue.
And he that would be free from this evill, muſt not inordinately
affect his own opinion or intereſt, which

will expoſe him to that inordinate courſe of making
parties to maintain it, but be content to have all his
Propoſitions fairly examined; neither muſt he look at
perſons more then things, as weak and angry men are
wont to do, having ſome mens perſons ſo in admiration,
as they moſt cry up, or at leaſt juſtifie or excuſe all their
wayes; and others in ſuch deteſtation, as to undervalue,
blaſt and blemiſh all they ſay or do. It's hard to finde
ei
•
her a man ſo good, as in ſome things he ſhould not
be declined: or ſo evill, that there may not be ſome uſe
of him: and if we could abſtract from perſons, and let
things and actions take their own demerits, much injury
and miſery might be prevented. There have been
many viciſſitudes of late, and thoſe that have been
higheſt have ſtill loſt themſelves, and endangered others
by extremities.Moderata durant. It's now come to your turn again, and
unleſſe God grant ſo much wiſdom, ſelf-deniall, and
forgetfulneſſe, as may diſpoſe toward moderation, it
will not, it cannot laſt. I adde no more but an excuſe,
firſt, for this Epiſtle, if plain dealing need one: and 2ly,
for the Sermon, which when I compoſed, I was ſo far
from thoughts of the Preſſe, that I never thought of a
London Pulpit: it hath been a moneth delayed in hopes
of an excuſe. But ſince you will have it, I ſubmit with
a homely but hearty complement, Much good may it
do you. And the God of peace give you peace alwayes
by all means: The Lord be with you all. So prayeth

York, May 15.
1648.

Your welfares faithfull
Servant,
EDW: BOVVLES.

