

TO
THE LEARNED AND
EMINENT FRIENDS OF
Mr CHILLINGWORTH,
And in particular
TO
Sir JOHN CULPEPPER, Knight,

Doctor

JOHN PRIDEAUX Biſhop of Worceſter,
FELL Deane of Chriſt-Church,
BAYLY Deane of Sarum,
SHELDEN Warden of All-ſoules,
POTTER Provoſt of Queenes, and
MORLEY Canon of Chriſt-Church.





SIRS,


YOur deceaſed friend is not yet ſpeechleſſe, he calls
upon you to beware and repent; ſome preach more,
at leaſt more practically, when they are dead, then
ever they did whilſt they were alive. You that
were his Patrons and Encouragers, as hee acknowledged
ever,Dr. Bayly, Dr. Prideaux, Dr. Fell. when he was in the heigth of his Rebellion, doe
you beware leſt a worſe thing come unto you. You that were
the Licenſers of his ſubtile Atheiſme, Repent, Repent; for he

was ſo hardened by your flattery, that (for ought the moſt
charitable man can judge) hee periſhed by your Approbation:
he ever appealed to his works even to his very dying day, and
what was it, which made him dote upon them, but your Licence
and Approbation? Heark what hee ſaith, The third and laſt
part of my Accuſation was, That I anſwer out of principles,
which Proteſtants themſelves will profeſſe to deteſt: which
indeed were to the purpoſe, if it could be juſtified. But beſides
that, it is confuted by my whole Book, and made ridiculous
by the Approbation premiſed unto it, &c. read Mr Chillingworth
his Preface to the Author of Charity &c. Sect. 30.
Sure I am, that the Accuſation may bee juſtified, and therefore
is to the purpoſe; but the Approbation cannot bee juſtified, and
is therefore juſtly Reprobated: The Accuſation is ſo ſerious,
that the Approbation cannot make it (but may well make the
Approvers and their Church) ridiculous. O what a ridiculous
Church doe the Licenſers make the Church of England to be,
by ſaying that there is nothing in Mr Chillingworth his Book
contrary to the doctrine of the Church of England; ſure they
meant the Church of Canterbury. But Dr Fell, and Dr
Bayly are not aſhamed to ſay, that there is nothing in that Book
contrary to good manners, which Dr Prideaux would not ſay; but
enough of that.
Sirs, the following Hiſtory will teſtifie my compaſſion towards
your deceaſed friend, whom I ever oppoſed in a charitable and
friendly way.


〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
. I doe not account it any glory to trample upon
the carkaſſe of Hector, or to pluck a dead Lion by the beard;
ſhould I miſquote his Book, and make that errour mine owne
by a falſe citation, which I pretend to be his in an Accuſation,
you that were the unhappy Licencers of his Book would ſoone take
me tripping. If you conceive that he deſerved a more Honourable
buriall, bee pleaſed to anſwer my Reaſons, and patronize
his errours with all the learning Bodleyes Library can afford:
or elſe ſtudy his Catechiſme, pardon my boldneſſe, ſome Courtiers
never learnt, and ſome Doctours have forgot their Catechiſme,
or elſe this man we speak of had never beene ſo
much admired, his Book extolled, or theſe Antichriſtian warres

fomented by ſuch great Clerks and buſie wits.
I looked upon Mr Chillingworth as one who had his head as
full of Scruples as it was of Engines, and therefore dealt as tenderly
with him as I uſe to doe with men of the moſt nice and
tender conſciences: for I conſidered, that though Beefe muſt bee
preſerved with ſalt; yet Plums muſt be preſerved with ſugar.
I can aſſure you I ſtooped as low to him as I could without falling,
and you know he is not a wiſe man in the judgement of
the Philoſopher, who ſtoops ſo low to another mans weakneſſe,
that he himſelfe falls into weakneſſe: and it is a Rule with us
at Weſtminſter, that he falls into weakneſſe who falls into
ſinne.

Doe not conceive that I ſnacht up my pen in an angry mood,
that I might vent my dangerous wit, and eaſe my overburthened
ſpleene. No, no, I have almoſt forgot the Viſitation at Merton
Colledge, the Deniall of my Grace, the plundering of
my houſe and little Library: I know when and where and of
whom to demand ſatisfaction for all theſe injuries and indignities.
I have learnt Centum plagas Spartanâ Nobilitate concoquere.
I have not yet learnt how to plunder others of goods
or living, and make my ſelfe amends by force of armes. I will
not take a living which belonged to any civill, ſtudious, learned
Delinquent, unleſſe it be the much neglected Commendam of
ſome Lordly Prelate condemned by the knowne Lawes of the
Land, and the higheſt Court of the Kingdome for ſome offence
of the first magnitude: I can, without ſtraining my conſcience,
ſwallow ſuch a gnat, a camel I ſhould ſay, for every one of their
Commendams hath a bunch upon its back, and may well make
a bunch upon their conſcience. I ſhall not trouble you with any
long diſcourſe about State matters, only you will give me leave
to ſay what the Lacedemonian ſlave ſaid, when he stood to be
ſold in the market;

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
. and one asked him what he was? I am
(ſaith he) a Free man, and ſo am I, for though I have not
taken Antidotum contra Caeſarem, yet I have taken Antidotum
contra Tyrannidem. I could never yet ſtoop ſo low to
the moſt tyrannicall Prelate as to cry Your humble Slave.

Sirs, we heare you have made a New Almanack at Oxford;

and ſome conceive that you hold correspondence with all the ſwore
Planets, and that you have enticed the truſty Sunne from his
Ecliptick line, and taught him to goe Retrograde. We wonder,
I muſt tell you, that the Sunne never came into Libra, that Opinions,
Proteſtations, Actions were ſeldome or never weighed in
the ballance of the Sanctuary: and we wondered more, that
Venus (I had almost forgot my Aſtronomy, and ſaid Iuno) was
ſhufled into Virgo's place, and the ſigne was in the Dogs head,
when we did expect it in a more propitious place, the Lions heart.
I remember that of Tertullian, Habet & Eccleſia dies Caniculares,
the Church of Chriſt hath cauſe to complaine of Dog
dayes; for the Dog doth not only ſhew his teeth; we heare him
bark and feele him bite; we may in every month write the Dog
dayes in capitall letters, nay you write them for us (ſo capitall
are your crimes) in letters of blood. What is England become
a Wilderneſſe? if it be not, why are ſo many wilde beaſts ſuffered
to goe looſe and prey upon the zealous Proteſtants? for ſhame
chaine up thoſe beaſts before the firſt of March: if ſhame work
not, feare may, the ſame feare which falls upon the men of
Northumberland, the feare of a Scottiſh Reformation: I will
not liſten at the doore of your Iunto to heare what newes, nor
will I peepe into your pretended Parliament, no nor into
Merton Colledge, for feare I ſhould ſee ſome ſights like thoſe
in the eighth of Ezekiel,
Ezek. 8. 16. ſome with their backs towards the
Temple of the Lord, and their faces towards the Eaſt; and
if I ſhould look farther, one that is no Prophet tells me, that
I may ſee greater abominations then theſe. Sir, I beſeech you
keepe downe your ſtaffe: but if you will hold it up, as Eurybiades
did, I muſt cry as Themiſtocles did, 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
,
ſtrike if you pleaſe; yet heare me, or at leaſt heare what
the Prophet ſaith to me, doth he not ſpeak of you? Then hee
ſaid unto me,
Ezek. 8. 17. 18.
Haſt thou ſeene this O ſonne of man. Is it
a light thing to the houſe of Iudah, that they commit the
abominations which they commit here? for they have filled
the Land with violence, and have returned to provoke
me to anger: and lo they put their branch to their noſe.
Therefore—read and tremble at the reſt. Come, come

away with this learned Atheiſme, your Iudge looks upon you,
the ſearcher of hearts and diſcoverer of ſecrets is acquainted
with all your plots. The Lord ſees what the Ancients of
Oxford doe in the dark, every man in the chambers of his
imagery: the Lord heares what you ſay—O doe not ſay
as the Ancients of Iſrael ſaid, The Lord ſeeth us not, the
Lord hath forſaken the earth. I am afraid that you have the
ſame temptations at Oxford, which were preſented to Origen, an
Ethiopian woman, and an Idoll; he was (you know) put to this
unhappy choice, to commit folly with which he pleaſed. Some luſt
as mnch after idols, as others doe after women; if in theſe dayes of
liberty you reſtraine from neither, you doe in effect tempt to both,
and are the grand ſeducers of the hopefull Gentry: but alaſſe you
are guilty of a more ambitious wickedneſſe, it is your ſtudy to ſeduce
a King.
I remember an old ſtory of King Canutus, who (as the Chronicler
relates) took off the Crowne from his owne head, and ſet it
upon the Crucifixe at Weſtminſter: But tell me (you that have
read ſome Italian Jeſuite more ſubtile then the Politicians Saint,
Saint Machiavel) doe you conceive that you can perſwade our
King to take off his Crowne from his owne head, and place it upon
your idoll the Queene, or her idoll the Crucifixe, at Oxford?
We have none at Weſtminſter. Well, plot on my Masters, and
walke in the light and warmth of that fire which you have kindled;
Iſa. 50. ult. but heare what the Prophet ſaith, Behold all you that kindle
a fire, and compaſſe about your ſelves with ſparkes, walke
in the light of your fire, and in the ſparks which you have kindled;
This ſhall ye have of mine hand, ye ſhall lay downe in ſorrow.
Pardon our just feare, if we dare not ſay a confederacy to
all thoſe Welch Atheiſts, Iriſh Rebels, bloudy Papiſts of the
French or Spaniſh faction, to whom you ſay, A confederacy; Aſſociate
your ſelves together (you know what followes) take
counſell together (in your pretended Parliament) and it will be
brought to nought,
Iſa. 8. 9, 10. enact and pronounce a decree, imagine miſchiefe
as a Law, yet you ſhall not proſper, for God is with us.
I know you urge the 13 to the Romanes, to justifie your royall cruelty;
but you know what Chryſoſtome, and many others, have

ſaid upon that place: But I ſhall onely aske you one queſhion (with
which I ſtopped your friend Chillingworths mouth) be pleaſed
to anſwere it: Doe you beleeve that Tyrannie is Gods ordinance?
I ever held it a violation of Gods ordinance: and whether the ſupreme
Judicatory of the Kingdome may not repell that force with
force, which would violate Gods ordinance, judge ye; for it is abſurd
to talke, as Doctor Ferne doth, of a morall reſtraint in ſuch
a caſe. Sure I am, the Parliament hath power to raiſe an Army
to preſerve Gods ordinance inviolable,Vbi jus humanum, naturale vel divinum, arma e
•
pere jubet, ibi juris autoritas intervenit, etiamſi expreſſa voluntas principis non accedat. Biel. 4. Sent. q. 4. when it cannot be preſerved
by any other meanes: They doe certainly reſist Gods ordinance
who ſeeke to violate it; You endevour to violate it, We to
preſerve it; who is in the fault?
I have examined your great Champion Doctor Ferne his
three bookes, and cannot finde any thing in them, whereby the conſcience
of an impartiall Scholar may be fully reſolved or ſatisfied.
It is very impertinent, in my weake judgement, to talke of the priviledges
of the Kings of Judah, who were immediately elected by
God; or to diſcourſe of the power of the Romane Emperour, or the
first draughts of Government in the Saxon and Norman lines;
for Doctor Ferne doth acknowledge that it is not injurious to his
Majeſties poſterity,
Dr Ferne his 2. book p. 33.
that the King ſweares to a limited power,
a power limited by priviledges and immunities, granted, or reſtored
to the people ſince the conqueſt; which priviledges
grants,Dr Fern ib. p. 27 liberties, though not originall, yet are they irrevocable.
Doctor Ferne diſtinguiſhes betweene the Title of the King, and the
Power of the King; but wee did never ſo much as once queſtion
his Majeſties Title, whether it be limited or no? It is confeſſed
that his power, and therefore much more the exerciſe of his power,
is limited by the Priviledges of the Parliament, the immunities
of the Subject, and the Kings owne oath: Nay, it is acknowledged
that the two houſes of Parliament are in a ſort co-ordinate with
his Majeſty,
Dr Ferns 2. book p. 6.
to ſome act or exerciſing of the ſupreme power,
by a fundamentall conſtitution Truely here is, in my judgement,
ſo much granted, that the reſt need not be diſputed. But
what if theſe powers be divided, and claſh one againſt the other?
why then the power is not fully in King or Parliament, for the
power which is in the three Estates is ſuspended, whileſt one part

ſuſpends:Book 2 p. 34. So Doctor Ferne. Give me leave to aske him, and you,
whether the power of the Militia be not in the three Eſtates, as
well as the power of making Lawes? if it be not, then ſure the power
of making Lawes is to no purpoſe, becauſe they have no power to
defend or enforce I aw: and if the power of the Militia be in the
three Eſtates, then the Kings power of levying, arming men, &c.
is ſuſpended by the ſeverall Ordinances of Parliament; for it is
Doctor Fernes concluſion, that the power which is in the three
Eſtates is ſuſpended whileſt one part ſuspends; Ergo, much more
if two Eſtates ſuspend.
But on the other ſide, I deſire Doctor Ferne to ſhew how the
Kingdome is ſecured by the government of three Eſtates, if the
two houſes of Parliament have not ſufficient power to preſerve the
King and the Kingdome, in caſe the King refuſe to preſerve it or
him.Book 2. p 28.
It is unreaſonable (ſaith Doctor Ferne) that the ſupply
ſhould be made by the body onely, without the head: nay rather,
Doctor, it is unreaſonable for the Head to neglect the preſervation
of it ſelfe, and the body; but it is very reaſonable for to
lift up both armes, to defend the head, and the whole body; and
therefore reaſonable for both houſes to take up armes, and lift up
their armes, put forth their whole ſtrength to defend the King and
themſelves.Book 2. pag. 6. Doctor Ferne talkes of a Fundamentall conſtitution,
which hath provided this temper of three Eſtates, as the reaſonable
meanes of our ſafety. But I muſt confeſſe, that it cannot
enter into my dull pate to conceive, that our Government is of any
ſetled temper; or that we have any reaſonable meanes provided
for the ſafety of this Kingdome, by that fundamentall conſtitution,
if the King may doe what he pleaſes, ſeize on our goods, ('tis Doctor
Fernes ſuppoſition) impriſon our perſons, kill us outright, and
(which is worſe) overthrow our Lawes, our 
•
iberties, our Religion,
and all at once, and by conſequence enſlave not onely the bodies,
but the conſciences of our poſterity; and there is no more
power in both houſes of Parliament to protect us by force against
force, then if we had no ſuch remedy provided, as the government
of three Eſtates. Are we not ſubjected to an abſolute Monarch,
if the other two Eſtates have no legall power to releeve our neglected
or oppreſſed Common-wealth? how are we ſecured by the

temper of three Eſtates? or how can it be called a temper? or a
temper of three Eſtates? if the firſt of the three may oppreſſe us,
and the other two have no power to releeve us? Sure I am, that
by this account there is but one Eſtate that hath a true power, and
therfore that Estate muſt be an eſtate of abſolute Monarchy, which
Dr Ferne himſelfe ſeemes to abhorre; and yet ſo vaine is that
Doctor, as to call the Power of Supply legally placed in both
Houſes of Parliament, a Conceit, nay a vaine Conceit; his
words are theſe; The Conceit of Supply by the two Houſes
in caſe the King refuſe (to preſerve the Kingdome) is a
vaine Conceit:
2 Book p. 28. and if that be true, then I muſt conclude, that
this proviſion of a Temper of three Eſtates is no Temper, no
proviſion, two of the Eſtates are no Eſtates; or elſe this proviſion
is in the phraſe of Doctor Ferne,
Ib. ubi ſupra. a lame proviſion,
which argues the firſt contrivement of our Anceſtors very
inconſiderate; becauſe then it followes, that there is no Reaſonable
Meane of ſafety provided for this Kingdome by that
Fundamentall Conſtitution which provided this Temper of
three Eſtates,2 Book p. 16. ſo the Doctor loves to call it, though he make
one Eſtate ſo praedominant, that as there is no Temperamentum
ad pondus, ſo there will bee no Temperamentum ad
juſtitiam neither by his conceit. How ſay you Sir John, are
not you of my perſwaſion, or are you aſhamed to tread in the
ſteppes of your learned Countrey-man? The Lord open your
eyes, and cleare your eye-ſight; you are naturally ſharp-ſighted,
but if your eye look red or yellow, you know your diſeaſe by
the ſymptome. It ſball be my prayer, that your eye may neither
be dimme nor blood-ſhotten.Iudg. 9. 24.

Conſider that the blood of the 70 was laid upon Abimelech
their brother who ſlew them, and upon the men of Shechem,
which had ayded him by ſtrengthning his hands to
kill his brethren. Whether you have ſtrengthned their hands
who ſlew their Brethren, only for being too zealous in the
maintenance of that Religion which you profeſſe, I appeale to
God, your Conſcience, and the evidence of the fact. If you
have dealt truly and ſincerely with thisAc ne maledicis verborum in eos uti conviciis arguamur cauſam perditionis publicae ne cuiquam ignota ſit non tacemus, Hilar. contra Arian p. 214 Reforming Parliament,
nay with your owne party, rejoyce and flatter your ſelves

with hope of a deſired ſucceſſe; but if not, then take heed the
curſe of Iotham doe not fall upon you:Iudg. 9. 19, 20, 23 and 57 verſes. there may be an evill ſpirit
ſent between the Iriſh and Engliſh, the French and Spaniſh factions;
nay, fire may come out from the Queen and conſume the Prelates,
and fire from the Prelates and conſume the Papiſts; or elſe
there may come a fire from the North, a fire to purge and refine,
not to deſtroy; which is my prayer, and will be your happineſſe.
I will not hold you any longer upon the racke: Learne the firſt
leſſon of Chriſtianity, Self-deniall; deny your owne will, and ſubmit
your ſelves to Gods; deny your reaſon, and ſubmit to faith:
Reaſon tells you that there are ſome things above reaſon, and you
cannot be ſo unreaſonable as to make reaſon judge of thoſe things
which are above reaſon: Remember that Maſter Chillingworth
(your friend) did runne mad with reaſon, and ſo loſt his
reaſon and religion both at once: hee thought he might truſt his
reaſon in the higheſt points; his reaſon was to be Iudge, whether
or no there be a God? Whether that God wrote any Booke? Whether
the bookes uſually received as Canonicall be the bookes, the
Scriptures of God? What is the ſenſe of thoſe books? What Religion
is beſt? What Church pureſt? Come, doe not wrangle, but
beleeve, and obey your God, and then I ſhall be encouraged to ſubſcribe
my ſelfe

Your Friend and Servant,
FRANCIS CHEYNELL.

