


TO THE HONOVRABLE THE COMMONS Aſſembled in PARLIAMENT.

Honourable and Worthy,


AS the LORD repreſented theſe truths to you before, in the Miniſtery of the Word; ſo now again, He offers them to your ſecond conſideration, in this Printed Book; becauſe he hath a minde, you ſhould take notice of them. And I muſt needs ſay, it is the LORD's voyce to you; and I hope he will move your hearts, to regard it; though Satan hath mightily beſtirr'd himſelf, by caſting an ill Vizzard upon the Truth, to make you diſlike it. But if you like CHRIST the worſe for a Face ſpit on and buffeted, you may want a SAVIOUR: And if you like the truth of CHRIST the

worſe for a ſcratcht Face, you may make your dwelling place, with Errour & Humane Doctrines, wch are all one. Micaiah had no ſooner delivered the truth of GOD, but there was a Falſe Prophet, to ſmite him on the face: the LORD no ſooner prepares Inſtruments to reveale his truth, but Satan hath his inſtruments, ready to turn the truth of GOD into a lye. And this GOD ſuffers to be done, to exerciſe your skill and wiſdome, that you might learn, not to be offended at the truth with the World; but to receive and love the truth, notwithſtanding all the indignities and reproaches of men. When you reade what you have heard, you muſt needs acknowledge it to be the minde of GOD, if you received the anointing of the Spirit: and the truth herein contained, ſhall prevaile with all that belong to GOD. For my part; I am not carefull touching the ſucceſſe of it, I can truſt GOD with that, whoſe Word it is. For, as the Doctrine of the World, hath the weak power of the World to carry on that; ſo the Doctrine of Ieſus Chriſt, hath the mighty power of GOD to carry on that; and the power of GOD in the World ſhall as ſoon be made void, as the true Doctrine of the Goſpel, though called Errour, Hereſie, & Schiſme, and have all the miſguiſes of Hell put upon it. The truth you then heard delivered, and may

here reade again, ſhall carry all oppoſition, and oppoſers before it, and none ſhall be able to ſtand againſt it, that ingage againſt it: And of this, both your ſelves and this generation ſhall be Witneſſes.

If any think that I gave too much power to CHRIST, in the Reforming of the Church, his own Body; let them conſider again, that too much cannot be given to CHRIST in GODS kingdome, ſeeing he is all in all in it. Neither is that exaltation the Gospel gives to CHRIST in this Buſineſſe, any diminution to your ſelves: neither by making CHRIST all in the Kingdome of GOD, are you made ever the leſſe, in the Kingdomes of this World. But what ever power the Word of GOD hath given you, I will deny you none of it; nay, I will be among the firſt, that ſhall attribute it to you. And do deſire, you would no more any of you be diſpleaſed for attributing the Reformation of the Church, to CHRIST alone, then the Redemption, Iuſtification, Sanctification, or Glorification of it, to CHRIST alone: The former being every whit, as great and glorious a work of CHRIST, as the latter. I do moſt willingly allow you your Thrones in the Kingdoms of this World, but only deſire to reſerve to Chriſt his own Throne in the Kingdome of GOD.


There are thoſe indeed that would lift you up to this Throne, not becauſe they would have you ſit there, but place them there: they would aſcribe to you, the power only due to the Sonne of GOD, not becauſe they would have you uſe it, but would uſe it themſelves; they would derive power from you, to do that, which they ſay you cannot do: and the power they attribute to you in the things of GOD, they ſay, is not well in your hands, but in theirs.

And here I would deſire you, to take notice of the working of the Myſterie of Iniquity, from the Head, to the very Little-toes of the Man of Sinne: At firſt you know the Pope intereſted himſelf in the Emperour, and Powers of the World (for his own advantage and ſupport no doubt, rather then for theirs) after, the Prelates ſucceſsively, ſaid to worldly Kings, Lend us your power, and we will lend you ours; Let our ſpiritual power deale in temporal things, and your temporal power ſhall deale in ſpirituall things: and ſtill the Clergy-power (which call'd it ſelf ſpiritual) ſo linkt it ſelf with the temporal, that the power that was not of God, might be upheld, by the power that was of God; and (having got this advantage) they cried, Deſtroy one, Deſtroy both; and ſo the Prelates were wont to ſay, No Biſhop, no King. And

their ſucceſſors in the Kingdome of Antichriſt ſtill cry, No Miniſter, no Magiſtrate; and ſo ſtill mingle intereſts and powers with the civil Magiſtrate; that under the Magiſtrate, the power of GOD, they might cunningly ſhrowd that power that is not of GOD. And thus they ſtill, under the name of the Magiſtrate, ſeek themſelves, and the drawing of that power that is only his, from him to themſelves, to whom it doth not belong: Being, in the mean time, really againſt Magiſtracy, further then it is ſerviceable to their own ends. Whereas, we reckon Magiſtracy, not leſſe Magiſtracy, no leſſe the Ordinance of GOD, though we ſuffer under it, and by it.
This Clergie-Antichriſtian power where ever it is, will ſtill ſit upon the power of the Nation; the power of Antichriſt, ſo domineering over the powers of the World, that none but the power of CHRIST can caſt it off. That will ſtill be uppermoſt, what power ſoever is ſupream. Beſides all the experience of former Ages (which is the greateſt wonder in the World, that men conſider not) GOD gives you ſparklings enough of it, in this Age; ſome preaching, That the government of the Church (which they make outward and viſible, and over mens eſtates, bodies, and lives,) belongs not to King nor Parliament, but to the Miniſters

and their Elders: and better it is, there ſhould be no government at all (ſay they) then not in their hands by whom it ſhould be. And here lyes the Myſterie of Iniquity in this, That they make the whole Kingdome a Church, and then require a power, authority and juriſdiction in their Church-Kingdome, which the Magiſtrate is not to deale withall, but themſelves. Whereas we acknowledge the whole power of the Kingdome, to belong to the Magiſtrate, and onely give unto CHRIST the power of his own Kingdome, which is not of the World, but ſpirituall and heavenly.

And here alſo, fully to deliver my ſelfe from miſapprehenſions, I underſtand not by the Church of CHRIST, any company of men whatſoever, who under the notion of a Church or Saints, or any other title, may pleade priviledge or exemption of their lives, liberties, or eſtates, from the power of the Civil Magiſtrate; for that were to juſtifie the Papal, Prelatical, or any other government of a newer name, which under pretence of Ius Divinum, ſhall ſet up and exerciſe an outward and viſible power and juriſdiction, free and exempted from the authority and power of the civil Magiſtrate; which I utterly both deny and deteſt, as Antichriſtian.



And therefore, I humbly repreſent, how prejudiciall this may prove to you in the end, to ſuffer a Generation of men in the Kingdome, under the name either of Church or Clergie, whoſe power, preferment, and intereſt is different and excentricall from the power, welfare, and intereſt of the Kingdome; and what a ballance they may prove againſt the State, where they live, in turning and tumultuous times, as they themſelves know, ſo (I hope) you clearly perceive it, as well as they. How they already dare lift up the Head againſt you, who ſees not? How do they manifeſt their diſcontents againſt you, in Pamphlets and Pulpits, in their Sermons and Prayers, becauſe you have not ſetled the Government, they have ſtudied out for you, as Ius Divinum, and the certain and unchangeable minde of GOD; though they can neither make it out, to your ſelves, nor to any body elſe, by the Word, that it is ſo. And how do they labour to inſtill, into the people, their own diſcontents; perſwading them, you have done nothing at all, becauſe you have not done all that ever they would have you do, though you can ſee neither Scripture nor reaſon for it. And for this cauſe, rendering you every where odious to the people. Many other things beſides, do they ſcramble

up, and uſe againſt you, which they conceive may make for your diſadvantage, and diſ-intereſt in the people: becauſe they think, they ſhall never get much higher, except they make you a little lower; for they muſt (according to the law of Antichriſt) ſet their feet on your power, to get up to their own.

Some diſcoveries of this ſpirit you might ſee in Mr. Loves Sermon, telling you before your faces, and before the people; That ſome call'd you a Mungrell Parliament: Indeed the King (as I underſtand) call'd the Parliament at Oxford ſo, but Mr. Love was the firſt (for ought I can learne) that ever named you ſo, and I wiſh he may be the laſt, (but any Doctrine is Orthodox, out of a mans mouth of his Order) farther threatning you with a diſcerning people, to look into your actions, and to ſpy out your boundleſſe priviledges; as if you muſt do juſtice, not out of the love of Righteouſneſſe, but out of fear of Mr. Loves diſcerning people. Telling you alſo, The Clergie had done as much ſervice for you in their Pulpits, as your Regiments in the Field: that by this means he might minde you, what they can do againſt you, as well as for you, if you be not ſervants to their deſignes; for they that have heretofore been for you, can (if

they pleaſe) turn to others againſt you, who ſhall be more for themſelves. And in many other things flying out againſt your worthy Commanders in the Army, upon ſuſpitions of his own; and againſt the Articles at Oxford, &c. For it is no proper Presbyterial Doctrine, that does not (at leaſt) meddle with the affairs of the State, which in time they may hopefully come to order. In theſe and divers other things, he took his full ſwinge, all of them (no doubt) deeply appertaining to the myſterie of the Goſpel.

The other things, he ſpake, to the diſadvantage of the ignorant and weak, and neither to the Truths diſadvantage, nor mine, I ſhall clear in a ſhort Reply, ſet after the Diſcourſe; and ſo ſhall trouble you no farther, with any ſuch ſtuffe, but only with a ſmart expreſsion, from one (it ſeems) of ſome note in the Aſſembly, who ſaid, If the Parliament approved Mr. Dells Sermon, it were no blaſphemy to ſay, They were no Parliament. So that it ſeems you ſhall be no longer a Parliament then you approve, what the Aſſembly approves; but the Kingdome hopes you are built upon a better foundation. And to him (who hath been ſo bold with you) I ſhall only crave leave to Reply in your preſence: If the Aſſembly (which I hope

they will not) ſhould condemne that Doctrine of the Goſpel for the ſubſtance of it, delivered then by Mr. Dell; it will be no blaſphemy to ſay, They are the enemies of the truth of Chriſt: And (I hope) the laſt prop of Antichriſt in the Kingdome.

For your ſelves, Honourable and Worthy, I beſeech you conſider, that GOD is wonderfull in counſel, and excellent in working; and that all power is given to CHRIST, in Heaven and in Earth, that he might give free paſſage to the Goſpel. And therefore take heed, after GOD hath bleſt your Power and Forces in the field, and ſubdued that Malignant power that was againſt you, and hath given you a little peace and quietneſſe in the Kingdome; you do not now begin your affaires with diſcountenancing, diſreliſhing, much leſſe condemning, the faithfull and true Word of GOD, witneſſed in the Scriptures, and confeſt to by the faithfull and Martyrs of Christ, in all Ages; and with the ſetting off from you, that Ministery, that hath most of the Spirit in it, leſt the Lord withdraw his preſence from you, and your latter end be not anſwerable to your beginnings.

It might be eaſily ſhewed unto you, how many great and wiſe Kings and Magiſtrates, acting according to humane wiſdom and prudence, and

deſpiſing or neglecting the wiſdome of the Word; have with all their own wiſdome, prudence, and deſignes, deſtroyed themſelves, and their Kingdomes: For it is written, He takes the wiſe in their own craftineſſe: And again, The Lord knowes the thoughts of men, that they are but vaine.

And therefore renounce the wiſdom of the world, with all its fleſhly Counſels, and cleave cloſe to the true, faithfull, and ſincere Doctrine of the Goſpel; and then, though you have many enemies and Kingdomes againſt you, you ſhall not be moved, but GOD will yet establiſh you, in all the ſhakings of the World, and your Enemies ſhall be as a thing of nought. I ſhall no longer detaine you, but only deſire this, in the behalf of the faithful, GODS peculiar portion in the Kingdome, That you would not ſuffer us to be oppreſſed by our Adverſaries, who would uſe your power againſt us, not for you, but for themſelves: neither would ſuffer them, thus publickly and ſhameleſſely to call us Sectaries and Hereticks, who do believe and profeſſe the truth of the Goſpel in ſincerity and ſimplicity of heart, according to what we received from GOD; but that you would ſuffer, yea, procure us, to live quietly and ſafely under you, in the faith and practice of the Goſpel, we in all things obeying you, as becomes Christians.



The Remainder is, to aſſure you, That there is no man ſhall ſerve the State more ſincerely, according to his place and calling; nor in more faithfulneſs and humility tender the Truth of GOD, either to your ſelves or the Kingdome (as occaſion ſerves) according to the meaſure of the gift of CHRIST; Then,

Your Servant in the Goſpel,
VV. DELL.

