


TO THE HONORABLE THE KNIGHTS, CITIZENS, and BVRGESSES Of the Commons Houſe OF PARLIAMENT.

TIs not unknowne to You, Right Noble and Worthy Senators, that the Great and Preſent Controverſie of theſe Times is about the Church, and Church Government. In the dayes of Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, Bucer, and the reſt of thoſe Worthies, the controverſie of that age, was concerning

the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, being generally ſtiled Bellum Sacramentarium, and the Sacramentary Controverſie, the contention about it (even amongſt the Servants of God) being ſo ſharpe, that it produced moſt ſad and woſull effects. The e was not any one thing more hindred Melch. Adam. vita Oecolamp. pag. 53. Melch. Adam vit Bucer p. 213. Melch. Ad. vit Toſan. pag. 702. Melc. Ad vita Brent. pag 441. the cauſe of God, or the free paſſage of the Word, or the progreſſe of the worke of God begun in the Church then this. This weakened and wounded the Proteſtant party, their weapons being turned each againſt other, this made them a gratefull ſpectacle to their enemies, this ſtrengthened the Popiſh ſide, they placing more confidence in their cauſe by theſe differences than in all other wayes beſides. This Sacramentarie controverſie kindled ſuch a fire in many Reformed Churches, that it even burnt them up, and turned them much a ſide from that true edification which is in Chriſt, and in the practiſe of godlineſſe: And hath proved ſuch a laſting fire, that it is not quenched till this day (although thoſe Churches have had ſword, famine, and Peſtilence, to put it out.) Now in our dayes in this Kingdome, the chiefe queſtion is about the Church and the diſcipline of the Church, and our Controverſie may fitly be tearmed the Diſciplinary Controverſie, which however it differs from the Sacramentary Quid? nonne vident diſſidia noſtra eſſe amicorum diſpendia, hoſtium compendia, & publica irae divinae incendia. in the ſubject matter, yet it is too like it in the manner, & way of it, being likely to bring forth as ſad births and fruites as did that? What? Is it not ſo, that we do ſee already (that I may ſpeake with Hierome) that our differences about the Church

and Diſcipline are the loſſe of friends, the gaine Junius Bi
•
enu. Epiſt. land Haſ. of enemies, and the publicke flames of Divine wrath? The great differences in this Kingdome about the Church and Diſcipline, are one of the ſaddeſt and greateſt ſymptomes of Gods diſpleaſure againſt us. Theſe contentions and opinions make us forget the proper cauſes of God, and that maine building up of one another, which is in faith and love, ſo craſtily doth that old Serpent Adeo vetera
••
ie hic antiqu
•
s d
•
aco imprudentiae noſtrae ne vit illudere. know how to delude our ignorance; (as Iurius ſpeakes upon a like caſe.) Oh there is ſuch a fire kindled in this Kingdome about theſe points, that unleſſe the Lord looke downe from Heaven, and graciouſly be pleaſed to quench it timely, it may hazzard the burning and conſuming all. Now it is the duty of all the Sonnes of Sion to endeavour in their places, the putting out this fire, before it goe too farre, as by povring out buckets of teares and prayers before the Lord, ſo by all other good wayes, but eſpecially of the Miniſters of the Goſpell by all meane, both by themſelves and by ſtirring up of others to doe it. The ſerious conſideration of which hath ſtirred up in me ſtrong reſolutions, to lay out my ſelfe (according to that meaſure of the giſt of Chriſt beſtowed upon me) for the healing of this ſchiſme, and quenching this fire. Now the firſt borne of this kind (though not the firſt conceived) is this preſent Treatiſe againſt Independant Government, and the Toleration of it, which I here humbly preſent to this Honourable Houſe, ſubmitting it to your grave Judgements, and ſerious Conſiderations,

humbly deſiring your Acceptance of it: Now the Reaſons moving me to take this boldneſſe, to Dedicate this Booke to your Honours, are theſe. Firſt, that great and generall liberty you grant of free acceſſe to your Honourable Houſe, unto all rankes of perſons, in this Kingdome, both by Petitions and Bookes. Secondly, that hereby I might take an occaſion to teſtifie my humble duty and thankefullneſſe unto, together with my high thoughts and eſtimation of this Honourable Houſe for all the Indefatigable paines and care beſtowed on the Publicke; Seeing that by You (under God, and the Kings moſt Excellent Majeſty) I, and hundreds of my Brethren, enjoy ſo great quietneſſe and freedome in our Miniſteries, Eſtates, Perſons, (after ſo great a ſtorme) and that very worthy deeds are done, both to us, and to this Nation by your Providence, we accept it alwayes, and in all places, moſt Noble Patriots, with all thankfullneſſe, and here I offer to you the firſt fruites of my labours, as a laſting Monument of Gratitude. Thirdly, that by preſenting it to You, both my ſelfe and Booke might here take Sanctuary, and have your Protection againſt the many Calumnies and Reproaches which will be caſt upon us from that ſpirit of Separation. Neither flye I to this Honourable Houſe, as if I were conſcious to my ſelfe of any crimes or juſt grounds of ſuch revilings (for had I not Innocency and Integrity in my actions, and intentions, I durſt not preſent this Booke to this Juſt and Honourable Houſe, as knowing well

you are a refuge onely for Innocent and oppreſſed perſons, and perſons who ſeeke the Publicke good) Or, as if I were not fore-armed to beare them; I know whom I ſerve in this worke, and Quiſquis volens detrabir fama meae, iſte nob
••
 addit mercedi meae. Auguſtirus Regium eſt male audire cum bene feceris. that therefore, whoever doth willingly detract from my name, doth but adde to my reward; I know alſo tis a Royall priviledge for a man to beare ill when he hath done well, and I have long agoe given my backe to the ſmiters, and by the grace of Chriſt hope to beare all calumnies with much quietneſſe of ſpirit, having in part learned that leſſon to goe through bad report (even amongſt good men) as well as amongſt evill men, and to be counted an enemy (as Paul was) for telling the Truth; but I therefore preſent it to your Honours, and put it under your ſhadow, that ſo your Countenance and Acceptance of it (according as you finde it) may counter-ballance and weigh downe with all ſorts of men, the calumnies and cenſures caſt upon it, to hinder that good intended by it, and may the more commend the Worke to make it take with many for their ſatisfaction. Fourthly, I take this boldneſſe, that ſo I might have an opportunity, to move and ſtirre you up, moſt Noble Worthies, to put to your hands for the earely and timely compounding of this great Controverſie about the Church, and Church Government: When fires are begun in great Cities and Townes, or Tumults raiſed, the Fathers of Families, and the Citizens run to the Magiſtrates and Governours to acquaint them with the caſe, and to deſire their helpe, who having

power to command both Men, Armes, Waters, Engines, buckets from every quarter, the fire is quickely out, and the peace ſetled. Now be pleaſed to ſuffer me to mind you of that which few or none doe, namely of our danger from errors on the right hand, the growing and ſpreading evill of this preſent time. Every one minds you by Petitions, Sermous, Bookes, concerning the Reformation of this Church, in Government, Miniſtery, Ceremonies, and worſhip; and God forbid that a word ſhould ever fall from my mouth, or my pen draw a line, to call you off from it. Goe on ſtrongly and fully in the worke of Reformation to purge this Church thorowly, and purely to take away all our droſſe and tinne; caſt out of the way all ſtumbling blocks, & gather out all things that offend, let nothing be left to hurt or to deſtroy in Gods holy mountaine; Break downe all Images and Crucifixes, throw downe all Altars, remove the High Places, breake to peeces the brazen Serpents, which have beene ſo abuſed to Idolatry and ſuperſtition, put out the unpreaching and ſcandalous Miniſters, take a courſe for ſetting up good Paſtors and Miniſters in every Congregation, and in your great Wiſdomes, and zeale be pleaſed to conſider of wayes to provide oyle for al the Lampes of the Sanctuary; Goe on Comfortably (for God is with you, and the Miniſters with ſounding Trumpets of Miniſtery of Word and Prayer; and the people of God with you, covering you all over with earneſt prayers, and and teares, as alſo with praiſes to God

for you) and be pleaſed to remember not to doe the worke of God by halves, or negligently. Perfect and thorow Reformation, will be your praiſe both with God and all good men, at home and abroad; and your zeale may provoke other Kingdomes, and States, and many will ariſe up and call you bleſſed, for the good Paſtors, and pure Ordinances that they ſhall enjoy. Tis the blemiſh of ſome of the good Kings that were reformers, as Aſa and Iehoſaphat; But nevertheleſſe 2 King. c. ult. v. 43. 2 Chron. 15. v. 17. 2 King 18. v. 4. the high places were not taken away. It was the praiſe of other Kings, that they were taken away, as of King Hezekiah. Perfect Reformation takes away all poſſibility and hopes from men, of bringing things backe againe; but an imperfect leaves both a ground-worke, and faire poſſibility upon any advantage or opportunity to returne: Theodoret in his Eccle. historie relates that Theodoſius that moſt faithfull Emperor, being fully ſet Theod. hiſt. Eccle. l. 5. cap. 20. to overthrow the errors of the Gentiles, he made Lawes, by which he commanded that the Temples of the Images ſhould be puld downe. Conſtantine the great, with ſome other Emperours, who ſucceeded Conſtantine, forbad all Sacrifices and worſhips to the heathen gods, and their Images, and forbad any to come to their temples, but they did not demoliſh the temples & places wherin they were worſhipped; ſo that Iulian and Valens, Emperours who came after, did renew the impiety of the Gentiles, ſo that fire was kindled againe upon the Altars, and Sacrifices were offered to the Images: All which things when Theodoſius

underſtood for certaine, hee did not onely ſhut up the Idols houſes, forbidding all to come to the Temples, but he did extirpate them by the rootes, and tooke care to have them buried in eternall oblivion. It was the ſaying of Ziſca the famous leader of the Thaborites, That the very neſts of the Storkes are to be puld downe, leſt Diruendi ſunt etiam ipſi ciconiarum nidi ne redeant. Lavat. in Deurer. they returne againe. And may it pleaſe this Honorable Houſe to purge us thoroughly, and the rather for this, becauſe the more perfect our Reformation is, according to the will of God, you ſhall by this lay the better and ſurer ground-worke, for healing and compoſing the great ſchiſme, and diviſions riſen about the Church, and Church Government. But amidſt all your care and paines in this kinde, I beſeech you caſt an eye upon the errors and evills of the other hand, as Anabaptiſme, Browniſme, &c. and be pleaſed to take into your ſerious conſiderations the meanes and wayes how to hinder their growth, and ſo much the rather, in regard there is not now in this Kingdome (things ſtanding as they doe) ſo much danger of errors on the left hand. Popery, ſuperſtition, prophaneneſſe, have beene ſo diſcountenanced of late, ſo diſcovered, and their nakedneſſe laid ſo open, as that Altars, Images, preſſing of Ceremonies, and prophane Miniſters are falling of themſelves. Satan for this time hath even done with errors on the left hand, and their time is going out, growing like an Almanacke out of date. Any man who hath but halfe an Eye in his head,

and obſerves the courſe of things may ſee that errors on the right hand are now comming on the ſtage to take their turne alſo and to act their part; the Devill ſeeing he cannot effect his ends in the former wayes he went, he will now try others, as Theodoret ſpeaks in the caſe of Neſtorius, that Satan Theod. Heret. Fab. lib. 4. de Neſt. gave over moving againſt the Church by outward & manifeſt enemies, but came under the ſhow of the Orthodox, and in the habit of great ſtrictneſſe bewitching many & drawing the injudicious common people to a deſire after him. Satan is now transforming himſelfe from an Angell of darkneſſe into an Angell of light, and though hee muſt uſe other kind of inſtruments, and goe other waies, yet tis to bring about the ſame things, the upholding of his kingdome and the hindring of Gods, ſo that he will now labour to doe that by correcting and building up, which hee did before by perſecuting and pulling downe (as Luther ſpeakes.) In a word plainly to expreſſe my meaning, one extremitie (as many examples both antient and moderne teſtifie) 
Neſtorius ſpeaking againſt the perſonall union of the divine and humane nature of Chriſt: Extiches fell into an error contrary, confounding the natures, that he would have the humane nature ſo ſwallowed up by the immenſitie of the divine nature in Chriſt, that there was not two natures in Chriſt, but one onely, to wit, the divine nature, Evag. lib. 1. cap. 9. So Ofiander broaching that error, that Chriſt was our mediatour only according to the divine nature, Stancarus oppoſing that fell into another error that Chriſt was mediator only according to the humane Schluſſels de Stancar. pag. 37. ſo Flacius Illyricus oppoſing Strigelius who made originall ſinne to be but a light kind of accident, he to aggravate the monſtruouſneſſe of originall ſinne, fell into that errour, that originall ſinne was the ſubſtance of a man, Schluſſels de ſecta Manic: pag. 4. hath cauſed another, the Tyrannie of Epiſcopall government in ſome Biſhops hath brought forth the Democracie and Independencie, the violent preſſing of ſome pretended orders hath ſet many againſt all

order, and Satan ſeing hee cannot doe as he did, the times not favouring thoſe things, they being growne old, and even antiquated that every man is ready to hiſſe at them, hee now goes about by other waies, and if he can but effect what he is in a faire way for and what he hath begun in a great meaſure, he hath enough. Tis reported of the Fiſh called Polypus petrae cui adhaeſit colorem referens. Nazianz: de ſe ipſo.
Polypus, that it will be of the colour  of that ſtone to which it cleaves, whether white or blacke, or any other: ſo will Satan be of that colour and that temper juſt that the men are of with whom he deales, and the times are of. (For beſides this that Satan hath more wayes to kill Soules and advance his deſignes then one, as Oreg. Naz ad epiſcop. when he cannot have his will by perſecution, then he will attempt it by ſchiſme and ſowing diviſion amongſt miniſters (as Nazianzen ſheweth:) Satan will in time bring about the ſame things though in another way, for Independancie will bring againe what now it would caſt out, namely libertiniſme, prophaneneſſe, errors, and will by ſome removes bring many men to be of no religion at all. Be pleaſed moſt worthy Senators to let me tell you that the greateſt ſort of erroneous ſpirits with all unſtable and wanton witted men, will be much for Independant Government and Tolerations, and be to their uttermoſt againſt Synods & ſetled Government: Socinians, Arminians, Anabaptiſts, Separatiſts, how different ſoever in other principles, yet will agree in this; Independancie will both breed them, and being bred will foſter them. And however in many men

who bee principall actors in this way of Independancie, the dangers and evills may not ſo appeare for the preſent, there being many things in moſt of the Miniſters lovely, which the more commends this way, yet wiſe men, ſuch as this Honourable houſe conſiſts of, looke upon things and judge of them not onely as they are for the preſent, but as they may be hereafter, and accordingly ſetle things; that being the great principle Legiſlators goe by, to preſume that men may degenerate, and things will be abuſed, and therefore ſo to provide that they may not. All errors commonly be beſt at firſt, moſt modeſt then, and the firſt Authors of errors be commonly the beſt and faireſt. Eccleſiaſticall Hiſtory mentions that the Novatian errors did more hurt in the fourth Centurie then in the third wherein it was firſt broached. The followers of Novatus did adde many other errors to his, as Theodoret relates. Arminius was more candid, and leſſe erroneous then his Theod. lib. 3. Haeret: Fabul. Parvus error in initio fit magnus in fine, negligenda non ſunt parva initia, ex quibus paulatim majores fiunt acceſſiones. followers, they having much improved the points, as ſome Divines have ſhewed. Be pleaſed therefore to give me leave to ſtirre you up to lay theſe ſchiſmes and diviſions to heart, (the diviſions of Reuben being great thoughts of heart) and in your great wiſedomes early to find out meanes and remedies to heale the great rents about the Church and Church Government, and to hinder the further increaſe of this way: God hath called you together, and continued you for this worke amongſt the reſt; Noble Patriots doe your parts, and what in you lyes to conclude of ſome ſpeedy

way and courſe for ſetling theſe differences. Tis the praiſe of Cyprian and Cornelius that by the helpe of a Councell they did indeavour timely to ſuppreſſe the errors of Novatus. And in the meane while till Church Government be ſetled, whether it be not neceſſary to provide by ſome meanes againſt the ſpreading of this ſect, and the meetings of theſe ſeparated Aſſemblies, I leave it to your great wiſedomes to conſider, leſt otherwiſe wee be overgrowne with Anabaptiſme, Browniſme and ſuch like. And I humbly crave leave to tell you, that delayes in this kind will prove very dangerous, many falling to that way daily, and others by continuance will be ſo accuſtomed to it, that it will be harder to regaine them: Beſides the Independants ly at the catch and advantage of delaies, all their hopes and ſtrength ſtanding in this, that it will be long before there be a Synod, or before the Church Government be ſetled, hoping that in the interim whilſt things ſtand betweene two, and are unſetled, they may both gather and increaſe their Churches, and make their party more conſiderable; and there is juſt ground to thinke they are not wanting to endeavour by ſome inſtruments how to effect it: The hand of Ioab is ſometimes where tis not dreamt of. I could preſent this Honourable Houſe with a ſad relation of the ſtate of things both in the City and Countrey in reſpect of errors on the right hand, as alſo beſpeake You by the teares & feares of all the godly & painfull Miniſters of this Church of England: But I know

I ſpeake to the wiſe, and to them who are deeply ſenſible; and tis time for me to take off my hand leſt the porch be too large for the houſe. Now the good will of him that dwelt in the buſh reſt upon your heads; The Lord hide you from the counſells and plots of wicked men, and from the raging diſeaſes of the time, making you more and more his hidden ones; He make you more and more his choſen & ſanctified ones to fulfill all his mind and to doe his whole worke both againſt all hereſie and ſchiſme, both errors on the left hand and right; Hee double and treble upon you all that ſpirit of wiſedome, counſell, might, and unanimitie, which former Parliaments ever had. The Lord ſet your feet upon a rock, and eſtabliſh your goings; He give you an unwearied ſpirit to goe on without fainting, till there be a perfect ſetling of peace in Church and Common-wealth, and till the worke of reformation ſo happily begun be finiſhed. And the Lord recompence into your boſomes ſeven-fold in bleſſings both temporall, ſpirituall, and eternall, all your worke and labour of love which yee have ſhewed towards his name, and towards this Kingdome. And ſo humbly laying my ſelfe, and theſe poore endeavours at your feet, I reſt

Your Honours moſt devoted ſervantThomas Edwards.

