

TO
the Two moſt Famous
VNIVERSITIES
OF
ENGLAND

I Dare not give you ſuch high Epithites
as Maſter Saltmarſh beſtoweth upon
the Aſſembly,
Quid amplius praepotenti & immortali Deo tribuimus ſi quod eius proprium eſt eripimus? Bodin. de Repub. l. 1 c. ult to call you the MOST
SACRED. Be contented to be
Stiled the Two moſt Famous Vniverſities; a Title,
which it is no Flattery to give you, but Injury
to deny you.
I have the Studies of ſome whole dayes to
ſpread before you. I am not aſhamed to confeſſe
ſo much, but ſhould be aſhamed to preſent your
learned Conſiderations with leſſe. And will rather
runne the hazard of other mens Cenſure,
to have ſtudied ſo long to no purpoſe, then to

be guilty to my ſelfe of ſo much diſreſpect to
You, as to offer to your Patronage what coſt me
but ſleight ſtudying.
Indeed I examined his Examinations of my
Sermon with the ſame pace that I read them.
But I could not confute his Errors ſo ſpeedily as
I could diſcover them, nor could I ſo ſoon make
them appeare to others, as they appeared to
me; and the Evidencing of his Faults did coſt
me ſome Paines, whereof I hope I ſhall never
have juſt Cauſe to Repent.
I am altogether out of hope that my Truth
ſhould quickly overtake his Error, which had
the Advantage of me both at the Starting and
in the Speed; And yet I beleeve what I want in
the ſwiftneſſe of my Feet, I ſhall have in the
Firmeneſſe of my footing. And when I overtake
it at laſt, as I am ſure I ſhall, ſeeing untruths will
Tire (as being better at hand then at length) I
am confident by Gods Aſſiſtance, it will get
firme and quiet Poſſeſſion in ſpight of oppoſition.
It is altogether Improper for mee to compare
You being Two in number to the Palme
Tree under which the Propheteſſe Deborah ſate;

But the Analogie will, hold well, if I ſhould reſemble
You to the Two Olive Trees continually
dropping oyle in the Preſence of God. And methinks
Maſter Saltmarſh his Expreſſion to the
Aſſembly, VNDER SVCH A SHADE AS
YOVR SELVES, making them in the Aſſembly
but a Shadow, (and then what is the Shadow
of a Shadow worth under which hee deſireth
to ſit?) was but an undervaluing and diminutive
expreſſing of their worth.
I honour you as You Deſerve, and Counting
You a Real and Laſting Subſtance, ſo I addreſſe
my Reſpects unto you:
Humbly requeſting you to be pleaſed to Patronize
and defend this my defence: the rather
becauſe what doctrines therein I deliver, not
long ſince I ſuckt from One of you, and in this
reſpect I beleive both Breaſts give Milke alike;
And therefore as your Learning is moſt Able,
ſo your Goodneſſe will bee willing to Protect
the ſame, not ſo much becauſe I had them from
you, as becauſe you had them from the Truth.
Some perchance may blame my Choice in
Chooſing You for my Protection who in theſe
troubleſome times are ſcarce able to defend

your ſelves▪ The Univerſities being now Degraded,
at leaſt ſuſpended from the degree of their
former Honour. And I wonder, Men ſhould
now talke of an Extraordinary great Light, when
the two Eyes of our Land (ſo you were ever accompted)
are almoſt put out. However this
ſhort Interruption of your Happineſſe will but
adde the more to your Honour hereafter.
And here, as it were Store of Pride for me to
Counſell you, ſo it were want of duty not to
Comfort you. Know, the only Good Token of
theſe Times is, That they are ſo extreamely Bad
they can never laſt long. God give you a ſanctified
Impreſſion of your Afflictions, neither to
ſleight them nor ſink under them; and ſo, forbearing
to be longer troubleſome to your more
ſerious Employments, reſteth

The meaneſt of your Sonnes
or Nephewes
Thomas Fuller.

