


To the Right Honorable, ISAAC
PENNINGTON Lord Major of the
City of London, together with the Right
Worſhipfull the Sheriffes, and Aldermen of
the ſame City.

SIRS,


MAy it pleaſe you, Saul that great Perſecutor
of the new beginning Church of
Chriſt, that enemy who breathed out
threatnings and ſlaughter againſt the diſciples
of the Lord, after he was caſt down from his
horſe, and his pride was quelled by the might and
power of Chriſt, he was by the Lords order committed
to the care of Ananias, Acts 9. 11. True it is,
Ananias anſwered the Lord, that he was jealous and
fearefull of Saul, becauſe he had heard by many,
how much evill he had done to the Saints at Jeruſalem,
13. v. But the Lord replyed no more unto him,
but that he ſhould not feare nor miſtruſt him, becauſe
he had turned his heart, and made him a choſen

veſſell to beare his name before the Gentiles, and
Kings, and children of Iſrael, & that he would teach
him how great things he ſhould ſuffer for his names
ſake. Let it pleaſe your Honour and Worſhips to
behold here my own caſe deciphered; for if Saul perſecuted
the Church of Chriſt; I my ſelfe have perſecuted
the ſame Church, by oppoſing the doctrin of
it, by preaching and teaching contrary to it, by procuring
to ſeduce ſoules from it, by writing againſt
it. But now it hath pleaſed that mighty and powerfull
Lord; againſt whom there is no reſiſtance, to
caſt me down upon the ground, to quell my pride,
to lighten me round about with the beames and
light of his mercies, to make me know how hard a
thing it is to kicke againſt the will & calling of God,
and with trembling and feare to make me ſay, Lord
what wilt thou have me to do? If Saul was ſent to Damaſcus
to Ananias, a chiefe and zealous follower of
Chriſt, that by him he might be protected from the
Jews and enemies of the Lord, who doubtles hearing
of his change and converſion would have cruelly
torne and ſlaughtered him if they could have found
him. So I my ſelfe by a ſecret and inward order,
which I have found by God delivered to my Soule,
have judged it meet and fit to ſearch out in this City
ſome zealous Ananias, ſome religious follower of
Chriſts pure doctrin, that I may be ſafely ſheltered &

protected from the violent attēpts of the Lords enemies
the Papiſts, who I know will endeavour to do
me all the miſchief they can. Therfore let it pleaſe
your Honor and Wps. who are well known to be as
Ananias in Damaſcus, zealous and truly religious followers
of Chriſts own doctrin, and favorers of the
pure Word of the Lord, to caſt your eyes upon me a
new converted Saul, to ſhelter and protect me from
thoſe that plot my miſchief. O when ſureſt they are
to hinder my perſeverance in the truth, by plotting
and ſtudying my deſtruction, let them find me hovering
under the wings of your protection. O feare
not! nor ſay what Ananias ſaid, I have heard by many
of this man, how much evill he hath done to thy Saints, but
praiſe the work of the Lord in me, who hath opened
now my eyes, who hath brought me now out of Babylon,
who hath made me confeſſe my ſins and iniquities
with a ſorrowfull and contrite heart. And as
it pleaſed the Lord to ſhew Saul, as ſoon as he was
converted how great things he ſhould ſuffer for his
names ſake; even ſo be you confident, as I my ſelf am
that this my calling & converſion is purely & meerly
from above and from the Lord; from whom I
have receiv'd this teſtimony, that he hath ſhewed me
already how great things I muſt ſuffer for his names
ſake; for I muſt for him ſuffer many injuries and calumniations
from the Papiſts, I muſt ſuffer the loſſe

of all my kinred, I muſt ſuffer the loſſe of that maintenance,
which I was wont to receive from them, I
muſt ſuffer want and poverty. But for whom? For
the Lords ſake; for the teaching and preaching the
preciſe rule of the Word of the Lord, for abjuring all
Popiſh errors, for renouncing all ſupertitions, for abhorring
all idolatries. Let theſe my ſufferings ſerve
to your Honor and Worſhips for a true teſtimony of
my converſion; let theſe my ſufferings remove from
you all feares and jealouſies of my perſeverance, that
thus with your favorable protectiō I may rejoyce in
my calling, I may freely teach the pure Word of the
Lord, I may oppoſe all Antichristian doctrin, and by
my example may draw many wandring ſoules to the
true Faith & Church of Chriſt. And I ſhall alwayes
pray to the Lord to keep your Honor and Worſhips
in grace, and that you may ſo rule & govern this City
by your conſcionable and upright actions before
God and men, that you may truly here be called zelotes
of the Honour of the Lord, and afterwards you
may have your ſeats above in the triumphant City
of Jeruſalem.


Your Hon. and Wor. humble and faithfull ſervant, in
the things of God, and Chriſt.
THOMAS GAGE.

