


TO THE
RIGHT HONOVRABLE
Houſe of PEERS Aſſembled in
PARLIAMENT.

RIGHT HONOURABLE,



AS in ſundry other ages and places, ſo
in this age and place wherein we now
live, hath my Text been verified:
and that within the compaſſe of theſe
laſt five years; in every of which
God hath done better unto us
then at our beginnings: and we have great and juſt
cauſe to hope that he will yet continue to doe better and
better.

It was an eſpecial evidence of Gods good providence,
that the great Counſel of England was called at that
time, that it was called.
The State of Church and Common-wealth was ſo farre
out of order, and the diſorder in both ſo backed, as, without
a Parliament, it would not, it could not (in mans
apprehenſions) have been redreſsed.
The Reformation that was then intended by that

Parliament, being by ſome envious eyes eſpied, a diſſolution
thereof was procured.

But that, and other former diſsolutions of Parliaments
(neceſsity forcing another Parliament ſoon after
to be called) occaſioned an Act to prevent inconveniencies,
which may happen by the untimely Adjourning,
Proroguing, or diſſolving of this preſent
Parliament.
What better thing (rebus ſic ſtantibus ut tunc &
nunc) could have happened to this State? The good
conſequencies, that have happened thereupon, are evident
demonſtrations of Gods minde, ſtill to do better and better
for us.
It would exceed the proportion of a Dedicatory Epiſtle,
to reckon up the particular instances of the Divine
Providence, encreaſing time after time for the better unto
us, and that by vertue of this preſent Parliament:
they are ſo clear and evident, as none, but ſuch as take
notice of nothing, can be ignorant of them: and none,
but envious and malignant ſpirits, can conceal or pervert
them.
When might the good Providence of God have been
better diſcerned, in protecting the perſons, upholding the
ſpirits, directing the counſels, and proſpering the endeavours
of ſuch as were aſſembled in a Parliament, then
in this? When might the like Providence of God have

been better diſcerned in ſtirring up mens mindes, encouraging
their ſpirits, enabling their bodies, and preſerving
their perſons for maintaining a cauſe, then in this cauſe
that is now maintained by the Parliament? Of them
who with a ſingle eye behold the footſteps of the Lord in
the Counſels of our Parliament, it may juſtly be ſaid,
They have ſeen thy goings, O God, the goings
of my God,Pſal. 68: 24. my King.
Have not our Armies had ſucceſſe beyond expectation,
even to admiration?
What a stop hath been ſet to Superſtition? How
good a progreſſe hath been made in Reformation? And
may we not yet hope that God will doe better unto us
then at our beginnings? Gods promiſe is the ground
of hope: and my Text ſheweth that God hath promiſed
as much.
Goe on, Right Honourable, and put forth your utmoſt
endeavours,Cum aliqua spes ſubeſt, vehementiores vires apparere aſſolent. Aug. de quant. animae. c. 22. Spes ad majora audenda ſeſe erigit. Greg. M in Iob 4 l. 5 c. 29. for bringing on thoſe better things
that yet remain. Where their is Hope, there endeavours
uſe to be most earneſt: For Hope ſtirreth up
mens ſpirits to ſet upon great things.
Though the full accompliſhment of the remaining better
things ſhould be reſerved to a future age, yet it becomes
us, to be as earneſt in proſecuting them, according
to the ability and opportunity that God doth give
us, as if we our ſelves were ſure, while we live, to have

the fruition of them. Experience ſheweth that to be
true, which of old was ſaid of the provident husbandman,
that he planteth trees which may be uſefull in an
other age. But I hope that God will let you ſee and enjoy
the fruit of your Counſels, and of our deſires. This ſhall
be the continuall prayer of

Your Honours humble Servant
and Oratour,
William Gouge.

