


TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD BRIAN, Lord Biſhop of Sarum, and Tutour to both their Highneſſes, The moſt Illuſtrious CHARLES the Prince of VVales, and the moſt noble JAMES the Duke of Yorke, my moſt Honoured Lord and Patron.

Right Reverend Father in God,


YOVR Lordſhip hath often times call'd upon me to goe out and ſhew the people their Tranſgreſsions, and the Houſe of Iacob their ſinnes.

Next to my owne conſcience I confeſſe my ſelfe bound to give your Lordſhip ſatisfaction.


To fall foule upon the degenerous and intractable nature of this people cannot anſwer you, for it doth not me.
I doe not ſay I am not eloquent, and therefore that you would ſend by the hand of Him whom you ſhould ſend. When I am indeed able for theſe things, I doubt not to have Him with my mouth, becauſe I meane to leave all my ſelfe out. There was never more provocations for all men to ſpeake then now, when all the miſcheife that other ages did but imagine are practiced by a Law, and in the meane time the dumbe Aſses are taught to forbid the madneſse of the Prophets.

The Harvest is confeſſedly Great, but then the Labourers are not few. And if while ſo many are thus excellently imployed about the reſt of the Building, ſome one or other doe as well as he can towards the making good of the Ground worke, I thinke he may be let alone at leaſt. The hopes of the Superſtructionly from the aſſurance of the Foundation I ſhall give them leave to be Pillars: This I am ſure is the Corner-stone, and I need not tell you how rejected, I meane it not of all, but of the Common Builders.



If the Church be an Arke he that hath never ſo little to doe with the Compaſſe, though he ſit ſtill in his place, yet does as much or more then all the other neceſsary Noiſe in the Ship The Compariſon is quit of arrogance, for it holdeth in the deſigne, it is not meant of the performance.

The courſe I have runne here is Labour too, and in the ſame Vineyard. And I truſt my ſelfe for this, that my accounts will be as well paſs't above, if I reckon upon theſe paines, the pretence whereof though not ſo popular, yet is as ſubſtantially proficient towards the maine Aedification.

I have principally endeavoured to redeeme my Reader from that ſlavery, by which I have ſo long ſate downe my ſelfe, in not printing (ſo neare as I could I have not) the ſame things over againe.

I am ſure I have ſet downe nothing but what I beleive, if more ſometimes then I well underſtood, I have company enough, and the acknowledgement of an errour is more eaſe to me, then the committing of it was.
Why I ſhould make theſe Addreſſes to your

Lordſhip there is all the reaſon in the world; what have I but what I have received from you? and that which is, would be Nothing of it ſelfe. Rayes of incidency contract no warmth upon the Earth, unleſſe reflected backe upon their originall Sun.

My Lord, As once the Sonnes of the Prophets ſaid unto the Man of God, Behold now the place where we dwell is too ſtreight for us. We are humbly expecting the laſt courſe of that Iudgement which began at the Houſe of God. What ſhall be done to the dry Tree, or where the ſinner will appeare, is to be left to him to whom vengeance belongeth.

The Great Genius of this Place muſt now burne a while like thoſe Subterraneous Olibian Lampes under the Earth. VVe ſhall ſee it but Bernardin. Scarde

•
nius de Priſcis civibus Patavin. Lib. 1.
not now, we ſhall behold it but not nigh.
Have, ſalve, ſit tibi terra Levis.
Abite hinc peſſimi fures, Quid voſtris vultis cum oculis Emiſſitiis.

Your Lordſhips moſt faithfull Servant and Chaplaine.
JOHN GREGORY.

