


To my moſt Deare AND New-Borne Babe Benjamin Herbert.

Sweet Child,


THou haſt (by the Lords Grace) this day receiv'd the firſt viſible Signe and Seale of his Covenant with us: thou haſt e'en now beene Baptiz'd with Water, and (as I may comfortably conceive) with the Spirit of God, who (if thou canſt attaine the yeares of diſcretion) will (I hope and pray) aſſiſt thee with his effectuall grace, to caſt off the old man, Adam, with his ſinfull affections and actions; and put on the new, Chriſt Jeſus, with his whole Righteouſnes: renewing thy heart by degrees, and ſanctifying thy perſon; thus begetting thee to himſelfe, by the outward ſeed of his Word, and his inward lights and motives. This is my hope and pray'r for thee. But becauſe this converting Word is not often preacht ſo fully & diligently, as I wiſh; our old men being commonly in manie places of this Land, babes in knowledge, and Children in Chriſtian wiſdome: leſt thou ſhould'ſt want that neceſſarie food, for thy ſoules everlaſting life; here is, my Love, here is a help, to know that God, to whom this day, thou haſt vow'd Faith and Obedience. Here is a Confeſſion, made for thee in the Wombe, and now preſented thee, for thy future inſtruction,

conſolation and ſalvation. Receive it courteouſly, Deare Babe; caſt on it thy mild lookes; take it with thy litle fingers; kiſſe it with thy ſoft, ſweet, ſucking lips; and hereafter eſteeme it above all riches, & keep it as thy life. 'Tis thine, & made for thee, although I ſay, it is likewiſe made for others, thy vertuous and beauteous Mother, thy wittie and prettie Siſter. Thou maiſt hereafter underſtand, Knowledge is like the Sunne, which caſts his beames abroad, and yet looſes no light: Or like a Torch, at which millions may be lighted, without prejudice to anie, or to it ſelfe: for, light and heat are common unto all bodies, and given all to all. In giving Inſtructions, that, which I give, remaines with me; and although all the world divide my gift, yet each man may receive it whole. Thinke not therefore this Booke leſſe thine; becauſe compoſed for others: but rather indeavour, to make it truly thine, by diligently learning it, and heartily beleeving, boldly profeſſing, faithfully practiſing that ſound Faith, and thoſe pious Works, I have taught thee in it and in my Catechiſme, dedicated to thy faire and loving Siſter, which I give thee likewiſe. And when thus thou haſt made them thine, hide not thy light, my Deare; burie not thy talent: but as a Sunne, impart thy light and heat to thy friends, nighbours, yea all men, with whom thou ſhalt converſe. Let it be thy daily ſtudie & holie ambition, to doe well to all men; ſo behaving thy ſelfe, that by thy vertuous examples, Chriſtian inſtructions, and friendlie admonitions, no man goe from thee without gaine. Convert ſinners from their ill wayes: comfort the penitent and afflicted, in their ſorrow & griefes: releeve the poore, in their hunger, nakednes, miſeries: inſtruct the ignorant, in honeſtie and religion: and as Peter,

confirme thy brethren the faithfull, in Chriſtian verities and religious duties. Doe this, my ſweet Infant, doe this diligently, having no other intention, then to pleaſe, ſerve, obey that God, who ſhall (I hope) give thee both the will & the deed, both the deſire and pow'r to doe ſuch noble things. And as that gracious God hath made me a good helpe, for thy greater and ſpeedier abilitie, to advance his glorie; ſtudie my Love, ſtudie by thy dutifull obſervance, to anſwer (if I live) the great affection, care and paines of me.

Thy then happie Father W. HERBERT.
Pointington.
2. of March, and the 13. day of thy Life. 1644.


