


TO THE HONOVRABLE HOVSE OF COMMONS, NOW ASSEMBLED in PARLIAMENT.

WHen I firſt heard that I was deſigned for this ſolemne ſervice, being conſcious of my own inſufficiencie to Preach to ſo awfull an Aſſembly, I couldnot entertaine it without trouble; yet reſolved with Luther, rather to undergoe others 
Inveniar ſanè ſuberbus &c. modò impit ſilcutii non arguar dum Dominus patititur. Luth. Ep. ad Staup. cenſures, then to be reproved for ungodly ſilence, in ſuch times when the Lord ſuffereth. And now I have as much reaſon to be full of bluſhings, to thinke that this plaine Diſcourſe ſhould be expoſed to more publique view; but herein I muſt reſigne up my ſelf unto your diſpoſings, to whom I owe, & quod poſſum, & quod non poſſum, much more then my meaneneſſe can performe.
This Sermon, ſuch an one as it is, I humbly tender to your Gracious Acceptance, who have adopted it; I put it into your Honourable Protection, who have liſted it; I commend it to your Practicall obſervation, for whom I intended it; heartily deſiring Gods Bleſſing upon your ſpirits in the peruſall of it; that you may read and act it, turning words into works, that you may repeate it over in your lives, which is the beſt repetition of Sermons.
Our preſent breaches, call for a contribution from every

one, for the repairing of them; but much is expected from you, who are called to be publique Counſellors, and thereby obliged to expreſſe a publique frame of ſpirit (which is the beautie and ſtrength of a Great Councell), ſwallowing up your private intereſts, in the publique Welfare. Not with Baruch, ſeeking great things for your ſelves, which is moſt incongruous to Stormy times, but rather reſembling Melancthon, who 
Ier. 45▪ 5. profeſſed, though he had many Domeſticall troubles, yet the publique wounds of the Church moſt deeply afflicted him. England is more bemoaned, by many with that language in Auſtin over the poore man. Quomodo huc cecidiſti? Alas how cameſt thou into theſe diſtractions? She may anſwer as 
Aug. Ep. 129. the poore man there, ſtanding in more need of reliefe then diſcourſe. Obſecro cogita quomodo hinc me liberes. Thinke how I may be reſcued out of th
•
ſe troubles. Towards this bleſſed Worke, I have caſt in my two mites, moving in the proper ſphaere of a Divine, as an Agent for the Truth, perſwading you, who are betruſted by others, and have farre engaged your ſelves in the Reformation of Religion, that with all your might, you would promote The Trade of Truth.

It is not for me to ſuggeſt a Methode in the execution of your counſels. He whoſe name is Counſellour guide you; yet I ſhall ſtill pray that in your Intention, the purging, the ſetling, 
Iſa. 9. 6. the advancing of True Religion may be moſt Dear unto you. It is one maine end, and a pretious fruit of government, that wee may lead peaceable and quiet lives in All Godlineſſe and honeſtie. This is well worth peoples wraſtling prayers, and your moſt active endeavours. The ſtabillity 1 Tim. 2. 2. of all our bleſſings muſt come by the True Religion, Gods preſence is the beſt ſecurity, who is moſt powerfully preſent where there is moſt power and purity of Religion. Would you have a flouriſhing Kingdome, advance the Kingdome of Chriſt in it. Let the State maintaine Religion, and Religion will bleſſe the State, could you ſettle all our State liberties, yet if the Arke of Truth bee taken from us, Our glory is departed, we may write theſe mourning characters upon all our Comforts, ICHABOD, where is the glory?
1 Sam. 4. 21, 22.



It is too high a complement in the Lord Cordes, a French Commander, who often ſaid, that he would willingly lie

Hollinſh. in Hen. 7.
ſeven yeeres in Hell, ſo that Callice were in the poſſeſſion of the French againe. We bleſſe God for that reall ſelfe-deny all and activity ye have expreſſed, abating ſo many perſonall and family contentments, in your long attendance upon publike affaires. Be not weary of well doing, in due ſeaſon ye ſhall reape if you faint not.
Gal. 6. 9.

Never had any PARLIAMENT more work to do; Ireland ſtill bleeds, the affaires thereof find unhappy obſtructions. To ſubdue Rebellion, to plant Religion there, are great matters. England is very much out of frame. The Church cals for Truth; the State cryes for Peace, they who ſowed in hope, reape in feare, out ſickles are turning into ſwords. Now to effect an happy correſpondence betwixt our Soveraigne and his people, a bleſſed compliance betwixt England and Religion, heres work for the ſtrongeſt ſhoulders.
Never had any PARLIAMENT greater oppoſition. As Nehem. 4. 17. our builders worke with one hand, and hold a weapon with the other. Achitophels plot, Rabſhekahs raile, Sanballats mocke. Yea ſince councels of Reformation, there is a more malignant antipathy appears againſt truth in many places. As 2 Tim. 3. 13. evill men and ſeducers waxe worſe and worſe, deceiving and being deceived. Yet be encouraged Worthy Sirs. Never had any PARLIAMENT ſo many Thundring Legions of praying Chriſtians, to aſſiſt them. when others inſult and blaſpheme, Iacobs poſterity are wreſtling with God for you, reſolving not to let him goe till he bleſſe you. And whilſt you are purſuing peace, allow this plaine Sermon that humble boldneſſe as to whiſper you in the eare, beſeeching you ſtill to maintain your former zeale in the cauſe of Truth. When did your counſels proſper more, then when you were moſt active about religion. When you were building the Lords Houſe. For hee builded yours as Hag. 2. 19. from this day I will bleſſe you.

Be pleaſed therfore more and more to engage your ſelves

for the Truth, ſo ſhal you engage God for you; let your cauſe be His cauſe then his Attributes will be yours, his providence will work for you, his ſpirit wil work in you; then will you
2 King. 6. 16.
have more with you then againſt you, though the Devill and the Pope combine. Do your owne work, truſt God with his; duty is ours, Events, ſucceſſe are his. Commit the keeping of your ſoules, of the Church, of the ſtate, to him in well doeing as unto a faithfull creator. Truth will yet Triumph, Babylon
1 Pet. 4. 19. and all her Crutches muſt downe; the fight of faith is a good fight, becauſe ſuch ſouldiers are ſure of the victory. 1 Tim. 6. 12. The kingdome of Chriſt ſhall prevaile, though ſecond cauſes be impotent, yet the zeale of the Lord of Hoaſts will perform this. Iſa. 9. 7.
When Hieruſalem is reſtored it will be a city of Truth Zach. 8. 3. O that all our Parliament worthyes, might bee ſo valiant for the Truth that England might become a kingdome of Truth; following Chronicles will then give you a ſhare in that Honour of being the Churches Saviours, as Obad. v. 21. and God will put Zerubbabels high dignity upon you, making you as Signets. Hag. 2. 23.
The Good Lord guide, unite, act and bleſſe your counſels, And think upon you for good, according to all you have done, or ſhall doe for his people.


So prayes He who deſires to be found, Your faithfull ſervant for the Truth: THOMAS HILL.

