


TO The Honourable Houſe of Commons, now aſſembled in PARLIAMENT.

I Have offered violence to my ſelfe to ſatisfie your deſires, in Preaching firſt, and next in publiſhing, theſe weake and courſe-ſpun meditations; fitter indeede for a popular auditory then ſuch an awfull and judicious aſſembly concerning which I may fitly ſay what Zeba and Zalmunna ſometimes did of Gideons brethren, each one reſembled the children of a King, Jud. 8.18. or as Cyneas the Embaſſador of Pyrrhus being asked after his return from Rome, what he thought of the City and State, made anſwere 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
, the ſame may I, with better reaſon, ſay of your Honourable Senate, It ſeemed unto me to looke like a little Common-wealth of Kings. When firſt I underſtood you had deſigned me (the unfitteſt in many reſpects you could have thought upon) unto this ſolemne ſervice: I reſented it truely no otherwiſe than Jonah did his meſſage to Nineveh, with much trouble and emotion of ſpirit, not to ſay diſcontent: and as forward ſhould I have beene as he (had not a ſtrong band of reaſon and conſcience held me backe) to flye to Tarſus or any whither elſe, rather then undertake the Province you had called me to: Not out of any diſaffection to the worke, or the Authority that ſummoned me to it, which I ſhall alwayes honour, and next to that of Gods, eſteeme ſacred; but being ſenſible of nothing more in all this world, then mine owne defects: and knowing well how hard a matter I finde it to ſatisfie my ſelfe, I held it impoſſible for me to bring forth ought that might ſatisfie others (eſpecially ſuch a grave Court of great Stateſmen) either in the Pulpit or the Preſſe. However ſince you are pleaſed out of your ingenuity and candor, not onely to owne this worthleſſe piece, but to over value it ſo far, as to call it forth into the publique light, having nothing elſe to ſway with me, beſides the obedience I owe to your commands, I do therefore in all humility preſent it unto your honourable acceptance, ſuch as it is it glorieth to be yours, and were all the body of this ſimple diſcourſe, like Solomons Lineae aureae cum punctis argenteis, Cant. 1.11. wrought with lines of gold and enameled with pearles, I ſhould not hold it too rich a preſent, for ſuch unparalleld Worthies, which have honoured God ſo much, and are ſo much honoured by him. Your exemplary zeale and piety, your Noble and heroicall atchieuments, for the honour of our God, and the advancement of his kingdome, hath already ſtamped for you ſuch an Impreſſion of reſpect and reverence, in the eſtimations and thoughts of all the godly, that you ſeeme to be as the ſtones of a crown lifted up, and as an Enſigne upon our Land, Zech. 9.16. Go on and proſper, moſt worthy Senators, in the great worke which you have ſo happily begun, till you ſhall have fully crowned our hopes, and perfected your owne moſt glorious undertakings. Never had any Parliament either

ſo glorious a prize as you have to contend for, or ſo many potent adverſaries, oppoſitions, and difficulties, to encounter with: but this may ſerve as a more then ſufficient encouragement to hearten you on, that you have a good God, a Noble Cauſe, an Honourable Reward, and what could you wiſh more? See what you have done already, and let your former, many and precious experiences of divine favour and aſſiſtance, animate you to waite upon God, with an unwearied patience, till he ſhall make all your enemies of the Synagogue of Sathan, to come and worſhip before your feete, and to know that he hath loved you. Conſider how many great and ſtupendious workes God hath already made you inſtruments to bring about. How many mighty Nimrods have you cut down? how many yoakes of oppreſſion and tyranny have you broken? how many dying Saints have you revived? The Lord hath made darkeneſſe light before you, and crooked things ſtreight, he hath levelled mountaines, and raiſed vallies; what enterprize have you taken in hand, which hath not in the Iſſue proſpered beyond your expectations? You have ſprung a myne under the walls of Babylon, unſetled the Throu of the Beaſt. Behold how the Antichriſtian faction languiſheth, the Pontificall chaire reeles, the Miters wither, the triple Crowne ſhakes: that which the Lord threatned ſometimes againſt one of the worſt of the Kings of Judah, the ſame he ſeemes to doe now againſt the great Monarch of Babylon, Remove the Diadem, take away the Crown, I will overturn, overturn, overturn it, untill he come whoſe right it is, and I will give it him, Ezek 22.26, 27. Me thinkes I ſee the proud turrets, and battlements of Rome falling, and Sion riſing up faire as the morning, cleere as the moone, terrible as an Army with Banners. Howſoever this is certaine, God hath promiſed, and he will no doubt in due time make it good, which we have in the Prophet. Eſay 24.23. The moone ſhall be confounded, and the Sunne aſhamed, when the Lord of Hoſts ſhall reigne in Mount Sion, and before all his ancients gloriouſly. I hope the happy time is at hand, which God hath appointed for the full working out of his Glory and our deliverance, and that this dawning of our hopes may break forth into a perfect day of joy and triumph, It is and ſhall be the earneſt and conſtant prayer of

Your moſt unworthy Servant in the worke of Chriſt, HEN: HALL.

