


TO
THE HONORABLE
the Houſe of
COMMONS
Aſſembled in PARLIAMENT.

Right Honourable,


THE great Councell of Ieruſalem
ſate neare the Temple,R. Sol. in Ex. 21 and the
greateſt managings of the Councell,Luke 2. 46.
were the matters of Religion.Talm. in Sanhed. cap. Dine. mammonoth. Such
hath been the poſture of your deſires,
and ſuch the bent of your indeavours
in all your ſitting: And as it is ingratitude in
any degrees of men not to ſerve you, who ſtrive ſo much
to preſerve the State, ſo eſpecially is it in the Miniſters
of the Temple, ſince you labour ſo much alſo to ſerve the
Temple. Obedience to your commands is the loweſt expreſsion
of ſuch a ſervice, becauſe it is ſo naturally due,
yet is it the higheſt that my meanneſſe can reach unto;
Readineſſe being joyned to that obedience: Theſe are

the two mites that I can tender unto your Corban, and
the two Turtles that I have to offer at your Altar, not
having a better or more valuable gift and offering to
bring, your Nobleneſſe will pleaſe to accept of the gift
becauſe of the heart of the giver given with it, and like
him whom yee repreſent, to account. To obey, to be
better then Sacrifice, and to hearken, better then
the fat of Rams. What in obedience to your command
was humbly preſented to your eares and hearing not long
agoe, is now upon the like command in the ſame obedience
and humility preſented to your eyes and reading. If
it ſhall finde acceptance with you, it ſecureth me againſt
al thought or care of inferiors diſpleaſure or exceptions.
I moſt humbly and ſubmiſsively caſt it, my ſelfe,
and all that I am or can at the feete and diſpoſall of your
honourable Houſe: and becauſe ſhort diſcourſe beſt fitteth
your great occaſions, ceaſe to trouble you with more
words: but ſhall never ceaſe to ſolicite the Throne of
grace for continued defence and bleſsing upon your perſons
and indeavours; that the Law-giver may never
faile till Shiloh come as we deſire amongst us: And ſo
ever prayeth,

Your moſt unworthy, but truly
devoted Servant, John Lightfoote.

