



TO THE HONORABLE Houſe of COMMONS Aſſembled In PARLIAMENT.



WHen Joſhua was by Jericho, there ſtood a man overIoſh. 5. 13, 14▪
 againſt him with his ſword drawn in his hand; and Joſhua ſeemeth in a military way to examine him, Art thou for us, or for our adverſaries? Nay (ſaith he) but as Captain of the hoſt of the Lord am I now come. This anſwer maketh him fall on his face to the earth and worſhip; acknowledging Him for Commander in chief, and humbly ſubjecting himſelf to Him as His Lieftenant Generall, ready to receive His Commands: What ſaith my Lord unto his ſervant? It is one of the greateſt▪ honours the ſons of men are capable of here on earth, to follow the Enſignes of this victorious Captain of the Lords hoſt▪ and to wait upon his triumphant chariot. If herein the Lord hath honoured You above many thouſands of your brethren, it concerneth You much to imitate Joſhua▪
 Firſt, as he queſtioned the Son of God whom he knew not in that apparition at the firſt ſight; ſo ye knowing Chriſt to be that Captain of the Lords hoſt, who will ſubdue all things to Himſelf, ought in an holy jealouſie to ſearch your own hearts, and to examine all your counſels and proceedings: Are we in theſe things for Chriſt, or for His adverſaries, for Him or againſt Him? Secondly, I beſeech You be willing to lye lowe before him and to ſay, What ſaith our Lord unto His ſervants? Ye expect not His immediate voice, and therefore in all humility hear Him by His Ambaſſadours, when they ſpeak according to their Commiſſion, as if His mandates were delivered unto You by His own mouth. Admirable is that of Valentinian recordedTheod. 
•
. 4. cap. 6. by Theodoret, when Ambroſe had freely reproved ſome things amiſſe

in his government, ſaid the Emperour, I knew well thy zeal and courage, and therefore was ſo far from oppoſing, that I was forward to promote thine election to this paſtorall charge: Go on therefore to cure the diſeaſes of our Souls according to the preſcript of Gods Word▪ And it is reported of Albert Duke of Mickleburgh▪ that when a flattering Courtier ſought to incenſe him againſt a Preacher for dealing roundly with him; He told him, he loved the man ſo much the better, and willed him in his name to give him thanks for his pious Sermon▪ If Ye follow Chriſt as your Captain, not turning to the right hand or to the left, who knoweth whether after ſix yeers compaſſing the w
•
ls of Jericho, they may not on the ſeventh fall to the ground before You. The Lord Jeſus direct You by His Spirit, and gird You with His ſtrength, to endure unto the end, that no man take Your Crown.
So prayeth
Your unworthy Servant in the Lord, JOHN MAYNARD.

