

The Còpy of a Letter Writt'n By Sir HENRY WOOTTON, To the Author, upon the following Poem.
From the Colledge, this 13. of April, 1638.


SIR,


IT was a ſpecial favour, when you lately beſtowed upon me here, the firſt taſte of your acquaintance, though no longer then to make me know that I wanted more time to value it, and to enjoy it rightly; and in truth, if I could then have imagined your farther ſtay in theſe parts, which I underſtood afterwards by Mr. H., I would have been bold in our vulgar phraſe to mend my draught (for you left me with an extreme thirſt) and to have begged your converſation again, joyntly with your ſaid learned Friend, at a poor meal or two, that we might have banded together ſom good Authors of the antient time: Among which, I obſerved you to have been familiar.
Since your going, you have charg'd me with new Obligations, both for a very kinde Letter from you dated the ſixth of this Month, and for a dainty peece of entertainment which came therwith. Wherin I ſhould much commend the Tragical part, if the Lyrical did not raviſh me with a certain Dorique delicacy in your Songs and Odes, wherunto I muſt

plainly confeſs to have ſeen yet nothing parallel in our Language: Ipſa mollities. But I muſt not omit to tell you, that I now onely owe you thanks for intimating unto me (how modeſtly ſoever) the true Artificer. For the work it ſelf, I had view'd ſom good while before, with ſingular delight, having receiv'd it from our common Friend Mr. R. in the very cloſe of the late R's Poems, Printed at Oxford, wherunto it was added (as I now ſuppoſe) that the Acceſſory might help out the Principal, according to the Art of Stationers, and to leave the Reader Con la bocca dolce.

Now Sir, concerning your travels, wherin I may chalenge a little more priviledge of Diſcours with you; I ſuppoſe you will not blanch Paris in your way; therfore I have been bold to trouble you with a few lines to Mr. M. B. whom you ſhall eaſily find attending the young Lord S. as his Governour, and you may ſurely receive from him good directions for the ſhaping of your farther journey into Italy, where he did reſide by my choice ſom time for the King, after mine own receſs from Venice.

I ſhould think that your beſt Line will be thorow the whole length of France to Marſeilles, and thence by Sea to Genoa, whence the paſſage into Tuſcany is as Diurnal as a Graveſend Barge: I haſten as you do to Florence, or Siena, the rather to tell you a ſhort ſtory from the intereſt you have given me in your ſafety.
At Siena I was tabled in the Houſe of one Alberto Scipioni an old Roman Courtier in dangerous

times, having bin Steward to the Duca di Pagliano, who with all his Family were ſtrangled, ſave this onely man that eſcap'd by foreſight of the Tempeſt: With him I had often much chat of thoſe affairs; Into which he took pleaſure to look back from his Native Harbour; and at my departure toward Rome (which had been the center of his experience) I had wonn confidence enough to beg his advice, how I might carry my ſelf ſecurely there, without offence of others, or of mine own conſcience. Signor Arrigo mio (ſayes he) I penſieri ſtretti, & il viſo ſciolto will go ſafely over the whole World: Of which Delphian Oracle (for ſo I have found it) your judgement doth need no commentary; and therfore (Sir) I will commit you with it to the beſt of all ſecurities, Gods dear love, remaining

Your Friend as much at command as any of longer dateHenry Wootton.

