


TO My deare Wife THE LADY STAPYLTON.


My Love,


PErhaps the Wits may be as much offended at men for writing to, as Walking with their owne Wives: neither is in faſhion I confeſſe, but

ſure they would exceedingly well-become our Age. Indeed Gifts between Man and Wife, were prohibited by the Roman Legiſlator, yet hee intended not to deſtroy Kindneſs by a Law, but to declare Community in Marriage, where both have equall Proprieties, in that which either is poſſeſſed of. And even in reaſon (the ground of Law) he that makes a Preſent to his Wife, offers an Injury in a Complement: for he intitles her to that by his Gift,

which is hers in her owne Right.

I will not therefore ſo much tranſgreſſe, as to ſay, I give thee my Engliſh of Leander's Epiſtle and Hero's anſwer: for that were to imply, an expectation of receiving Thankes, for what was thy own as ſoone as mine. All that (by praefixing of thy Name) I pretend to, is first, to ſhew the World how ſenſible I am of thy Love, expreſſed to mee in both fortunes, the later being lively

repreſented in theſe Letters, that paſt betweene Husband and Wife divided by a Storme. In the next place, I ſhew thee, how I ſpent part of that time, when I had nothing left but (what Fortune could not take away) ſome houres for ſtudy, wherein I enjoyed my ſelfe as much, as I could, in thy abſence. Laſtly, I do an honour to my Authour, for I dare boldly ſay, the ſtricteſt and moſt rigid Modesty will not ſcruple to read a paſsion writ by OVID,

where his name is placed ſo near to thine, which nothing unchaſt durſt ever be ſo impudent to approach. And if my Augury deceive me not, the Goodneſs of the Times is ſuch, that the Lady I ſend to beare thee company, Hero, will be ſtudyed by thy Sex in generall; her vertue drawn into Preſident, and the greateſt Modesties diſcovered in the greateſt Beauties; teaching the bold Pretenders to their favour, to court them, not in lewd unmanly Verſe (the new-ſickneſs of

the mind) but in Leander's primitive way of wooing, timerous bluſhes, noble undertakings, and gallant performances: but all of the vertuous ancient straine, ſuch as this, wherein Ovid himſelf preſumed not to uſe one laſcivious ſyllable: and if the Muſe of ſo incomparable a Wit, preſumed not upon a looſer Flight, when his ſubject was the faire dead Seſtian: how dare our puny Aretines draw a wanton line, when they write of Hero's yet alive? I hope this Patterne

will ruin their Deſigne; to which good purpoſe, if my poore Endeavours may conduce, I must account them ſeaſonably beſtowed. Howſoever I ſhall not repent me, ſince they are crowned with ſo deſired ſucceſſe, that they publiſh me, as I am,

Thy moſt affectionate HUSBAND ROBERT STAPYLTON.

