


TO THE HONORABLE HOVSE OF COMMONS Aſſembled in PARLIAMENT.

THE Lord that now makes it his great work to build up Zion, and ſettle his Arke there, in its place, hath made it your great honour, that hee hath taken you into a partnerſhip in ſo bleſſed a work; Hee make it your happineſſe,

that your Faithfull indevours being crowned with a bleſſed ſucceſſe, both the preſent and after Ages may deſervedly call you the Repairers of the breach, and reſtorers
Eſa. 58. 12.
of paths to dwell in. It is pity ſuch builders ſhould want either fair weather, or a ſure Scaffold to build on; but you will not be diſcouraged, whileſt you think how in great repaires, all uſe to lie on heaps, and remember, what the ableſt of Gods Maſter-builders in this kind have met with, it is enough that Jeruſalems Wall may be built in troubleous times. God can lay the beams of
Dan. 9. 25. Pſal. 104 3. Luk. 17. 6.
his Chambers in the water, and Faith can plant Sycamines in the Sea; it was a confuſed Chaos, without form and void, full of darkneſſe, which this goodly Fabrick of Heaven and Earth was at first made out of, and there were Evenings as well as Mornings all along in the Work, however it went on, each day adding diſtinction and beauty, and the laſt, perfection, ſo that God beheld

all and ſaw it to bee very good. It is the ſame creating God, that must order our preſent confuſions, and raiſe up our ruines, in which your humble and faithfull Prayers, will be more uſefull then your ableſt Counſels. Moſes, Elias, our Saviour, the great builders and repairers of the Church, are every one of them recorded to have faſted forty daies and nights, when they were upon that Worke, it much commends Prayer and Faſting to all who are at any time ingaged in a like ſervice; that was your buſineſſe, when this Sermon was Preached, which, if either in the delivery it did any whit help your Spirits then in prayer, or in the publiſhing, it may now or hereafter, ingage you, when you moſt diligently look to your Work, more earneſtly to look up to God in it, it will bee the joy, as it is the prayer of

Your Servant in this great Work,
STEPHEN MARSHALL.

