

To the Honourable Houſe of Commons
aſſembled in Parliament.

THat which was preached by your command is now
publiſhed, when the great voice ſaith Come up
hither, tis an evill modeſty to hide among the
ſtuff. In theſe buſie times they are happy to whom
God hath vouchſafed the ſhelter oſ an obſcure privacy; yet
upon a call we ſhould not conſult with our own eaſe & quiet.
The times are violent and blaſting, & this poor endeavour
is likely to undergoe ſeveral miſconſtructions. But (I thank
God) I am learning to paſſe through2 Cor. 6. 8
good report and evil
report, and to diſvalue cenſure, when it ſeizeth upon me in
the way of duty, I have dealt freely and impartially againſt
the miſcarriages of both parties, & happily my liberty may
diſpleaſe ſome, others may look upon the things offered here
as too low and trivial, & not weighty enough to reach the
end of the deſign; let them remember, the intent of theſe propoſalls
is only to ingage to a further conſultation about the
matter, the entire diſcourſe were fitter for a Treatiſe then a
Sermon; and yet ſomething is offered, which by the bleſſing
of God may be ſerviceable to reduce men from their violences
& extremities to ſome better temper and moderation.
Some poſſibly may diſlike the whole deſigne, ſpirits now are
very keen and exaſperated, men think 'twill be a cooling of
their zeal if we ſhould a little take off their edge and ſharpneſs;
fire wil not be quenched without hiſſing. To theſe I ſhall
only profes, that if I know mine heart, I abhor all ſuch moderation
& compliances as wil not ſtand with chriſtian zeal,
and may diſadvantage truth and religion, what ever become

of my own party I would be faithfull and true to that intereſt.
I know that as 'tis hard to be moderate without danger,
ſo alſo without ſin, men of middle intereſts do alwayes
diſpleaſemen, and they ſhould be carefull they do not diſpleaſe
God, there are many counterfeits of Chriſtian moderation,
a cold or at beſt a tepid indifferency; lukewarm
Chriſtians may eaſily middle it; Carnally-wiſe neutrality,
it's no wonder to ſee men that obſerve the times, neither
hot nor cold.
James 1. 8
A doubtfull uncertainty,

〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 are 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

double-minded men are unſtable, and their compliance is
promiſcuouſly diſpenſed: ſome poſſibly may have ſo much of
child and ſelfe in them, as to mind Church-peace only as a
taking theam, & ſpeak for it rather from their brain then
their heart;
Dan. 11. 23. others may (like him in Daniel) deale deceitfully,
and preſs a league that they may become ſtrong with
a ſmall people, mind moderation for their own advantage,
ſome out of a deſire of their carnall eaſe and quiet, may be
againſt ſtirs. I fore-ſaw theſe rocks, deſired grace to avoide
them, therefore I hope nothing will be found here to occaſion
any ſuch prejudice & ſuſpition againſt this endeavour: however
it ſpeedeth abroad you were pleaſed to honour it with
acceptance, and to do ſomething upon it, which I hope you
will revive againe, when it ſhall comport with the times. I
ſhall deſire God to guide you in that and other your great affaires;
the Wonderfull Counſellour be with you in all your
ſtreights,Eſay 9. 6. make you underſtanding men of the ſeaſon, carefull
to apply apt remedies to the diſtempers of it.1 Chron. 12. 32.


So prayeth your meaneſt ſervant in the Lords Work, THOMAS MANTON.

