

To my very noble Friend, Sir Paul Neale, Knight.

SAint Paul cannot re-aſcend to Heaven, before he gives you alſo a ſalute: My Lord, your Father, having been ſo great a Light, and a Star of the higheſt magnitude in the Firmament of the Church.
If you pleaſe to goe along with him in this his Progreſſe, by the guidance of this Diſcourſe, you ſhall diſcover many things that are not vulgar, by a curious mixture of Church and State affaires: You ſhall feele herein the pulſe of Italy, how it beates at this time, ſince the beginning of theſe late warres 'twixt the Pope and ſome Princes, with the grounds, procedure, and ſucceſſe of the ſaid warres, together with the intereſt and grievances, pretences and quarrels of every Prince againſt Rome.

I muſt confeſſe, my Genius hath often prompted me, that I was never cut out for a Tranſlater, there being a kinde of ſervility therein: For it muſt needs be ſomewhat tedious to one that hath any free-borne thoughts, and genuine conceptions of his owne (whereof I have a few, though poore ones) to enchaine himſelfe to the ſenſe of another. Moreover, Tranſlations at the beſt, ſpecially in Languages which have an advantage one of the other, as the Italian hath of the Engliſh, which may be ſaid to differ as Silke doth from Clotb, the common weare of both Countries where they are ſpoken, though Cloth be the more ſubſtantiall (as the Engliſh, by reaſon 'tis ſo knotted with conſonants, is more ſinewy and ſtronger then the Italian) yet Silke is the ſmoother and ſliker: I ſay, Tranſlations are like the wrong ſide of a Turkey Carpet, which is fuller of thrummes and knots, and not ſo eeven as the right ſide. Or I may ſay, Tranſlations are like Wines (as I ſpeake elſewhere) t'ane off the Lees, and powred into other veſſels, which muſt needs loſe

ſomething of their firſt ſtrength and briskneſſe, which in the powring (or paſſage rather) evaporates into ayre.
Touching this preſent Tranſlation, I may ſay, it is a thing I did, when I did nothing; 'twas to finde ſomething to paſſe away the ſlow houres of this ſad condition of impriſonment, wherein I have been ſo long plung'd. I pray take this as a ſmall token of the true reſpects I owe you, and to my noble Lady, whoſe hands I humbly kiſſe, wiſhing you both, as the ſeaſon invites me, with a good New-yeare (which begins but now in Law) a holy Lent, and a healthfull Spring.



Fleet 25. of March.
Your much obliged and ready Servant,

I. H.


