


The Epiſtle Dedicatory.

THou Royall Croſſe, with Age and
Honour crown'd,
That ſtand'ſt i'th mid'ſt of the
Kings Bath, renown'd
Both farre and neer, ſuch Cures
thy Bath hath wrought,
As thouſands unto thee for help have ſought,
Who by thy warming Waters healed were,
Whoſe Stilts there left thereof do witneſſe beare,
And to thy Honour, on thy top are placed,
To ſhew with what great vertue thou art graced:
Neer to thy Springs my agitating Muſe,
Hath made a Book which doth report ſome Newes
As from thy ſelf: Her Book craves at thy hand
It under thy renowned name may ſtand.
And I the Author chooſe to make my moan
Uuto thy ſelf. For why? As ſenſeleſſe ſtone
Moſt hearts are now become. Therefore from
thee
An equall good may well expected be,


Through devious wayes & ſundry ſuddain fears
My Pilgrimage in this ſad vale of tears
Hath paſt, In Schools, Camp, and Court, poor I
Have ſeen the change of times variety;
And learn'd to know worlds beſt proſperity
Is but a ſtate of wretched miſery.
I then began my thoughts for to remove,
From things beneath unto thoſe things above
And then my heart all ſweetning comfort
borrows.
From him who was a man of woe and ſorrows
In this baſe world, which then I did forſake,
And once again unto my books betake
My ſelf, God then of his free grace did call
Me to that Warre which is ſpirituall,
And lawfully by Church-authority,
I was admitted to the Miniſtry;
And being thus by Gods great mercy brought
Unto his work, I have his Battels fought,
Full fourty yeers, and never yet did ceaſe,
Next to the Faith, for to preſerve the Peace
Of holy Church, as did become a Sonne;
All her commads by me were juſtly done:
And yet the heaps of followers did me wrong,
I could not mend't but all the way along,
In the whole courſe of my poor Miniſtry,


I was acquainted with adverſity.
And did at laſt all means of living looſe,
That hope fail'd me which I to truſt did chooſe;
The Letters from, and Orders of that Court
Of High-Commiſſion ſhall of me report
No thing but well, who pleaſe to ſee them may,
And hear on my behalf what truths they'l ſay:
But once grown poor from England then I went
To Ireland, where I might with good content,
Have lived but that Rebellious fatall curſe
Drove me from thence, to a Rebellion worſe,
And now poor man in this thy City Bath,

I am alive as buried in my grave;
With grief I ſee the wofull miſery
Of honeſt, poor, diſpiſed Poverty.
The Prophet of his time did hit it right,
That every one was found an Hypocrite.
Yea, now that Hell-born ſinne doth wound and ſtain.
The greateſt number, who as yet remain
Profeſſed Chriſtians without Charity:
In ſuch I'me ſure ther's moſt Hypocriſie:
And for this cauſe that Book doth ſwiftly flie,
Which lamentation, mourning, woe doth cry
To every Soul. This Truth though ſeen, and
kown,
The greateſt part from ill to worſe are grown.


And ſeeing this, I have the world forſook,
A help from thence it is in vain to look:
Yet went I on with my well-meaning Book,
From firſt to laſt with hardſhip undertook.
And though the means appears diſpis'd & weak,
And men may think it doth but vainly ſpeak,
To ſtop Rebelious courſe that's grown ſo ſtrong


Joſhua. 6. 4. Seven Trumpets of Rams-Hornes. Judges 7. 16. G
•
deons 300. broken Pit hers. 1 Sam. 17. 49. Young, little, and unarmed David with a Stone and a Slinge to overcome and ſlay the triple armed Gyant great Goliah.
 By weaker means God hath deſtroy'd the throng,
Of ſtronger Enemies as you may ſee,
In holy Writ recorded there to be.
My ſelf, my Book poor and diſpis'd though thought
Yet by ſuch means the mighty God hath brought
Great things to paſſe, yea, works of wondrous
fame.
That glory might be given to his great name,
A happy Peace that precious Pearl to gain.
My Book with Gods aſſiſtance may obtain,
Or further the Obtainment and not hinder,
What may a Peace to King and Kingdom
render.
Kind Croſſe, I pray thou wouldſt accept it then,
For thou art kind unto all ſorts of men.
To Poor, and Rich, to th' Leſſer, and the Great,
To all thou doſt afford a warming Seat
As is thy ſelf, my Booke's a Bath for Health,
To heale the Aches of the Common-wealth,


If ſome therein to bathe will wiſely trie,
It would them heale of Treaſons Leproſie,
And thus (kind Croſſe) I humbly take my leave
Thou wilt not me of any hope bereave.
And what thou art, I muſt reſolve to bear,
My proper Croſſe is unto me my ſhare,
Which I'le take up, and joyfully will kiſſe,
So following Chriſt to my eternall bliſſe.

R. P.

