


To the Right Honorable, John Lord Roberts,
Baron of Truro, Preſident; Francis Lord
Willoughby of Parham, Sir William Balfore, and
Sir Philip Stapleton, Knights; Colonell Sheffield,
Col. Martin, Col. Ayſcough, Col. Coningham,
Col. Thompſon, Col. Hoburn, Col. Carlton,
and Mr. Engliſh Adjutant Generall:
Colleagues and Judges in the late Councell of War at St. Albans,
at the Tryall and Condemnation of Col. Nath. Fiennes.

Right Honorable, Right Worſhipfull, and Worſhipfull:


WE here humbly preſent you with a True, though late
Relation, and Vindication of your impartiall Juſtice, in
the Tryall of Nathaniel Fiennes, the Unfortunate Governour
of Briſtoll, which hath been over-long traduced,
miſreported, by the licentious Pens, the ſlanderous
Tongues of him and his, which will not yet
learn ſilence.
It was his own vainglorious humour that firſt inevitably engaged
us, by publike Proclamations to be his Proſecutors, and now
inforceth us to become the Regiſters of his deſerved Doom. Had
his Tongue or quill been diſcreetly ſilent, and not miſreported his
ignoble ſurrender of Briſtoll to the world, the memoriall of it had
been dead ere this, at leaſt our Lips, our Pens would have continued
mute. And had he not returned to his former folly, in juſtifying
himſelf again in Print, after your Honorable juſt ſentence
denounced againſt him (to the inſufferable derogation of your
moſt upright Juſtice) this Hiſtory of his Tryall and Condemnation,
(truly collected out of our broken Notes and Memories, without any
Sophiſtication of Additions) had never ſeen the light: But his
pertinacious inſolency, firſt in appealing privately from, and ſince
in Writing openly againſt the Juſtice of your ſentence, againſt the
Ordinances of War themſelves, as ſummum jus, yea ſumma Injuria,
in his late Check to the Checker, to palliate or extenuate his own
Cowardize and Treaſon, for which he was condemned to loſe his

head, hath now obliged us (in point of honour, of duty, both to
your Honours, the Parliament, Kingdom, Juſtice, and our ſelves)
to publiſh the reall verity of all the proceedings in this publike caſe,
under your Noble Patronage: to whom as we both reſorted for Juſtice
in the Tryall of the Cauſe; ſo we now appeal for the Truth of the
enſuing Debates, Relation, Teſtimonies, as to the moſt equall Judges,
who tooke Notes of all the Paſſages, Arguments, Depoſitions on
either ſide, the true publication whereof will ſcatter all the miſts of
Prejudices, Miſtakes, Miſreports, wherewith they have been
hitherto clouded.
Our deſire is, that your eminent Juſtice may ſhine as bright in
this Relation of it, throughout the Realm, as it did in the Councell-Chamber
at Saint Albans, in the pronounced Sentence: from whence
the deſperate Malefactor (who hath loſt his braine, or modeſty at
leaſt in ſtead of his head) I know not by what prodigious Chymiſtry
endeavours to (*) abſtract Arguments of his Innocencie,In his Check to the Checker.
 Integrity
Valour, againſt all ſenſe and reaſon. If he will not henceforth
learn better manners, and ſubmit himſelf to your publike Juſtice,
with humble acknowledgement, and Recantation of his former
Calumnies, we preſume you will be ſo ſenſible of your wounded
Honors and Integrities, as to make this ſtout affronter of Juſtice, and
Cowardly Oppoſer of the common Enemy, a Preſident to poſterity in
point of exemplary Execution, as well as of bare Conviction; ſince
others of better extraction and deſert then he,See here p. 118 (as Van * Hemert,
with two of his Captains by name) have loſt their heads, for ſurrendring
places of leſſe conſequence and ſtrength then Briſtoll, after
a longer, ſharper ſiege by far then it ſuſtained.
Thus ſubmitting both our Canſe and this unpoliſhed Relation
to your Honorable, impartiall Cenſures, We humbly reſt

Your Honors, VVorſhips, and the Republikes
Devoted Servants,
W: Prynne.
Clement Walker.


