


TO THE
RIGHT WORSHIPFULL
JOHN KENRICK
Alderman of LONDON, Governour of the
Merchant Adventurers of ENGLAND.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFULL
ISAAC LEE,
Deputy of the ſaid Company of Merchant Adventurers
reſiding at Hamburgh.
To all other Deputies, Aſſiſtants and Members of the
ſaid Famous Company.

Worthy Gentlemen:


IF in this brief Argument (which here treats of your Charters,
and maintains your priviledges) there be any thing beſeeming
an Advocate of yours: I deſire the intire advantage
thereof may redound ſolely to your ſelves. For indeed the
Merit of your Cauſe is ſuch, as would require an able Orator:
and when I firſt applyed my ſelf to ſerve you herein, I perceived your intereſt
was the ſame as the Common intereſt of all Merchants, and that could
have no termination, but in the common intereſt of our Nation: But if
there appear any Error, or Fayler in theſe papers: if the workmanſhip be
found too unworthy of the ſtuffe: I ſhall then deſire of all my Readers, that
the blame may be onely mine: and that none but my ſelf may ſuffer the leaſt
diſadvantage by my defects, and diſabilities. I am certain all wiſe, impartial
Judges will diſtinguiſh betwixt that which is mine in this weak peece,
and that which is yours: and if they caſt ſome diſdain upon me for not

pleading your cauſe, as I might: they will not proceed to a condemnation
of your cauſe, for being no better pleaded here then it is.
In Queen Elizabeths dayes a Tract to this very purpoſe was Printed by
Mr. Wheeler (a learned Gent: that preceded me in this place) were that
Tract now re-printed, perhaps our Times would be better ſatisfied in this
Caſe. It came not to my fight, till after I had formed the lump of this, and
given it all thoſe rude lineaments almoſt, which it now bears: and I was
induced then to perſiſt in my reſolution of finiſhing this, and not of retroceding;
the rather; becauſe I ſaw my ſtile and method varied much from his:
becauſe, the face of the times (which has great influence upon the State
and fate of Merchandize) was not the ſame when He wrote, as it is now:,
becauſe, his Tract was in bulk more then twice, as great as mine; becauſe,
He might give ſome light to me in ſome things, and I adde ſome to Him in
other things; and ſo both might be more effectuall for the ends propoſed by
both, then either: becauſe, if He was more ſatisfactory in matters of this
particular Company, I had ſome thoughts in my ſelf, that I was more proper
for the affairs of Merchants in generall. Theſe reaſons kept from abortion
this Eſſay of mine at that time: but for how long a ſpace it was repreived, I
cannot prognoſticate: nor do I much regard how ſoon its fatall houre approaches,
ſo the buſineſſe which it aymed at may ſurvive, and proſper. Gentlemen,
my reputation in this caſe muſt run ſome hazard, and ſtand or fall,
as the vogue of this age pleaſes: yet my intention is to be judged of onely by
you; wherefore let that onely finde your fair acceptation, and favourable
conſtruction, and that ſhall be a ſufficient encouragement to

Hamb: Decemb. 30. 1647.

Your Worſhips obliged,
faithfull Servant,
HEN: PARKER.

