


TO
THE HIGH COVRT
OF
PARLIAMENT.

Right Honourable,


HAving had the Honour, through Gods aſſiſtance, to be
a meane, though cordiall Inſtrument, of Vindicating The
Soveraigne Power of Parliaments and Kingdomes, in all
Civill or Military affaires which concerne the State,
in Foure ſeverall Volumes, againſt all Oppoſites whatſoeever;
which they have (for the moſt part) ſatisfied, or put to ſilence:
I expected a Quietus eſt from all other Controverſies, concerning the
Iuriſdiction of Parliaments, eſpecially in Eccleſiaſticall matters; which
moſt imagined had been put to eternall ſilence when our Lordly Prelates
loſt their Votes and Seſsion in Parliament, by a publike Law: But (alas)
I know not by what evill Genius, and Pythagorean Metempſychoſis, the
Anti-Parliamentary Soules, formerly dwelling in our defunct Prelates
earthly Tabernacles, are tranſmigrated into, and revived in a New-Generation
of men (ſtarted up of late among us) commonly known by
the Name of INDEPENDENTS; who, though for the moſt part
really cordiall in their Affections, Actions to the Parliament and
Church of England, (for which, and for their piety they are to bee
highly honoured▪) yet ſome of them are of late become extremely derogatory,
and deſtructive unto both, in their Anarchicall and Anti-Parliamentary
Poſitions: For which, and for their late gathering of Independent
Churches, contrary to Your Parliamentary Injunctions, they are to be
juſtly blamed, as great diſturbers of our publike Peace and Vnity.

It is the obſervation of learnedSelect. Diſputat. de Quaeſt. in quibus ſit Poteſtas Eccleſiaſtica. Theſ. 1. 4, & 5.
Voetius andDe Epiſcopatu Conſtantini Magni. p. 3. 4, 5, 6.
Vedelius, That
the Arminians in the Netherlands, for the advancing of their owne
Faction, and more facill accompliſhment of their private ill Deſignes,
did before the Synod of Dort, and in the beginning thereof,
exceedingly cry up the Power of the Civill Magiſtrate, and States

of Holland, in Eccleſiaſticall matters, both by Writing and Preaching;
aſcribing to them the higheſt Juriſdiction and Power of giving
ultimate Judgement in all Controverſies of Faith, and Eccleſiaſticall
matters ariſing in the Church, as a Prerogative belonging immediately
under Chriſt to them alone: And thereupon they appealed
to the States, from the Eccleſiaſticall Claſſes, as the proper
Iudges of the Controverſies they had raiſed in the Belgick Churches.
But at laſt, after the Synod of Dort had determined againſt their
Arminian Errors, and the
See Acta Synodi Dod
•
. p. 3
•
5, 326, 327
States eſtabliſhed their Determinations,
prohibiting the Preaching or Printing of any Arminian Tenets, with
the private Independent Congregations and Conventicles of the Arminian
Party, they preſently altered both their opinions and practice;
crying downe the Authority of the States and Civill Magiſtrate, as
faſt as they had cryed it up, both in theirApologiae. c. 25. See Epiſcopius Diſput. 32. Theſ. 4. Mr. Rutherfords, Due Right of Presbyteries. p. 343, 344, 345 357, 358, 359.
Apologies and Sermons;
contracting, yea denying them that very power which before they
had ſo liberally meaſured 
•
ut unto them; affirming, that the States
had no power at all over their private Congregations: that it was not
any right or part of their Office to obliege men, by their authorities,
to the Decrees of Synods, however agreeable to the word of God;
and that they ought not to uſe any coactive Power or Authority in
ſuch caſes, to obliege them to conformity.

This Practice of the Arminians was, by
Anti-apol
•
gia. p. 157, 158.
Mr
 Thomas Edwards, by way
of prediction, applied to the Independents, in theſe very tearmes: And
it may be feared, however theſe Apologiſts NOW to ingratiate themſelves,
and being let alone in their Church-way, ſay, they give more to the Magiſtrates
than the Presbyteriall, and that they profeſſe to ſubmit, and to be moſt willing
to have recourſe to the Magiſtrates Iudgement, and Cognizance, and Examination
of Eccleſiaſticall Cauſes; yet when they ſhall come once to be
croſſed, and the Parliament, by the advice of the Aſſembly, to ſettle the
Government of the Church, and by their Authority to bind them to things agreeable
to the word, wee ſhall ſee then what they will ſay of the Magiſtrates
Power. There are too many ſpeeches already, ſince the Aſſembly, (out of
their feare how they may goe) which have fallen from many Independents,
THAT PROGNOSTICATE, THEY WILL DOE BY THE PARLIAMENT,
AS THE REMONSTRANTS DID AFTER THE
SYNOD OF DORT BY THE STATES. Which Prognoſtication
hath fallen out accordingly. For ſince that time our Independents having
felt the Pulſes of the Aſſembly and Parliament bearing, but very
gently, by way of debate, againſt their Anarchicall and Anomolous New-Way,
(derived from their good friends, the

See Lac
••
 Oſiander his 
〈◊〉
 Controverſiarum cum Anabaptiſtis. German Anabaptiſts and

See Mr Rob
••
ſons Apology Separatiſts, and ſupported only with their Arguments, as I am fully able
to demonſtrate;) they have not only in Preſſe and Pulpit cryed up their
Way, as the Onely Way, Kingdome, and Scepter of Chriſt; and denyed all
oppoſition in word, deed, or thought againſt it; as a direct
See Mr. Iohn Goodwins Theomachia, and Innocencies Triumph. FIGHTING
AGAINST GOD; and promoted it publikely and privately with
all their Induſtry, Policy, Power; ſetting up New Independent Congregations
in every corner; but even with open mouth, pen, hand, (contrary
to their former Solemne Vowes, Covenants, Proteſtations, which I feare
they have over-much forgotten) cryed downe, and fought againſt the
very Eccleſiaſticall Power, and Legiſlative Authority of the High Court of
Parliament it ſelf, and Supreme Temporall Magiſtrates: proclaiming not
onely in their
Mr. Iohn Goodwins Sermon, Febr. 25. 1643. Pulpits, but likewiſe in ſundry late
Reply to A. S. Mr. Iohn Goodwins Theomachia: and Inocencies Triumph. An Anſwer to Mr. William Prins Twelve Queſtions. My Brother Burtons Vindication. p. 5. 6. &c.
 Pamphlets, wherewith
they have filled the World, That every particular Congregation of viſible
Saints, and Independent Church, is under the Government of Chriſt alone, as the
ONELY Head, King, Governour, Law-giver of it; and ſubject TO NO OTHER
IVRISDICTION, then that of Chriſt, his word and Spirit. That
NO POWER ON EARTH, NOR EARTHLY LAW-GIVERS MAY,
CAN, OR OVGHT TO GIVE LAWES, FOR THE GOVERNMENT
OF THIS REPVBLIKE, nor claime, nor exerciſe an Headſhip, or undertake
the Government of this Body. That neither KINGS, NOR PARLIAMENTS,
NOR SYNODS, have any Authority to preſcribe Lawes or Rules
for the Churches Government, to order the affaires of Chriſts Kingdome, or
inſtitute the Government of his Churches; or to make coactive Lawes, in any
Eccleſiasticall matters, to bind the conſcience of any Church or Chriſtian to outward
conformity, or inflict any mulcts or penalties for contempt or diſobedience;
Chriſt onely being the Lord of mens conſciences, which ought to be left at liberty.
That the Members of the Parliament are choſen but by a ſecular Root, by the Generality
and Riffe Raffe of the world, Papiſts, Atheiſts, Drunkards, Swearers,
Men voyd of the knowledge, feare, and grace of Chriſt: And therefore
the Independent Brethren conceive as great AN IMPOSSIBILITY, that
a Legitimate Eccleſiaſtick Power ſhould, according to the mind of Christ, bee
by them conferred upon any men, or that they ſhould have any Power or Authority
from Chriſt to nominate or appoint who ſhall bee the men, by vertue of
ſuch nomination or election, to enact Lawes and Statutes in matters of Religion,
and to order under mulcts and penalties how men ſhall worſhip and ſerve God,
as it is (in Jobs expreſsion) to bring a cleane thing out of an uncleane.
That the Parliaments claiming or exerciſing any ſuch Eccleſiaſticall Power, or
others attributing of it to them, is a meanes to awaken the eye of Jealouſie upon
them, and ſeven times more deſtructive and under-mining of not onely
their Power, but Honour, Peace, nd Safety alſo, than any thing that is

found in the Independent Way, ſo ill entreated. That it is a claiming of
the ſacred and incommunicable Royalties of Heaven; an accounting it no Robbery
to make themſelves equall with God; and ſuch an high provocation in the
eyes of the Moſt High, as IF CONTINVED IN (by the Parliament) will
kindle a fire in the breſt of him whoſe name is Jealous, which will conſume
and devoure. Yea, one of them puts this Queſtion,
An Anſwer to Mr. Prynnes 12, Queres. p. 24. & 2. If the whole Kingdome
may deny obedience unto Popiſh Acts and Canons, or upon any other like juſt
occaſion, and they themſelves bee Judges whether the occaſion bee juſt or no;
Whether MAY NOT INDEPENDENTS, a part of the Kingdome onely,
doe the like in all reſpects? Or, Whether ought they, becauſe a Leſſer part of
the Kingdome, yeeld obedience to Popiſh Acts and Canons, becauſe a Major part
approve of, and agree with a Parliament and Synod in approving them? What
if they ſhould be for Popery again, Judaiſme, or Turciſme? tis no offence to make
a Quere, nor impoſsible to come to paſſe; the greateſt part of thoſe that choſe our
Parliament men being thought to be Popiſhly or Malignantly affected, &c. Putting
divers ſuch like Queries, deſtructive to the very fundamentall Power
and Being of Parliaments; and as bad or worſe than the Popiſh Gun-powder
Plot, to blow up the Soveraign Eccleſiaſtick, and Civill Authority
of this High Court, in all ſucceeding Ages.

Theſe, with infinite other Anti-Parliamentall, Anti-Synodicall, and
Anti-Monarchicall Paradoxes (at which I profeſſe I ſtand amazed)
have not onely dropped from the Lips, but Pens of ſundry Independents,
who have avowed them publikely in Print, with their Names affixed
to their Bookes, even before the face of Your Right Honourable Parliamentary
Aſſembly and Supreme Tribunall, in ſuch open affront and high
contempt of Your undoubted Rights, Power, Priviledges, (which
Your Honours and wee all are obliged, by Late Solemne Oathes,
Covenants, Proteſtations, to defend, maintaine, with our very Lives and
Eſtates; and to diſcover, oppoſe all others who ſhall invade them, to
our uttermoſt power) as I am confident no Age, nor Hiſtory can ever
parallel, in the leaſt meaſure; the very Malignant Prelates, and Anti-Parliamentary
Cavaliers, having not proceeded, in this kind, ſo farre as they:
which I ſpeake with deepeſt griefe of heart and ſpirit, out of Conſcience
of that common Vow and Covenant, (which bindes mee to diſcover,
oppugne, reveale, abhorre it) and deteſtation of their moſt pernicious
Aſſertions, not out of the leaſt malice or hatred to any of their Perſons.
What the Independents end of publiſhing theſe deſperate Anti-Parliamentary
Paradoxes ſhould be, unleſſe to prepare their party and all others,
as much as in them lies, utterly to reject whatever publike forme of
Church-Government, Diſcipline, Reformation, and Directory of Worſhip,

Your Honours by the advice of the Reverend Aſſembly ſhall eſtabliſh
in our Church for the future, after all your ſerious conſultations, debates,
paines, Prayers and Faſtings about it; and to ſet up their owne
Anomolous Platforme, (whichReply to A. S. p. 111. Mr. Burtons Vindication. p. 54. 71. they averre is Chriſts Kingdome and Government;
and which may, upon probable and higher grounds than of reaſon,
bee thought in time to overthrow, and put downe all other Governments
whatſoever, and to ſtand up alone in their ſtead; ſince Chriſts Kingdome ſhall
ſtand up, when all oppoſite earthly Kingdomes, like earthen veſſells, ſhall with
an Iron Rod bee daſhed in peeces: Which they cloſe up with a Faxit Deus
& feſtinet,) in deſpight of Your Authority, and all humane Power
whatſoever, I cannot conjecture. And their owne late printed Paſſages,
withFeb. 15 1643. Mr. Iohn Goodwins Sermon, (that it would be more eaſie for
him, and hee ſhould rather yeeld to bee torne in pieces by wild horſes, than ſubmit
to ſuch a Government which proceeded from a Parliament, choſen by
the Riffe-raffe of the world, &c.) intimate and expreſſe as much. Which,
what an high contempt it is againſt Your undoubted Power, and pious
Eccleſiaſticall proceedings, in Reforming, ſetling the Doctrine,
Diſcipline, and Government of our Church, (the grand deſire and
prayer of all wel-affected ſpirits) I moſt humbly ſubmit to Your ſaddeſt
thoughts and deepeſt wiſedomes, who have both Power and Authority
in Your hands to ſuppreſſe, incomparable Prudence and Providence
to prevent, theſe growing, dangerous Inſolencies, before they
become Maſterleſſe, or Epidemicall, paſt Your cure.
Farre be it from my thoughts, to exaſperate Your Power or Iuſtice
againſt any Delinquents of this kind; ſome whereof are ſo neare and
deare unto mee, that it is my heavieſt affliction to mention their extravagancies
in this kind; of which I truſt they (and all their followers)
will be now aſhamed; and a Brotherly Admonition to their Perſons
(though their Writings undergoe the ſharper Cenſure) will
I hope induce them, upon ſecond thoughts, both to diſcerne, lament,
recant their fore-mentioned Paradoxes, and abhorre themſelves for
them even in duſt and aſhes, (as one of themMr. Goodwin in his Innocencies Triumph. p. 5.
profeſſeth hee will
doe, in caſe hee be convinced:) And then if they will not bee reclaimed,
Fiat Iuſtitia; better ſome ſhould ſuffer, than all periſh. My onely
deſire is, that Your Honours would have a ſpeciall jealous care of
preſerving your owne undoubted Parliamentary Rights and Priviledges
againſt theſe unparalleld publike Violations, Impeachments of them,
and of the tranquility, ſafety of our Church and State, endangered by
them. Toward the juſt defence whereof, I have (with as much expedition
as my many other diſtracting publike and private Imployments

would permit) contributed theſe my indigeſted Nocturnall Lucubrations,
(borrowed from the houres allotted to my neceſſary naturall
reſt) in Vindication of the ancient and undoubted Eccleſiaſticall Power
and Iuriſdiction of Parliaments, Chriſtian Princes, and Magiſtrates; (which
I have made good by ſundry Divine, Hiſtoricall Preſidents, and Authorities,
in all Ages) and anſwered all the chiefe Pretences, Objections
of Papiſts, Prelates, Independents, Anabaptiſts, Separatiſts, and all others
who oppugne them; in ſuch a manner as I hope will ſilence them for
the preſent, and reforme them for the future.
It was my primitive intention and deſire to have publiſhed this Treatiſe
complete at firſt; but it ſwelling to a greater bulk than I expected, and
my engagements in other publike ſervices for the Common-weale retarding
my ſpeedy progreſſe herein, I have thereupon divided it into two
Parts: the Firſt whereof I here humbly tender to your Honourable Patronage,
till God and oportunity enable mee to complete the Second; of
which there is leſſe Neceſſity, ſince learned Mr. Samuel Rutherford, in his
Due right of Presbyteries, and Mr. Thomas Edwards, in his Anti-Apologia,
(neither of them hitherto Anſwered by the Independents, and in truth unanſwerable)
with Gulielmus Apollonius and the Wallacrian Miniſters, Conſideratio
Quarundam Controverſiarum, &c. quae in Angliae Regno hodie agitantur,
newly publiſhed, will ſupply the preſent defect thereof; and this Firſt
Part ſupply ſome particulars concerning the Eccleſiaſticall Power of Parliaments,
Chriſtian Princes, Magiſtrates, Councells, which are wanting in them,
and in laborious Sir Edward Cookes Fourth Inſtitutes; who hath recorded
little or nothing concerning the Juriſdiction or Power of Parliaments in
Eccleſiaſticall affaires, and matters of Religion.
Thus humbly ſubmitting theſe my diſtracted ſubitane Collections, and
Lucubrations, to Your Honourable favourable Acceptation; and imploring
the God of Verity, of Unity ſpeedily to diſſipate all our Errors, and comprimiſe
all our unhappy Diviſions (which threaten ruine to us, if continued)
by Your moſt Religious Care, Wiſedome, and indefatigable Endeavours,
that ſoRom. 15. 5. 6.
wee may bee all like minded one towards another, and may with
ONE MIND, and ONE MOVTH, (in one Way, one Congregation) glorifie
God, even the Father of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt: I ſhall with my ferventeſt
Oriſons daily recommend Your Honourable Aſſembly, with all Your
pious Endeavours for the Reforming, Setling of our Church, State, to
his Divine Benediction; and ever reſt,

Your Honours moſt humble,
devoted Servant,
William Prynne.


