


TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE JOHN, Earle of Exeter, Baron of Burley, &c.

Noble Lord,


MAny whoſe eyes are upon your Lordſhip, do acknowledge the good hand of the Lord towards you, not in conferring eminency of honour

upon you in your minoritie, (as it were, before your time) but in giving you a ſerious diſcerning ſpirit, farre above your yeers, whereby they conceive great hope, and powre out many prayers to the Lord, that he may in due time bring you forth in publique, as a choice Inſtrument in the hand of your God, to do worthily
Ruth 4. 11
in Ephratah, and to be famous in Bethlehem.

Among others the publiſhers of this ſmall Treatiſe, (part whereof being the Meditatiōs, of a pious yong man, now with God, and the reſidue the labour of a reverend Divine) to declare their great affection to your Lordſhip, have importuned mee to recommend

this Tractate to your Honour, conceiving, that under your Lordſhips Name theſe Meditations not only may appeare to the world with ſome acceſs of luſtre, but that the influence they may have upon ſome hereby may prove more available.
The ſubject herein handled, is about the choice of that which ſcarce yet ever entered into your ſerious thoughts, yet it is wiſdome to ſtore up good rules before you need to uſe them: Mariners learne their skill before they launch into the deeps: All Artiſts ſtudy the Theory before the Practice; Wiſe men are long in contemplation,

before they adventure upon action: It's a known rule, Deliberation muſt be long, where Determination can be but once; and where there is no admiſſion of ſecond thoughts to reverſe a former errour, the firſt thoughts muſt be carefull, that errour be prevented.
In the interim, before the Lord incline your heart to think of any choice that way on earth, be intreated to make your choice in heaven; that the Lord Jeſus may be the guide of your youth, & ſo the God of your age, that God may ſay of you: I remember the kindneſs
Jere. 2. 2.
of thy youth, and the love of thy eſpouſals.


Surely it can be no diſparagement, for the greateſt of men to betroth themſelves to the great God, to contract ſpirituall alliance with innumerable companies of
Heb. 12. 22, 23.
Angels and Souls made perfect, and to match with himEph. 3. 15.
of whom the whole familie of Heaven and Earth is called.

Satan hath done his utmoſt to brand the ſervants of God with ignominy, and to deterre men of quality from owning the way called holy. It is not long ſince ſome of our Nobility, eminentE. M. for pietie, paralleled our age with the ſad times ofCogunt
••


•
ſſ
•
 ma
•••


〈◊…〉


•
ſſe v
•
les Sal▪ de Prov.

Salvian, wherein the complaint was, that great men were forced to be more ſinfull,

that they might not be reputed to be leſſe honourable.
But God hath begun to take away the reproach of his people from off the earth; and doubtleſs, will make his ſervants an eternall excellency, when men of carnall policies ſhall be made an abhorring to all
ſ
•
. 66. 24.
fleſh.

You cannot make any choice higher, nor is it poſſible you ſhould begin too ſoone to love him, who hath loved you from all eternitie. Love of all affections is moſt active, and in youth predominant; It's reſtles till it fix, and if it fix any where below Chriſt, it debaſeth it ſelfe, and may eaſily be enthralled, but cannot

eaſily be disingaged: What pittie is it thoſe vitall ſtreames ſhould run in a channell that goes downe to the Chambers of death?
I hope the Father of mercies is looking towards your Lordſhip, and ſaying unto you as once unto his Church, Surely, this is a time of love.
Ezek. 16. 8. Your pious mother, whom I may truely call an Elect Lady, is to your Lordſhip as another Monicha to Saint Auguſtine; You are the ſonne of many prayers: and as Salomon was to Bathſheba, You are the ſonne, not onely of her wombe, but of her vowes;
Pro. 31 1. Shee hath learned to loveFilii diligend
•
 ſunt in Deo, 
〈◊〉
 propter Deum. you in the Lord, and for the Lord: The longings of her

ſoule, are for your ſpirituallQuid Chriſtus niſi Deum in nobis dilexit, non quem habebamus ſed ut haberemus, Lomb. l. 3. D. 27.
 and eternall good. It is one of her greateſt comforts on earth, that ſhee hath ſuch a ſonne to call her mother: But it will be farre greater, even the Crowne of her glory, to ſee you the adopted ſonne of the eternall Father, and that God hath honoured you, even in your youth, to obtain an Inheritance among them that are ſanctified.
You are left in your fathers familie, with your hopefull ſiſter, as the onely branches of many, which have long ſince ceaſed from among men. And when the deſtroying Angel was ſmiting all, the Father of mercies looked upon you, and

ſaid, Deſtroy him not, for a bleſſing
Iſa. 65. 8.
is in him.

The Lord delight to fill you with all ſpirituall bleſſings in heavenly things, and make it every day more and more appeare, that God hath reſerved you to be bleſſed, and to be a bleſſing to your family, to your Countrey, and to the Kingdomes. And when your Lordſhip▪ ſettles in the world, you may begin with Joſuahs fixed reſolution, I and my houſe will ſerve the
Joſ. 24. 15
Lord. And that you may ſhew forth the grace of him that hath called you out of darkneſſe, and the ſhadow of death, into his marvellous light; that they that obſerve your Lordſhip may ſee, that greatneſſe and

goodneſſe, as they are inſeparable in God, ſo they are not incompatible to the ſonnes of men. That ſo you may rejoyce above all greatneſſe, that you have your name written in the Lambes book of life, and you may look beyond death▪ and the grave, and ſee your greateſt portion in eternitie; which is the earneſt prayer of

Your Lordſhips ſervant, JER: WHITTAKER.

