


To the Noble and right worthy
Patriots, Colonell Nathaniel Fiennes Governour,
Colonell Richard Cole, Colonell Alexander
Popham, and to the reſt of the worthy
Commanders, and Souldiers in the
City of Briſtoll.


AS it is a certaine truth, that no events
happen without God, ſo it is moſt
certaine that all events are ordered
by Gods wiſedome to excellent
purpoſes. The utmoſt and meet end
of all Gods actions is himſelfe, that
as all things are of him, and through him, ſo all
things may bee to him, Rom. 11. 36. The ſubordinate
and nearer ends are many and various as
the Almighty ſees conducible to his glory which is
the utmoſt. And thus are wee to conceive that in
the ordering of the preſent commotions of this
Land the Lord hath ſundry ends, whereby he will
in fine ſhew himſelfe great in counſell, though as yet
we can hardly diſcerne whereto they tend. Among

many other ends he hath, theſe two ſeeme moſt apparent,
the diſcovery of men, and the diſcovery of
himſelfe. For whereas on the one ſide the bloody
minded Papiſts, the proud ſenſuall Libertines, the
jugling deceitfull Prieſts and Prelats had gotten the
reputation of honeſt men, and on the other ſide the
ſincere, zealous and faithfull Chriſtian ſuffered all indignities
under the imputations of hypocriſie, covetouſneſſe,
faction and ſuch like calumnies; now by
theſe preſent tryalls the integrity, faithfulneſſe and
courage of the one, the hypocriſie, falſehood, and
wickedneſſe of the other are made manifeſt. And
whereas the frequency of prophane oathes, and Atheiſticall
perjuries, the ſcorne of Religion, deriſion
of Piety, and contempt of holineſſe had worne out
the apprehenſions of God, and imboldned men to
play with him as a contemptible name, God hath
begun to diſcover himſelfe, and yet further will in
time appeare to be the great Lord of Hoaſts, and
the protector of his deſpiſed, and oppreſſed people.
In reference to the later of theſe forenamed ends
God hath vouchſafed to diſcover many Plots, to
give many deliverances, to doe great things in theſe
few yeares laſt paſt for the vindicating of his owne
Name, the worth and innocency of his people▪ and
declaration of the malignitie of ungodly ſpirits.
Among which that which he did in preſerving of

this city in the late deliverance hereof is not the leaſt,
being in the apprehenſion of thoſe that know all the
circumſtances and the concurrence of Gods providence
therein, a very remarkable & memorable thing.
In the commemoration and acclamation thereof
it pleaſed God that by the appointment of one of you
I ſhould have a part, having by Gods providence bin
driven hither for ſhelter againſt the unreaſonable &
impetuous violence of ſuperſtitious people enraged
by the inſtigations of bloody minded Papiſts, corrupt
Prieſts, and looſe Libertines. Since which time
I have been ſollicited to publiſh theſe ſubitany Meditations:
though the matter deſerves a more full
diſcovery and an exacter commentary. Nevertheleſſe
that the remembrance hereof might not die,
and that ſome light might bee added to them that
ſeeke out Gods workes as having pleaſure therein,
I have yeelded to their requeſt. And foraſmuch as
the deliverance in the firſt place belonged to your
ſelves as firſt deſtinated to ſlaughter, and my worke
in the T
•
ankſgiving proceeded from you, I have
conceived it meeteſt to tender theſe Sermons to you
for your acceptance and uſe, praying the Almighty
ſtill to preſerve your perſons and to direct your
wayes for the publike good and your own ſalvation.
In both which to ſerve you continueth

Yours in all humble obſervance,
JOHN TOMBES.

