


To the deſervedly Honoured, Sir GILBERT GERARD, Baronet,
and Sir JOHN FRANKLIN, Knight Knights
for the County of Middleſex, in this preſent Parliament.

Right Worſhipfull,


THere is no condition whatſoever, can priviledge a folded
Arme: For if Idleneſſe had beene better then Labour,
our firſt Parents had never beene put into the
Garden to dreſſe it: but they muſt labour then in their
innocent eſtate, becauſe they were happy: and ſo
much more muſt every one of us in his ſinfull condition;
get up and be doing, that he may be ſo. The Church of God is a
Garden encloſed, ſo Cant. 4. 12. otherwiſe called, the vineyard of the Lord
of Hoſts, Iſaiah 5. 7. Now, Laberandum in vinea, Labourers are for this
vineyard, where they ſhall ever finde, never want worke: they therefore
which dare be idle and loyter heere, are worthy to be caſt out. The
Apoſtle compares the Church of God to a building, Ep. 2. 20. the beauty
whereof hath ever beene ſuch a great eye-ſore to all ungodly men,
that their mouthes of wickedneſſe have ſtill extended themſelves wide
againſt it, crying of it, as they of Jeruſalem, Pſa. 137. 7. Raſe it, raſe it;
and their hands of violence lifted up, to downe with it, downe with it, even
to the foundation thereof. The caſe being thus, he is not worthy to be eſteemed
a member of the Church of God, who labours not with the
very utmoſt of his endevours, one way or other, to uphold, defend, maintaine,
enlarge this building, to keepe this vineyard from waſte, this Fabricke
from ruine, which could not poſſibly continue, were it in the power
of men or divels to deſtroy it.
And if ever Diſtractions, Diſſentions, Diviſions, threatned the wel-being
of a Church and State (as they alwayes doe) the Church of God in
this Kingdome, at this time, is in very much danger; wherein a generall
liberty is taken, in matters which concerne Religion, by people (of
what ſpirit I know not) to doe what they pleaſe, not what they ſhould.
Our malady we ſee, and cannot chuſe but complaine of; and if there be
not a ſpeedy cure thought on to apply unto our hurt, the whole Kingdome
may ſhortly take up that ſaying, and make particular application
of it, prudens, ſciens, vivus, videnſ



que
 pereo.

For my ſelfe being lately called to that publicke place where this Sermon

was delivered, I thought it my duty to fall upon ſome ſubject that
might have relation to our preſent times and diſtempers. In which
you may pleaſe cleerely to behold the neceſſity of Government, as well in
Church as State, Then, how generally it is diſaffected, and by whom: eſteemed
the heavieſt of all burthens: who therefore doe what they can to throw it off:
which meditations, as they then paſſed through the eares (as I feare) of
many who then heard them: (for this I am ſure of, that abundance of
this ſpirituall ſeed every where miſcarries) ſo they now moſt humbly
deſire leave to take the boldnes, that through Yours, they may paſſe into
the hands of others, that may conſider them at leyſure and upon better
advantage.

Vox audita perit, litera ſcripta manet. That which we only hear may
eaſily ſlip from us; when as that we read, & may read againe, in probability
may ſtick by us. And the Lord in mercy make this thus ſucceſſeful.
For ſurely there were never any people under heaven that enjoyed
and wanted more inſtruction then we doe: when we ſeriouſly conſider
how that Almighty God hath laid wide open before us the Books of his
revealed will, of his mercies, of his judgements: yet though we have been
taught abundantly by precepts, we have not learned: been preſt upon
by mercies, we have not regarded: and chaſtned too by the keeneſt, the
ſharpeſt of all temporall judgements, we have not been taught▪
 Doubtleſſe,
the body of this Kingdome was exceedingly corrupted, when it
could not live, unleſſe it bled, as it hath abundantly done, and yet the
cure is not perfect, nor ever ſhalbe, till Reformation make up that breach,
which ungodlineſſe hath troden downe. Now there is no Reformation
to be hoped for, without Religion: and no life, no power of Religion,
without Government, to order it, guard it, encourage it. Which Church-Government,
that Great Councell (of whom your very worthy Selves
are a part) have reſolved ſpeedily to eſtabliſh. The City of London are
ready to taſte, and like, and entertaine it. We in the Country do exceedingly
want it, and the preſent want of that moſt deſired iſſue of your
great labours, is ready to fill us with as much impatiency, as poore Rachel
expreſſed for want of children, Gen. 30. 1.

Now the Lord ſend it, and ſettle it throughout the whole Kingdome,
and make all thoſe that ſhalbe called, to act in this great work,
like Joſhua, who when he was appointed to be a Leader and a Governour
of the people, Deut. 34. 9. was full of the ſpirit of wiſedome: And fill
them full of the spirit of zeale too, for the houſe of God, that Gods glory

in the increaſe of his Church, may be ever before their eies, ever in
their aime. And the Lord make us who are Miniſters of the Word, in
a ſpeciall maner to apply our ſelves unto all thoſe, with whom wee
ſhall have to deale in all love, and meekeneſſe, and tenderneſſe, and prudence,
that ſo good and ſo great a worke, be not quite mar'd by an ungodly,
indiſcreet or careleſſe handling. And the Lord give us arguments
to perſwade thoſe that have long continued in blindneſſe, and
conſequently have beene ignorant of the neceſſary truths of God,
now to encline their eares unto wiſdome, and to apply their hearts
unto underſtanding, Pr. 2. 2. that they may be while they are in a capacity
of helpe, entreated to ſuffer God through Jeſus Chriſt, to ſave
their ſoules: and let God ariſe and have mercy in building up his Sion
amongſt us, that after our Eclipſe, he may appeare unto us in glory.

There was never yet any good and great worke carried on
without much oppoſition. From which, if that worke of Church-Government,
ſo ſeriouſly and long debated by You, had beene exempted,
I ſhould have joyned with thoſe that had moſt queſtioned it. But
now a great and effectuall dore is opened unto you; God having ſo bleſſed
the way you have reſolved to goe, that he hath given it a free entrance
into the hearts of many of his people; And you have many adverſaries;
and it cannot be otherwiſe, ſo long as there are ſuch a number
amongſt us, who are like bad Wares, which are for Darke ſhops, or
like unto Bleare-eyes, that cannot endure the Light.
Moſt worthy Sirs, I dare not flatter you, and I ſhall not, if I tell you
that it hath been ever my thoughts, as the thoughts of very many more,
who have beſt meanes to know you, that you have done your parts in
this great worke. The advantage of whoſe prayers, you ſhall never
want to carry you on, in it, through it: and then whatſoever the ſucceſſe
be, you may waſh your Hands. The Lord who only can, moſt graciouſly
aſſiſt, and abundantly recompence the unwearied paines of you
All. I have this only to adde, in relation to your particular Selves, that
if my deare and tender reſpects unto you, cannot, your pardon may excuſe
him for this boldneſſe, who is,

Your Worſhips,
in all Chriſtian obſervance
Edward Terry.


