


To the Right Honourable, and moſt
worthily to be highly honoured
THOMAS ADAMS, Eſquire;
Lord Major of the moſt famous and
renowned City of LONDON; I. V.
prayeth all encreaſe of Gracious Honour, here
and of Glorious Happineſſe,
hereafter.

Right Honourable:


IT was the ſad and unhappy complaint of the
Prophet Jeremy in his dayes, and in that ungracious
and ungratefull City, Jeruſalem;
That no man among them was valiant for the
Truth. Jer. 9. 3. Nay, the Lord himſelfe, by the ſame
Prophet, ſeeming to be, as it were, tranſported with holy
indignation and juſt jealouſie of neglect of his honour,
and worſhip, bids them Run to and fro through the ſtreets of
Jeruſalem, to ſee and ſeek if they could find any one man that
loved the Truth. Jer. 5. 1. Yea, this penury of pious men
was not only among the poor and mean men, Ver. 4. But
even among the Great Men and Rulers of Jeruſalem, ver. 5
But, ô the honour and happineſſe of this moſt famous,
faithfull and ever renowned City of London! This City
of our God, of which (moſt juſtly) ſo many glorious Things
are, and may, and muſt be ſpoken, to the Glory of God,
and honour thereof! Over which, ſuch a renowned and
religious, ſuch a valiant and vertuous Governour is ſet (verifying

that of the Prophet, Nah. 2. 3. (though there, Iconfeſs,
ſpoken in another ſenſe:) That our valiant men are in
Scarlet, even your good Lordſhip, who have bin, as it were,
purpoſely placed and appointed by God himſelfe for
theſe times; and who are ſo valiant and couragious for the
Truth of your God, and the glorious work of Goſpell Reformation,
as cannot be dampt or daunted with any vaporous
and ſeeming Eclipſing Clouds of unworthy Diſguſts
raiſed by the ſelfiſh and elfiſh Envy of Schiſmaticall ſpirits,
which of late have, only, paſſed over the faire face and
cleer Sun-ſhine of your Honours Piety and Integrity; For
with unvanquiſhable Valour and Vigour of Zeal for God
and his Truth, (like a pious Patriot, indeed) your Honour
hath moſt gravely and graciouſly diſpell'd them all, ſtanding
ſtill, like an immoveable, invincible, and impregnable
Rock; or rather running on, like the active Sun in the
Firmament with ſo much the more reſplendent Beauty,
and radiant Luſtre, in a ſweet and ſwift courſe of Conſtant
Piety and Magnanimity, for the advancement of the immaculate
Cauſe of your God, and the Common-wealth, to the
high honour of God, and ſingular joy and comfort of all
the true Presbyterian Saints and Sons of our Engliſh Sion,
both in City and Country. Ride on proſperouſly, then,
(my moſt honourable good Lord,) in the Cauſe of Truth and
Righteouſneſſe, backt with the ſacred Suffrages and faithfull
Affections of very many thouſands of moſt peaceable
honeſt-hearted and God-honouring Covenanters, both in City
and Country, yea, even of a whole Nation of loyall
and loving Scottiſh-Brethren, who, with us, moſt juſtly
look for and long for the happy and holy conſummating
of a glorious Reformation of the Kingdoms Grievances,
and eſtabliſhment of a bleſſed Church-Diſcipline, according
to the Minde of our great Maſter Chriſt Jeſus, and

the plain literal meaning of our ſacred ſolemne Covenant.
And hence (my honourable good Lord) I have bin humbly
bold (emboldened by your Honours much experienced
candor and courteſie toward me, the meaneſt and moſt
unworthy of all your Lordſhips Votaries) to dedicate this
little, but, I hope, very neceſſary and uſefull Treatiſe (conſidering
theſe ſeducing ſtaggering and unſtable-times) as
a ſmall Symbol, and though poore and plain, yet true
Teſſera of my bounden Gratitude, to your Honours pious
Patronage: Thus, I ſay, both, to take fit occaſion to manifeſt
my obliged hearts Thankfulneſſe for your Lordſhips
many moſt free and friendly favours; As alſo, by this,
though ſuccinct, yet ſincere diſcovery of the ſly and ſubtile
Diſſemblers and Deceivers of our dayes, and conſequently
the mayn moleſters and diſturbers of the happy
ſettlement of a godly Church-Government among us; As
alſo thus to adde, at leaſt, one ſmall ſtick to encreaſe the
flame (though I am confident I need not) of your good
Lordſhips godly zeale in this glorious work, ſo much and
ſo maliciouſly oppoſed by the impious and impudent Sectaries
of theſe moſt ſadly diſtracted Times. Which,
humbly hoping your Honour will with accuſtomed Chriſtian
candor, and exuberant friendly favour, candidly accept;
The continued, yea perpetuated Encreaſe of all Honour
and Happineſſe to your good Lordſhip, in this your
renowned Majoralty, and to the period of your pious
Pilgrimage, ſhall be the daily devoted prayers of

Your Honours moſt humble and eve
•

to be commanded, obſervant
Servant in the Lord,
John Vicars.

