


TO THE LOVERS OF HONOUR & POESIE.

GENTLEMEN,


YOu whoſe conſtitutions are even and equall, not over-balanced with earthly and baſe metall, love Honour and Gallantry in any man, & virtus in hoſte probatur. You who know God made all things by his owne Rule of Proportion, (in weight, meaſure and number:) you who are friends to that Divine, Noble, and Royall Art of Poeſy, for what is it but well weighed words, made even by that Lesbian Rule of Proportion? you can beſt judge of theſe phancies dedicated to you, as they are meant. The ſubject of my Poetry is noble, and the nobleſt of Gods creatures, Man, brave men,

loyal men, who have dyed like Ionathan and his brothers, either with the King, or in his Cauſe, (moſt of them) the other were worthy a better Muſe as well as they.
This way of ſervice to the memory of the dead wants not preſidents worthy our imitations, Kings and Prophets, and the greateſt Law-giver, whom I will take for my firſt preſident of Poetry, even Moſes, who from Gods owne mouth gave the Law to his owne people: he compoſed ſuch a ſong, as the Lambe and Angels make uſe of it, (Apoc. 15.) which was his ſong of deliverance he left compoſed, and ſo firſt ſanctified Poetry, as Chriſt and his Apoſtles in the New Teſtament by the allegation of the Pſalmes and Prophets, who were both Poets and Vates. Alſo S. Paul ſanctified the Heathen Poets. David, vir ſecundùm cor Dei, that pious Prince, that martiall King, that glorious man of God, truly deſerved that glorious Epithet, Princeps Poetarum. Solomon, the wiſeſt of men, compoſed his Songs and Canticles. David in this way of Poeſy made an 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 for Saul and Ionathan. And Ieremy made the 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 for good Ioſias. He that goes up to the mountaine of God, ſhall meet the Prophets

with muſicall raptures. The Jewes buryed their dead with great ceremony, and had their Praeficaes, women ſingers, their 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
, their ſongs of mourning and lamentation, their burning of Incenſe and ſweet odours for their Kings, and ſolemn mournings for their Princes. They mourned and faſted (1 Sam. 31. 13. and 2 Sam. 1. 12.) for their Kings, they mourned many dayes, as for Moſes and Ioſhua, and ſo for Ioſias; for whom (as I ſaid) Ieremy made the 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
. The chief mourner at every reſting place ſung the uſuall 
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
, or as we call it, the burden of the ſong; like that in Ier. 9. 18. that our eyes may run downe with teares, and our eye-lids guſh out with waters. And this they did in hope of Reſurrection, as well as honour of the dead, for they comforted their friends with places of Scripture fulleſt of comfort, as that of Eſay 25. 8. He will ſwallow up death in victory, and wipe away all teares: And Pſal. 72. 16. They ſhall flouriſh and ſpring againe as the graſſe on the earth. And they called the Church-yard, or burying place, BETH CHAIIM, Domus viventium, the houſe of the living.
The Primitive Church uſed ſuch Ceremonies

in this way, as would paſſe for Popery amongſt us now adayes▪ though it was in the pureſt times of the Church uſed, (ſo much as it was by miſtake abuſed) and turned to Idolatry. But if that were a juſt exception againſt lawfull Ceremonies, it may ſtand as well againſt Doctrine as Diſcipline, for both have beene abuſed, the one by Heretiques, the other by Schiſmatiques, and both ought to be obſerved, the one in ordine ad eſſe Eccleſiae, the other ad bene eſſe. So this kind of Poeſie hath warrant beyond exception, and this ceremony of Buryall: He who wanted it amongſt the Jewes was ſaid to have the buryall of an Aſſe, ſo Ier. 22. Ieconia vvas ſaid to have ſuch a buryall.
Thus much I have ſaid to ſatisfie the curious, or rather ignorant concerning Poeſy, and the honourable mention and memory of the dead: And they who had it not in the Primitive Church (if it could be had) were ſaid to have inſepultam ſepulturam. As for my Characters and Tranſlations, they are fruits of Phanſie, and vvere but as Salads are to ſolid diſhes, to ſharpen the appetite: ſo theſe to my ſerious ſtudies vvere, or as Davids Harp, to the

melancholy thoughts of my impriſonment. I muſt acknowledge (with thanks to God) I found ſingular comfort in this way, and this ſufferance, and that it ſet an edge upon my over-tyred and dulled braine, and theſe Phancies vvere the fire vvarmed them. My vviſh is, they may be accepted of ſuch as know how to judge, and have ſo much honour not to miſinterpret good meaning, and my zeale to the Cauſe vvherein I ſuffer. I thanke heaven, God hath ſupplyed me vvith a large meaſure of patience and comfort, as pledges of his favour, and ſo much charity▪ I wiſh them rather a right underſtanding, then any ill; and ſuch a proportion of inward comfort as may make them as happy in their Liberty as I am in priſon. Let them therefore with Charity reade, what they find in this little Volume, and ſuch an encouragement may produce to the view of the world, my more ſerious Studies, to which theſe were but a preparative, and as I ſaid before, a ſalad to more ſolid diſhes, which I will promiſe you ſhall be ſerved up, if this pleaſe; if not, I have not loſt my patience, much leſſe the comfort of my phancie, (which

none can take from me) and I can content my ſelfe with that Greek ſaying, which ſuits me as well as if it had been made for me,


〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
.


The Motto of my Family.

AMICITIAS VOLO, INIMICITIAS SPERNO.

I ſtudy my friends, and ſcorne my cauſeleſſe enemies.


This is the Reſolution of your Servant,
Fr. Wortley.


