


To the Honourable City of London,
and all the Inhabitants thereof, who ſincerely
ſeek and deſire a true reformation of the
Church, according to the Word of God.

GIve me leave, moſt famous and renowned
City, and ye the Right Honourable Lord
Major, the Right Worſhipfull Aldermen,
and religious Common-Councell and Commoners,
to congratulate and rejoice with you,
for that honour which the Lord hath laid on you in theſe daies
of great confuſion. You, under God, have been the guard of
this preſent Parliament, by which ſo great things have been
done for the ſafety and defence of three Kingdoms. Your
free contributions of your wealth and ſubſtance, have been
the ſinews of this warre, undertaken for the defence of our
Religion, Laws and Liberties. Few Counties in this
Kingdom have been able to defend themſelves, much leſſe to
help others, except thoſe whom you have encouraged, and ſet
on work by your example, and to whom you have been a bulwark
againſt the enemies, who by you have been terrified
from invading them. All the aſsociated Counties have
cauſe to bleſſe God for the vicinity and neighbour-hood of
London. And all the reſt of the Kingdom may ſay,
If the Lord had not helped us by the Forces, Arms, and
ſupplies of men and money from London, we had been

utterly deſtroied and laid waſte. But the chief glory beſtowed
on you by God, is your courage for the truth, and
true Chriſtian Religion; your earneſt ſtudy, and conſtant
endeavour for promoting an happy Reformation of the Church
in Religion, Dostrine, Worſhip, and Diſcipline, according
to the Word of God; your zeal against Sectaries,
Schiſmaticks, Hereticks, and Blaſphemers, who labour
cunningly to corrupt your ſervants, to ſteal away the hearts
of your wives and children, to pull many fair feathers
out of your wings, and to draw Diſciples after them, and
your ſtanding steadfaſt in the old paths, and walking in
that good way, Ier. 6. 16. which the Lord Chriſt by his
Apoſtles hath praeſcribed to the Vniverſall Church; In
which all the pure primitive Churches of old, and all the
beſt reformed Churches have walked from the daies of your
Fathers, untill this day. God hath inabled you wonderfully
by his grace, to reſiſt the ſubtle temptations of the
world and the Devil. I know when you were courted
with offers of greateſt honours and priviledges, to withdraw
you from your purpoſe and reſolution, of ſtanding
for the common weal of State and Church, and of ſupporting
and upholding of the props and pillars of this Land,
when it trembled, and was ready to be diſsolved.
I cannot forget that ſad time, full of fears and dangers,
when (the chief command of your City, being in the
hand and power of Malignants, who had alſo a strong
faction, by which they attempted to overthrow you) it was
the opinion and profeſsion of ſome of the moſt faithfull Patriots,
aud wiſe members of Parliament, that unleſſe God
did put into your hearts a reſolution to ſtand up for them,
they had ſmall hope of ſaving either the Church and Kingdom
from ruine, or our Religion, Laws, Liberties, and their

own lives from deſtruction; and in that juncture of time
the Lord did put ſuch a ſpirit of courage, fortitude and
holy zeal into you, who were the main body of the City,
that you stood up, and appeared openly for the worthy Patrons
of your Religion, Laws and Liberties, whereby they
were animated to proceed vigorouſly in their wonted courſe
of juſtice, to the terrour and aſtoniſhment of all the enemies
and diſturbers of our peace. After this you have
been strongly aſſaulted by ſpirituall wickedneſſes divers
waies.
Firſt, by cunning ſeducers, who uſurping the name and
outward ſhew of rare Saints, have ſtollen away the hearts
of many, and with feigned ſanctity and large promiſes
of a pure platform and modell of Church-Diſcipline and
perfect Reformation, according to Chriſts own inſtitution,
have drawn them into Schiſme, and ſeparation from their
own Congregations. But you, by your wiſdom have quickly
ſmelled out their fraud, and vain boaſting of great
things, which they can never perform and bring to
paſſe.
Secondly, you have been tried, (when Scriptures failed
them, and favoured not their modell) with bold pretences
of new lights, which you have ſcorned, as wiſe
men are wont to ſcorn, and not vouchſafe to look after thoſe
ignes fatuos, wandring lights and night fires, by which
fools, who follow them in the dark, are lead into dangerous
pits, boggs, ditches, and downfalls.
Thirdly, they have repreſented unto you Presbyterian
Government as a Bugbear, and cruell monſter, worſe then
Popery and Prelacy, unto which if you ſubmit, you and
your children are made ſlaves for ever, to the lust of proud,
peeviſh, tyrannicall Priests; And allthough many credulous

fools, and unſtable ſouls, are hereby terrified and
skared out of their wits, and run wilde after ſeverall
dangerous ſects, and know not where to reſt: Yet you are
no ſuch ſtrangers to the Goſpel, nor ſo little acquainted
with the Scriptures of the New Teſtament, as to be moved
with ſuch skarecrowes; but rather by ſuch rabid
railing againſt Government of the Church by Claſsicall
Presbyteries, you have been moved and ſtirred up (after
ſerious conſideration, and conſultation had with your godly
Paſtours, and Teachers, diligent ſearching of the Scriptures,
and good aſſurance of underſtanding of divine truth
gained to your ſelves) to be more earneſt and importunate
in promoting that Presbyterian Government, beſides
which there is no mention of any other in all the writing
of the Apoſtles; nor any other acknowledged or received,
in any well reformed Churches in all the Chriſtian
world.
The Apoſtolicall Church at Jeruſalem, conſiſting of
many thouſands and ten thouſands of beleevers, and ſo
many particular Congregations, was altogether governed
by the Apoſtles and Presbyters, Aſſemblies, Synods and
Presbyteries, as appears, Act. 11. 30. and 15. 6. and
21. 18. The Chriſtian Church of the Gentiles gathered
unto Chriſt in ſeverall Nations, Countries and Cities by
Paul and Barnabas, had every one their Presbyters, ordained
to have rule over them in the Lord, Acts 14.
23.
The Church of Epheſus, that great City of Aſia, had
alſo divers Presbyters, whom the Holy Ghoſt had made
overſeers to watch in common over it, Acts 20. 17, 28.
And of them S. Paul ſpeaks, 1 Tim. 5. 17. ſaying,
Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of

double honour. Alſo S. Paul left Titus in Creet,
and appointed him to ordain Presbyters in every City,
and ſuch overſeers as were fit to rule the Church, Tit.
1. 5. Peter and Iohn were Presbyters, and called
themſelves ſo, as they with others governed ſeverall
Churches, 1. Pet. 5. 1. John 2. 1. and John 3. 1.
Wherefore, ô London, thou that haſt choſen the beſt
part, rejoice in the Lord thy God, who hath made his
glory to riſe upon thee, and his light to ſhine upon thy
grave Senatours, thy religious Common-Councell, and
all thy true hearted Citizens; and hath led them into
thoſe waies which be in Chriſt, which Saint Paul
taught every where, and in every Church, 1 Cor. 4.
17. For the encouraging of you, worthy Citizens, in
your conſtancy, and for the confirming of them that are
weak and wavering, I have framed out of the Scriptures
this brief diſcourſe, concerning that one uniform
Church-Government, which Chriſt by his Apoſtles ordained,
and appointed to be ſet up in the whole univerſall
Church, and to be obſerved in all other Churches,
members of the univerſall. Here you have the Heavenly
patern ſhadowed out in a ſmall compaſſe, of that Government,
for the eſtabliſhment whereof in this City
and Kingdom, you have ſtood up and appeared openly at
ſeverall times. If the Lord be pleaſed to bleſſe you with
courage for his truth, and with conſtancy and perſeverance
till you obtain your deſire, which is the deſire alſo
of all Orthodox faithfull Miniſters in the Land, then
ſhall London be called, The City of the Lord, the Zion
of the holy one of Iſrael; And they who deſpiſe her and
ſtand up against her, to hinder the work of God in her
hands, ſhall bow down at the ſoles of her feet, and her

enemies ſhall lick the duſt, even lick up the duſt of her
feet, for they ſhall not be aſhamed who wait for the Lord,
Iſa. 49. 23.
This is the praier of your ſervant in
the work of the Lord, and humble
ſuppliant for your proſperity at
the throne of grace.
G. W.

